t-vMF Similarity For Regularizing Intra-Class Feature Distribution
Takumi Kobayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) leverage
large-scale training dataset to produce remarkable performance on various image classification tasks. It, however,
is difficult to effectively train the CNNs on some realistic learning situations such as regarding class imbalance,
small-scale and label noises. Regularizing CNNs works
well on learning with such deteriorated training datasets
by mitigating overfitting issues. In this work, we propose a
method to effectively impose regularization on feature representation learning. By focusing on the angle between a
feature and a classifier which is embedded in cosine similarity at the classification layer, we formulate a novel similarity
beyond the cosine based on von Mises-Fisher distribution
of directional statistics. In contrast to the cosine similarity, our similarity is compact while having heavy tail, which
contributes to regularizing intra-class feature distribution
to improve generalization performance. Through the experiments on some realistic learning situations such as of imbalance, small-scale and noisy labels, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method for training CNNs, in
comparison to the other regularization methods. Codes are
available at https://github.com/tk1980/tvMF.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are fundamental methods to produce promising performance on
various computer vision tasks including visual recognition [16, 27]. A large amount of parameters in CNNs
are effectively optimized in an end-to-end manner on a
large-scale dataset which contains plenty of image samples
with detailed annotation; in other words, high-performance
CNNs demand such a healthy dataset of large-scale and
clean-labeled samples. For example, ImageNet [10], a standard benchmark dataset for image classification, is composed of a large number of training samples, each of which
is assigned one of 1000 class labels, and those samples
are uniformly distributed across classes without severe bias

+1

(a) cos θ

0 +1

+1

0 +1

(b) t-vMF (κ = 4)

+1

0 +1

(c) t-vMF (κ = 16)

Figure 1. t-vMF similarity (7) compared to cosine similarity cos θ.
The proposed t-vMF produces compact-support similarity function around the classifier weight w with the parameter κ to control
the compactness. It orients features x toward w as a implicit regularization to enhance compact intra-class distribution. Colored
line indicates similarity values in [−1, +1] over the angle θ.

toward specific class categories. Such a data-hunger nature hinders CNNs from being applied to various real-world
tasks. Due to the laborious procedure of collecting and annotating data, real-world tasks are frequently equipped with
rather deteriorated training datasets which are subject to
such as class imbalance, small-scale and label noises. The
CNNs trained on those poor datasets degrade performance,
e.g., due to overfitting.
The bottleneck of CNNs could be alleviated by reducing their parameter size from the architectural viewpoint [19, 51] and data-augmentation techniques would
contribute to virtually enlarge the training data by means
of injecting perturbation into real image samples [12, 50].
On the other hand, as a rather general approach, some regularizations can be effectively introduced to CNNs for improving generalization performance [40, 46, 20, 31, 11].
A crucial feature representation is found in the neuron
activations produced by the penultimate layer which are fed
into the final classifier. Thus, regularization on those features contributes to enhancing feature representation learning even on the deteriorated datasets where training samples are too poorly collected to well model the intrinsic feature distribution. In the literature of deep learning, there
are some regularization techniques for feature representation such as center loss [46] to reduce within-class variance and DropOut [40, 29] to inject stochastic perturbation. It is also possible to regularize features at a classifi-

6616

