UV-Net: Learning from Boundary Representations
Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman
Autodesk Research
Karl D.D. Willis
Autodesk Research

Aditya Sanghi
Autodesk Research

Thomas Davies
Autodesk

Joseph G. Lambourne
Autodesk Research

Hooman Shayani
Autodesk Research

Nigel Morris
Autodesk Research

Abstract
We introduce UV-Net, a novel neural network architecture
and representation designed to operate directly on Boundary
representation (B-rep) data from 3D CAD models. The B-rep
format is widely used in the design, simulation and manufacturing industries to enable sophisticated and precise CAD
modeling operations. However, B-rep data presents some
unique challenges when used with modern machine learning
due to the complexity of the data structure and its support
for both continuous non-Euclidean geometric entities and
discrete topological entities. In this paper, we propose a unified representation for B-rep data that exploits the U and V
parameter domain of curves and surfaces to model geometry,
and an adjacency graph to explicitly model topology. This
leads to a unique and efficient network architecture, UV-Net,
that couples image and graph convolutional neural networks
in a compute and memory-efficient manner. To aid in future
research we present a synthetic labelled B-rep dataset, SolidLetters, derived from human designed fonts with variations
in both geometry and topology. Finally we demonstrate that
UV-Net can generalize to supervised and unsupervised tasks
on five datasets, while outperforming alternate 3D shape
representations such as point clouds, voxels, and meshes.

1. Introduction
Parametric curves and surfaces form the basis of
computer-aided design (CAD) and are widely used in design,
simulation, and manufacturing. CAD software is primarily concerned with modeling and representing 3D solids—
closed, watertight shapes which describe objects unambiguously with consistently oriented patches of surface geometry.
The industry-wide standard to represent solid models is the
Boundary representation (B-rep) [41, 23]. The B-rep is a
versatile data structure comprised of faces (bounded portions of surfaces), edges (bounded pieces of curves) and vertices (points), glued together with topological connections
between them. The B-rep enables a variety of parametric

F ace Features

Surf
Conv
E
F
F

E dge Features
E
F

E

Curve
Conv

E

Figure 1: UV-Net builds features by sampling points on the
edges and faces of solid models. These features are then
message-passed among adjacent topological entities.

curves and surfaces, such as lines, arcs, planes, cylinders,
toruses and Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines (NURBS), to
precisely represent complex 3D shapes formed from CAD
modeling operations such as extrusions, fillets, and Booleans.
CAD users interact directly with B-rep faces, edges, and vertices to select, align, and modify 3D shapes. To leverage the
recent advances of deep neural networks in CAD software,
an appropriate representation of B-rep data is required. Such
a representation has the potential to unlock numerous CAD
applications such as auto-complete of modeling operations,
smart selection tools, shape similarity search and many more.
Critical to enabling these applications is a representation that
encodes the B-rep entities themselves.
Despite widespread usage of B-rep data in the industry,
there exists limited research on applying deep neural networks to this representation directly. There are numerous
challenges in feeding B-rep data to neural networks. B-rep
data consists of disparate geometric and topological entities,
such as parametric curves and surfaces, each with their own
set of parameters. Moreover, the mapping between a shape
and a surface type is not one-to-one, for example, a plane

11703

