From Semantic Categories to Fixations: A Novel Weakly-supervised
Visual-auditory Saliency Detection Approach
Guotao Wang1

Chenglizhao Chen2∗

Dengping Fan4

Aimin Hao1,3,6

Hong Qin5

1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Qingdao University
3
Research Unit of Virtual Human and Virtual Surgery, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
4
5
6
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
Stony Brook University
Pengcheng Laboratory

Abstract
Thanks to the rapid advances in the deep learning techniques and the wide availability of large-scale training sets,
the performances of video saliency detection models have
been improving steadily and significantly. However, the
deep learning based visual-audio fixation prediction is still
in its infancy. At present, only a few visual-audio sequences
have been furnished with real fixations being recorded in
the real visual-audio environment. Hence, it would be neither efficiency nor necessary to re-collect real fixations under the same visual-audio circumstance. To address the
problem, this paper advocate a novel approach in a weaklysupervised manner to alleviating the demand of large-scale
training sets for visual-audio model training. By using the
video category tags only, we propose the selective class activation mapping (SCAM), which follows a coarse-to-fine
strategy to select the most discriminative regions in the
spatial-temporal-audio circumstance. Moreover, these regions exhibit high consistency with the real human-eye fixations, which could subsequently be employed as the pseudo
GTs to train a new spatial-temporal-audio (STA) network.
Without resorting to any real fixation, the performance of
our STA network is comparable to that of the fully supervised ones. Our code and results are publicly available at
https://github.com/guotaowang/STANet.

1. Introduction and Motivation
In the deep learning era, we have witnessed a growing
development in video saliency detection techniques [53, 34,
29, 14], where the primary task is to locate the most distinctive regions in a series of video sequences. At present,
this field consists of two parallel research directions, i.e.,
the video salient object detection and the video fixation prediction. In practice, the former [19, 49, 41, 32, 13, 4, 5, 8]
aims to segment the most salient objects with clear object
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. This paper mainly focuses on using a weakly-supervised
approach to predicting spatial-temporal-audio (STA) fixations,
where the key innovation is that, as the first attempt, we automatically convert semantic category tags to pseudo-fixations via the
newly-proposed selective class activation mapping (SCAM).

boundaries (Fig. 1-A). The latter [35, 54, 12, 44, 18], as the
main topic of this paper, predicts the real human-eye fixations in the form of scattered coordinates spreading over the
entire scene without any clear boundaries (Fig. 1-B). In fact,
this topic has long been investigated extensively in the past
decades. Different from the previous works [39, 29, 51],
this paper is interested in exploiting the deep learning techniques to predict fixations under the visual and audio circumstance, also known as visual-audio fixation prediction,
and this topic is still in its early exploration stage.
At present, almost all state-of-the-art (SOTA) visualaudio fixation prediction approaches [47, 45] are developed with the help of the deep learning techniques, using
the vanilla encoder-decoder structure, facilitated with various attention mechanisms, and trained in a fully-supervised
manner. Albeit making progress, these fully-supervised approaches are plagued by one critical limitation (see below).
It is well known that a deep model’s performance is
heavily dependent on the adopted training set, and large-

15119

