View-Guided Point Cloud Completion
Xuancheng Zhang1 , Yutong Feng1 , Siqi Li1 Changqing Zou3 , Hai Wan1 ,
Xibin Zhao1 *, Yandong Guo4 , Yue Gao1, 2 *
1
BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
2
THUICBS, Tsinghua University, 3 Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd, 4 OPPO Research Institute
{zxc19,fyt19,lsq19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, aaronzou1125@gmail.com
{wanhai,zxb,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn, yandong.guo@live.com

Abstract
This paper presents a view-guided solution for the task
of point cloud completion. Unlike most existing methods directly inferring the missing points using shape priors, we
address this task by introducing ViPC (view-guided point
cloud completion) that takes the missing crucial global
structure information from an extra single-view image. By
leveraging a framework that sequentially performs effective
cross-modality and cross-level fusions, our method achieves
significantly superior results over typical existing solutions
on a new large-scale dataset we collect for the view-guided
point cloud completion task.

1. Introduction
Point cloud has attracted increasing research interest due
to its wide range of applications in various fields such as
auto-driving [16], robotics [27], geography [29], phenomics
[19], and archaeology [4]. In practice, the point cloud’s
data quality directly acquired by the depth scanning devices
can be affected by many factors such as occlusions between
objects and low scanning precision, which may lead to the
poor-quality point cloud, e.g., incomplete, sparse, and noisy
point cloud.
Existing methods, mainly including point cloud completion [42], denoising [5], and super-resolution (up-sampling)
[38], have been proposed for the task of point cloud enhancement. Early methods generated enhanced point cloud
by mainly using shape prior information [17] or handcrafted geometric regularities [35]. In recent years, datadriven methods, especially deep learning techniques like
PointNet [28] and DGCNN [37], have made significant
progress on this problem. Compared to traditional methods, these deep learning based methods have demonstrated
significant advantages in processing objects with irregular
structure and geometry.
* Corresponding authors

+
Partial Point Cloud Single View Image

ViPC
Complete Point Cloud

Figure 1. ViPC is a new approach completing a partial point
cloud by leveraging the complementary information from an extra single-view image.

In this paper, we focus on the following point completion
task: the input point cloud is incomplete but with limited
noise, while our method outputs a complete point cloud.
Studying this problem addresses a common problem in realworld 3D data acquisition where a 3D scanner with a RGB
camera is occluded by other objects in the environment. The
most recent solutions to this problem are data-driven, leveraging an encoder-decoder architecture [9, 42, 24, 39]. In
those methods, an encoder transfers the incomplete input
point cloud into the feature space, and then a decoder reconstructs a complete point cloud by transferring the features back to Euclidean space. The whole network works as
a parameterized model by learning a mapping between the
two latent spaces of incomplete and complete point cloud.
In the cases where there is a large degree of incompleteness
in the input point cloud, learning this mapping with only the
single-modality point cloud data is challenging because of
the following factors: 1) there is a great uncertainty in inferring the missing points due to the limited amount of information available, 2) point cloud is of an unstructured data,
together with inherent sparseness, it is difficult to determine
whether a blank 3D space is caused by inherent spareness
or incompleteness.
In this paper, we seek a more applicable solution to the
point cloud completion task. Specifically, we address the
task with the help of the image modality and propose a
view-guided point completion framework (ViPC) as illustrated in Figure. 1. This setting of sensor fusion is increasingly common as the hardware cost decreases (e.g., the In-

15890

