HCRF-Flow: Scene Flow from Point Clouds with Continuous High-order CRFs
and Position-aware Flow Embedding
Ruibo Li1,2 , Guosheng Lin1,2∗, Tong He3 , Fayao Liu4 , Chunhua Shen3
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
University of Adelaide, Australia 4 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
E-mail: ruibo001@e.ntu.edu.sg , gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Scene flow in 3D point clouds plays an important role
in understanding dynamic environments. Although significant advances have been made by deep neural networks, the
performance is far from satisfactory as only per-point translational motion is considered, neglecting the constraints of
the rigid motion in local regions. To address the issue, we
propose to introduce the motion consistency to force the
smoothness among neighboring points. In addition, constraints on the rigidity of the local transformation are also
added by sharing unique rigid motion parameters for all
points within each local region. To this end, a high-order
CRFs based relation module (Con-HCRFs) is deployed to
explore both point-wise smoothness and region-wise rigidity. To empower the CRFs to have a discriminative unary
term, we also introduce a position-aware flow estimation
module to be incorporated into the Con-HCRFs. Comprehensive experiments on FlyingThings3D and KITTI show
that our proposed framework (HCRF-Flow) achieves stateof-the-art performance and significantly outperforms previous approaches substantially.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation [37] aims to provide dense or
semi-dense 3D vectors, representing the per-point 3D motion in two consecutive frames. The information provided
has proven invaluable in analyzing dynamic scenes. Although significant advances have been made in the 2D optical flow, the counterpart in 3D point cloud is far more challenging. This is partly due to the irregularity and sparsity of
the data, but also due to the diversity of the scene.
As pointed out in [17], most of the structures in the visual world are rigid or at least nearly so. Many previous topperforming approaches [13, 5, 45, 26] simplify this task as a
∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin. (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg )

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. The warped point cloud at the next frame based on different scene flow. Green points represent the point cloud at frame t.
Red points are the warped results at frame t + 1 by adding scene
flow back to corresponding green points. (a) scene flow produced by FlowNet3D [13]; (b) scene flow produced by FlowNet3D
and refined by a conventional CRF; (c) scene flow produced by
FlowNet3D and refined by our continuous high order CRFs; (d)
ground truth scene flow. The local structure of the warped point
cloud is distorted in Flownet3d and the conventional CRF but preserved in our method.

regression problem by estimating a point-wise translational
motion. Although promising results have been achieved,
the performance is far from satisfactory as the potential
rigid motion constraints existing in the local region are ignored. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the results generated by the
FlowNet3D [13] are deformed and fail to maintain the local geometric smoothness. A straightforward remedy is to
utilize pair-wise regularization to smooth the flow prediction. However, ignoring the potential rigid transformations

364

