Learning Delaunay Surface Elements for Mesh Reconstruction
Marie-Julie Rakotosaona
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
mrakotos@lix.polytechnique.fr

Paul Guerrero
Adobe Research
guerrero@adobe.com

Niloy Mitra
UCL, Adobe Research
n.mitra@ucl.ac.uk

Noam Aigerman
Adobe Research
aigerman@adobe.com

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract

[35]

We present a method for reconstructing triangle meshes
from point clouds. Existing learning-based methods for
mesh reconstruction mostly generate triangles individually,
making it hard to create manifold meshes. We leverage
the properties of 2D Delaunay triangulations to construct
a mesh from manifold surface elements. Our method first
estimates local geodesic neighborhoods around each point.
We then perform a 2D projection of these neighborhoods
using a learned logarithmic map. A Delaunay triangulation in this 2D domain is guaranteed to produce a manifold patch, which we call a Delaunay surface element. We
synchronize the local 2D projections of neighboring elements to maximize the manifoldness of the reconstructed
mesh. Our results show that we achieve better overall manifoldness of our reconstructed meshes than current methods to reconstruct meshes with arbitrary topology. Our
code, data and pretrained models can be found online:
https://github.com/mrakotosaon/dse-meshing
[42]

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from a given set of points (e.g.,
a scan), has a long history in computational geometry and
computer vision [5, 39]. A version of the problem requires
triangulating a given point cloud to produce a watertight and
manifold surface. A key challenge is to handle different
sampling conditions while producing well-shaped triangles
and preserving the underlying shape features.
A good surface reconstruction algorithm should satisfy
the following requirements: (i) produce a connected, manifold and watertight triangulation; (ii) require no casespecific parameter tuning; (iii) preserve sharp features;
(iv) handle point sets with non-uniform distribution; and

PointTriNet [42]

IER Meshing [35]

ours

Figure 1. We present a method for mesh reconstruction from point
clouds. We combine Delaunay triangulations with learned local
parameterizations to obtain a higher-quality mesh than the current
state-of-the-art. Bad (non-manifold) triangles are shown in red.
Our method is robust to uniformly (top) and non-uniformly (bottom) sampled points.

22

