A Fourier-based Framework for Domain Generalization
Qinwei Xu1
1

Ruipeng Zhang1

Ya Zhang1,2 B

Yanfeng Wang1,2

Qi Tian3

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Huawei Cloud & AI

{qinweixu, zhangrp, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks suffer from performance
degradation when evaluated on testing data under different distributions from training data. Domain generalization aims at tackling this problem by learning transferable
knowledge from multiple source domains in order to generalize to unseen target domains. This paper introduces
a novel Fourier-based perspective for domain generalization. The main assumption is that the Fourier phase information contains high-level semantics and is not easily
affected by domain shifts. To force the model to capture
phase information, we develop a novel Fourier-based data
augmentation strategy called amplitude mix which linearly
interpolates between the amplitude spectrums of two images. A dual-formed consistency loss called co-teacher regularization is further introduced between the predictions induced from original and augmented images. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks have demonstrated that the
proposed method is able to achieve state-of-the-arts performance for domain generalization.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, deep learning have made
tremendous progress on various tasks. Under the assumption that training and testing data share the same distribution, deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown great
promise for a wide spectrum of applications [18, 10, 12].
However, DNNs have demonstrated quite poor generalizability for out-of-distribution data. Such performance degeneration caused by distributional shift (a.k.a. domain
shift) impairs the applications of DNNs, as in reality training and testing data often come from different distributions.
In order to address the problem of domain shift, domain
adaptation (DA) bridges the gap between source domain(s)
and a specific target domain with the help of some labelled
or unlabeled target data. However, DA methods fail to generalize to unknown target domains that have not been seen

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of the amplitude-only and phase-only reconstruction: (a) original image; (b) reconstructed image with amplitude information only by setting the phase component to a constant; (c) reconstructed image with phase information only by setting the amplitude component to a constant.

during training. Collecting data from every possible target
domain and training DA models with every source-target
pair are expensive and impractical. As a result, a more challenging yet practical problem setting, i.e., domain generalization (DG) [29, 20] is proposed. Unlike DA, DG aims to
train model with multiple source domains that can generalize to arbitrary unseen target domains. To tackle the DG
problem, many existing methods utilize adversarial training [24, 23, 38], meta learning [21, 1, 25, 4], self-supervised
learning [2] or domain augmentation [44, 37, 50, 51] techniques and have shown promising results.
In this paper, we introduce a novel Fourier-based perspective for DG. Our motivation comes from a well-known
property of the Fourier transformation: the phase component of Fourier spectrum preserves high-level semantics of
the original signal, while the amplitude component contains
low-level statistics [32, 33, 35, 11]. For better understanding, we present an example of the images reconstructed
from only amplitude information and only phase information, as well as the corresponding original image in Fig. 1.
As shown in Fig. 1(c), the phase-only reconstruction reveals
the important visual structures, from which one can easily recognize the “house” conveyed in the original image.
On the other hand, it is hard to tell the exact object from
the amplitude-only reconstruction in Fig. 1(b). Based on

14383

