Alpha-Refine: Boosting Tracking Performance by
Precise Bounding Box Estimation
Bin Yan1 ,* Xinyu Zhang1 ,* Dong Wang1†, Huchuan Lu1,2 and Xiaoyun Yang3
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Remark AI
{yan bin,zhangxy71102}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, xyang@remarkholdings.com

Abstract
Visual object tracking aims to precisely estimate the
bounding box for the given target, which is a challenging problem due to factors such as deformation and occlusion. Many recent trackers adopt the multiple-stage strategy
to improve bounding box estimation. These methods ﬁrst
coarsely locate the target and then reﬁne the initial prediction in the following stages. However, existing approaches
still suffer from limited precision, and the coupling of different stages severely restricts the method’s transferability.
This work proposes a novel, flexible, and accurate reﬁnement module called Alpha-Reﬁne (AR), which can signiﬁcantly improve the base trackers’ box estimation quality. By
exploring a series of design options, we conclude that the
key to successful reﬁnement is extracting and maintaining
detailed spatial information as much as possible. Following
this principle, Alpha-Reﬁne adopts a pixel-wise correlation,
a corner prediction head, and an auxiliary mask head as the
core components. Comprehensive experiments on TrackingNet, LaSOT, GOT-10K, and VOT2020 benchmarks with
multiple base trackers show that our approach signiﬁcantly
improves the base tracker’s performance with little extra
latency. The proposed Alpha-Reﬁne method leads to a series of strengthened trackers, among which the ARSiamRPN
(AR strengthened SiamRPNpp) and the ARDiMP50 (AR
strengthened DiMP50) achieve good efﬁciency-precision
trade-off, while the ARDiMPsuper (AR strengthened DiMPsuper) achieves very competitive performance at a realtime speed. Code and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/MasterBin-IIAU/AlphaReﬁne.

1. Introduction
Precise box estimation is indispensable for a successful tracker. Early trackers usually solve this problem by
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author: Dr. Dong Wang, wdice@dlut.edu.cn

Table 1. Oracle experiment on LaSOT. The center of the search
region is always set at the center of the ground truth, reﬂecting the
box estimation capacity of these methods. The best three results
are marked in red, green and blue bold fonts respectively.

Oracle
SiamRPNpp[23]
ATOM[7]
DiMPsuper[2]
ECO[6]
AlphaReﬁne

AUC
0.682
0.580
0.693
0.496
0.762

PNorm
0.829
0.686
0.799
0.666
0.902

P
0.745
0.604
0.734
0.533
0.919

multi-scale search [1, 6, 35, 3] or sampling-then-regression
strategy [37, 29], which are inaccurate and greatly limit the
performance of the trackers. For obtaining more robust
and precise tracking results, many state-of-the-art trackers [40, 12, 7, 2] adopt a multiple-stage tracking strategy,
which introduces additional tracking stages for more precise box estimation. These trackers ﬁrst coarsely locate the
target and then reﬁne the initial result in the additional tracking stages to get more precise box prediction. However,
this box estimation can still be improved, even for state-ofthe-art trackers. An oracle experiment veriﬁes this opinion.
We set the tracker’s search region always centering at the
ground truth so that the performance will be mainly determined by the capacity of box estimation. Table 1 shows
that with the aforementioned oracle setting, state-of-the-art
trackers’ AUC scores are still far from perfection, indicating
unsatisfying box estimation, although some methods (e.g.
ATOM [7], DiMP [2]) have built-in box estimation modules. In contrast, given the perfectly centered search region,
the proposed Alpha-Reﬁne achieves signiﬁcantly better performance, demonstrating that Alpha-Reﬁne’s superiority in
box estimation.
Additionally, most of reﬁnement methods in existing
trackers [40, 12, 7, 2] are weak in transferability, because
their training is coupled with other components. Extra retraining is required if above reﬁnement modules are applied
to new base trackers. As opposed to these methods, Alpha-

5289

