TPCN: Temporal Point Cloud Networks for Motion Forecasting
Maosheng Ye1‡
Tongyi Cao2
Qifeng Chen1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 DEEPROUTE.AI

Abstract
Spatial Module

We propose the Temporal Point Cloud Networks (TPCN),
a novel and flexible framework with joint spatial and temporal learning for trajectory prediction. Unlike existing approaches that rasterize agents and map information as 2D
images or operate in a graph representation, our approach
extends ideas from point cloud learning with dynamic temporal learning to capture both spatial and temporal information by splitting trajectory prediction into both spatial
and temporal dimensions. In the spatial dimension, agents
can be viewed as an unordered point set, and thus it is
straightforward to apply point cloud learning techniques
to model agents’ locations. While the spatial dimension
does not take kinematic and motion information into account, we further propose dynamic temporal learning to
model agents’ motion over time. Experiments on the Argoverse motion forecasting benchmark show that our approach
achieves state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting in autonomous driving concerns future trajectories of agents, including vehicles and pedestrians. For a self-driving car, the predicted future trajectories
of surrounding traffic participants serve as key information
to plan its future trajectories. A self-driving car should be
able to predict the distribution or a few possible future trajectories of each agent as the future is full of uncertainty,
given the relevant sensor input information in the past.
Traditional methods for motion forecasting [15, 28, 34,
39] are based on kinematic constraints and road map information with handcrafted rules. Though these approaches
are sufficient in many simple situations, they fail to capture
the rich behavior strategies and interaction in complex urban scenarios. Great progress has been made to explore the
power of data-driven methods in motion forecasting with
deep learning [2, 4, 6, 7, 25]. These methods encode the
agents (e.g., vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists) and highdefinition map (HD map) information by rasterizing the corresponding elements (lanes, crosswalks) as lines and poly‡ Part of the work was done during an internship at DEEPROUTE.AI.

Temporal Module

Predicted
trajectories

Input (agents + map)

Figure 1. A high-level illustration of our approach. Red points
represent the agent history trajectory points, while blue points are
discrete map lane points. We use a spatial module based on point
cloud learning to extract geometric features and a temporal module to extract sequential features. Both modules utilize the output
of the other module and propagate mutually to output future trajectory points.

gons with different colors. A standard image backbone network [12, 31] is then applied to the rasterized image to extract the map and agent features and perform motion prediction.
However, the rasterized image is an overly complex representation for environment and agent history and requires
significantly more computation and data to train and deploy.
More succinct representations have been explored to avoid
this heavy process. VectorNet [10] proposes a vector representation to exploit the spatial locality of individual road
components with graph neural networks. LaneConv [19]
constructs a lane graph from vectorized map data and proposes LaneGCN to capture the topology and long dependency of the agents and map information. Both VectorNet [10] and LaneConv [19] can be viewed as extensions
of graph neural network in prediction with strong capability
to extract spatial locality. However, both works fail to fully
utilize the temporal information of agents with less focus on
temporal feature extraction.
In this work, we extend ideas from 3D point cloud learning to the motion forecasting task. Previous works on point
cloud networks focus on spatial points. We extend the met-

11318

