Indoor Panorama Planar 3D Reconstruction via Divide and Conquer
Cheng Sun1,2

Chi-Wei Hsiao1

chengsun@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

chiweihsiao@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

Ning-Hsu Wang1

Min Sun1,3

Hwann-Tzong Chen1,4

albert100121@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw

+RUL]RQWDO

Abstract
Indoor panorama typically consists of human-made structures parallel or perpendicular to gravity. We leverage this
phenomenon to approximate the scene in a 360-degree image
with (H)orizontal-planes and (V)ertical-planes. To this end,
we propose an effective divide-and-conquer strategy that
divides pixels based on their plane orientation estimation;
then, the succeeding instance segmentation module conquers
the task of planes clustering more easily in each plane orientation group. Besides, parameters of V-planes depend on
camera yaw rotation, but translation-invariant CNNs are less
aware of the yaw change. We thus propose a yaw-invariant
V-planar reparameterization for CNNs to learn. We create
a benchmark for indoor panorama planar reconstruction
by extending existing 360 depth datasets with ground truth
H&V-planes (referred to as “PanoH&V” dataset) and adopt
state-of-the-art planar reconstruction methods to predict
H&V-planes as our baselines. Our method outperforms the
baselines by a large margin on the proposed dataset.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing planar surfaces from single-view images
have many applications such as interior modeling, AR/VR,
robot navigation, and scene understanding. Generally, an
indoor scene consisting of human-made structures can be
approximated by a small set of dominant planes, making
planar reconstruction suitable for 3D indoor modeling.
Recent works on planar reconstruction [17, 18, 20] employ state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods and
achieve promising results. However, these works are mostly
trained on the planar datasets derived from ScanNet [6] or
NYUv2 [23] with a small field-of-view (FoV). Data of this
kind require multiple images to reconstruct entire scenes,
1 National Tsing Hua University
2 ASUS AICS Department
3 Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
4 Aeolus Robotics

,QSXW5*%

9HUWLFDO

3ODQH,QVWDQFH6HJPHQWDWLRQ3ODQH3DUDPHWHUV

Figure 1: Planar surfaces of human-made structures are
mostly horizontal or vertical with respect to the gravity direction. Given an RGB panorama, we propose to model a
3D scene as horizontal or vertical planes (the H&V-planes).
which would cost more computational time and resources.
As 360° devices get popularized, the amount of 360° data
has significantly increased, with many panorama datasets being released to facilitate learning-based methods. By taking
input in 360° format, 3D reconstruction of an entire scene
can be done with only one snapshot. Considering the benefit
of real-world 360° data in planar reconstruction and the gap
of existing literature in this research field, we believe the
planar reconstruction task from panorama imagery is worthy
of investigation.
In this work, we construct the first real-world indoor
360° H&V-plane dataset (PanoH&V dataset), where we simplify the planar reconstruction task by focusing on horizontal
and vertical planes (illustrated in Fig. 1). To this end, we
extend existing large-scale 360° datasets by fitting the provided depth modality with horizontal and vertical planes.
The H&V-planes are similar to the concept of the Manhattan
world [5] and the Atlanta world [22], but we only constrain
the extracted planes to be vertical or horizontal without assuming other inter-plane relationship. With the extended
modality from large-scale H&V-planes, we train two current state-of-the-art planar reconstruction methods, PlaneRCNN [17] and PlaneAE [31], and report their performance
to serve as the strong baselines in our benchmark.
We find existing planar reconstruction methods suboptimal when applied to the presented PanoH&V dataset. First,
existing methods employ instance segmentation to detect
planes from visual cue with less consideration about the
estimated geometry. In practice, some planes are easier to
differentiate through geometry instead of visual appearance

11338

