Pareto Self-Supervised Training for Few-Shot Learning
Zhengyu Chen1,2,3 , Jixie Ge1,2 , Heshen Zhan1,2 , Siteng Huang1,2 , Donglin Wang1,2∗
1
Machine Intelligence Lab (MiLAB), AI Division, School of Engineering, Westlake University
2
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
3
College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
{chenzhengyu,gejixie,zhanheshen,huangsiteng,wangdonglin}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
While few-shot learning (FSL) aims for rapid generalization to new concepts with little supervision, self-supervised
learning (SSL) constructs supervisory signals directly computed from unlabeled data. Exploiting the complementarity
of these two manners, few-shot auxiliary learning has recently drawn much attention to deal with few labeled data.
Previous works benefit from sharing inductive bias between
the main task (FSL) and auxiliary tasks (SSL), where the
shared parameters of tasks are optimized by minimizing a
linear combination of task losses. However, it is challenging to select a proper weight to balance tasks and reduce
task conflict. To handle the problem as a whole, we propose
a novel approach named as Pareto self-supervised training
(PSST) for FSL. PSST explicitly decomposes the few-shot
auxiliary problem into multiple constrained multi-objective
subproblems with different trade-off preferences, and here
a preference region in which the main task achieves the
best performance is identified. Then, an effective preferred
Pareto exploration is proposed to find a set of optimal solutions in such a preference region. Extensive experiments on
several public benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness
of our approach by achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Although deep learning has achieved great success in
a variety of fields, limitations still exist in many practical
applications where labeled samples are intrinsically rare or
expensive. Different from humans who can easily learn to
accomplish new tasks with a few examples, it is difficult
for machines to rapidly generalize to new concepts with
very little supervision, which draws considerable attention
to the challenging few-shot learning (FSL) setting. As training large models with few labeled samples leads to overfitting or even non-convergence, conventional deep neural
∗ Corresponding author.

networks fail to address such a problem.
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) attracts many
researchers for its soaring performance without involving
manual labels. By defining pretext tasks to exploit the structural information of data itself, supervisory signals can be
easily developed to learn useful general-purpose representations [2, 20, 31]. As self-supervised learning can improve
the generalization of the network under the limitation of labeled data, some recent few-shot auxiliary learning (FSAL)
works [16, 39] take few-shot learning as learning main task
with self-supervised auxiliary tasks. To encourage that the
few-shot task benefits from auxiliary tasks, some parameters are shared across tasks to inductive knowledge transfer. However, as the objectives of distinct tasks are different and the relationship between objectives is complicated
and unknown, optimizing each task not only promotes each
other but also naturally conflicts. A typical solution to suppress such conflict is to optimize the shared parameters by
minimizing a weighted sum of the empirical risk for each
task, where each weight of the empirical risk can be viewed
as the trade-off. In previous works [16, 39], these tradeoffs are usually set by experience in practical situations.
It is difficult to find optimal trade-offs. Moreover, these
works [16, 39] attempt to find one single solution for all
objectives, which is likely to sacrifice the performance of
the main task and be inconsistent with the goal of few-shot
auxiliary learning.
According to the above discussion, few-shot auxiliary
learning with conflicting objectives requires better modeling of the trade-off between tasks, which is beyond what
a linear combination achieves. To overcome the issue, we
propose a novel approach named Pareto self-supervised
training (PSST) for few-shot learning. PSST explicitly
casts few-shot auxiliary learning as a multi-objective optimization problem, with the overall objective of finding
a Pareto optimal solution of network parameters [26, 27].
However, different from previous works that explore in the
global space [27], PSST uses an effective preferred Pareto
exploration for FSL. Specifically, PSST decomposes the

13663

