Sewer-ML: A Multi-Label Sewer Defect Classification Dataset and Benchmark
Joakim Bruslund Haurum
Thomas B. Moeslund
Visual Analysis and Perception (VAP) Laboratory, Aalborg University, Denmark
joha@create.aau.dk, tbm@create.aau.dk

Abstract
Perhaps surprisingly sewerage infrastructure is one of
the most costly infrastructures in modern society. Sewer
pipes are manually inspected to determine whether the
pipes are defective. However, this process is limited by the
number of qualified inspectors and the time it takes to inspect a pipe. Automatization of this process is therefore of
high interest. So far, the success of computer vision approaches for sewer defect classification has been limited
when compared to the success in other fields mainly due
to the lack of public datasets. To this end, in this work
we present a large novel and publicly available multi-label
classification dataset for image-based sewer defect classification called Sewer-ML.
The Sewer-ML dataset consists of 1.3 million images
annotated by professional sewer inspectors from three different utility companies across nine years. Together with
the dataset, we also present a benchmark algorithm and a
novel metric for assessing performance. The benchmark
algorithm is a result of evaluating 12 state-of-the-art algorithms, six from the sewer defect classification domain
and six from the multi-label classification domain, and combining the best performing algorithms. The novel metric
is a class-importance weighted F2 score, F2CIW , reflecting
the economic impact of each class, used together with the
normal pipe F1 score, F1Normal . The benchmark algorithm
achieves an F2CIW score of 55.11% and F1Normal score of
90.94%, leaving ample room for improvement on the SewerML dataset. The code, models, and dataset are available at
the project page http://vap.aau.dk/sewer-ml

1. Introduction
The sewerage infrastructure is an important but often
unnoticed infrastructure. 240 million US citizens are serviced by 1.28 million kilometers of public sewer pipes and
800,000 kilometers of privately owned pipes [3]. In order to
maintain public health and sanitation, and avoid e.g. unintentional sewer overflows, a 271 billion dollar investment is
needed within the next 10 years in order to service an addi-

(a) DE, PF

(b) RO, FS, AF

(c) PH, RB

(d) Normal pipe

Figure 1: Sewer-ML data examples. Images showcasing a
subset of the classes and the visual variation in the dataset.
The class codes below each image are described in Table 1.

tional 56 million US citizens [3]. Additionally, all of these
sewer pipes have to be regularly inspected to avoid sudden
pipe collapse or reduced sewer capabilities.
Sewer inspections are currently performed on location
by a professional inspector, who simultaneously maneuvers
a remote controlled vehicle with a movable camera through
the sewer pipe. This is hard and tiresome work, as the inspectors must look at a video feed for a prolonged amount
of time. This can lead to flawed inspections, which in the
worst case can result in damage to the sewerage infrastructure. Furthermore, the variance in visual appearance within
sewer pipes further complicates the task, see Figure 1.
Therefore, the field of automated sewer inspection has
been researched by industry and academia for the last three
decades, through the development of different robot platforms and specialized algorithms [31]. However, there are
at the moment no means to determine which method is the

13456

