Pushing it out of the Way: Interactive Visual Navigation
Kuo-Hao Zeng1
1

Luca Weihs2

Ali Farhadi1

Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI

Figure 1: Visual navigation may require interactions that go beyond moving forward/backward, and turning left/right. For
example, the agent in the top row needs to push the chair out of its way to reach the target. Interactive navigation entails
deeper understanding of the outcome of agents actions on objects in the scene. In this paper, we introduce Neural Interaction
Engine (NIE) to explicitly predict the effect of actions on objects poses. By integrating NIE with our policy network we
show that we can perform long-horizon planning while predicting the outcome of the actions. We evaluate NIE for visual
navigation where the path to the goal is obstructed, and moving objects to specific locations in the scene and show major
improvements over state of the art in these tasks.

Abstract
We have observed significant progress in visual navigation for embodied agents. A common assumption in studying visual navigation is that the environments are static; this
is a limiting assumption. Intelligent navigation may involve
interacting with the environment beyond just moving forward/backward and turning left/right. Sometimes, the best
way to navigate is to push something out of the way. In this
paper, we study the problem of interactive navigation where
agents learn to change the environment to navigate more efficiently to their goals. To this end, we introduce the Neural
Interaction Engine (NIE) to explicitly predict the change in
the environment caused by the agent’s actions. By modeling the changes while planning, we find that agents exhibit
significant improvements in their navigational capabilities.
More specifically, we consider two downstream tasks in the
physics-enabled, visually rich, AI2-THOR environment: (1)
reaching a target while the path to the target is blocked (2)
moving an object to a target location by pushing it. For both
tasks, agents equipped with an NIE significantly outperform
agents without the understanding of the effect of the actions indicating the benefits of our approach. The code and
dataset are available at github.com/KuoHaoZeng/

Interactive_Visual_Navigation.

1. Introduction
Embodied AI has witnessed remarkable progress over
the past few years owing to advances in learning algorithms,
benchmarks, and standardized tasks. A popular task that has
received a considerable amount of attention is visual navigation [3, 5, 8, 29, 39, 48], where the goal is to navigate
towards a specific coordinate or object within an unseen environment. One of the common implicit assumptions for
these navigation methods is that the scene is static, and the
agent cannot interact with the objects to change their pose.
Consider the scenario that the path of the agent towards
the target location is blocked by an obstacle (e.g., a chair)
as shown in Fig. 1 (top). To reach the target, the agent has
to move the obstacle out of the way. Therefore, planning
for reaching the target requires not only understanding the
outcome of agent actions but also the dynamics of agentobject interactions. There are many factors such as object
size, spatial relationship with other objects in the scene, and
reaction of the object to the applied forces, that influence
the outcome of the interaction with the object. Hence, long-

9868

