Zero-shot Single Image Restoration through Controlled Perturbation of
Koschmieder’s Model
Aupendu Kar∗, Sobhan Kanti Dhara∗, Debashis Sen, Prabir Kumar Biswas
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, WB, India

Abstract
Real-world image degradation due to light scattering
can be described based on the Koschmieder’s model. Training deep models to restore such degraded images is challenging as real-world paired data is scarcely available
and synthetic paired data may suffer from domain-shift issues. In this paper, a zero-shot single real-world image
restoration model is proposed leveraging a theoretically deduced property of degradation through the Koschmieder’s
model. Our zero-shot network estimates the parameters of
the Koschmieder’s model, which describes the degradation
in the input image, to perform image restoration. We show
that a suitable degradation of the input image amounts to a
controlled perturbation of the Koschmieder’s model that describes the image’s formation. The optimization of the zeroshot network is achieved by seeking to maintain the relation
between its estimates of Koschmieder’s model parameters
before and after the controlled perturbation, along with the
use of a few no-reference losses. Image dehazing and underwater image restoration are carried out using the proposed zero-shot framework, which in general outperforms
the state-of-the-art quantitatively and subjectively on multiple standard real-world image datasets. Additionally, the
application of our zero-shot framework for low-light image
enhancement is also demonstrated.

1. Introduction
Due to the scattering of light in adverse environmental conditions, captured images suffer from poor visibility [48, 34]. Such conditions are often encountered during imaging in hazy and underwater environments. Due
to the presence of suspended particles like dust, aerosol,
and water droplets in air, light gets absorbed to produce
hazy images having reduced visibility and contrast [38].
The presence of color particles renders a hazy image to
∗ Aupendu Kar and Sobhan Kanti Dhara share equal contribution

Webpage and Code: aupendu.github.io/zero-restore
Correspondence to: {mailtoaupendu, dhara.sk}@gmail.com

be a color cast one as well [32, 14, 31]. Due to absorption of light in turbid water medium, and attenuation of
light depending on optical wavelengths and water salinity, underwater images suffer from poor visibility and color
cast [46]. The well-accepted Koschmieder’s light scattering
model [34, 48] with the transmission map and atmospheric
light parameters describes such degradations in hazy images. A modified version of the model [30] does so for the
underwater images, where the atmospheric light is replaced
by the global background light and the transmission map is
modified into a channel-wise component. The said degradations in the images lead to poor performance in computer
vision applications such as surveillance and robotic navigation [37, 27, 29].
A plethora of techniques have been proposed for image
dehazing [26, 10, 36, 52, 47, 51, 32, 15, 37, 22] and underwater image restoration [9, 50, 63, 12, 3, 42, 5, 2, 61, 39, 19,
58] to restore the images degraded due to haze and turbid
medium, respectively. Most of the approaches either provide hand-crafted prior or deep learning based solutions for
the restoration. Most of the deep learning based techniques
rely on synthetically generated degradation for training due
to lack of large-scale datasets of real-world degraded images with ground truth [36]. Such a training may not capture the features of the real-world degradation, and hence,
suffer from domain-shift issues [36]. A few deep learning
based solutions are unsupervised approaches which either
use hand-crafted priors for restoration [22] or use generative adversarial networks (GAN) [52].
A zero-shot approach learns the task at hand from the input image alone, and therefore, is helpful in scenarios where
real-world paired data for training is limited and its creation is labor-intensive [35, 57, 53, 36]. Hence, a few zeroshot approaches have been proposed for the said restoration based on the Koschmieder’s model. However, as these
zero-shot approaches do not have any other reference than
the input image itself, they are required to estimate the parameters of the Koschmieder’s model using loss functions
or regularizers based on classical hand-crafted priors. For
example, the zero-shot image dehazing approaches DoubleDIP [21] and ZID [36] use the dark channel prior DCP [26]

16205

