Image Super-Resolution with Non-Local Sparse Attention
Yiqun Mei, Yuchen Fan, Yuqian Zhou
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Both Non-Local (NL) operation and sparse representation are crucial for Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR).
In this paper, we investigate their combinations and propose
a novel Non-Local Sparse Attention (NLSA) with dynamic
sparse attention pattern. NLSA is designed to retain longrange modeling capability from NL operation while enjoying robustness and high-efficiency of sparse representation.
Specifically, NLSA rectifies non-local attention with spherical locality sensitive hashing (LSH) that partitions the input space into hash buckets of related features. For every
query signal, NLSA assigns a bucket to it and only computes attention within the bucket. The resulting sparse attention prevents the model from attending to locations that
are noisy and less-informative, while reducing the computational cost from quadratic to asymptotic linear with respect
to the spatial size. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness and efficiency of NLSA. With a few non-local sparse
attention modules, our architecture, called non-local sparse
network (NLSN), reaches state-of-the-art performance for
SISR quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. introduction
Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) has attracted
great attention in recent years. In general, the goal of
SISR is to reconstruct a high-resolution image given its lowresolution counterpart. Due to the ill-posed nature of SISR
task, a variety of image priors [12, 14, 24, 36, 40, 46] were
proposed as the regularizers, including the most representative sparse and non-local priors, which are the focus of this
paper.
For decades, sparsity constraints have been wellexplored as a powerful driving forces for many image reconstruction problems [4, 7, 19], especially SISR [46]. With
sparse coding, images are well-expressed as the sparse linear combinations of atoms in a predefined over-complete
dictionary such as wavelet [11] and curvelet [9] functions.
Combining with exemplar-based approaches, sparse representation developed the dictionary using raw image patches
[46] or learned semantic feature patches from the degraded

image itself [17, 19] or external datasets[47]. As the deep
Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) for SISR emerges,
the non-linearity activation between layers embraces the
benefits of sparsity prior. Dong et al. propose the SRCNN
[16] to first successfully bridge convolution to classic sparse
coding where the ReLU activation roughly enforced 50%
sparsity by zeroing-out all negative entries. Recently, Fan
et al. [21] go beyond that by explicitly imposing sparsity
constraints upon hidden neurons and conclude that sparsity in feature representation is indeed beneficial and favorable. It is widely proven that the sparsity constraints lead
to high efficiency by largely decreasing the number of elements to represent images. It also yields a more powerful
and robust expression in handling inverse problems theoretically [10, 20] and practically.
Another widely-explored image prior is the Non-Local
(NL) prior. For SISR, adopting Non-Local Attention becomes a more prevalent way [37, 51] to utilize the image
self-similarity prior that small patterns tend to recur within
the same image [5]. NL operation searches for those similar
patterns globally, and selectively sums over those correlated
features to enhance the representation. Though Non-Local
Attention is intuitive and promising to fuse features, directly
applying it for SISR task will encounter some issues that
cannot be ignored. First, the receptive field of features in
deeper layers tend to be global, thus the mutual-correlation
computation among deep features are not that accurate [33].
Second, global NL attention requires the computation of
feature mutual-similarity among all the pixel locations. It
results in quadratic computational cost with respect to image size. To alleviate the above mentioned problems, one
strategy is to limit the NL searching range within a local
neighbourhood. But it reduces computational cost at the
expense of missing much global information.
In this paper, for the specific SISR task, we aim to enforce sparsity in the Non-Local attention module, as well
as largely reduce its computational cost. Specifically, we
propose a novel Non-Local Sparse Attention (NLSA) and
embed it into a residual network baseline like EDSR [32]
to form a Non-Local Sparse Network (NLSN). To force the
sparsity of the NLSA, we spatially partition the deep feature pixels into different groups (termed attention buckets

3517

