Bilateral Grid Learning for Stereo Matching Networks
Bin Xu1 , Yuhua Xu1,2,∗, Xiaoli Yang1 , Wei Jia2 , Yulan Guo3
1
Orbbec, 2 Hefei University of Technology, 3 Sun Yat-sen University
xyh nudt@163.com, guoyulan@sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-time performance of stereo matching networks is
important for many applications, such as automatic driving, robot navigation and augmented reality (AR). Although
significant progress has been made in stereo matching networks in recent years, it is still challenging to balance realtime performance and accuracy. In this paper, we present
a novel edge-preserving cost volume upsampling module
based on the slicing operation in the learned bilateral grid.
The slicing layer is parameter-free, which allows us to obtain a high quality cost volume of high resolution from a
low-resolution cost volume under the guide of the learned
guidance map efficiently. The proposed cost volume upsampling module can be seamlessly embedded into many existing stereo matching networks, such as GCNet, PSMNet,
and GANet. The resulting networks are accelerated several times while maintaining comparable accuracy. Furthermore, we design a real-time network (named BGNet)
based on this module, which outperforms existing published
real-time deep stereo matching networks, as well as some
complex networks on the KITTI stereo datasets. The code is
available at https://github.com/YuhuaXu/BGNet.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a key step in 3D reconstruction,
which has numerous applications in the fields of 3D modeling, robotics, UAVs, augmented realities (AR), and autonomous driving [27, 10, 1]. Given a pair of stereo images,
the purpose of stereo matching is to establish dense correspondences between the pixels in the left and right images.
Although this problem has been studied for more than 40
years, it has not been completely solved due to some difficult factors, such as sensor noise, foreground-background
occlusion, weak or repeated textures, reflective regions, and
transparent objects.
In recent years, deep learning has shown great potential
in this field [43, 14, 18, 16, 5, 37]. Some recent work indi∗ Corresponding author

cates that 3D convolutions can improve the accuracy of the
disparity estimation networks [14, 5, 9]. However, the 3D
convolutions are time consuming, which limits their application in real-time systems.
Bilateral filter [32] is an edge-preserving filter, which
has wide applications in image de-noising, disparity estimation [41], and depth upsampling [40]. However, the original implementation of bilateral filter is time-consuming.
Bilateral grid proposed by Chen et al. [7] is a technique
for speeding up bilateral filtering. It treats the filter as a
“splat/blur/slice” procedure. That is, pixel values are “splatted” onto a small set of vertices in a grid, those vertex values
are then blurred, and finally the filtered pixel values are produced via a “slice” (an interpolation) of the blurred vertex
values. Recently, Gharbi et al. [11] utilize the idea of the
bilateral grid to estimate the local affine color transforms in
their real-time image enhancement network.
For StereoNet [16], the 2D disparity map regressed from
an aggregated 4D cost volume at a low resolution (e.g., 1/8)
is upsampled via bilinear interpolation and refined hierarchically. Although the speed of the lightweight network is
fast, the accuracy is relatively low compared with existing
complex networks, as shown in Table 4. On the ranking list
of KITTI 2012 [10] and KITTI 2015 [23], the top performing methods usually conduct 3D convolutions at a relatively
high resolution, such as 1/3 resolution for GANet [44] and
1/4 resolution for PSMNet [44]. However, their efficiency
is reduced. For example, it takes 1.8s for GANet to process
a pair of images of 1242 × 375, and 0.41s for PSMNet.
The motivation of this paper is to propose a solution that
can regress the disparity map at a high resolution to keep
the high accuracy, while maintaining high efficiency. The
main contributions of this work are as follows:
(1) We design a novel edge-preserving cost volume upsampling module based on the learned bilateral grid. It can
efficiently obtain a high-resolution cost volume for disparity estimation from a low-resolution cost volume via a slicing operation. With this module, cost volume aggregations
(e.g., 3D convolutions) can be performed at a low resolution. The proposed cost volume upsampling module can
be seamlessly embedded into many existing networks such

12497

