V ISUALVOICE: Audio-Visual Speech Separation with Cross-Modal Consistency
Ruohan Gao1,2
Kristen Grauman1,3
1
2
The University of Texas at Austin
Stanford University

3

Facebook AI Research

rhgao@cs.stanford.edu, grauman@fb.com

Audio-visual speech separation

Abstract
We introduce a new approach for audio-visual speech
separation. Given a video, the goal is to extract the
speech associated with a face in spite of simultaneous background sounds and/or other human speakers. Whereas existing methods focus on learning the alignment between
the speaker’s lip movements and the sounds they generate, we propose to leverage the speaker’s face appearance
as an additional prior to isolate the corresponding vocal
qualities they are likely to produce. Our approach jointly
learns audio-visual speech separation and cross-modal
speaker embeddings from unlabeled video. It yields stateof-the-art results on five benchmark datasets for audiovisual speech separation and enhancement, and generalizes well to challenging real-world videos of diverse scenarios. Our video results and code: http://vision.
cs.utexas.edu/projects/VisualVoice/.

Distinctive voice tracks
aid embedding learning

Vocal and facial prior
aids separation

Pull
Push
Cross-modal embedding space

Cross-modal face-to-voice matching

Figure 1: We propose a multi-task learning framework
to jointly learn audio-visual speech separation and crossmodal face-voice embeddings. Our approach leverages the
complementary cues between lip movements and crossmodal speaker embeddings for speech separation. The embeddings serve as a prior for the voice characteristics that
enhances speech separation; the cleaner separated speech in
turn produces more distinctive audio embeddings.

1. Introduction
Human speech is rarely observed in a vacuum. Amidst
the noisy din of a restaurant, we concentrate to parse the
words of our dining partner; watching a heated presidential debate, we disentangle the words of the candidates as
they talk over one another; on a Zoom call we listen to a
colleague while our children chatter and play a few yards
away. Presented with such corrupted and entangled sounds,
the human perceptual system draws heavily on visual information to reduce ambiguities in the audio [62] and modulate
attention on an active speaker in a busy environment [29].
Automating this process of speech separation has many
valuable applications, including assistive technology for the
hearing impaired, superhuman hearing in a wearable augmented reality device, or better transcription of spoken content in noisy in-the-wild Internet videos.
While early work in automatic speech separation relied
solely on the audio stream [53, 78, 18], recent work explores
ways to leverage its close connections to the visual stream
as well [21, 2, 19, 55, 15]. By analyzing the facial motion
in concert with the emitted speech, these methods steer the

audio separation module towards the relevant portions of
the sound that ought to be separated out from the full audio
track. For example, the mouth articulates in different shapes
consistent with the phonemes produced in the audio, making it possible to mask a spectrogram for the target human
speaker based on audio-visual (AV) consistency. However,
solely relying on lip movements can fail when lip motion
becomes unreliable, e.g., the mouth region is occluded by
the microphone or the speaker turns their head away.
While AV synchronization cues are powerful, we observe that the consistency between the speaker’s facial appearance and their voice is also revealing for speech separation. Intuitively, attributes like gender, age, nationality,
and body weight are often visible in the face and give a
prior for what sound qualities (tone, pitch, timbre, basis of
articulation) to listen for when trying to separate that person’s speech from interfering sounds. For example, female
speakers often register in higher frequencies, a heavier person may exhibit a wider range of sound intensities [9], and
an American speaker may sound more nasal. The face-voice

15495

