Improving Unsupervised Image Clustering With Robust Learning
Sungwon Park∗1,2 Sungwon Han∗1,2 Sundong Kim2 Danu Kim1,2
Sungkyu Park2 Seunghoon Hong1 Meeyoung Cha2,1
1
2
School of Computing, KAIST
Data Science Group, Institute for Basic Science

Abstract
Unsupervised image clustering methods often introduce
alternative objectives to indirectly train the model and are
subject to faulty predictions and overconfident results. To
overcome these challenges, the current research proposes
an innovative model RUC that is inspired by robust learning. RUC’s novelty is at utilizing pseudo-labels of existing
image clustering models as a noisy dataset that may include
misclassified samples. Its retraining process can revise misaligned knowledge and alleviate the overconfidence problem in predictions. The model’s flexible structure makes it
possible to be used as an add-on module to other clustering methods and helps them achieve better performance on
multiple datasets. Extensive experiments show that the proposed model can adjust the model confidence with better
calibration and gain additional robustness against adversarial noise.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised clustering is a core task in computer vision that aims to identify each image’s class membership
without using any labels. Here, a class represents the group
membership of images that share similar visual characteristics. Many studies have proposed deep learning-based algorithms that utilize distance in a feature space as the similarity metric to assign data points into classes [11, 44].
Training without ground-truth guidance, however, is
prone to finding trivial solutions that are learned from lowlevel visual traits like colors and textures [22]. Several studies have introduced innovative ways to guide the model’s
training indirectly by setting alternative objectives. For example, Hu et al. [20] proposed to maximize the mutual information between input and its hidden representations, and
Ji et al. [22] proposed to learn invariant features against
data augmentation. Entropy-based balancing has often been
adopted to prevent degenerate solutions [17, 22, 42].
Nevertheless, these alternative objectives are bound to
∗ Equal contribution to this work.

Figure 1: Illustration for this work’s basic concept: robust
learning is used to separate clean data from unclean data
using pseudo-labels from off-the-shelf unsupervised clustering algorithm.

producing overconfident results, i.e., low-entropy predictions, due to the dense grouping among clusters. When
uncertain samples are added to a wrong cluster at an early
stage of training, the model gradually becomes overconfident in its later predictions as the noise from misclassification accumulates and degrades the overall performance.
This paper introduces a novel robust learning training method, RUC (Robust learning for Unsupervised
Clustering), that runs in conjunction with existing clustering models to alleviate the noise discussed above. Utilizing and treating the existing clustering model’s results as
a noisy dataset that may include wrong labels, RUC updates the model’s misaligned knowledge. Bringing insights
from the literature, we filter out unclean samples and apply
loss correction as in Fig. 1. This process is assisted by label smoothing and co-training to reduce any wrong gradient
signals from unclean labels. This retraining process with revised pseudo-labels further regularizes the model and prevents overconfident results.
RUC comprises two key components: (1) extracting
clean samples and (2) retraining with the refined dataset.
We propose confidence-based, metric-based, and hybrid
strategies to filter out misclassified pseudo-labels. The first
strategy considers samples of high prediction confidence
from the original clustering model as a clean set; it filters
out low confidence samples. This strategy relies on the

12278

