Closing the Loop: Joint Rain Generation and Removal
via Disentangled Image Translation
Yuntong Ye1,2 , Yi Chang2,∗, Hanyu Zhou1 , Luxin Yan1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
AI Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
1

{yuntongye, yichang, hyzhou, yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

Rain is a common weather phenomenon which dramatically degrades the quality of images and affects many computer vision tasks such as detection [17] and segmentation
[1]. The forward rain generation procedure [19, 35, 8, 12,
16] is usually simplified as:
O = B + R,
(1)
∗ Corresponding Author

Dis

Real

1. Introduction

Synthetic

Existing deep learning-based image deraining methods
have achieved promising performance for synthetic rainy
images, typically rely on the pairs of sharp images and
simulated rainy counterparts. However, these methods suffer from significant performance drop when facing the real
rain, because of the huge gap between the simplified synthetic rain and the complex real rain. In this work, we argue that the rain generation and removal are the two sides
of the same coin and should be tightly coupled. To close
the loop, we propose to jointly learn real rain generation
and removal procedure within a unified disentangled image
translation framework. Specifically, we propose a bidirectional disentangled translation network, in which each unidirectional network contains two loops of joint rain generation and removal for both the real and synthetic rain image,
respectively. Meanwhile, we enforce the disentanglement
strategy by decomposing the rainy image into a clean background and rain layer (rain removal), in order to better preserve the identity background via both the cycle-consistency
loss and adversarial loss, and ease the rain layer translating between the real and synthetic rainy image. A counterpart composition with the entanglement strategy is symmetrically applied for rain generation. Extensive experiments
on synthetic and real-world rain datasets show the superiority of proposed method compared to state-of-the-arts.

ilar

Sim

sim

ilar
(b) Rain Removal

(a) Rain Generation

(c) Joint Rain Generation and Removal

Figure 1. Illustration of rain generation and removal. (a) The handcrafted simplified rain generation model. (b) Although the simulated rain has been well removed, the huge gap between synthetic
training images and real-world testing images leads a significant
performance drop in existing learning-based method JORDER
[35]. (c) The proposed method learns the complex rain model
from the data-driven perspective. We propose to jointly learn the
rain generation and removal within a unified framework, as so to
better bridges the domain gap between the real and synthetic rain.

where O, B, R denote the rainy image, clean background
and rain layer [Fig. 1(a)]. Image deraining is formulated
as an ill-posed inverse problem of the rain generation (1),
aiming to recover the clean image B from rainy image O.
Recently, the deep learning-based deraining methods
have achieved remarkable performance, benefiting from
powerful representation of convolutional neural network.
Fu et al. [8] introduced the end-to-end residual CNN for
rain streaks removal task. Latter, more sophisticated CNN
architectures [35, 18, 20, 26, 16, 33, 27, 6] have sprung up
with tremendous progress, and the visual deraining results
are impressive. Unfortunately, it is widely recognized that
although the trained models can achieve satisfactory results
on the synthetic rain, they cannot well generalize to the real
rain [Fig. 1(b)] because of the huge gap between the simplified synthetic rain and the complex real rain.
To address this problem, a number of works have been
proposed for better real rain removal. The first category

2053

