Simultaneously Localize, Segment and Rank the Camouflaged Objects
Yunqiu Lv1,‡ Jing Zhang2,3,‡ Yuchao Dai1 Aixuan Li1 Bowen Liu1 Nick Barnes2 Deng-Ping Fan4
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China 2 Australian National University, Australia
3
CSIRO, Australia 4 Inception Institute of AI (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
‡ Equal contributions;

Image

Corresponding author:daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Fixation

Binary

Ranking

Figure 1: The conventional “Binary” ground truth only provides the scope of the camouflaged objects. We present additional fixation
(“Fixation”) and ranking (“Ranking”) annotations, where the former discovers regions that make camouflaged objects detectable and the
latter highlights the level of camouflage. Blue color in “Ranking” indicates higher rank (harder) of camouflage.

Abstract
Camouflage is a key defence mechanism across species
that is critical to survival. Common strategies for camouflage include background matching, imitating the color and
pattern of the environment, and disruptive coloration, disguising body outlines [37]. Camouflaged object detection
(COD) aims to segment camouflaged objects hiding in their
surroundings. Existing COD models are built upon binary
ground truth to segment the camouflaged objects without
illustrating the level of camouflage. In this paper, we revisit this task and argue that explicitly modeling the conspicuousness of camouflaged objects against their particular backgrounds can not only lead to a better understanding about camouflage and evolution of animals, but also
provide guidance to design more sophisticated camouflage
techniques. Furthermore, we observe that it is some specific
parts of the camouflaged objects that make them detectable
by predators. With the above understanding about camouflaged objects, we present the first ranking based COD network (Rank-Net) to simultaneously localize, segment and

rank camouflaged objects. The localization model is proposed to find the discriminative regions that make the camouflaged object obvious. The segmentation model segments
the full scope of the camouflaged objects. Further, the ranking model infers the detectability of different camouflaged
objects. Moreover, we contribute a large COD testing set to
evaluate the generalization ability of COD models. Experimental results show that our model achieves new state-ofthe-art, leading to a more interpretable COD network1 .

1. Introduction
Camouflage is one of the most important anti-predator
defences that prevents the prey from being recognized by
predators [43]. Two main strategies have been widely used
among prey to become camouflaged, namely background
matching and disruptive coloration [37]. The prey that rely
1 Our code and data is publicly available at:

https://github.
com / JingZhang617 / COD - Rank - Localize - and - Segment.
More detail about the training dataset can be found in http://dpfan.
net/camouflage.

11591

