Reciprocal Transformations for Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation
Sucheng Ren1 , Wenxi Liu2 , Yongtuo Liu1 , Haoxin Chen1 , Guoqiang Han1 , Shengfeng He1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University

Abstract
Unsupervised video object segmentation (UVOS) aims at
segmenting the primary objects in videos without any human intervention. Due to the lack of prior knowledge about
the primary objects, identifying them from videos is the major challenge of UVOS. Previous methods often regard the
moving objects as primary ones and rely on optical flow
to capture the motion cues in videos, but the flow information alone is insufficient to distinguish the primary objects from the background objects that move together. This
is because, when the noisy motion features are combined
with the appearance features, the localization of the primary objects is misguided. To address this problem, we
propose a novel reciprocal transformation network to discover primary objects by correlating three key factors: the
intra-frame contrast, the motion cues, and temporal coherence of recurring objects. Each corresponds to a representative type of primary object, and our reciprocal mechanism enables an organic coordination of them to effectively remove ambiguous distractions from videos. Additionally, to exclude the information of the moving background objects from motion features, our transformation
module enables to reciprocally transform the appearance
features to enhance the motion features, so as to focus
on the moving objects with salient appearance while removing the co-moving outliers. Experiments on the public
benchmarks demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/OliverRensu/RTNet.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims at localizing and
segmenting objects in videos. As one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, VOS has many applications,
e.g., object tracking [22, 30, 51] autonomous driving [5, 13],
video surveillance [45]. In specific, the existing techniques
of VOS can be roughly categorized into: semi-supervised
∗ Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

Input

Optical Flow

Prediction
from Flow

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Segmenting primary objects based on optical flow
is usually distracted by the co-moving outliers. We attack
this problem by reciprocally transforming appearance features to motion features, and thus avoid misleading motion
information from corrupting the localization of primary objects.

video object segmentation [14, 32, 56] in which the segmentation mask of the primary object(s) is given at the
first frame, and unsupervised video object segmentation
(UVOS) [31, 47, 48, 60] that aims to extract the mask of the
primary object(s) without any prior knowledge. In this paper, we focus on the task of UVOS.
Due to the lack of prior knowledge, the UVOS models
have to handle the major concern for identifying the sources
of primary objects in the videos. We observe that there are
three types of candidate primary objects: the salient objects
in a single frame, the moving objects, and recurring objects
in the video. In general, human attention will be drawn on
the salient objects [18, 28, 52] within an image, thus these
visually distinct objects may be the candidate primary objects. However, these methods may not be applicable for
identifying primary objects in videos, as human attention
will naturally shift to various patterns of dynamics or motions in video [9, 37]. Thus, the objects that are indistinct
in a single frame but moving in video may be the primary
objects according to motion cues, yet ignored by the imagebased models. Besides, people also tend to memorize the
objects that appear repeatedly in the video, therefore these
objects may be treated as another type of primary ones.
Previous methods [24, 65] apply optical flow to capture
motion information. However, the optical flow can hardly

15455

