Generative Interventions for Causal Learning
Chengzhi Mao1

Augustine Cha1 *

Amogh Gupta1 *
Hao Wang2
Carl Vondrick1
1
Columbia University, 2 Rutgers University

Junfeng Yang1

{mcz, junfeng, vondrick}@cs.columbia.edu, {ac4612, ag4202}@columbia.edu, hoguewang@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a framework for learning robust visual
representations that generalize to new viewpoints, backgrounds, and scene contexts. Discriminative models often learn naturally occurring spurious correlations, which
cause them to fail on images outside of the training distribution. In this paper, we show that we can steer generative
models to manufacture interventions on features caused by
confounding factors. Experiments, visualizations, and theoretical results show this method learns robust representations more consistent with the underlying causal relationships. Our approach improves performance on multiple
datasets demanding out-of-distribution generalization, and
we demonstrate state-of-the-art performance generalizing
from ImageNet to ObjectNet dataset.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition today is governed by empirical risk
minimization (ERM), which bounds the generalization error when the training and testing distributions match [47].
When training sets cover all factors of variation, such as
background context or camera viewpoints, discriminative
models learn invariances and predict object category labels
with the right cause [33]. However, the visual world is vast
and naturally open. Collecting a representative, balanced
dataset is difficult and, in some cases, impossible because
the world can unpredictably change after learning.
Directly optimizing the empirical risk is prone to learning unstable spurious correlations that do not respect the
underlying causal structure [11, 8, 24, 44, 4, 35]. Figure 1
illustrates the issue succinctly. In natural images, the object of interest and the scene context have confounding factors, creating spurious correlations. For example, ladle (the
object of interest) often has a hand holding it (the scene
context), but there is no causal relation between them. Several studies have exposed this challenge by demonstrating
substantial performance degradation when the confounding
bias no longer holds at testing time [41, 19]. For example,

Ladle

Television

Shovel

Figure 1. Top predictions from a state-of-the-art ImageNet classifier [21]. The model uses spurious correlations (scene contexts,
viewpoints, and backgrounds), leading to incorrect predictions.1
In this paper, we introduce a method to learn causal visual features that improve robustness of visual recognition models. The
predictions of our model are in Figure 7.

the ObjectNet [6] dataset removes several common spurious correlations from the test set, causing the performance
of state-of-the-art models to deteriorate by 40% compared
to the ImageNet validation set.
A promising direction for fortifying visual recognition
is to learn causal representations (see [43] for an excellent
overview). If representations are able to identify the causal
mechanism between the image features and the category labels, then robust generalization is possible. While the traditional approach to establish causality is through randomized
control trials or interventions, natural images are passively
collected, preventing the use of such procedures.
This paper introduces a framework for learning causal
visual representations with natural images. Our approach
is based on the observation that generative models quantify nuisance variables [23, 26], such as viewpoint or background. We present a causal graph that models both robust features and spurious features during image recognition. Crucially, our formulation shows how to learn causal
features by steering generative models to perform interventions on realistic images, simulating manipulations to the
camera and scene that remove spurious correlations. As our
approach is model-agnostic, we are able to learn robust representations for any state-of-the-art computer vision model.
Our empirical and theoretical results show that our ap1 The correct categories are clearly a broom, a tray, and a shoe.

* Equal Contribution. Order by coin flip.

3947

