Hierarchical Motion Understanding via Motion Programs
Sumith Kulal∗
Stanford University

Jiayuan Mao∗
MIT

Abstract
Current approaches to video analysis of human motion
focus on raw pixels or keypoints as the basic units of reasoning. We posit that adding higher-level motion primitives, which can capture natural coarser units of motion
such as “backswing” or “follow-through”, can be used to
improve downstream analysis tasks. This higher level of
abstraction can also capture key features, such as loops of
repeated primitives, that are currently inaccessible at lower
levels of representation. We therefore introduce Motion Programs, a neuro-symbolic, program-like representation that
expresses motions as a composition of high-level primitives.
We also present a system for automatically inducing motion
programs from videos of human motion and for leveraging
motion programs in video synthesis. Experiments show that
motion programs can accurately describe a diverse set of
human motions and the inferred programs contain semantically meaningful motion primitives, such as arm swings and
jumping jacks. Our representation also benefits downstream
tasks such as video interpolation and video prediction and
outperforms off-the-shelf models. We further demonstrate
how these programs can detect diverse kinds of repetitive
motion and facilitate interactive video editing.

1. Introduction
Most current video analysis architectures operate on either pixel-level or keypoint-level transitions that are good
at local and short-term motions of human bodies but do
not handle higher-level spatial and longer-lasting temporal
structures well. We posit that incorporating higher-level reasoning of motion primitives and their relationships enables
better video understanding and improved downstream task
performance: after seeing a person perform jumping jacks a
few times, it’s reasonable to predict that they may repeat the
same action for a few more iterations.
We thus introduce a hierarchical motion understanding
framework with three levels of abstraction, as shown in
Figure 1:
∗ Equal contribution. Email: sumith@cs.stanford.edu.
Webpage: https://sumith1896.github.io/motion2prog.

Alex Aiken
Stanford University

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

• Level 1 (Figure 1b) is Keypoints, which are the basis
of most current computer vision systems. This level
provides low-level priors such as temporal smoothing.
• Level 2 (Figure 1c) is Concrete Motion Programs, a
programmatic representation of motion consisting of a
sequence of atomic actions or motion primitives, each
describing a set of frames for a single action. This level
provides priors on primitive level motion.
• Level 3 (Figure 1d) is Abstract Motion Programs,
which describe higher-level groupings of the concrete
primitives, such as patterns of repetitive motion. This
level provides priors on sequences of primitives and
their patterns.
We describe the concrete and abstract levels with simple domain specific languages (DSLs). The Concrete DSL
consists of motion primitives such as stationary, linear, and
circular movement with necessary spatial and temporal motion parameters. The Abstract DSL includes for-loops for
capturing higher-level groupings of primitives. Along with
the DSLs, we propose an algorithm to automatically synthesize motion programs from videos. For the sake of brevity,
we often refer to motion programs as simply programs.
To demonstrate the advantages of motion programs,
we apply our methods for synthesizing motion programs
from videos to three applications: video interpolation (Section 4.2), repetitive segment detection (Section 4.3) and
video prediction (Section 4.4). For video interpolation, we
demonstrate that when combined with state-of-the-art image
synthesis models, such as SepConv [23], motion programs
can achieve higher quality interpolations with bigger gaps
between frames than previous approaches. For repetitive
segment detection, we demonstrate that motion programs
can detect and extract repetitive segments of human motion.
For video prediction, we show that motion programs can
perform longer-range video prediction than HierchVid [29]
and HistryRep [32] by identifying repetitive motions.
To summarize, our contributions are:
• We introduce a hierarchical motion understanding
framework using motion programs.
• We present an algorithm for automatically synthesizing
motion programs from raw videos.

6568

