Labeled from Unlabeled: Exploiting Unlabeled Data for
Few-shot Deep HDR Deghosting
K Ram Prabhakar1
1

Gowtham Senthil1,2*

Susmit Agrawal1*

R. Venkatesh Babu1

Rama Krishna Sai S Gorthi2
2
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Indian Institute of Technology Tirupati

Abstract
High Dynamic Range (HDR) deghosting is an indispensable tool in capturing wide dynamic range scenes without
ghosting artifacts. Recently, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have shown tremendous success in HDR deghosting. However, CNN-based HDR deghosting methods require collecting large datasets with ground truth, which is a
tedious and time-consuming process. This paper proposes
a pioneering work by introducing zero and few-shot learning strategies for data-efficient HDR deghosting. Our approach consists of two stages of training. In stage one, we
train the model with few labeled (5 or less) dynamic samples and a pool of unlabeled samples with a self-supervised
loss. We use the trained model to predict HDRs for the unlabeled samples. To derive data for the next stage of training, we propose a novel method for generating corresponding dynamic inputs from the predicted HDRs of unlabeled
data. The generated artificial dynamic inputs and predicted
HDRs are used as paired labeled data. In stage two, we
finetune the model with the original few labeled data and
artificially generated labeled data. Our few-shot approach
outperforms many fully-supervised methods in two publicly
available datasets, using as little as five labeled dynamic
samples.

1. Introduction
Unlike the human eye, a standard digital camera has limited dynamic range that it can recognize in a scene. All
objects beyond the recognizable dynamic range are thresholded to the minimum or maximum pixel intensity value,
thus losing their details in the process. High Dynamic
Range imaging is an algorithmic solution to this problem.
It creates an image with a wider dynamic range than a standard camera image, closer to what human eyes perceive.
The generated HDR image contains details in both bright
* equal contribution

LE image
(𝑋1 )

ME image
(𝑋2 )

HE image
(𝑋3 )

LE
image

ME
image

Hu
[16]

Sen
[44]

Kalant Prabha
ari [19] kar [35]

Wu
[53]

Yan
[55]

Ours
(K=5)

GT

Figure 1. Qualitative results by different methods for an example
from Kalantari et al. dataset [19]. As shown in the zoomed in
boxes, our proposed few-shot approach using only 5 labeled dynamic sequences and pool of unlabeled sequences, generate better
results without any artifacts, than existing methods trained with
full dataset of 74 labeled dynamic sequences.

and dark regions.
To generate an HDR image, multiple images with different exposure values (also known as exposure stack or LDR
images) are captured and merged. The merging process is
simple when the exposure stack’s input images are static
without any camera or object motion. However, such an
assumption is too good to be true in real-world scenarios.
Most often, the exposure stack is dynamic, consisting of
camera and object motion. Fusing such dynamic exposure
stack naively results in undesirable ghosting artifacts. The
process of fusing dynamic exposure stack without ghosting
artifacts is known as HDR deghosting.
A widely followed approach for HDR deghosting is to
register the LDRs first and identify moving regions. Once
identified, either the motion affected regions are excluded

4875

