DeepI2P: Image-to-Point Cloud Registration via Deep Classification
Jiaxin Li
Bytedance

Gim Hee Lee
National University of Singapore

Abstract
This paper presents DeepI2P: a novel approach for
cross-modality registration between an image and a point
cloud. Given an image (e.g. from a rgb-camera) and a
general point cloud (e.g. from a 3D Lidar scanner) captured at different locations in the same scene, our method
estimates the relative rigid transformation between the coordinate frames of the camera and Lidar. Learning common feature descriptors to establish correspondences for
the registration is inherently challenging due to the lack
of appearance and geometric correlations across the two
modalities. We circumvent the difficulty by converting the
registration problem into a classification and inverse camera projection optimization problem. A classification neural network is designed to label whether the projection of
each point in the point cloud is within or beyond the camera frustum. These labeled points are subsequently passed
into a novel inverse camera projection solver to estimate
the relative pose. Extensive experimental results on Oxford Robotcar and KITTI datasets demonstrate the feasibility of our approach. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/lijx10/DeepI2P.

1. Introduction
Image-to-point cloud registration refers to the process of
finding the rigid transformation, i.e., rotation and translation
that aligns the projections of the 3D point cloud to the image. This process is equivalent to finding the pose, i.e., extrinsic parameters of the imaging device with respect to the
reference frame of the 3D point cloud; and it has wide applications in many tasks in computer vision, robotics, augmented/virtual reality, etc.
Although the direct and easy approach to solve the registration problem is to work with data from the same modality, i.e., image-to-image and point cloud-to-point cloud,
several limitations exist in these same-modality registration
approaches. For point cloud-to-point cloud registration, it
is impractical and costly to mount expensive and hard-tomaintain Lidars on large fleet of robots and mobile devices
during operations. Furthermore, feature-based point cloudto-point cloud registration [6, 43, 21, 40] usually requires

Figure 1. Illustration of feature based registration on the left, e.g.,
2D3D-MatchNet, and our feature-free DeepI2P on the right. Instead of detecting and matching features across modalities, we
convert the registration problem into a classification problem.

storage of D-dimensional features (D ≫ 3) in addition to
the (x, y, z) point coordinates, which increases the memory complexity. For image-to-image registration, meticulous effort is required to perform SfM [37, 36, 12] and store
the image feature descriptors [29, 22] corresponding to the
reconstructed 3D points for feature matching. Additionally,
image features are subjected to illumination conditions, seasonal changes, etc. Consequently, the image features stored
in the map acquired in one season/time are hopeless for registration after a change in the season/time.
Cross-modality image-to-point cloud registration can be
used to alleviate the aforementioned problems from the
same modality registration methods. Specifically, a 3D
point cloud-based map can be acquired once with Lidars,
and then pose estimation can be deployed with images
taken from cameras that are relatively low-maintenance
and less costly on a large fleet of robots and mobile devices. Moreover, maps acquired directly with Lidars circumvents the hassle of SfM, and are largely invariant to
seasonal/illumination changes. Despite the advantages of
cross-modality image-to-point cloud registration, few research has been done due to its inherent difficulty. To
the best of our knowledge, 2D3D-MatchNet [11] is the
only prior work on general image-to-point cloud registration. This work does cross-modal registration by learning to
match image-based SIFT [22] to point cloud-based ISS [45]
keypoints using deep metric-learning. However, the method
suffers low inlier rate due to the drastic dissimilarity in the
SIFT and ISS features across two modalities.
In this paper, we propose the DeepI2P: a novel approach
for cross-modal registration of an image and a point cloud

15960

