CGA-Net: Category Guided Aggregation
for Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Tao Lu
Limin Wang*
Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
Previous point cloud semantic segmentation networks
use the same process to aggregate features from neighbors
of the same category and different categories. However, the
joint area between two objects usually only occupies a small
percentage in the whole scene. Thus the networks are welltrained for aggregating features from the same category
point while not fully trained on aggregating points of different categories. To address this issue, this paper proposes
to utilize different aggregation strategies between the same
category and different categories. Specifically, it presents
a customized module, termed as Category Guided Aggregation (CGA), where it first identifies whether the neighbors belong to the same category with the center point or
not, and then handles the two types of neighbors with two
carefully-designed modules. Our CGA presents a general
network module and could be leveraged in any existing semantic segmentation network. Experiments on three different backbones demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
3D sensor plays an important role in perceiving the environment geometry, it’s widely equipped in home service
robots, autonomous cars and even some mobile devices.
Point cloud is an efficient data type to represent the 3D
scene. Recently, lots of scene understanding works [22,
23, 30, 15, 27, 34, 35, 3] are committed to designing pointcloud-based neural networks to analyze the semantic label
for each point. They usually use an ”Encoder-Decoder” architecture. The encoder extracts features for every point by
aggregating features from neighbors progressively. And the
decoder combines the low-level features and the propagated
neighboring features to parse the representations to semantic labels.
In a real scene, some objects are distinctive, like tables,
chairs, and planes. We can classify its category by aggregating the features from the object itself. Some objects are
* Corresponding author.

0.75
0.62
0.25
0.45
0.38
0.55
0.6
0.12
0.88
0.4
0.9

Same
Direct Augmentation
Different

0.3
0.4
0.7

0.1
0.6

Co-occurrence Relation
Binary classification

Figure 1. An illustration of our method. We find k neighbors for
the center point, and identify the probability that they belong to
the same or different categories with the center point. Red arrows
implies a directly augmentation to the center point. ”Green-Red”
dash line means a co-occurrence relation between neighbors and
the center.

easily confused, like the cup and vase, windows and doors.
Because they are very similar in 3D contour. Since in a real
scene, there is a certain dependency between multiple objects, we can leverage the neighbor context to identify those
categories.
For those points located in the center area of an object, its
context mainly focus on the object itself. In the joint area of
two different categories objects, each point gathers features
from both the same and different categories. The features
of the same category should be similar and serve as components for object classification together. Meanwhile, the features from the neighbor objects of different categories serve
as relation to infer co-occurrence. The learning process for
the two types features are different in principle. However,
previous works [23, 30, 15, 3] prefer to use a unified operator to cover the two types feature learning. Although
the network has strong fitting ability, joint areas only occupy a small percentage in the whole scene, the network
tends to learn a group of biased parameters which are more
friendly to those areas who keep away from the joint areas,
which leading to more ambiguous features in the joint areas. JSENet [6] emphasizes the particularity of edges and
designs modules to detect the edge area. It’s useful and obtains better results. However, the features for edge detection
are different from the semantic segmentation in essence, we
think that only detecting the edge is not enough.

11693

