Achieving robustness in classification using optimal transport with
hinge regularization
Mathieu Serrurier∗

Franck Mamalet†

Alberto González-Sanz

Université Paul Sabatier

IRT Saint-Exupery

Université Paul Sabatier

Thibaut Boissin

Jean-Michel Loubes

Eustasio del Barrio

IRT Saint-Exupery

Université Paul Sabatier

Universidad de Valladolid

Abstract
Adversarial examples have pointed out Deep Neural
Network’s vulnerability to small local noise. It has been
shown that constraining their Lipschitz constant should
enhance robustness, but make them harder to learn with
classical loss functions. We propose a new framework
for binary classification, based on optimal transport,
which integrates this Lipschitz constraint as a theoretical requirement. We propose to learn 1-Lipschitz
networks using a new loss that is an hinge regularized version of the Kantorovich-Rubinstein dual formulation for the Wasserstein distance estimation. This
loss function has a direct interpretation in terms of adversarial robustness together with certifiable robustness
bound. We also prove that this hinge regularized version is still the dual formulation of an optimal transportation problem, and has a solution. We also establish several geometrical properties of this optimal solution, and extend the approach to multi-class problems.
Experiments show that the proposed approach provides
the expected guarantees in terms of robustness without
any significant accuracy drop. The adversarial examples, on the proposed models, visibly and meaningfully
change the input providing an explanation for the classification.

1. Introduction
The important progress in deep learning has led to a
massive interest for these approaches in industry. However, when applying machine learning to critical tasks
such has in the transportation or the medical domain,
empirical and theoretical guarantees are required. Un∗ corresp. author: mathieu.serrurier@irit.fr
† corresp. author: franck.mamalet@irt-saintexupery.com

fortunately, it has been shown that neural networks are
weak to adversarial attacks: a carefully chosen small
shift to the input, usually indistinguishable from noise,
can change the class prediction [30]. This sensitivity
to adversarial attacks is mainly due to the Lipschitz
constant of a neural network which can be arbitrarily
high when unconstrained. Most of white-box attacks
(where the full model is available) take advantage of
it to build adversarial examples by using gradient descent with respect to the input variables. F GSM [13]
performs only one step of gradient descent when other
approaches such as P GD [20, 6] find the optimal adversarial example iteratively. In black-box scenarios,
gradients or logits of the model are not available. In
such case, attacks start from large perturbations and
then reducing it step by step (see for instance, boundary attacks [5] and pointwise attacks [28]).
There are three major types of strategy to address
the issue of adversarial attacks. Agnostic defenses are
independent of the model and consist of altering the
input or the prediction. For instance, Cohen et al.
obtain a provable certificate with respect to l2 norm
by using Gaussian random smoothing [8]. DEFENSEGAN [27] uses a GAN to transform the input into the
closest non-adversarial one at inference time. The second group of strategies relies on saddle point optimization by adding a penalty term measuring the empirical weakness against adversarial example during the
learning process [20]. The last type of approaches focus on the Lipschitz constant of the network. It has
been proven that bounding the Lipschitz constant of
a neural network provides certifiable robustness guarantees against local adversarial attacks [15, 23], improves generalizations [29] and the interpretability of
the model [31]. This constraint can be achieved layer
by layer by using spectral normalization [7] or non-

505

