PV-RAFT: Point-Voxel Correlation Fields for Scene Flow Estimation of Point
Clouds
Yi Wei1,2,3 *, Ziyi Wang1,2,3 *, Yongming Rao1,2,3 *, Jiwen Lu1,2,3†, Jie Zhou1,2,3,4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
{y-wei19, wziyi20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; raoyongming95@gmail.com; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Point-Voxel Recurrent AllPairs Field Transforms (PV-RAFT) method to estimate
scene flow from point clouds. Since point clouds are irregular and unordered, it is challenging to efficiently extract features from all-pairs fields in the 3D space, where all-pairs
correlations play important roles in scene flow estimation.
To tackle this problem, we present point-voxel correlation
fields, which capture both local and long-range dependencies of point pairs. To capture point-based correlations, we
adopt the K-Nearest Neighbors search that preserves finegrained information in the local region. By voxelizing point
clouds in a multi-scale manner, we construct pyramid correlation voxels to model long-range correspondences. Integrating these two types of correlations, our PV-RAFT makes
use of all-pairs relations to handle both small and large displacements. We evaluate the proposed method on the FlyingThings3D and KITTI Scene Flow 2015 datasets. Experimental results show that PV-RAFT outperforms state-ofthe-art methods by remarkable margins.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding [7,16,32,34,45,51] has attracted
more and more attention in recent years due to its wide realworld applications. As one fundamental 3D computer vision task, scene flow estimation [6, 10, 18, 23, 26, 50] focuses on computing the 3D motion field between two consecutive frames, which provides important dynamic information. Conventionally, scene flow is directly estimated
from RGB images [20, 21, 41, 43]. Since 3D data becomes
easier to obtain, many works [6, 18, 26, 50] begin to focus
on scene flow estimation of point clouds more recently.
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed point-voxel correlation fields. For a point in the source point cloud, we find
its k-nearest neighbors in the target point cloud to extract
point-based correlations. Moreover, we model long-range
interactions by building voxels centered around this source
point. Combining these two types of correlations, our PVRAFT captures all-pairs dependencies to deal with both
large and small displacements.
Thanks to the recent advances in deep learning, many
approaches adopt deep neural networks for scene flow estimation [6, 18, 26, 39, 50]. Among these methods, [18, 50]
borrow ideas from [5, 11, 35], leveraging techniques in mature optical flow area. FlowNet3D designs a flow embedding module to calculate correlations between two frames.
Built upon PWC-Net [35], PointPWC-Net [50] introduces
a learnable point-based cost volume without the need of 4D
dense tensors. These methods follow a coarse-to-fine strategy, where scene flow is first computed at low resolution
and then upsampled to high resolution. However, this strategy has several limitations [37] , e.g. error accumulation
from early steps and the tendency to miss fast-moving objects. One possible solution is to adopt Recurrent All-Pairs

6954

