FP-NAS: Fast Probabilistic Neural Architecture Search
Zhicheng Yan,* Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Yuandong Tian, Bichen Wu, Matt Feiszli
Facebook AI

Abstract
Differential Neural Architecture Search (NAS) requires
all layer choices to be held in memory simultaneously; this
limits the size of both search space and final architecture. In
contrast, Probabilistic NAS, such as PARSEC, learns a distribution over high-performing architectures, and uses only as
much memory as needed to train a single model. Nevertheless, it needs to sample many architectures, making it computationally expensive for searching in an extensive space.
To solve these problems, we propose a sampling method
adaptive to the distribution entropy, drawing more samples
to encourage explorations at the beginning, and reducing
samples as learning proceeds. Furthermore, to search fast in
the multi-variate space, we propose a coarse-to-fine strategy
by using a factorized distribution at the beginning which can
reduce the number of architecture parameters by over an
order of magnitude. We call this method Fast Probabilistic
NAS (FP-NAS). Compared with PARSEC, it can sample 64%
fewer architectures and search 2.1× faster. Compared with
FBNetV2, FP-NAS is 1.9× - 3.5× faster, and the searched
models outperform FBNetV2 models on ImageNet. FP-NAS
allows us to expand the giant FBNetV2 space to be wider
(i.e. larger channel choices) and deeper (i.e. more blocks),
while adding Split-Attention block and enabling the search
over the number of splits. When searching a model of size
0.4G FLOPS, FP-NAS is 132× faster than EfficientNet, and
the searched FP-NAS-L0 model outperforms EfficientNet-B0
by 0.7% accuracy. Without using any architecture surrogate
or scaling tricks, we directly search large models up to 1.0G
FLOPS. Our FP-NAS-L2 model with simple distillation outperforms BigNAS-XL with advanced inplace distillation by
0.7% accuracy using similar FLOPS.

1. Introduction
Designing efficient architectures for visual recognition
requires extensive exploration in the search space; doing
this by hand takes substantial human effort and computational resources. Since the introduction of AlexNet [18],
handed-crafted models like ResNet [10], Densenet [14] and
* Correspondence to Zhicheng Yan <zyan3@fb.com>.

InceptionV4 [28], have become increasingly deep with more
complex connectivity. Exploring this space manually is difficult and time-consuming. Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
aims to automate the architecture design process. However, early approaches based on evolution or reinforcement
learning take hundreds or thousands of GPU days just for
CIFAR10 or Imagenet target datasets [42, 43, 31, 25].
Recently, differentiable neural architecture search
(DNAS) [20] relaxed the discrete representation of architectures to a continuous space, enabling efficient search with
gradient descent. This comes at a price: DNAS instantiates
all layer choices in memory, and computes all feature maps.
Therefore, its memory footprint increases linearly with the
number of layer choices, and greatly limits the size of both
search space and final architecture. PARSEC [4] presents
a probabilistic version of DNAS which samples individual
architectures from a distribution on search space. PARSEC’s
sampling strategy uses much less memory, but it samples
a large number of architectures to fully explore the space,
which significantly increases computational cost. Here we
pose the following question: Can we reduce PARSEC’s compute cost and maintain a small memory footprint to support
the fast search of both small and large models?
In this work, we accelerate PARSEC by proposing two
novel techniques. First, we replace the fixed architecture
sampling with a dynamic sampling adaptive to the entropy
of architecture distribution. In particular, we sample more
architectures in the early stage to encourage exploration, and
fewer later, as the distribution concentrates on a smaller set of
promising architectures. Furthermore, in multi-variate space
where several variables (e.g. block type, feature channel, expansion ratio) are searched over, we propose a coarse-to-fine
search strategy. In the beginning stage, we adopt a factorized
distribution representation to search at a coarse-grained granularity, which uses much fewer architecture parameters and
makes the learning much faster. In the following stage, we
seamlessly convert the factorized distribution into the joint
distribution to support fine-grained search.
When searching in the FBNetV2 space [33], FP-NAS
samples 64% fewer architectures and searches 2.1× faster
compared with the PARSEC method. Compared with FBNetV2, FP-NAS is 3.5× faster, and the searched mod-

15139

