Deep Denoising of Flash and No-Flash Pairs
for Photography in Low-Light Environments
Zhihao Xia1 , Michaël Gharbi2 , Federico Perazzi3 , Kalyan Sunkavalli2 , Ayan Chakrabarti1
1
Washington University in St. Louis 2 Adobe Research 3 Facebook
{zhihao.xia,ayan}@wustl.edu, {mgharbi,sunkaval}@adobe.com, fperazzi@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce a neural network-based method to denoise
pairs of images taken in quick succession, with and without a flash, in low-light environments. Our goal is to produce a high-quality rendering of the scene that preserves
the color and mood from the ambient illumination of the
noisy no-flash image, while recovering surface texture and
detail revealed by the flash. Our network outputs a gain
map and a field of kernels, the latter obtained by linearly
mixing elements of a per-image low-rank kernel basis. We
first apply the kernel field to the no-flash image, and then
multiply the result with the gain map to create the final
output. We show our network effectively learns to produce
high-quality images by combining a smoothed out estimate
of the scene’s ambient appearance from the no-flash image,
with high-frequency albedo details extracted from the flash
input. Our experiments show significant improvements over
alternative captures without a flash, and baseline denoisers
that use flash no-flash pairs. In particular, our method produces images that are both noise-free and contain accurate
ambient colors without the sharp shadows or strong specular highlights visible in the flash image.

1. Introduction
Flash photography has long been a convenient way to
capture high-quality images in low-light conditions. A flash
illuminates the scene with a bright burst of light at the time
of exposure, allowing the camera to acquire a photograph
with a much higher signal-to-noise ratio than would be possible under the dim ambient lighting alone and without introducing any motion or defocus blur. The flash addresses
the problem of limited illumination at its root—by adding
light to the scene. However, flash illumination is not without drawbacks. An on-camera flash often creates unappealing flat shading and harsh shadows, resulting in images that
fail to capture the true mood and ambience of the scene.
Researchers have considered combining pairs of flash

Figure 1: Given a pair of images of low-light scenes captured with and without a flash (left), our method produces
a high-quality image of the scene under ambient lighting
(right). This output is generated by filtering the no-flash image with a predicted field of kernels—to capture a smoothed
stimate of scene appearance under ambient lighting, followed by multiplication with a scale map that introduces
high-frequency detail illuminated by the flash.

and no-flash images—captured in quick succession with
and without the flash—to create a single enhanced photograph that is both noise-free and accurately represents the
scene under ambient lighting. This is achieved by merging
information about the ambient scene appearance from the
noisy no-flash image, with high-frequency surface image
details revealed by the flash [9, 29]. However, these methods assume moderate levels of noise in the no-flash image,
and that the flash and no-flash pair are, or can be, aligned.
In extremely low light, the no-flash image can be very
noisy, especially when using mobile phone cameras with
small apertures. This precludes the use of traditional

2063

