A2 -FPN: Attention Aggregation based Feature Pyramid Network for Instance
Segmentation
Miao Hu Yali Li* Lu Fang Shengjin Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
hum19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liyali13, fanglu, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Information loss

Content-agnostic sampling

Semantic inconsistency between adjacent features

Learning pyramidal feature representations is crucial
for recognizing object instances at different scales. Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) is the classic architecture to
build a feature pyramid with high-level semantics throughout. However, intrinsic defects in feature extraction and fusion inhibit FPN from further aggregating more discriminative features. In this work, we propose Attention Aggregation based Feature Pyramid Network (A2 -FPN), to improve multi-scale feature learning through attention-guided
feature aggregation. In feature extraction, it extracts discriminative features by collecting-distributing multi-level
global context features, and mitigates the semantic information loss due to drastically reduced channels. In feature
fusion, it aggregates complementary information from adjacent features to generate location-wise reassembly kernels for content-aware sampling, and employs channelwise reweighting to enhance the semantic consistency before element-wise addition. A2 -FPN shows consistent gains
on different instance segmentation frameworks. By replacing FPN with A2 -FPN in Mask R-CNN, our model boosts
the performance by 2.1% and 1.6% mask AP when using ResNet-50 and ResNet-101 as backbone, respectively.
Moreover, A2 -FPN achieves an improvement of 2.0% and
1.4% mask AP when integrated into the strong baselines
such as Cascade Mask R-CNN and Hybrid Task Cascade.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the most challenging
tasks in computer vision. It aims to categorize and localize
individual objects with pixel-wise instance masks. Accurate instance segmentation has wide applications in real scenarios including automatic driving and video surveillance.
Driven by the rapid advances in deep convolutional networks (ConvNets), the development of instance segmentation frameworks, e.g., Mask R-CNN [14], PANet [26], and
* Corresponding author.

2× Up
1×1 Conv
3×3 Conv, /2

Figure 1. Defects in the construction of feature pyramid: (1)
information loss, (2) content-agnostic sampling, and (3) semantic
inconsistency between adjacent features.

HTC [5], has substantially pushed forward the state-of-theart. Learning multi-scale feature representations is of great
significance because high-performance instance segmentation needs to recognize varying numbers of instances across
a broad range of scales and locations.
To address the issue of multi-scale processing, Feature
Pyramid Network (FPN) [22] is widely adopted in existing
frameworks. FPN leverages the inherent feature hierarchy
and constructs a feature pyramid that has strong semantics
at all scales by fusing adjacent features through lateral connections and a top-down pathway. PAFPN in PANet [26]
shortens the information path from the low level to top ones
by adding an extra bottom-up pathway, further improving
the localization capability of the feature pyramid.
Although FPN and PAFPN are effective in learning
multi-scale feature representations, the simple designs inhibit feature pyramids from further aggregating more discriminative features. We decompose the construction of
feature pyramid into feature extraction and fusion, and find
each step has some intrinsic defects, as shown in Figure 1.
In feature extraction, lateral connections using 1×1 convolutional layers are employed to generate features of the
same channel dimension. However, the extracted feature
maps, especially the high levels, suffer from serious information loss because of drastic dimension reduction. In
the first step of feature fusion, feature maps are upsampled
using interpolation in the top-down pathway or downsam-

15343

