Cross-View Cross-Scene Multi-View Crowd Counting
Qi Zhang1 , Wei Lin2 , Antoni B. Chan1
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
{qzhang364-c@my., abchan@}cityu.edu.hk
2

School of Computer Science and School of Artificial Intelligence,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China.
elonlin24@gmail.com

Synthetic training dataset

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural network-based multi-view (MV) crowd
counting [56, 57] was recently proposed to count people in
wide-area scenes that cannot be covered by a single camera. In these works, feature maps from multiple camera
views are fused together and decoded to predict a scenelevel crowd density map. However, one major disadvantage
of the current MV paradigm is the models are trained and

PETS2009

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澥

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澦

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澧

DukeMTMC
View pooling

Multi-view crowd counting has been previously proposed
to utilize multi-cameras to extend the field-of-view of a single camera, capturing more people in the scene, and improve counting performance for occluded people or those in
low resolution. However, the current multi-view paradigm
trains and tests on the same single scene and camera-views,
which limits its practical application. In this paper, we
propose a cross-view cross-scene (CVCS) multi-view crowd
counting paradigm, where the training and testing occur on
different scenes with arbitrary camera layouts. To dynamically handle the challenge of optimal view fusion under
scene and camera layout change and non-correspondence
noise due to camera calibration errors or erroneous features, we propose a CVCS model that attentively selects
and fuses multiple views together using camera layout geometry, and a noise view regularization method to train the
model to handle non-correspondence errors. We also generate a large synthetic multi-camera crowd counting dataset
with a large number of scenes and camera views to capture
many possible variations, which avoids the difficulty of collecting and annotating such a large real dataset. We then
test our trained CVCS model on real multi-view counting
datasets, by using unsupervised domain transfer. The proposed CVCS model trained on synthetic data outperforms
the same model trained only on real data, and achieves
promising performance compared to fully supervised methods that train and test on the same single scene.

濆澧
濆澦

濆澥

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澦

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澧

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澩

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澬

CityStreet

Cross-View Cross-Scene
澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澥

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澧

澷濕濡濙濦濕澔澨

Real test datasets

Synthetic validation dataset

Figure 1: Cross-view cross-scene (CVCS) multi-view crowd counting.
The CVCS model is trained and validated on synthetic multi-view crowd
scenes, where the scenes and camera-views are different between the training and validation sets. To test on a real scene, unsupervised domain adaptation is applied to the trained CVCS model, where only the real images
are used to fine-tune the model.

tested on the same single scene and a fixed camera layout,
and thus the trained models do not generalize well to other
scenes or other camera layouts.
In this work, we propose a new paradigm of crossview cross-scene multi-view counting (CVCS), where MV
counting models are trained and tested on different scenes
and arbitrary camera layouts. This paradigm is challenging because both the scene and camera layout (including
number of cameras) change at test time. In particular, in
single-scene MV counting, the optimal selection of features
from each camera and the handling of non-correspondence
errors (caused by camera calibration errors or erroneous
features) can be directly learned by the MV model (in its
network parameters), since it is trained and tested on the
same scene/cameras. In contrast, for CVCS MV counting, because the camera positions, camera orders, and
scenes are all varying, the MV counting model must learn
to dynamically handle different camera layouts and noncorrespondence noise. To address these two issues, we propose a CVCS counting model, which attentively selects and
fuses features from multiple cameras using the camera lay-

557

