Few-Shot Object Detection via Classification Refinement
and Distractor Retreatment
Yiting Li1 ∗ , Haiyue Zhu2 † *, Yu Cheng1 ∗ , Wenxin Wang1
Chek Sing Teo2 , Cheng Xiang1 , Prahlad Vadakkepat1 , and Tong Heng Lee1
1
National University of Singapore
2
SIMTech, Agency for Science, Technology and Research
elelyit@nus.edu.sg, zhu haiyue@simtech.a-star.edu.sg, chengyu996@gmail.com
wenxin.wang@u.nus.edu, csteo@simtech.a-star.edu.sg, elexc@nus.edu.sg, prahlad@nus.edu.sg, eleleeth@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We aim to tackle the challenging Few-Shot Object Detection (FSOD), where data-scarce categories are presented
during the model learning. The failure modes of FasterRCNN in FSOD are investigated, and we find that the performance degradation is mainly due to the classification incapability (false positives) caused by category confusion,
which motivates us to address FSOD from a novel aspect
of classification refinement. Specifically, we address the intrinsic limitation from the aspects of both architectural enhancement and hard-example mining. We introduce a novel
few-shot classification refinement mechanism where a decoupled Few-Shot Classification Network (FSCN) is employed to improve the final classification of a base detector. Moreover, we especially probe a commonly-overlooked
but destructive issue of FSOD, i.e., the presence of distractor samples due to the incomplete annotations where
images from the base set may contain novel-class objects
but remain unlabelled. Retreatment solutions are developed
to eliminate the incurred false positives. For FSCN training, the distractor is formulated as a semi-supervised problem, where a distractor utilization loss is proposed to make
proper use of it for boosting the data-scarce classes, while
a confidence-guided dataset pruning (CGDP) technique is
developed to facilitate the few-shot adaptation of base detector. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed framework achieves state-of-the-art FSOD performance on public datasets, e.g., Pascal VOC and MS-COCO.

Figure 1. FSOD performance gain by eliminating classification
false positives.

Deep learning based object detection [13, 4, 2] have
achieved remarkable performance outperforming traditional

approaches [24, 5]. However, deep learning detection relies
on the availability of a large number of training samples.
In many practical applications such as robotics [22, 23],
labeling a large amount of data is often time-consuming
and labor-intensive. This paper focuses on a practically desired but rarely explored area, i.e., Few-Shot Object Detection (FSOD). With the aid of data-abundant base classes,
the object detector is trained to additionally detect novel
classes through very limited samples. Existing approaches
are mainly built on top of Faster-RCNN [13]. For example,
the current state-of-the-art approach TFA [17] is presented
that employs a classifier rebalancing strategy for registering
novel classes. During finetuning, the backbone pre-trained
on the base set is reused and being frozen, while only the
box classifier and regressor are trained with novel data. Despite its’ remarkable progress, its performance on challenging benchmarks such as MS-COCO, is still far away from
satisfaction compared with those general data-abundant detection tasks, which deserves more research efforts as dataefficiency is practically preferred in most real-world applications.

* ∗ indicates equal contribution (Yiting Li, Haiyue Zhu and Yu Cheng).
† indicates corresponding author: Haiyue Zhu.

To make a step towards the challenging FSOD task, it
crucial to find out the major cause of performance degrada-

1. Introduction

15395

