Single-Stage Instance Shadow Detection
with Bidirectional Relation Learning
Tianyu Wang1,∗ , Xiaowei Hu1,∗,†, Chi-Wing Fu1 , and Pheng-Ann Heng1,2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy System,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

Abstract
Instance shadow detection aims to ﬁnd shadow instances
paired with the objects that cast the shadows. The previous
work adopts a two-stage framework to ﬁrst predict shadow
instances, object instances, and shadow-object associations
from the region proposals, then leverage a post-processing
to match the predictions to form the ﬁnal shadow-object
pairs. In this paper, we present a new single-stage fullyconvolutional network architecture with a bidirectional relation learning module to directly learn the relations of
shadow and object instances in an end-to-end manner.
Compared with the prior work, our method actively explores the internal relationship between shadows and objects to learn a better pairing between them, thus improving
the overall performance for instance shadow detection. We
evaluate our method on the benchmark dataset for instance
shadow detection, both quantitatively and visually. The experimental results demonstrate that our method clearly outperforms the state-of-the-art method.

(a) Input image

(b) LISA [54]

(c) Our learned paired locations

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Instance shadow detection results produced by (b)
LISA [54] and (d) our method, where LISA mismatches the
large shadow with another horse. Our method learns the
paired locations (c) for a better shadow-object pairing.

1. Introduction

stage framework to ﬁrst generate region proposals that have
high probabilities of containing shadow instances, object instances, and shadow-object associations. Then, in the second stage, for each proposal, regions-of-interest (ROIs) are
cropped from the feature maps, and the two-stage framework makes predictions of the masks and boxes of the
shadow instances, object instances, and shadow-object associations from each ROI. Lastly, they formulate a strategy
to pair up the shadow and object instances with the shadowobject associations predicted from a deep network.
After revisiting the task, we identiﬁed various limitations
in [54]. First, it considers the shadow-object association
as a single category and predicts a bounding box for each
shadow-object association. However, the appearance of
shadow and object instances are very different, so shadowobject associations could easily be missed; see Figure 1
(b) for an example. Second, this method generates region

Research on shadows has been a fundamental problem in computer vision. Prior works focus mainly on the
shadow detection and shadow removal tasks, while a recent
work [54] proposes a new task called instance shadow detection, which aims to detect shadow instances paired with
the associated objects that cast the shadows. Overall, instance shadow detection beneﬁts many vision applications,
such as light direction estimation and photo editing.
To approach instance shadow detection, Wang and Hu et
al. [54] built a dataset called SOBA, each with labeled
masks for shadow instances, object instances, and shadowobject associations. To detect the shadow instances together with their associated objects, they designed a two∗ Joint ﬁrst authors
† Corresponding author (xwhu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk)

1

