Leveraging the Availability of Two Cameras for Illuminant Estimation
Abdelrahman Abdelhamed

Abhijith Punnappurath
Samsung AI Center – Toronto

Michael S. Brown

{a.abdelhamed,abhijith.p,michael.b1}@samsung.com

Abstract
Sensitivity

Camera 1
11

R
G
B

0.50.5

1. Introduction
An overwhelming percentage of consumer photographs
are currently captured using smartphone cameras. A recent
trend in smartphone imaging system design is to employ
two (or more) rear-facing cameras to ameliorate the limitations imposed by the smartphone compact form factor.
In most cases, the two rear-facing cameras have different
focal lengths and lens configurations to allow the smartphone to deliver DSLR-like optical capabilities (i.e., wideangle and telephoto). In addition, the two-camera setup has
been leveraged for applications such as synthetic bokeh effect [48] and reflection removal [40]. Given the utility of the
two-camera configuration, this design trend is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. In this work, we show that
the two-camera setup has another benefit, that of improving

00
400 nm

Wavelength

700 nm

Camera 2

(A)

Sensitivity

Most modern smartphones are now equipped with two
rear-facing cameras – a main camera for standard imaging
and an additional camera to provide wide-angle or telephoto zoom capabilities. In this paper, we leverage the
availability of these two cameras for the task of illumination
estimation using a small neural network to perform the illumination prediction. Specifically, if the two cameras’ sensors have different spectral sensitivities, the two images provide different spectral measurements of the physical scene.
A linear 3×3 color transform that maps between these two
observations – and that is unique to a given scene illuminant – can be used to train a lightweight neural network
comprising no more than 1460 parameters to predict the
scene illumination. We demonstrate that this two-camera
approach with a lightweight network provides results on par
or better than much more complicated illuminant estimation methods operating on a single image. We validate our
method’s effectiveness through extensive experiments on radiometric data, a quasi-real two-camera dataset we generated from an existing single camera dataset, as well as
a new real image dataset that we captured using a smartphone with two rear-facing cameras.

Lens

Two-camera
smartphone

Scene illuminant

Sensor

Camera 1

1

R
G
B

0.5
0
400 nm

Wavelength

700 nm

Sensor’s spectral sensitivity

Our two-camera
illuminant estimation
algorithm

Raw-RGB image

Camera 2
Scene

(B)

Illuminant
estimate
of camera 1
Raw-RGB image

Figure 1: (A) Most modern smartphones use two rearfacing cameras. Typically, the spectral characteristics of
these two cameras’ sensors are slightly different. (B) Thus,
a two-camera system furnishes two different measurements
of the scene being imaged. Our proposed two-camera algorithm harnesses this extra information for more accurate
and efficient illuminant estimation.

the accuracy of illuminant estimation.
Illuminant estimation is the most critical step for computational color constancy. Color constancy refers to the
ability of the human visual system to perceive scene colors as being the same even when observed under different
illuminations [39]. Cameras do not innately possess this illumination adaptation ability; the raw-RGB image recorded
by the camera sensor has significant color cast due to the
scene’s illumination. As a result, computational color constancy is applied to the camera’s raw-RGB sensor image as
one of the first steps in the in-camera imaging pipeline to
remove this undesirable color cast. The main goal of the
camera’s auto-white-balance (AWB) module, which is motivated by the concept of computational color constancy, is
illuminant estimation. AWB involves estimating the scene
illumination in the sensor’s raw-RGB color space and then
applying a simple 3×3 diagonal matrix computed directly

6637

