Affordance Transfer Learning for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Zhi Hou1 , Baosheng Yu1 , Yu Qiao2,3 , Xiaojiang Peng4 , Dacheng Tao1
1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Shenzhen Technology University
zhou9878@uni.sydney.edu.au, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn,
pengxiaojiang@sztu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Reasoning the human-object interactions (HOI) is essential for deeper scene understanding, while object affordances (or functionalities) are of great importance for human to discover unseen HOIs with novel objects. Inspired
by this, we introduce an affordance transfer learning approach to jointly detect HOIs with novel object and recognize affordances. Specifically, HOI representations can
be decoupled into a combination of affordance and object
representations, making it possible to compose novel interactions by combining affordance representations and novel
object representations from additional images, i.e. transferring the affordance to novel objects. With the proposed
affordance transfer learning, the model is also capable of
inferring the affordances of novel objects from known affordance representations. The proposed method can thus
be used to 1) improve the performance of HOI detection,
especially for the HOIs with unseen objects; and 2) infer
the affordances of novel objects. Experimental results on
two datasets, HICO-DET and HOI-COCO (from V-COCO),
demonstrate significant improvements over recent state-ofthe-art methods for HOI detection and object affordance detection. Code is available at https://github.com/
zhihou7/HOI-CL.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims to localize the human and objects in a given image, and recognize the interactions between the human and objects [4].
Considering the combinatorial nature of HOIs, there are always a variety of rare or unseen interactions with novel objects (e.g., “ride tiger”), which remains a great challenge for
the HOI detection model to detect unseen interactions with
those novel objects.

tiger

horse rideable

Affordance Transfer Learning
ride tiger


rideable


rideable
Discover novel HOIs

Recognize Affordances

Figure 1. An intuitive example to demonstrate affordance transfer learning for jointly exploring human interactions with novel
objects (e.g., “tiger”), and recognizing the affordance of novel objects. The proposed method is able to learn from the unseen interaction samples (e.g., “ride tiger”) that are composed from affordance representations and novel object representations, which
meanwhile transfers the affordance to novel objects and enables
the object affordance recognition.

The interactions between the human and object,
hhuman, verb, objecti, can be captured by either a humancentric (actions) or object-centric (affordance) manner.
Specifically, each HOI can be disentangled into a verb and
an object, in which the verb also indicates one of the possible affordances (or functionalities) of the object [12, 16],
i.e. what actions can be applied to a particular object [11].
Therefore, we are able to jointly learn the affordances of
object from the HOI samples, making it possible to com-

495

