IQDet: Instance-wise Quality Distribution Sampling for Object Detection
Yuchen Ma, Songtao Liu, Zeming Li, Jian Sun
Megvii Technology
{mayuchen, liusongtao, lizeming, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
We propose a dense object detector with an instancewise sampling strategy, named IQDet. Instead of using human prior sampling strategies, we first extract the regional
feature of each ground-truth to estimate the instance-wise
quality distribution. According to a mixture model in spatial dimensions, the distribution is more noise-robust and
adapted to the semantic pattern of each instance. Based
on the distribution, we propose a quality sampling strategy,
which automatically selects training samples in a probabilistic manner and trains with more high-quality samples.
Extensive experiments on MS COCO show that our method
steadily improves baseline by nearly 2.4 AP without bells
and whistles. Moreover, our best model achieves 51.6 AP,
outperforming all existing state-of-the-art one-stage detectors and it is completely cost-free in inference time.

1. Introduction
Recent object detection methods have proposed various
sampling strategies, assigning the predicted boxes to the
ground truth according to their quality. These sampling and
assignment strategies have led to great progress in modern
object detection task.
As shown in Fig. 1, the improvements in sampling strategies can be divided into two tendencies. (1) From Static
to Dynamic: Static rules like RetinaNet [8] assign anchor
boxes to the ground truth according to the predefined quality of anchors (i.e., IoU), while Dynamic rules (e.g., lossbased sampling in PAA [6]) further boost the performance
of the dense object detection, because they are predictionaware and directly determined by the prediction quality.
(2) From Sample-wise to Instance-wise: Assigned by the
Sample-wise rule like RetinaNet[8], a predefined anchor is
assigned as a positive sample when its IoU is higher than
the threshold. Meanwhile, based on Instance-wise distribution, [14, 15] propose a center-based distribution according
to the ground-truth(GT)’s location, where the samples located inside the central region are assigned as positive samples. These two tendencies achieve better performance and

Static

Dynamic

0.93

0.93
0.92 0.94
0.93

(a) RetinaNet

Sample-wise
rule

(b) PAA

GT
Image

Instance-wise
distribution

(c) FCOS

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Different sampling strategy of dense object detection.
The green squares are GT and the red circles represent the positive
samples. (a) Static sampling strategies mainly base on the anchors’
locations, while the Dynamic sampling strategies are predictionaware. (b) The IoUs of the predicted boxes are quite similar, but
the predicted box with IoU=0.92 is compulsively assigned as a
negative sample due to the slightly lower IoU, bringing inconsistent noisy samples for the training process. (c) FCOS uses a static
center distribution for sampling. (d) IQDet samples training set
according to an instance-wise dynamic distribution.

gradually become the de-facto standard in object detection.
However, these sampling strategies might have a few
limitations: (1) Static rules are not learnable and predictionaware (e.g. center region and anchor-based), which may
be not always the best choice for some eccentric object.
(2) Some Dynamic rules like PAA might suffer from the
noisy samples and per-sample quality rules, without jointly
formulating a quality distribution in spatial dimensions, as
shown in Fig. 1(b). (3) They sample uniformly over regular grids of image owing to the dense prediction paradigm,
which is difficult to assemble enough high-quality and
diverse samples. These methods might either Static or
Sample-wise, failing to completely solve these limitations.
In this paper, we propose an instance-wise(GT-wise)
quality distribution for sampling to address these issues: instead of assigning each sample independently, the instancewise sampling strategy selects training samples based on
the quality distribution. To achieve dynamic sampling, we

1717

