Leveraging Large-Scale Weakly Labeled Data for Semi-Supervised Mass
Detection in Mammograms
Yuxing Tang1 , Zhenjie Cao1 , Yanbo Zhang1 , Zhicheng Yang1 , Zongcheng Ji1 ,
Yiwei Wang1 , Mei Han1 , Jie Ma2 , Jing Xiao3 , Peng Chang1
1
PAII Inc., USA 2 Shenzhen People’s Hospital, China 3 Ping An Technology, China
tangyuxing87@gmail.com, pengchang@gmail.com

Abstract
Mammographic mass detection is an integral part of
a computer-aided diagnosis system. Annotating a large
number of mammograms at pixel-level in order to train
a mass detection model in a fully supervised fashion is
costly and time-consuming. This paper presents a novel
self-training framework for semi-supervised mass detection
with soft image-level labels generated from diagnosis reports by Mammo-RoBERTa, a RoBERTa-based natural language processing model fine-tuned on the fully labeled data
and associated mammography reports. Starting with a fully
supervised model trained on the data with pixel-level masks,
the proposed framework iteratively refines the model itself
using the entire weakly labeled data (image-level soft label)
in a self-training fashion. A novel sample selection strategy is proposed to identify those most informative samples
for each iteration, based on the current model output and
the soft labels of the weakly labeled data. A soft crossentropy loss and a soft focal loss are also designed to serve
as the image-level and pixel-level classification loss respectively. Our experiment results show that the proposed semisupervised framework can improve the mass detection accuracy on top of the supervised baseline, and outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art semi-supervised approaches with
weakly labeled data, in some cases by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Mammography is widely used for the early detection of
breast cancer, the most common cancer in women. With
about 48 million mammograms performed annually in the
US, a Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) system for mammogram screening is of great interest. This paper focuses
on detecting mass lesions from mammograms, an important indication of potential malignancy. Despite the recent progress of Deep Neural Networks (DNN)-based approaches, mass detection with high accuracy still remains a

Fully labeled images 𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹

Weakly labeled images 𝐷𝐷𝑊𝑊
Report

Findings:
xxxxxx
Impression:
xxxxxx

Report
Findings:
xxxxxx
Impression:
xxxxxx

image

…

mask

Supervised learning

image

…

text report

Weakly supervised learning

Figure 1. Our semi-supervised breast mass detection system uses
fully labeled data (with mass masks) as well as large-scale weakly
labeled data (with probabilistic NLP labels).

challenging problem.
Many previous DNN-based mass detection models are
trained with fully supervised fashion [26, 36, 22], and in
turn require a large amount of fully labeled data (with pixellevel masks or rectangular bounding-boxes), which must be
manually annotated by medical experts [33]. In many cases,
the amount of high-quality annotation data has become the
bottleneck for further performance improvement. Semisupervised approaches can minimize the effort required to
prepare the labeled data by training the model with a limited number of fully labeled examples and an additional, arbitrary amount of unlabeled or weakly labeled (e.g., imagelevel class labels) examples [28, 30].
For this study, we collected a large-scale dataset containing 134,520 images with diagnostic reports from 30,495
patients, among which 2,634 images have pixel-level
mass masks labeled by our collaborative radiologists. To
fully leverage the diagnostic reports, we further adopt a
RoBERTa [21]-based natural language processing (NLP)

3855

