Graph Stacked Hourglass Networks for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Tianhan Xu, Wataru Takano
Osaka University
xth430@gmail.com, takano@sigmath.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel graph convolutional
network architecture, Graph Stacked Hourglass Networks,
for 2D-to-3D human pose estimation tasks. The proposed
architecture consists of repeated encoder-decoder, in which
graph-structured features are processed across three different scales of human skeletal representations. This multiscale architecture enables the model to learn both local
and global feature representations, which are critical for
3D human pose estimation. We also introduce a multi-level
feature learning approach using different-depth intermediate features and show the performance improvements that
result from exploiting multi-scale, multi-level feature representations. Extensive experiments are conducted to validate
our approach, and the results show that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the application of deep learning
methods, the performance of 2D human pose estimation
has been greatly improved. Recent works show that using
such detected 2D joints positions, the 3D human pose can
also be efficiently and accurately regressed [27]. Due to the
graph structure formed by the topology of the human skeleton, many attempts have been made to use the generalized
form of CNN: Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN), to
perform the regression task of 2D-to-3D human pose estimation [48, 7, 23]. Since the graph convolution has a good
feature extraction capability for the graph-structured data,
the GCN-based approaches work well and some of them
achieve the state-of-the-art results in the 2D-to-3D human
pose estimation task.
However, the existing GCN-based approaches have the
following limitations: First, the graph convolutions exploit
all node information, which can be seen as that all features
are processed at only “one scale”. Thus it is difficult to
extract features that can represent spatial local and global
information and limits the representation capabilities. Second, most existing approaches use a straightforward archi-

tecture of sequentially connecting the graph convolution
layers (Fig. 4 (Top)). Such a model architecture does not
take advantage of the benefits of model depth, such as intermediate features at each depth, and therefore limits its
performance.
The core issue mentioned above is that the features extracted by existing architecture are oversimple, which limits the expressiveness of the model. Features with greater
representation capabilities, such as multi-scale and multilevel features, are commonly used in image-related tasks.
For multi-scale features, they denote the information from
small to large resolutions of the image features, thus bringing rich image understanding from local to global [5, 22],
while multi-level features denote the latent representations
in different depths of the latent space, bringing important
semantic information at all levels from shallow to deep. The
introduction of the above multi-scale and multi-level features can enrich the performance of the model. However,
because the upsampling and downsampling operations required for multi-scale features are defined on the image, and
the graph has an irregular structure, such methods cannot be
directly applied to the graph-structured data.
To address these issues, we propose a novel architecture for 2D-to-3D human pose estimation: Graph Stacked
Hourglass Networks. Specifically, we do not focus on specific graph convolution operations, but rather consider how
to integrate them in the architecture which gives the best
performance improvement. Given the advantages of the
2D human pose estimation approaches, proposed architecture adopts the repeated encoder-decoder applicable to the
graph-structured data for multi-scale feature extraction, as
well as the intermediate features at each depth of the model
for multi-level feature extraction. Such multi-scale and
multi-level feature information makes the model more expressive and enables the model to achieve high-precision
3D human pose estimation.
Our work makes the following contributions. First, we
propose Graph Hourglass modules suitable for extracting
multi-scale human skeletal features, which includes novel
pooling and unpooling operations considering human skeletal structure, called Skeletal Pool and Skeletal Unpool.

16105

