Multi-Label Learning from Single Positive Labels
Elijah Cole1 Oisin Mac Aodha2 Titouan Lorieul3 Pietro Perona1 Dan Morris4 Nebojsa Jojic5
1
2
3
4
Caltech
University of Edinburgh
Inria
Microsoft AI for Earth 5 Microsoft Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
The majority of work in visual classification is focused
on the multi-class setting, where each image is assumed
to belong to one of L classes. However, the world is
intrinsically multi-label: scenes contain multiple objects,
CT scans reveal multiple health conditions, satellite images
show multiple terrain types, etc. Unfortunately, it can be
prohibitively expensive to obtain the large number of accurate multi-label annotations required to train deep neural
networks [10]. Heuristics can be used to reduce the required
annotation effort [34, 18], but this runs the risk of increasing
error in the labels. Even without heuristics, false negatives
are common because (i) rare classes are often missed by
human annotators [59, 58] and (ii) detecting absence can be
more difficult than detecting presence [59]. This may ex-

86
84
82

MAP

Predicting all applicable labels for a given image is
known as multi-label classification. Compared to the standard multi-class case (where each image has only one label), it is considerably more challenging to annotate training data for multi-label classification. When the number
of potential labels is large, human annotators find it difficult to mention all applicable labels for each training image. Furthermore, in some settings detection is intrinsically
difficult e.g. finding small object instances in high resolution images. As a result, multi-label training data is often
plagued by false negatives. We consider the hardest version
of this problem, where annotators provide only one relevant
label for each image. As a result, training sets will have
only one positive label per image and no confirmed negatives. We explore this special case of learning from missing labels across four different multi-label image classification datasets for both linear classifiers and end-to-end finetuned deep networks. We extend existing multi-label losses
to this setting and propose novel variants that constrain the
number of expected positive labels during training. Surprisingly, we show that in some cases it is possible to approach
the performance of fully labeled classifiers despite training
with significantly fewer confirmed labels.

80

ROLE
AN

78
76

AN LS
BCE

103

104

# Observed Labels

105

Figure 1. It is possible to approach the performance of full supervision (LBCE ) using only one positive label per image. Here
we show test MAP as a function of the number of training labels
for PASCAL VOC 2012 [13]. Each curve is generated by randomly subsampling m% of the images from the training set for
m ∈ {10, 20, . . . , 100}. The number of labels per image then
determines the number of observed label on the horizontal axis:
LBCE receives all 20 labels per image, while the other methods
only receive one positive label per training image. Despite having
a factor of 20 times fewer labels, our LROLE approach achieves
comparable performance to the fully labeled case (LBCE ).

plain why even flagship multi-class datasets like ImageNet
have been found to include images that actually belong to
multiple classes [60]. Since it is generally infeasible to exhaustively annotate every image for all classes that could be
present, there is a natural trade-off between how many images receive annotations and how completely each image is
annotated. On one extreme, we could fully annotate images
until the labeling budget is exhausted. In this paper we are
interested in the other extreme, in which our dataset consists
of many images, but each individual image has minimal supervision.
We explore the problem of single positive multi-label
learning, where only a single positive label (and no other
true positives or true negative labels) is observed for each
training image. This is a worthwhile problem for at least
three reasons: First, an effective method for this setting

933

