Ensembling with Deep Generative Views
Lucy Chai1,2

Jun-Yan Zhu2,3
1
MIT

{lrchai, phillipi}@mit.edu

Eli Shechtman2 Phillip Isola1 Richard Zhang2
2
3
Adobe Research
CMU

{elishe, rizhang}@adobe.com

junyanz@cs.cmu.edu

Input Image

Abstract
Recent generative models can synthesize “views” of artificial images that mimic real-world variations, such as
changes in color or pose, simply by learning from unlabeled image collections. Here, we investigate whether such
views can be applied to real images to benefit downstream
analysis tasks such as image classification. Using a pretrained generator, we first find the latent code corresponding to a given real input image. Applying perturbations to
the code creates natural variations of the image, which can
then be ensembled together at test-time. We use StyleGAN2
as the source of generative augmentations and investigate
this setup on classification tasks involving facial attributes,
cat faces, and cars. Critically, we find that several design
decisions are required towards making this process work;
the perturbation procedure, weighting between the augmentations and original image, and training the classifier on
synthesized images can all impact the result. Currently, we
find that while test-time ensembling with GAN-based augmentations can offer some small improvements, the remaining bottlenecks are the efficiency and accuracy of the GAN
reconstructions, coupled with classifier sensitivities to artifacts in GAN-generated images.

1. Introduction
Image datasets are the backbone of learning-based vision problems, but images are only sparsely-sampled discrete snapshots of the underlying continuous world. However, recent generative adversarial networks (GANs) [18]
have shown promise in learning to imitate the real-image
manifold, mapping random samples from a latent distribution to realistic image outputs. A heavily exploited property
of these models is that the latent space is locally smooth:
samples nearby in latent space will appear perceptually similar in image space [42]. Therefore, GANs can be viewed
as a type of “interpolating mechanism” that can blend and
recombine images in a continuous manner. From individual image samples, can we use a GAN to generate nearby
alternatives on the image manifold, or “views,” giving us
unlimited variants of a given image?

C
Generator Samples

Σ

C

G
Latent
Space

C
C

Generator

Classifier

Figure 1: We project an input image into the latent space of a
pre-trained GAN and perturb it slightly to obtain modifications of
the input image. These alternative views from the GAN are ensembled at test-time, together with the original image, in a downstream
classification task.

Here, we investigate using GAN outputs as test-time
augmentation for classification tasks. In the standard classification pipeline, passing an image through a trained classifier yields predictions of the image belonging to one of several classes. However, performance is often improved using
more than one sample – if we have multiple views of an image, we can use the classifier to obtain predictions for each
view and average the results together as an ensemble. The
classic approach to generating additional views has been to
crop the image at different locations before classification.
Using a GAN, we have an orthogonal, data-driven method
of generating additional views of a given image, such as altering its pose, shape, or color based on the directions of
variation that a GAN learns.
A secondary advantage of unconditional GANs is that
they can be trained on image collections without requiring
image labels. As data labeling is often vastly more expensive than data collection, GANs learn from much larger
datasets compared to tasks involving manual annotation,
such as classification. Training on large datasets allows sev114997

