AutoInt: Automatic Integration for Fast Neural Volume Rendering
David B. Lindell*

Julien N. P. Martel*

Gordon Wetzstein

Stanford University
{lindell, jnmartel, gordon.wetzstein}@stanford.edu

Abstract

Images and poses

Training the grad networks
grad net

Numerical integration is a foundational technique in scientific computing and is at the core of many computer vision applications. Among these applications, neural volume
rendering has recently been proposed as a new paradigm
for view synthesis, achieving photorealistic image quality.
However, a fundamental obstacle to making these methods
practical is the extreme computational and memory requirements caused by the required volume integrations along the
rendered rays during training and inference. Millions of
rays, each requiring hundreds of forward passes through
a neural network are needed to approximate those integrations with Monte Carlo sampling. Here, we propose
automatic integration, a new framework for learning efficient, closed-form solutions to integrals using coordinatebased neural networks. For training, we instantiate the
computational graph corresponding to the derivative of the
coordinate-based network. The graph is fitted to the signal to integrate. After optimization, we reassemble the
graph to obtain a network that represents the antiderivative. By the fundamental theorem of calculus, this enables
the calculation of any definite integral in two evaluations of
the network. Applying this approach to neural rendering,
we improve a tradeoff between rendering speed and image
quality: improving render times by greater than 10× with a
tradeoff of reduced image quality.

1. Introduction
Image-based rendering and novel view synthesis are
fundamental problems in computer vision and graphics
(e.g., [5, 54]). The ability to interpolate and extrapolate a
sparse set of images depicting a 3D scene has broad applications in entertainment, virtual and augmented reality, and
many other applications. Emerging neural rendering techniques have recently enabled photorealistic image quality
for these tasks (see Sec. 2).
* Equal contribution.
http://www.computationalimaging.org/publications/
automatic-integration/

grad net

Training

AutoInt
Novel views

Assembling the
integral networks
integral net

integral net

>10x speedup

Testing

Figure 1. Automatic integration for neural volume rendering. During training, a grad network is optimized to represent multi-view
images. At test time, we instantiate a corresponding integral network to rapidly evaluate per-ray integrals through the volume.

Although state-of-the-art neural volume rendering techniques offer unprecedented image quality, they are also extremely slow and memory inefficient [37]. This is a fundamental obstacle to making these methods practical. The
primary computational bottleneck for neural volume rendering is the evaluation of integrals along the rendered rays
during training and inference required by the volume rendering equation [33]. Approximate integration using Monte
Carlo sampling is typically used for this purpose, requiring
hundreds of forward passes through the neural network representing the volume for each of the millions of rays that
need to be rendered for a single frame. Here, we develop
a general and efficient framework for approximate integration. Applied to the specific problem of neural volume rendering, our framework improves a tradeoff between rendering speed and image quality, allowing a greater than 10×
speedup in the rendering process, though with a reduction
in image quality.

14556

