StylePeople: A Generative Model of Fullbody Human Avatars
Artur Grigorev 1,2∗, Karim Iskakov 1∗, Anastasia Ianina 1 , Renat Bashirov 1 ,
Ilya Zakharkin 1,2 , Alexander Vakhitov 1 , Victor Lempitsky 1,2
1

2

Samsung AI Center, Moscow
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow

Abstract
We propose a new type of full-body human avatars,
which combines parametric mesh-based body model with
a neural texture. We show that with the help of neural
textures, such avatars can successfully model clothing and
hair, which usually poses a problem for mesh-based approaches. We also show how these avatars can be created from multiple frames of a video using backpropagation. We then propose a generative model for such avatars
that can be trained from datasets of images and videos of
people. The generative model allows us to sample random
avatars as well as to create dressed avatars of people from
one or few images. The code for the project is available at
saic-violet.github.io/style-people.

1. Introduction
Creating realistically-looking and articulated human
avatars is a challenging task with many applications in
telepresence, gaming, augmented and virtual reality. In recent years, sophisticated and powerful models of “naked”
people that model shape of the body including facial and
hand deformations have been developed [33, 50]. These
models are based on mesh geometry and are learned from
several existing datasets of body scans. Clothing and hair
literally add an extra layer of complexity on top of body
modeling, they are even more challenging for appearance
modeling, and accurate 3D data for these elements are
scarce and hard to obtain. And yet creating realistic avatars
is not possible without modeling of these elements.
Here, we propose a new approach that we call neural
dressing that allows to create 3D realistic full body avatars
from videos and in a few-shot mode (from one or several images). Similarly to previous works, this approach
uses deformable meshes (specifically, SMPL-X model [33])
to model and animate body geometry in 3D. On top of
the body mesh, the approach superimposes a multi-channel
neural texture [44] that is processed by a rendering network
∗ equal contribution

in order to generate images of a full-body avatar with clothing and hair. Our first contribution is thus to show that the
combination of deformable mesh models and neural textures (neural dressing) can model appearance of full-body
avatars with loose clothing and hair well and to account for
the geometry missing in parametric body models.
As our second contribution, we build a generative model
of full-body avatars. The key component of the new model
is a generative network for neural body texture. The generative network is derived from StyleGANv2 [21] generator.
To build the complete model, we thus incorporate neural
texture synthesis, mesh rendering, and neural rendering into
the joint generation process, which is trained in an adversarial fashion on a large-scale dataset of full-body images. We
also address the need to ensure that avatars have consistent
appearance across variety of poses and camera positions.
This is ensured by adding an additional discriminator network and by modifying the training process accordingly.
Using the resulting generative model, we can sample
new realistic 3D “artificial humans” (StylePeople – Figure 1). Furthermore, the availability of a generative model
allows us to build avatars for existing people by fitting the
model to a single image or few images of a given person.
As the generative model is heavily over-parameterized, we
investigate how the fitting process can be regularized. In
the experiments, we then compare our model to previous
approaches to few-shot avatar modeling.

2. Related work
An early generative model for people in clothing [24]
translates renderings of a parametric body model to human
parsing (semantic segmentation) maps, which are subsequently translated into human images. The pose-guided human image generation [29] methods synthesize human images in new poses or with new clothes from a single image
by either relying on feature warping in pose-to-image translation [41, 11, 10, 14] or on predicting surface coordinates
in the source and target frames [5] and sampling RGB texture maps [31, 13]. In [30] the textures are transfered from
clothing images to 3D garments worn on top of SMPL [28]

5151

