Understanding Failures of Deep Networks via Robust Feature Extraction
Sahil Singla*
University of Maryland

Besmira Nushi, Shital Shah, Ece Kamar, Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research

ssingla@umd.edu

{benushi,shitals,eckamar,horvitz} @microsoft.com

Abstract
Traditional evaluation metrics for learned models that
report aggregate scores over a test set are insufficient for
surfacing important and informative patterns of failure over
features and instances. We introduce and study a method
aimed at characterizing and explaining failures by identifying visual attributes whose presence or absence results
in poor performance. In distinction to previous work that
relies upon crowdsourced labels for visual attributes, we
leverage the representation of a separate robust model to extract interpretable features and then harness these features
to identify failure modes. We further propose a visualization
method aimed at enabling humans to understand the meaning encoded in such features and we test the comprehensibility of the features. An evaluation of the methods on the
ImageNet dataset demonstrates that: (i) the proposed workflow is effective for discovering important failure modes, (ii)
the visualization techniques help humans to understand the
extracted features, and (iii) the extracted insights can assist
engineers with error analysis and debugging.

1. Introduction
It is critically important to understand the failure modes
of machine learning (ML) systems, especially when they are
employed in high-stakes applications. Aggregrate metrics
in common use capture summary statistics on failure. While
reporting overall performance is important, gaining an understanding of the specifics of failure is a core responsibility
in the fielding of ML systems and components. For example, we need to understand situations where a self-driving
car will fail to detect a pedestrian even when the system has
high overall accuracy. Similarly, it is important to understand for which features misdiagnosis is most probable in
chest x-rays even if the model has higher overall accuracy
than humans. Such situation-specific insights can guide the
iterative process of model development and debugging.
Model performance can be wildly non-uniform for dif-

ferent clusterings of instances and such heterogeneity is not
reflected by standard metrics such as AUC or accuracy. For
example, it was shown in [19] that a commercial model for
emotion detection from facial expressions systematically
failed for young children. Buolamwini et al. [5] found that
gender detection in multiple commercial models had significantly higher error rates for women with darker skin tone.
These examples highlight the importance of identifying natural clusters in the data with high failure rates. However,
practical problems with these approaches still remain: (a)
they require an expensive and time-consuming collection of
metadata by humans, and (b) visual attributes that machine
learning procedures pay attention to can be very different
from the ones humans focus on (see Appendix Section F).
To resolve these issues, we propose to leverage the internal representation of a robust model [25] to generate the
metadata. The key property that makes robust representations useful is that the features can be visualized more easily than for a standard model [14, 39]. Our method, named
Barlow1 , is inspired from Fault Tree Analysis [23] in safety
engineering and uses robust representations as a building
block.2 We demonstrate the results on the ImageNet dataset
[12] and find that it reveals two types of failures:
Spurious correlations: A spurious correlation is a feature
that is causally unrelated to the desired class but is likely to
co-occur with the same class in the training/test data. For
example, food is likely to co-occur with plates. However,
the absence of the food from a plate image should not result
in misclassification (see examples in Figures 1a, 1b and 1e).
Overemphasized features: An overemphasized feature is a
feature that is causally related to the desired class but where
the model gives excessive importance for classification, disregarding the other relevant features, and is unable to make
a correct prediction when that feature is absent from the image. For example, a model may be likely to fail on a purse
image if the buckle is absent (see Figures 1c and 1d).
While determining the type of failure (spurious vs.
causal but overemphasized feature) and formulating mitigation steps remains a task that depends on human expertise,
1 In honor of perceptual psychologist, Horace Barlow [3].
2 Code repository: https://github.com/singlasahil14/barlow

* Work carried out during a research internship at Microsoft Research.

12853

