A Multiplexed Network for End-to-End, Multilingual OCR
Jing Huang Guan Pang Rama Kovvuri Mandy Toh Kevin J Liang
Praveen Krishnan Xi Yin Tal Hassner
Facebook AI
{jinghuang,gpang,ramakovvuri,mandytoh,kevinjliang,pkrishnan,yinxi,thassner}@fb.com

Abstract
Recent advances in OCR have shown that an end-toend (E2E) training pipeline that includes both detection and
recognition leads to the best results. However, many existing methods focus primarily on Latin-alphabet languages,
often even only case-insensitive English characters. In this
paper, we propose an E2E approach, Multiplexed Multilingual Mask TextSpotter, that performs script identification
at the word level and handles different scripts with different recognition heads, all while maintaining a unified loss
that simultaneously optimizes script identification and multiple recognition heads. Experiments show that our method
outperforms the single-head model with similar number of
parameters in end-to-end recognition tasks, and achieves
state-of-the-art results on MLT17 and MLT19 joint text detection and script identification benchmarks. We believe
that our work is a step towards the end-to-end trainable and
scalable multilingual multi-purpose OCR system. Our code
and model will be released.

1. Introduction
Reading text in visual content has long been a topic of
interest in computer vision, with numerous practical applications such as search, scene understanding, translation,
navigation, and assistance for the visually impaired. In recent years, advances in deep learning have led to dramatic
improvements of Optical Character Recognition (OCR), allowing reading text in increasingly diverse and challenging scene environments with higher accuracy than ever before. A common approach is to decompose the task into
two sub-problems: text detection, the localization of text in
visual media, and text recognition, the transcription of the
detected text. While these two components were traditionally learned separately, recent works have shown that they
can be learned jointly, with benefits to both modules.
As the most commonly spoken language in the world [1]
and a lingua franca for research, the English language has
been the focus of many public OCR benchmarks [35, 62, 25,

24, 61, 53] and methods [30, 33, 43, 44]. However, English
(and other Latin alphabet languages) represent only a fraction of the languages spoken (and written) around the world.
OCR technology is also used to study forgotten languages
and ancient manuscripts, where alphabets and script styles
can vary enormously [14, 15]. Thus, developing OCR capabilities in other languages is also important to ensure such
technologies are accessible to everyone. Additionally, because of the increasing interconnectedness of the world and
its cultures, it is important to develop OCR systems capable
of recognizing text from multiple languages co-occurring in
the same scene.
While many concepts and strategies from OCR on English text can be adapted to other languages, developing
multilingual OCR systems is not completely straightforward. Naively training a separate system for each language is computationally expensive during inference and
does not properly account for predictions made for other
languages. Furthermore, previous works [44, 30] have
shown that jointly learning text detection and text recognition modules is mutually beneficial; separate models lose
out on the potential benefits of a shared text detection module. On the other hand, learning a unified model with single
recognition head also presents problems. While uncased
English only has 26 characters, many Asian languages like
Chinese, Japanese, and Korean have tens of thousands of
characters. Different languages/scripts can also have very
different word structures or orientations. For example, vertically written text is far more common in East Asian languages like Chinese, Japanese and Korean than in Western
languages, and characters in Arabic and Hindi are usually
connected to each other. This variability in the number of
characters as well as the wide variability in script appearance characteristics mean it is highly unlikely that a single
architecture can capably maximize accuracy and efficiency
over all languages/scripts, and any imbalances in the training data may result in significantly different performances
between languages.
Given these challenges, we present a blend of these two
approaches, incorporating each one’s advantages while mit14547

