Improving Panoptic Segmentation at All Scales
Lorenzo Porzi, Samuel Rota Bulò, Peter Kontschieder
Facebook
{porzi,rotabulo,pkontschieder}@fb.com

Figure 1: Panoptic segmentation on high-resolution natural images is challenged with recognizing objects at a wide range of
scales. Standard approaches (left) can struggle when dealing with very small (zoomed detail) or very large objects (bus on
the left). By introducing a novel instance scale-uniform sampling strategy and a crop-aware bounding box loss, we are able
to improve panoptic segmentation results at all scales (right).

Abstract
Crop-based training strategies decouple training resolution from GPU memory consumption, allowing the use
of large-capacity panoptic segmentation networks on multimegapixel images. Using crops, however, can introduce a
bias towards truncating or missing large objects. To address this, we propose a novel crop-aware bounding box
regression loss (CABB loss), which promotes predictions to
be consistent with the visible parts of the cropped objects,
while not over-penalizing them for extending outside of the
crop. We further introduce a novel data sampling and augmentation strategy which improves generalization across
scales by counteracting the imbalanced distribution of object sizes. Combining these two contributions with a carefully designed, top-down panoptic segmentation architecture, we obtain new state-of-the-art results on the challenging Mapillary Vistas (MVD), Indian Driving and Cityscapes
datasets, surpassing the previously best approach on MVD
by +4.5% PQ and +5.2% mAP.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [16] is the task of generating perpixel, semantic labels for an image, together with objectspecific segmentation masks. It is thus a combination of
semantic segmentation and instance segmentation, i.e. two
long-standing tasks in computer vision that have been traditionally tackled separately. Due to its importance for tasks
like autonomous driving or scene understanding it has recently attracted a lot of interest in the research community.

The majority of deep-learning based panoptic segmentation architectures [15, 23, 17, 29, 21] proposed a combination of specialized segmentation branches – one for conventional semantic segmentation and another one for instance segmentation – followed by a combination strategy
to generate a final panoptic segmentation result. Instance
segmentation branches in top-down panoptic architectures
are dominantly designed on top of Mask R-CNN [12], i.e.
a segmentation extension of Faster R-CNN [24] generating
state-of-the-art mask predictions for given bounding boxes.
In contrast and more recently, bottom-up panoptic architectures [6, 26] have emerged but still lag behind in terms of
instance segmentation performance.
Panoptic segmentation networks are typically solving
multiple tasks (object detection, instance segmentation and
semantic segmentation), and are trained on batches of fullsized images. However, with increasing complexity of tasks
and growing capacity of the network backbone, full-image
training is quickly inhibited by available GPU memory, despite availability of memory-saving strategies during training like [25, 20, 11, 14]. Obvious mitigation strategies
include a reduction of training batch size, downsizing of
high-resolution training images, or building on backbones
with lower capacity. These workarounds unfortunately introduce other limitations: i) Small batch sizes can lead to
higher variance in the gradients which will reduce the effectiveness of Batch Normalization [13] and consequently
the performance of the resulting model. ii) Reducing the
image resolution leads to a loss of fine structures which are
known to strongly correlate with objects belonging to the

7302

