Point Cloud Instance Segmentation using Probabilistic Embeddings
Biao Zhang
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

biao.zhang@kaust.edu.sa

pwonka@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose a new framework for point
cloud instance segmentation. Our framework has two steps:
an embedding step and a clustering step. In the embedding
step, our main contribution is to propose a probabilistic embedding space for point cloud embedding. Specifically, each
point is represented as a tri-variate normal distribution. In
the clustering step, we propose a novel loss function, which
benefits both the semantic segmentation and the clustering.
Our experimental results show important improvements to
the SOTA, i.e., 3.1% increased average per-category mAP
on the PartNet dataset.

1. Introduction
In this paper we tackle the problem of instance segmentation of point clouds. In instance segmentation we would
like to assign two labels to each point in a point cloud. The
first label is the class label (e.g., leg, back, seat, ... for a
chair data set) and the second label is the instance ID (a
unique number, e.g., to distinguish the different legs of a
chair). While instance segmentation had many recent successes in the image domain [11, 24, 7, 27, 4, 26], we believe
that the problem of instance segmentation for point clouds
is not sufficiently explored.
We build our work on the idea of embedding-based instance segmentation, that is very popular in the image and
volume domain [7, 27, 4, 26, 21] and has also been successfully applied in the point clouds domain [33, 34]. In this
approach typically two steps are employed. In the first step,
each point (or pixel) is embedded in a feature space such
that points belonging to the same instance should be close
and points belonging to different instances should be further
apart from each other. In the second step points are grouped
using a clustering algorithm, such as mean-shift or greedy
clustering.
One important design choice in embedding-based methods is the dimensionality of the feature space. Some methods propose to use a high dimensional feature space [4, 20],
while others use a low dimensional features space that has

Input

Semantic Instance

..
.
Figure 1: Our method takes a point cloud as input, encodes
the points as random variables, and outputs semantic class
labels and instance labels.
the same dimensionality as the input data [27, 16, 26], e.g.,
2D for images, and 3D for point clouds. Methods with
a low dimensional embedding space not only have lower
computational complexity, but they also lead to better interpretability, e.g., embeddings are encoded as offset vectors
towards instance centers.
Therefore, the main goal of our work is to extend the expressiveness of the embedding space in a way that leads to
improved segmentation performance. Our proposed solution is to employ probabilistic embeddings, such that each
point in the embedding space is encoded by a distribution.
While assessing uncertainty is a popular tool in recent computer vision research [15, 17, 23, 5] and we introduce this
idea to the task of instance segmentation. Incorporating uncertainty leads to an important improvement in segmentation performance. For example, on the PartNet [25] finegrained instance segmentation dataset we can improve the
SOTA by 3.1% average per-category mAP.
In the remainder of the paper, we will give more details on the probabilistic embedding algorithm (Sec. 3), explain the embedding step (Sec. 3.1) and the clustering step
(Sec. 3.4) in more detail.
Contribution. Our main contributions are as follows
1. We propose to use probabilistic embeddings for instance segmentation and present a complete framework in the context of point cloud instance segmentation based on probabilistic embeddings.
2. We develop a new loss function for the clustering step

8883

