3D-MAN: 3D Multi-frame Attention Network for Object Detection
Zetong Yang1∗
Yin Zhou2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
tomztyang@gmail.com

Zhifeng Chen3 Jiquan Ngiam3
2
Waymo LLC 3 Google Research, Brain Team

yinzhou@waymo.com

{zhifengc, jngiam}@google.com

Abstract
3D object detection is an important module in autonomous driving and robotics. However, many existing
methods focus on using single frames to perform 3D detection, and do not fully utilize information from multiple frames. In this paper, we present 3D-MAN: a 3D
multi-frame attention network that effectively aggregates
features from multiple perspectives and achieves state-ofthe-art performance on Waymo Open Dataset. 3D-MAN
first uses a novel fast single-frame detector to produce box
proposals. The box proposals and their corresponding feature maps are then stored in a memory bank. We design a
multi-view alignment and aggregation module, using attention networks, to extract and aggregate the temporal features stored in the memory bank. This effectively combines
the features coming from different perspectives of the scene.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the
large-scale complex Waymo Open Dataset, achieving stateof-the-art results compared to published single-frame and
multi-frame methods.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an important problem in computer vision as it is widely used in applications, such as autonomous driving and robotics. Autonomous driving platforms require precise 3D detection to build an accurate representation of the world, which is in turn used in downstream models that make critical driving decisions.
LiDAR provides a high-resolution accurate 3D view of
the world. However, at any point of time, the LiDAR sensor
collects only a single perspective of the scene. It is often the
case that the LiDAR points detected on an observed object
correspond to only a partial view of it. Detecting these partially visible instances is an ill-posed problem because there
exist multiple reasonable predictions (shown as red and blue
boxes in the upper row of Figure 1). These potential ambiguous scenarios can be a bottleneck for single-frame 3D
detectors (Table 1).
∗ Work done during an internship at Google Brain.

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

Figure 1. Upper row: Potential detections given LiDAR from a
single frame demonstrating ambiguity between many reasonable
predictions. Lower row: After merging the points aligned across 4
frames, there is more certainty for the correct box prediction.
IoU threshold
AP (%)

0.3
94.72

0.5
88.97

0.7
63.27

Table 1. We vary the intersection-over-union (IoU) threshold for
considering a predicted box correctly matched to a ground-truth
box, and measure the performance of the PointPillars model on the
Waymo Open Dataset’s validation set. A lower IoU threshold corresponds to allowing less accurate boxes to match. This shows that
improving the box localization could significantly improve model
performance.

In the autonomous driving scenario, as the vehicle progresses, the sensors pick up multiple views of the world,
making it possible to resolve the aforementioned localization ambiguity. Multiple frames across time can provide
different perspectives of an observed object instance. An
effective multi-frame detection method should be able to extract relevant features from each frame and aggregate them,
so as to obtain a representation that combines multiple perspectives (Figure 1). Research in 3D multi-frame detection has been limited due to a lack of available datasets
with well-calibrated multi-frame data. Fortunately, recently
released large-scale 3D sequence datasets (NuScenes [2],
Waymo Open Dataset [23]) have made such data available.
A straight-forward approach to fusing multi-frame point
11863

