SAIL-VOS 3D: A Synthetic Dataset and Baselines for Object Detection and 3D
Mesh Reconstruction from Video Data
Yuan-Ting Hu, Jiahong Wang, Raymond A. Yeh, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{ythu2, jiahong4, yeh17, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Figure 1. Temporal information in videos provides a lot of cues for 3D mesh reconstruction. For instance, as the main character in this
scene turns we can accurately reconstruct both the front and back. Unfortunately, existing image-based datasets don’t permit to develop
such methods. To alleviate this we introduce the synthetic SAIL-VOS 3D dataset and develop first baselines for this task.

Abstract
Extracting detailed 3D information of objects from video
data is an important goal for holistic scene understanding. While recent methods have shown impressive results
when reconstructing meshes of objects from a single image, results often remain ambiguous as part of the object
is unobserved. Moreover, existing image-based datasets for
mesh reconstruction don’t permit to study models which integrate temporal information. To alleviate both concerns we
present SAIL-VOS 3D: a synthetic video dataset with frameby-frame mesh annotations which extends SAIL-VOS. We
also develop first baselines for reconstruction of 3D meshes
from video data via temporal models. We demonstrate efficacy of the proposed baseline on SAIL-VOS 3D and Pix3D,
showing that temporal information improves reconstruction
quality. Resources and additional information are available
at http://sailvos.web.illinois.edu.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D shape of an observed object over
time is an important goal in computer vision. Very early

work towards this goal [42, 43, 44] focused on recovering
lines and primitives like triangles, squares and circles in images. Due to many seminal contributions, the field has significantly advanced since those early days. Given a single
image, exciting recent work [21, 31, 37, 76] detects objects
and infers their detailed 3D shape. Notably, the shapes are
significantly more complex than the early primitives.
To uncover the 3D shape, recently, single view 3D shape
reconstruction [10, 16, 41, 48, 55, 56, 77, 81] has garnered
much attention. The developed data-driven and learningbased approaches achieve realistic reconstructions by inferring the 3D geometry and structure of objects. All those
methods have in common the use of a single input image. However, moving objects and temporal information are
not considered. Intuitively, as illustrated in Fig. 1, we expect temporal information to aid 3D shape reconstruction.
How can methods benefit from complementary information
available in multiple views?
Classical multi-view 3D reconstruction [6, 18, 65] exploits the geometric properties exposed in multiple views.
For instance, structure from motion algorithms, e.g., [65],
infer the 3D shape using multi-view geometry [24]. However note that the assumption of a static scene in these classical methods is often violated in practice. Moreover, clas11418

