MagFace: A Universal Representation for
Face Recognition and Quality Assessment
Qiang Meng, Shichao Zhao, Zhida Huang, Feng Zhou
Algorithm Research, Aibee Inc.
{qmeng,sczhao,zdhuang,fzhou}@aibee.com

Abstract
The performance of face recognition system degrades
when the variability of the acquired faces increases. Prior
work alleviates this issue by either monitoring the face
quality in pre-processing or predicting the data uncertainty
along with the face feature. This paper proposes MagFace,
a category of losses that learn a universal feature embedding whose magnitude can measure the quality of the given
face. Under the new loss, it can be proven that the magnitude of the feature embedding monotonically increases if the
subject is more likely to be recognized. In addition, MagFace introduces an adaptive mechanism to learn a wellstructured within-class feature distributions by pulling easy
samples to class centers while pushing hard samples away.
This prevents models from overfitting on noisy low-quality
samples and improves face recognition in the wild. Extensive experiments conducted on face recognition, quality assessments as well as clustering demonstrate its superiority over state-of-the-arts. The code is available at
https://github.com/IrvingMeng/MagFace.

1. Introduction
Recognizing face in the wild is difficult mainly due to
the large variability exhibited by face images acquired in
unconstrained settings. This variability is associated to the
image acquisition conditions (such as illumination, background, blurriness, and low resolution), factors of the face
(such as pose, occlusion and expression) or biases of the
deployed face recognition system [34]. To cope with these
challenges, most relevant face analysis system under unconstrained environment (e.g., surveillance video) consists of
three stages: 1) face acquisition to select from a set of raw
images or capture from video stream the most suitable face
image for recognition purpose; 2) feature extraction to extract discriminative representation from each face image; 3)
facial application to match the reference image towards a
given gallery or cluster faces into groups of same person.

Class center

Easy

Semi-hard

𝒍
𝑙
Hard

𝜽
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃

O

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: MagFace learns for (a) in-the-wild faces (b) a universal
embedding by pulling the easier samples closer to the class center
and pushing them away from the origin o. As shown in our experiments and supported by mathematical proof, the magnitude l before normalization increases along with feature’s cosine distance
to its class center, and therefore reveals the quality for each face.
The larger the l, the more likely the sample can be recognized.

To acquire the optimal reference image in the first stage,
a technique called face quality assessment [4, 24] is often employed on each detected face. Although the ideal
quality score should be indicative of the face recognition
performance, most of early work [1, 2] estimates qualities based on human-understandable factors such as luminances, distortions and pose angles, which may not directly
favor the face feature learning in the second stage. Alternatively, learning-based methods [4, 13] train quality assessment models with artificially or human labelled quality
values. Theses methods are error-prone as there lacks of a
clear definition of quality and human may not know the best
characteristics for the whole systems.
To achieve high end-to-end application performances in
the second stage, various metric-learning [25, 28] or classification losses [46, 23, 18, 38, 8] emerged in the past few
years. These works learn to represent each face image as
a deterministic point embedding in the latent space regardless of the variance inherent in faces. In reality, however,
low-quality or large-pose images like Fig. 1a widely exist
and their facial features are ambiguous or absent. Given

14225

