MASA-SR: Matching Acceleration and Spatial Adaptation for
Reference-Based Image Super-Resolution

1

Liying Lu1 * Wenbo Li1 * Xin Tao2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Jiangbo Lu3
2
Kuaishou

Jiaya Jia1,3
3
SmartMore

{lylu,wenboli,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jiangsutx@gmail.com, jiangbo@smartmore.com

Abstract
Reference-based image super-resolution (RefSR) has
shown promising success in recovering high-frequency details by utilizing an external reference image (Ref). In this
task, texture details are transferred from the Ref image to
the low-resolution (LR) image according to their point- or
patch-wise correspondence. Therefore, high-quality correspondence matching is critical. It is also desired to be
computationally efficient. Besides, existing RefSR methods
tend to ignore the potential large disparity in distributions
between the LR and Ref images, which hurts the effectiveness of the information utilization. In this paper, we propose the MASA network for RefSR, where two novel modules are designed to address these problems. The proposed
Match & Extraction Module significantly reduces the computational cost by a coarse-to-fine correspondence matching scheme. The Spatial Adaptation Module learns the difference of distribution between the LR and Ref images, and
remaps the distribution of Ref features to that of LR features in a spatially adaptive way. This scheme makes the
network robust to handle different reference images. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments validate the
effectiveness of our proposed model.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is a fundamental computer vision task that aims to restore a highresolution image (HR) with high-frequency details from its
low-resolution counterpart (LR). Progress of SISR in recent years is based on deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [3, 11, 12, 13, 16, 31]. Nevertheless, the ill-posed
nature of SISR problems makes it still challenging to recover high-quality details.
In this paper, we explore reference-based superresolution (RefSR), which utilizes an external reference image (Ref) to help super-resolve the LR image. Reference
images usually contain similar content and texture with the
* Equal contribution

LR

Ref

Bicubic

SRNTT

TTSR

MASA(Ours)

Figure 1: Visual comparison of ×4 SR results. Our
MASA method generates more appealing texture details
than the two leading RefSR methods, i.e., SRNTT [33] and
TTSR [30].

LR image. They can be acquired from web image search
or captured from different viewpoints. Transferring fine
details to the LR image can overcome the limitation of
SISR and has demonstrated promising performance in recent work of [35, 23, 34, 33, 30].
Previous methods aimed at designing various ways to
handle two critical issues in this task: a) Correspond useful content in Ref images with LR images. b) Transfer features from Ref images to facilitate HR image reconstruction. To address the first issue, methods perform spatial
alignment between the Ref and LR images [35, 23] using optical flow or deformable convolutions [2, 36]. These
alignment-based methods face challenges in, e.g., finding
long-distance correspondence. Other methods follow patch
matching [34, 33, 30] in the feature space. State-of-the-art
methods generally perform dense patch matching, leading
to very high computational cost and large memory usage.
For the second issue, our finding is that even if LR and
Ref images share similar content, color and luminance may

6368

