Mining Better Samples for Contrastive Learning of Temporal Correspondence
Sangryul Jeon1 , Dongbo Min2,∗ , Seungryong Kim3 , Kwanghoon Sohn1,∗
1
Yonsei University, 2 Ewha Womans University, 3 Korea University
{cheonjsr,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr
dbmin@ewha.ac.kr, seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a novel framework for contrastive learning of
pixel-level representation using only unlabeled video. Without the need of ground-truth annotation, our method is capable of collecting well-defined positive correspondences
by measuring their confidences and well-defined negative
ones by appropriately adjusting their hardness during training. This allows us to suppress the adverse impact of ambiguous matches and prevent a trivial solution from being
yielded by too hard or too easy negative samples. To accomplish this, we incorporate three different criteria that
ranges from a pixel-level matching confidence to a videolevel one into a bottom-up pipeline, and plan a curriculum
that is aware of current representation power for the adaptive hardness of negative samples during training. With the
proposed method, state-of-the-art performance is attained
over the latest approaches on several video label propagation tasks.

(a) image pair

(b) collected positive correspondences

Hardness range
Difficult

Easy

(c) collected negative correspondences for a positive one (green-colored)

1. Introduction
Learning pixel-level representation for visual correspondence can facilitate numerous downstream applications [26,
5, 31]. In contrast to the image-level representation which
demands a semantic invariance among object instances of
the same category, the pixel-level representation further requires the fine-grained localization ability to discriminate a
distinctive match from all possible matching candidates.
Supervising the representation for pixel-level correspondence, however, often requires costly annotations defined
for all pixels. Constructing such dense annotations become even more problematic in the presence of occlusions
and non-rigid object deformations. Synthetically generated
data [34, 4, 43] would be an alternative of high-quality annotation maps, but it has the downside of limiting generalization to real scenes.
Several methods [51, 52, 30, 29, 28, 20] have attempted
∗ Co-corresponding author

Figure 1. Visualization of collected samples used in our contrastive learning: given (a) an image pair, we collect (b) positive
correspondences that are aware of matching uncertainty, and (c)
negative ones that are neither too easy nor too difficult.

to alleviate this by leveraging abundant unlabeled videos as
a source of free supervision. Unlike to the synthetic supervisions [34, 4, 43], richer appearance and shape variations captured from real world strengthen their generalization ability. Furthermore, the nature of temporal coherence
in video allows the correspondences likely to exist across
adjacent frames, providing useful constraints for training.
Standing on these bases, they first track points over time
and then learn from the inconsistency between the original
points and tracked ones in a form of reconstruction.
Establishing correspondences in the unconstrained
videos, however, imposes additional challenges due to the
existence of temporal discontinuities. For frames sampled
with a large temporal stride, the self-supervised loss often

1034

