Progressive Temporal Feature Alignment Network for Video Inpainting
Xueyan Zou2 *

Linjie Yang1

Ding Liu1

Yong Jae Lee2

{zxyzou,yongjaelee}@ucdavis.edu, {linjie.yang,liuding}@bytedance.com
1

ByteDance Inc.

2

Abstract
Video inpainting aims to fill spatio-temporal “corrupted” regions with plausible content. To achieve this
goal, it is necessary to find correspondences from neighbouring frames to faithfully hallucinate the unknown content. Current methods achieve this goal through attention,
flow-based warping, or 3D temporal convolution. However,
flow-based warping can create artifacts when optical flow
is not accurate, while temporal convolution may suffer from
spatial misalignment. We propose ‘Progressive Temporal
Feature Alignment Network’, which progressively enriches
features extracted from the current frame with the feature
warped from neighbouring frames using optical flow. Our
approach corrects the spatial misalignment in the temporal
feature propagation stage, greatly improving visual quality and temporal consistency of the inpainted videos. Using the proposed architecture, we achieve state-of-the-art
performance on the DAVIS and FVI datasets compared to
existing deep learning approaches. Code is available at
https://github.com/MaureenZOU/TSAM .

1. Introduction
Video inpainting is a task that aims to fill missing regions
in video frames with plausible content [3]. It has a wide
range of applications including corrupted video restoration, watermark/logo removal, object removal, etc. To fill
the “holes”, it is ideal to inpaint them with corresponding
known content from neighbouring frames, which can well
approximate the missing region. For any missing pixels that
lack good correspondence due to e.g., occlusion, the video
inpainting method must hallucinate reasonable content.
Existing state-of-the-art video inpainting methods rely
on extracting useful information from neighbouring frames,
and are based on three main directions: 3D temporal convolution [6, 7, 14], optical flow [8, 37], and attention [39, 26].
The general structure of existing 3D convolution models for video inpainting consists of a fully convolutional
* Work mostly done during an internship at ByteDance Inc.

University of California, Davis

generator to predict the inpainted result holistically and
a Temporal-Patch GAN discriminator to enforce temporal
smoothness and frame realism [7, 6]. However, these methods simply stack feature maps from neighboring frames
to encode 3D temporal information as an additional axis,
without considering the movement of objects across those
frames. This leads to spatial misalignment in the features,
which can cause issues for video inpaiting. For example,
as shown in the pink circle on the second row of Fig. 1,
the panda leg is not successfully inpainted when using 3D
convolutions [6]. In order to accurately predict structural
(i.e., edge/shape) details, video inpainting models require
spatially-aligned feature maps for each timestamp. This
motivates us to propose a feature alignment framework to
overcome these challenges, with inspirations from flowbased approaches.
Recent flow-based approaches [8, 37] first compute optical flow from the corrupted video frames, and then complete the unknown regions using flow-based inpainting techniques. Using the computed flow, pixels in corrupted regions are propagated from adjacent frames. Further, image inpainting techniques such as [38] are applied to complete the remaining content. Although optical flow methods are good at spatial content alignment and are able to
inpaint video frames with higher resolution compared to attention or 3D convolution models, any errors in optical flow
(especially in the missing regions) can prevent the models from capturing fine-grained structural details. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the telephone pole in the first
row using FGVC [8], a state-of-the-art optical flow based
approach, is not straight compared to 3D convolution approaches (FFVI [6] and ours). In addition, image inpainting
techniques might generate unwanted content that does not
match the ground truth content. As shown in the first row
of Fig. 1, the purple circle denotes an area that could not be
handled by propagated pixels. FGVC generates a car on the
grass that does not exist in the original video.
We hereby propose a novel framework called Progressive Temporal Feature Alignment Network to combine the
advantages and offset the weaknesses of temporal convolution frameworks and optical flow based warping ap-

16448

