Domain Consensus Clustering for Universal Domain Adaptation
Guangrui Li1 , Guoliang Kang2† , Yi Zhu3 , Yunchao Wei1 , Yi Yang1
1
ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Amazon Web Services

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) problem, which aims to transfer the knowledge from source to target under unaligned label space. The
main challenge of UniDA lies in how to separate common
classes (i.e., classes shared across domains), from private
classes (i.e., classes only exist in one domain). Previous
works treat the private samples in the target as one generic
class but ignore their intrinsic structure. Consequently,
the resulting representations are not compact enough in
the latent space and can be easily confused with common
samples. To better exploit the intrinsic structure of the
target domain, we propose Domain Consensus Clustering
(DCC), which exploits the domain consensus knowledge to
discover discriminative clusters on both common samples
and private ones. Specifically, we draw the domain consensus knowledge from two aspects to facilitate the clustering and the private class discovery, i.e., the semanticlevel consensus, which identifies the cycle-consistent clusters as the common classes, and the sample-level consensus, which utilizes the cross-domain classification agreement to determine the number of clusters and discover the
private classes. Based on DCC, we are able to separate
the private classes from the common ones, and differentiate
the private classes themselves. Finally, we apply a classaware alignment technique on identified common samples
to minimize the distribution shift, and a prototypical regularizer to inspire discriminative target clusters. Experiments on four benchmarks demonstrate DCC significantly
outperforms previous state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved significant progress in many fields, such as image classification [55, 24], semantic segmentation [7, 8], etc. However,
as a data-driven technique, the severe reliance on annotated in-domain data greatly limits its application to cross† Corresponding author.

Code available at: https://git.io/JY86C

Target Domain

Source Domain

Previous

Ours

Common Samples

Private Samples

Decision Boundaries

Cluster Boundaries

Figure 1. A comparison between previous methods and ours. Previous methods simply treat private samples as one general class
and ignore its intrinsic data structure. Our approach aims to better
exploit the diverse distribution of private samples via forming discriminative clusters on both common samples and private samples.

domain tasks. As a feasible solution, unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) [45] tries to solve this by transferring
the knowledge from an annotated domain to an unlabeled
domain, and has achieved significant progress in multiple
tasks [33, 34, 27, 29, 35, 37]. Despite UDA’s achievement,
most UDA solutions assume that two domains share identical label set, which is hard to satisfy in real-world scenarios.
In light of this, several works considering the unaligned
label set have been proposed: open set domain adaptation,
partial domain adaptation, and universal domain adaptation.
Open set domain adaptation (OSDA) [54] assumes the target domain possesses private classes that are unknown to
the source domain. Analogously, partial domain adaptation
(PDA) [4] describes a setting where only the source domain
holds private classes. However, both OSDA and PDA still
require prior knowledge where the private classes lie in. As
a result, they are limited to one scenario and fail to generalize to other scenarios. For example, an OSDA solution

9757

