Simulating Unknown Target Models for Query-Efficient Black-box Attacks
Chen Ma, Li Chen∗, and Jun-Hai Yong
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
mac16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {chenlee,yongjh}@tsinghua.edu.cn

𝒙𝟎 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏

Abstract
Many adversarial attacks have been proposed to investigate the security issues of deep neural networks. In the
black-box setting, current model stealing attacks train a
substitute model to counterfeit the functionality of the target
model. However, the training requires querying the target
model. Consequently, the query complexity remains high,
and such attacks can be defended easily. This study aims
to train a generalized substitute model called “Simulator”,
which can mimic the functionality of any unknown target
model. To this end, we build the training data with the form
of multiple tasks by collecting query sequences generated
during the attacks of various existing networks. The learning process uses a mean square error-based knowledgedistillation loss in the meta-learning to minimize the difference between the Simulator and the sampled networks.
The meta-gradients of this loss are then computed and accumulated from multiple tasks to update the Simulator and
subsequently improve generalization. When attacking a
target model that is unseen in training, the trained Simulator can accurately simulate its functionality using its
limited feedback. As a result, a large fraction of queries
can be transferred to the Simulator, thereby reducing query
complexity. Results of the comprehensive experiments conducted using the CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and TinyImageNet
datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach reduces
query complexity by several orders of magnitude compared
to the baseline method. The implementation source code is
released online1 .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [3, 13, 38], which add human-imperceptible
perturbations to benign images for the misclassification of
the target model. The study of adversarial attacks is crucial
in the implementation of robust DNNs [28]. Adversarial attacks can be categorized into two types, namely, white-box
∗ Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/machanic/SimulatorAttack

𝒙𝟎 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐

benign image 𝒙𝟎
update
𝒙𝟏 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏
adv image 𝒙𝟏

update

…

adv image 𝒙𝒕

𝒙𝟏 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐
𝒙𝒕 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏

Black Box Model

…

𝒙𝒕 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐

𝜽

fine-tune

update

subsequent queries  Simulator
𝒙𝒕+𝟏 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏

adv image 𝒙𝒕+𝟏

…

𝒙𝒕+𝟏 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐

output of 𝒙𝟎 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏
output of 𝒙𝟎 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐
output of 𝒙1 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏
output of 𝒙1 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐
output of 𝒙𝒕 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏
output of 𝒙𝒕 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐

fine-tune

Trained Simulator
fine-tune for 𝑻 iterations

𝜽

output of 𝒙𝒕+𝟏 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟏

output of 𝒙𝒕+𝟏 + 𝜹 ⋅ 𝒒𝟐

Fine-tuned Simulator

Figure 1: The procedure of the Simulator Attack, where q1
and q2 are the corresponding perturbations for generating
query pairs in the attack (Algorithm 2). The queries of the
first t iterations are fed into the target model to estimate the
gradients. These queries and the corresponding outputs are
collected to fine-tune the Simulator, which is trained without using the target model. The fine-tuned Simulator can accurately simulate the unknown target model, thereby transferring the queries and improving overall query efficiency.

and black-box attacks. In the white-box attack setting, the
target model is fully exposed to the adversary. Thus, the perturbation can be crafted easily by using gradients [4, 13]. In
the black-box attack setting, the adversary only has partial
information of the target model, and adversarial examples
are crafted without any gradient information. Hence, blackbox attacks (i.e., query- and transfer-based attacks) are more
practical in real-world scenarios.
Query-based attacks focus on estimating gradients
through queries [6, 40, 19, 20]. These attacks are considered
highly effective because of their satisfactory attack success
rate. However, despite their practical merits, high query
complexity inevitably arises when estimating the approximate gradient with high precision, resulting in costly procedures. In addition, the queries are typically underutilized,

11835

