Few-shot Open-set Recognition by Transformation Consistency
Minki Jeong
Seokeon Choi
Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{rhm033, seokeon, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Few-shot learning

Abstract
In this paper, we attack a few-shot open-set recognition (FSOSR) problem, which is a combination of few-shot
learning (FSL) and open-set recognition (OSR). It aims to
quickly adapt a model to a given small set of labeled samples while rejecting unseen class samples. Since OSR requires rich data and FSL considers closed-set classification,
existing OSR and FSL methods show poor performances in
solving FSOSR problems. The previous FSOSR method follows the pseudo-unseen class sample-based methods, which
collect pseudo-unseen samples from the other dataset or
synthesize samples to model unseen class representations.
However, this approach is heavily dependent on the composition of the pseudo samples. In this paper, we propose
a novel unknown class sample detector, named SnaTCHer,
that does not require pseudo-unseen samples. Based on the
transformation consistency, our method measures the difference between the transformed prototypes and a modified
prototype set. The modified set is composed by replacing a
query feature and its predicted class prototype. SnaTCHer
rejects samples with large differences to the transformed
prototypes. Our method alters the unseen class distribution estimation problem to a relative feature transformation
problem, independent of pseudo-unseen class samples. We
investigate our SnaTCHer with various prototype transformation methods and observe that our method consistently
improves unseen class sample detection performance without closed-set classification reduction.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks show outstanding performance in various computer vision problems. There are
many reasons for this achievement, but there is no doubt
that a large volume of high-quality datasets has been a great
aid. However, in real-world applications, a large amount
of high-quality data is not always available for various reasons, such as a high labeling cost of experts or the need to
collect rare data.
Few-shot learning (FSL) methods [28, 6, 27, 35] are pro-

Open-set recognition

Few-shot open-set recognition

Labeled sample
Query sample
Misjudged unseen class sample

Detected unseen class sample
Decision boundary

Figure 1. A visualization of the few-shot open-set recognition task.
Few-shot learning methods fail to recognize unseen class samples, and open-set recognition methods require a large amount of
datasets. Few-shot open-set recognition is a generalized few-shot
learning task, where the model has to identify unseen class queries
while classifying seen class queries correctly.

posed to reduce the data dependency. It assumes a severe
condition where a few labeled data are available for training, such as one to five for each class. Various methods
show remarkable improvements in FSL problems, however,
these methods are limited to closed-set problems where
training samples and testing samples share the same class
pool. On the contrary, in real-world scenarios, there could
be irregular inputs to network models that could damage the
reliability of models. For instance, let us consider an automatic face tag system in images for social network services.
For a new picture, the system should tag the face region of
a friend or ask the user for manual tagging if the person
in the image is not on the friend list. The system requires
two crucial features for better user experience: correct tagging (i.e., correct closed-set classification) and correct asking (i.e., correct unseen class sample detection). However,
the nature of FSL methods forces to tag the person as one
in the friend list.
Open-set recognition (OSR) manages the unseen class
detection problem in the large-scaled data situations. It
aims to detect unseen class samples (i.e., unseens) from

12566

