Self-Supervised Multi-Frame Monocular Scene Flow
Junhwa Hur1
Stefan Roth1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Estimating 3D scene flow from a sequence of monocular images has been gaining increased attention due to the
simple, economical capture setup. Owing to the severe illposedness of the problem, the accuracy of current methods
has been limited, especially that of efficient, real-time approaches. In this paper, we introduce a multi-frame monocular scene flow network based on self-supervised learning,
improving the accuracy over previous networks while retaining real-time efficiency. Based on an advanced twoframe baseline with a split-decoder design, we propose (i)
a multi-frame model using a triple frame input and convolutional LSTM connections, (ii) an occlusion-aware census
loss for better accuracy, and (iii) a gradient detaching strategy to improve training stability. On the KITTI dataset, we
observe state-of-the-art accuracy among monocular scene
flow methods based on self-supervised learning.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation, that is the task of estimating 3D
structure and 3D motion of a dynamic scene, has been receiving increased attention together with a growing interest
and demand for autonomous navigation systems. Many approaches have been proposed, based on various input data
such as stereo images [3, 27, 38, 57, 68], RGB-D sequences
[21, 37, 50], or 3D point clouds [4, 17, 35, 72].
Recently, monocular scene flow approaches [7, 23, 36,
73] have shown the possibility of estimating 3D scene flow
from a pair of temporally consecutive monocular frames
only, obviating complicated, expensive sensor setups such
as a stereo rig, RGB-D sensors, or a LiDAR scanner. Only a
simple, affordable monocular camera is needed. The availability of ground-truth data has been another key challenge
for scene flow estimation in general. To address this, methods based on self-supervised learning [23, 36] have shown
it possible to train CNNs for jointly estimating depth and
scene flow without expensive 3D annotations. Yet, their
accuracy is bounded by the limitation of only using two
frames as input, their underlying proxy loss, and training instabilities due to the difficulty of optimizing CNNs for mul-

It−2

It−1

It

It+1

}
}

2

hessian.AI

Depth

Conv.
ConvLSTM

3D Scene Flow

Figure 1. Our multi-frame monocular scene flow approach inputs three frames and estimates depth and scene flow (visualized
in 3D [78] with scene flow color coding).

tiple tasks, particularly in a self-supervised manner [36].
Semi-supervised methods have demonstrated promising
accuracy by combining CNNs with energy minimization [7]
or sequentially estimating optical flow and depth to infer
3D scene flow [73]. Those methods, however, do not reach
real-time efficiency due to iterative energy minimization [7]
or the additional processing time from pre-computing depth
and optical flow [73] beforehand. Yet, computational efficiency is important for autonomous navigation applications.
In this paper, we introduce a self-supervised monocular
scene flow approach that substantially advances the previously most accurate real-time method of Hur et al. [23],
while keeping its advantages (e.g., computational efficiency
and training on unlabeled data). We first analyze the technical design, revealing some limitations, and propose an
improved two-frame backbone network to overcome them.
Next, we introduce a multi-frame formulation that temporally propagates the estimate from the previous time step
for more accurate and reliable results in consecutive frames.
Previous monocular methods [7, 23, 36, 73] utilize only two
frames as input, which is a minimal setup for demonstrating
the underlying ideas. In contrast, our approach is the first
to demonstrate how to exploit multiple consecutive frames,
which are naturally available in most real-world scenarios.
We make the following main contributions: (i) We uncover some limitations of the baseline architecture of [23]
and introduce an advanced two-frame basis with a split-decoder design. Contradicting the finding of [23] on using
a single joint decoder, our split decoder is not only faster
and more stable to train, but delivers competitive accuracy.

2684

