Mol2Image: Improved Conditional Flow Models for Molecule to Image Synthesis
Karren Yang1 Samuel Goldman1 Wengong Jin1 Alex X. Lu2
Regina Barzilay1 Tommi Jaakkola1 Caroline Uhler1 *
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Toronto

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to synthesize cell microscopy images
under different molecular interventions, motivated by practical applications to drug development. Building on the recent
success of graph neural networks for learning molecular
embeddings and flow-based models for image generation,
we propose Mol2Image: a flow-based generative model for
molecule to cell image synthesis. To generate cell features
at different resolutions and scale to high-resolution images,
we develop a novel multi-scale flow architecture based on
a Haar wavelet image pyramid. To maximize the mutual
information between the generated images and the molecular interventions, we devise a training strategy based on
contrastive learning. To evaluate our model, we propose
a new set of metrics for biological image generation that
are robust, interpretable, and relevant to practitioners. We
show quantitatively that our method learns a meaningful
embedding of the molecular intervention, which is translated
into an image representation reflecting the biological effects
of the intervention.

1. Introduction
High-content cell microscopy assays are gaining traction
in recent years as the rich morphological data from the images proves to be more informative for drug discovery than
conventional targeted screens [6, 12, 55]. Motivated by these
developments, we aim to build, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst
generative model to synthesize cell microscopy images under different molecular interventions, translating molecular
information into a high-content and interpretable image representation of the intervention. Such a system has numerous
practical applications in drug development – for example,
it could enable practitioners to virtually screen compounds
based on their predicted morphological effects on cells, allowing more efﬁcient exploration of the vast chemical space
and reducing the resources required to perform extensive
experiments [46, 53, 57]. Small molecules are known to
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: KY, karren@mit.edu;
CU, cuhler@mit.edu

Figure 1: Molecule to Image Synthesis. High-content cell
morphology images captured under different molecular interventions enable practitioners to assess a broad spectrum of
drug effects. We improve on state-of-the-art ﬂow-based generative models to build a molecule to image synthesis model
with potential applications to virtual chemical screening.

enter cells and alter their biological functions and pathways,
leading to changes in cell shape, structure, organization, etc.,
that are visible in microscopy images [14, 13]. In contrast to
conventional models that predict speciﬁc chemical properties, a molecule-to-image synthesis model has the potential
to produce a panoptic view of the morphological effects of
a drug that captures a broad spectrum of properties such as
mechanisms of action [33, 34, 45] and gene targets [4].
To build our molecule-to-image synthesis model
(Mol2Image), we integrate state-of-the-art graph neural networks for learning molecular representations with ﬂow-based
generative models. Flow-based models are a relatively recent
class of generative models that learn the data distribution
by directly inferring the latent distribution and maximizing
the log-likelihood of the data [9, 10, 26]. Compared to other

6688

