Tracking Pedestrian Heads in Dense Crowd
Ramana Sundararaman Cédric De Almeida Braga Eric Marchand
Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, Irisa, Rennes, France

Julien Pettré

ramanasubramanyam.sundararaman@polytechnique.edu,
{cedric.de-almeida-braga,julien.pettre}@inria.fr,
eric.marchand@irisa.fr

Abstract
Tracking humans in crowded video sequences is an
important constituent of visual scene understanding.
Increasing crowd density challenges visibility of humans,
limiting the scalability of existing pedestrian trackers to
higher crowd densities. For that reason, we propose to
revitalize head tracking with Crowd of Heads Dataset
(CroHD), consisting of 9 sequences of 11,463 frames with
over 2,276,838 heads and 5,230 tracks annotated in diverse
scenes. For evaluation, we proposed a new metric, IDEucl,
to measure an algorithm’s efficacy in preserving a unique
identity for the longest stretch in image coordinate space,
thus building a correspondence between pedestrian crowd
motion and the performance of a tracking algorithm. Moreover, we also propose a new head detector, HeadHunter,
which is designed for small head detection in crowded
scenes. We extend HeadHunter with a Particle Filter and
a color histogram based re-identification module for head
tracking. To establish this as a strong baseline, we compare our tracker with existing state-of-the-art pedestrian
trackers on CroHD and demonstrate superiority, especially
in identity preserving tracking metrics. With a light-weight
head detector and a tracker which is efficient at identity
preservation, we believe our contributions will serve useful
in advancement of pedestrian tracking in dense crowds. We
make our dataset, code and models publicly available at
https://project.inria.fr/crowdscience/
project/dense-crowd-head-tracking/.

1. Introduction
Tracking multiple objects, especially humans, is a central problem in visual scene understanding. The intricacy
of this task grows with increasing targets to be tracked and
remains an open area of research. Alike other subfields in
Computer Vision, with the advent of Deep Learning, the
task of Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) has remarkably
advanced its benchmarks [12, 24, 25, 37, 42, 61] since its

Figure 1. Comparison between head detection and full body detection in a crowded scene from CroHD. HeadHunter detects 36
heads whereas Faster-RCNN [48] can detect only 23 pedestrians
out of 37 present in this scene.

inception [21]. In the recent past, the focus of MOTChallenge benchmark [13] has shifted towards tracking pedestrians in crowds of higher density. This has several applications in fields such as activity recognition, anomaly detection, robot navigation, visual surveillance, safety planning etc. Yet, the performances of trackers on these benchmark suggests a trend of saturation1 . Majority of online
tracking algorithms today follow the tracking-by-detection
paradigm and several research works have well-established
object detector’s performance to be crucial in tracker’s performance [3, 5, 11]. As the pedestrian density in a scene
increases, pedestrian visibility reduces with increasing mutual occlusions, leading to reduced pedestrian detection as
visualized in Figure 1. To tackle these challenges yet track
humans efficiently in densely crowded environments, we
rekindle the task of MOT with tracking humans by their
distinctly visible part - heads. To that end, we propose a
new dataset, CroHD, Crowd of Heads Dataset, comprising
9 sequences of 11,463 frames with head bounding boxes annotated for tracking. We hope that this new dataset opens
1 https://motchallenge.net/results/MOT20/

3865

