Continual Adaptation of Visual Representations
via Domain Randomization and Meta-learning
Riccardo Volpi

Diane Larlus

Grégory Rogez

NAVER LABS Europe*
{name.lastname}@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Most standard learning approaches lead to fragile models which are prone to drift when sequentially trained on
samples of a different nature—the well-known catastrophic
forgetting issue. In particular, when a model consecutively learns from different visual domains, it tends to forget the past domains in favor of the most recent ones.
In this context, we show that one way to learn models
that are inherently more robust against forgetting is domain randomization—for vision tasks, randomizing the current domain’s distribution with heavy image manipulations.
Building on this result, we devise a meta-learning strategy where a regularizer explicitly penalizes any loss associated with transferring the model from the current domain
to different “auxiliary” meta-domains, while also easing
adaptation to them. Such meta-domains are also generated through randomized image manipulations. We empirically demonstrate in a variety of experiments—spanning
from classification to semantic segmentation—that our approach results in models that are less prone to catastrophic
forgetting when transferred to new domains.

1. Introduction
Modern computer vision approaches can reach superhuman performance in a variety of well-defined and isolated tasks at the expense of versatility. When confronted
to a plurality of new tasks or new visual domains, they have
trouble adapting, or adapt at the cost of forgetting what they
had been initially trained for. This phenomenon, that has
been observed for decades [39], is known as catastrophic
forgetting. Directly tackling this issue, lifelong learning approaches, also known as continual learning approaches, are
designed to continuously learn from new samples without
forgetting the past.
* www.europe.naverlabs.com

Figure 1. This paper tackles the continual domain adaptation
task (bottom), compared here with standard domain adaptation,
domain generalization, and domain randomization (top).

In this work, we are concerned with the problem of continual and supervised adaptation to new visual domains (see
Figure 1). Framing this task as continual domain adaptation, we assume that a model has to learn to perform a
given task while being exposed to conditions which constantly change throughout its lifespan. This is of particular interest when deploying applications to the real-world
where a model is expected to seamlessly adapt to its environment and can encounter different domains from the
one(s) observed originally at training time. A possible solution to mitigate catastrophic forgetting is storing samples
from all domains encountered throughout the lifespan of the
model [41]. While effective, this solution may not be appropriate when retaining data is not allowed (e.g., due to privacy concerns) or when working under strong memory constraints (e.g., in mobile applications). For these reasons, we
are interested in developing methods for learning visual representations that are inherently more robust against catastrophic forgetting, without necessarily requiring any information storage or model expansion.
To tackle this problem, we start from a simple intuition:
when adapting a model trained on a domain D1 to a second domain D2 , we can anticipate the severity of forgetting
to depend on how demanding the adaptation process is—

4443

