Reducing Domain Gap by Reducing Style Bias
Hyeonseob Nam* HyunJae Lee*

Jongchan Park Wonjun Yoon Donggeun Yoo
Lunit Inc.

{hsnam,hjlee,jcpark,wonjun,dgyoo}@lunit.io

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) often fail to maintain their performance when they confront new test domains,
which is known as the problem of domain shift. Recent studies suggest that one of the main causes of this problem is
CNNs’ strong inductive bias towards image styles (i.e. textures) which are sensitive to domain changes, rather than
contents (i.e. shapes). Inspired by this, we propose to reduce
the intrinsic style bias of CNNs to close the gap between domains. Our Style-Agnostic Networks (SagNets) disentangle
style encodings from class categories to prevent style biased
predictions and focus more on the contents. Extensive experiments show that our method effectively reduces the style
bias and makes the model more robust under domain shift.
It achieves remarkable performance improvements in a wide
range of cross-domain tasks including domain generalization, unsupervised domain adaptation, and semi-supervised
domain adaptation on multiple datasets.1

1. Introduction
Despite the huge success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) fueled by large-scale training data, their performance often degrades significantly when they encounter
test data from unseen environments. This phenomenon,
known as the problem of domain shift [41], comes from
the representation gap between training and testing domains.
For a more reliable deployment of CNNs to ever-changing
real-world scenarios, the community has long sought to make
CNNs robust to domain shift under various problem settings
such as Domain Generalization (DG) [29, 9, 4, 8], Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [33, 11, 46, 34, 42], and
Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation (SSDA) [7, 50, 44].
In stark contrast to the vulnerability of CNNs against
domain shift, the human visual recognition system generalizes incredibly well across domains. For example, young
children learn many object concepts from pictures, but they
naturally transfer their knowledge to the real world [10].
* Equal contribution
1 Code: https://github.com/hyeonseobnam/sagnet

Similarly, people can easily recognize objects in cartoons
or paintings even if they have not seen the same style of an
image before. Where does such a difference come from?
A recent line of studies has revealed that standard CNNs
have an inductive bias far different from human vision: while
humans tend to recognize objects based on their contents (i.e.
shapes) [27], CNNs exhibit a strong bias towards styles (i.e.
textures) [1, 14, 21]. This may explain why CNNs are intrinsically more sensitive to domain shift because image styles
are more likely to change across domains than the contents.
Geirhos et al. [14] supported this hypothesis by showing that
CNNs trained with heavy augmentation on styles become
more robust against various image distortions. Research
on CNN architectures [40, 28] has also demonstrated that
adjusting the style information in CNNs helps to address
multi-domain tasks.
In this paper, we experimentally analyze the relation between CNNs’ inductive bias and representation gap across
domains, and exploit this relation to address domain shift
problems. We propose Style-Agnostic Networks (SagNets)
which effectively improve CNNs’ domain transferability by
controlling their inductive bias, without directly reducing
domain discrepancy. Our framework consists of separate
content-biased and style-biased networks on top of a feature
extractor. The content-biased network is encouraged to focus on contents by randomizing styles in a latent space. The
style-biased network is led to focus on styles in the opposite
way, against which the feature extractor adversarially makes
the styles incapable of discriminating class categories. At
test time, the prediction is made by the combination of the
feature extractor and the content-biased network, where the
style bias is substantially reduced.
We show that there exists an apparent correlation between
CNNs’ inductive bias and their ability to handle domain shift:
reducing style bias reduces domain discrepancy. Based on
this property, SagNets make significant improvements in a
wide range of domain shift scenarios including DG, UDA,
and SSDA, across several cross-domain benchmarks such as
PACS [29], Office-Home [47], and DomainNet [42].
Our method is orthogonal to the majority of existing domain adaptation and generalization techniques that utilize

8690

