Encoding in Style: a StyleGAN Encoder for Image-to-Image Translation
Elad Richardson1
Yuval Alaluf1,2
Or Patashnik1,2
Yotam Nitzan2
1
1
Yaniv Azar
Stav Shapiro
Daniel Cohen-Or2
1

Penta-AI

2

Tel-Aviv University

Figure 1. The proposed pixel2style2pixel framework can be used to solve a wide variety of image-to-image translation tasks. Here we show
results of pSp on StyleGAN inversion, multi-modal conditional image synthesis, facial frontalization, inpainting and super-resolution.

Abstract
We present a generic image-to-image translation framework, pixel2style2pixel (pSp). Our pSp framework is based
on a novel encoder network that directly generates a series of style vectors which are fed into a pretrained StyleGAN generator, forming the extended W+ latent space. We
first show that our encoder can directly embed real images
into W+, with no additional optimization. Next, we propose utilizing our encoder to directly solve image-to-image
translation tasks, defining them as encoding problems from
some input domain into the latent domain. By deviating
from the standard “invert first, edit later” methodology used
with previous StyleGAN encoders, our approach can handle a variety of tasks even when the input image is not
represented in the StyleGAN domain. We show that solving translation tasks through StyleGAN significantly simplifies the training process, as no adversary is required,

has better support for solving tasks without pixel-to-pixel
correspondence, and inherently supports multi-modal synthesis via the resampling of styles. Finally, we demonstrate the potential of our framework on a variety of facial image-to-image translation tasks, even when compared
to state-of-the-art solutions designed specifically for a single task, and further show that it can be extended beyond
the human facial domain. Code is available at https:
//github.com/eladrich/pixel2style2pixel.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) have significantly advanced image synthesis, particularly on face images. State-of-the-art image generation methods have achieved high visual quality and fidelity,
and can now generate images with phenomenal realism.
Most notably, StyleGAN [20, 21] proposes a novel style-

2287

