Learning Spatially-Variant MAP Models for Non-blind Image Deblurring
Jiangxin Dong
MPI Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

Stefan Roth
TU Darmstadt
& hessian.AI

Abstract
The classical maximum a-posteriori (MAP) framework
for non-blind image deblurring requires defining suitable
data and regularization terms, whose interplay yields the
desired clear image through optimization. The vast majority
of prior work focuses on advancing one of these two crucial
ingredients, while keeping the other one standard. Considering the indispensable roles and interplay of both data
and regularization terms, we propose a simple and effective
approach to jointly learn these two terms, embedding deep
neural networks within the constraints of the MAP framework, trained in an end-to-end manner. The neural networks not only yield suitable image-adaptive features for
both terms, but actually predict per-pixel spatially-variant
features instead of the commonly used spatially-uniform
ones. The resulting spatially-variant data and regularization terms particularly improve the restoration of fine-scale
structures and detail. Quantitative and qualitative results
underline the effectiveness of our approach, substantially
outperforming the current state of the art.

1. Introduction
The goal of single image deblurring is to estimate a desirable clear image from a blurry input. Mathematically, the
process leading to the image blur is frequently formulated
as
y = x ∗ k + n,
(1)
where y, x, k, and n denote blurry observation, latent clear
image, blur kernel, and image noise, respectively; ∗ is the
convolution operator. Significant progress [e.g., 20, 40, 42,
48] has been made in blind image deblurring, which aims
to estimate the latent clear image when the blur kernel is
unknown. When the blur kernel can be obtained or estimated, this problem reduces to non-blind image deblurring,
which has been an active area of research since the pioneering work of Richardson and Lucy [29]. Other classical approaches include the Wiener filter [46].
Non-blind image deblurring is a well-known ill-posed
problem. Most existing methods formulate it as a maximum

Bernt Schiele
MPI Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

a-posteriori (MAP) estimation problem [17, 21]:
x∗ = arg max p(y | x, k) p(x),
x

(2)

where p(y | x, k) denotes the likelihood that measures how
consistent the estimated x is with the observation of y and
the known k under the model in Eq. (1); p(x) denotes the
prior on the latent clear image x, which is used to regularize
the problem. Equation (2) can be equivalently reformulated
as
x∗ = arg min D(y, x, k) + R(x),
(3)
x

where D(·) denotes the data term and R(·) denotes the regularization term [32, 33, 44]. Effectively solving non-blind
image deblurring within the MAP framework thus requires
carefully designing both D(·) and R(·).
To restore high-quality clear images using Eq. (3), numerous approaches have been proposed. One family of
methods focuses on advancing the data term to better measure the image reconstruction error. Starting from the most
commonly used ℓ2 norm [17], data terms have been carefully designed for specific types of outliers [1, 6] or even
discriminatively learned [11, 28]. A second family of
approaches focuses on developing effective regularization
terms/image priors to ensure desirable properties of the estimated clear image. This includes modeling statistical properties, e.g. by employing Laplacian/hyper-Laplacian priors [17, 21]. Learning effective image priors based on datadriven methods has been a dominant research theme for
non-blind image deblurring, e.g., using Gaussian mixture
models [52], fields of experts [31], or deep learning [49, 50].
Therefore, most existing non-blind image deblurring methods focus on improving either the data term or the regularization term. However, as the data and regularization terms
play different but indispensable roles in non-blind image deblurring, only improving one of these two terms will limit
the power of the MAP framework in Eq. (3) and result in deblurred images with artifacts, see Fig. 1(b)–(d). In contrast,
we jointly learn both the data term and the regularization
term to build a more expressive deblurring model in which
these two terms can benefit from their interplay, resulting in
higher fidelity results as shown in Fig. 1(e).

4886

