TextOCR: Towards large-scale end-to-end reasoning
for arbitrary-shaped scene text

Amanpreet Singh∗, Guan Pang∗ , Mandy Toh∗ ,
Jing Huang, Wojciech Galuba, and Tal Hassner
Facebook AI Research
https://textvqa.org/textocr

Abstract
A crucial component for the scene text based reasoning required for TextVQA and TextCaps datasets involve detecting
and recognizing text present in the images using an optical
character recognition (OCR) system. The current systems
are crippled by the unavailability of ground truth text annotations for these datasets as well as lack of scene text
detection and recognition datasets on real images disallowing the progress in the field of OCR and evaluation of scene
text based reasoning in isolation from OCR systems. In this
work, we propose TextOCR, an arbitrary-shaped scene text
detection and recognition with 900k annotated words collected on real images from TextVQA dataset. We show that
current state-of-the-art text-recognition (OCR) models fail
to perform well on TextOCR and that training on TextOCR
helps achieve state-of-the-art performance on multiple other
OCR datasets as well. We use a TextOCR trained OCR model
to create PixelM4C model which can do scene text based reasoning on an image in an end-to-end fashion, allowing us to
revisit several design choices to achieve new state-of-the-art
performance on TextVQA dataset.

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has recently seen a surge
in interest to understand and reason on the text present in the
images (scene text) beyond the OCR extraction. In particular,
multiple datasets have been introduced that focus on visual
question answering (VQA) [53, 4, 39] and image captioning [51] but in the context of scene text. These tasks involve
understanding the objects and text in the image and then
reasoning over the spatial and semantic relations between
these along with a textual input (e.g. question). Though the
∗ Equal Contribution. Correspondence to textvqa@fb.com

OCR systems have matured, they still don’t work well on
pictures involving real-life scenarios given the lack of large
annotated real scene text OCR datasets. The text extracted
by the OCR systems doesn’t mean anything in itself until it
is used to solve a task which involves using the scene text.
Other than VQA and image captioning, the potential use
cases include several impactful and interesting tasks such
the hate speech and misinformation detection [25].
Although, the field has witnessed success and progress in
datasets on downstream OCR applications, the performance
of state-of-the-art models on these datasets are nowhere close
to human accuracy due to multiple factors which includes
the quality of the OCR extracted from existing OCR systems,
unavailability of ground-truth text annotations for the realworld images, and no feedback to OCR system to improve
detection or extraction based on the errors in the downstream
application i.e. no end-to-end training.
In this paper, we introduce a new dataset, TextOCR which
aims to bridge these gaps by providing (i) high quality and
large quantity text annotations on TextVQA images (ii) allowing end-to-end training of downstream application models with OCR systems and thus allowing fine-tuning of OCR
pipeline based on the task involved. Prior to TextOCR, many
OCR datasets exist [38, 59, 35, 24, 23, 45, 48, 8, 61, 34, 57,
41, 50, 40, 9, 54] that propelled the field’s development, but
many of these are either relatively small, or focus mostly
on outdoor or store-front scenes. As a result, OCR models trained on these datasets usually don’t perform well on
downstream tasks from other scene types. Moreover, existing datasets usually have a low number of words per image,
making them less dense, diverse and ideal to train OCR
models for tasks commonly having a high text density. As
a solution, we present the TextOCR dataset that contains
more than 28k images and 903k words in total, averaging
32 words per image. Jointly with existing TextVQA [53]
and TextCaps [51] datasets, it can also serve as an OCR

8802

