One Shot Face Swapping on Megapixels
Yuhao Zhu 1 , Qi Li ∗ 1,2 , Jian Wang 1,3 , Chengzhong Xu 2 , Zhenan Sun1,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, NLPR, CASIA
2
State Key Laboratory of IoTSC, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yuhao.zhu, jian.wang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {qli, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, czxu@um.edu.mo

Figure 1. Example of a swapped face. Left: source image that represents the identity; Middle: target image that provides the attributes;
Right: the swapped face image. All images are in 10242 .

Abstract
Face swapping has both positive applications such as
entertainment, human-computer interaction, etc., and negative applications such as DeepFake threats to politics, economics, etc. Nevertheless, it is necessary to understand the
scheme of advanced methods for high-quality face swapping and generate enough and representative face swapping
images to train DeepFake detection algorithms. This paper proposes the first Megapixel level method for one shot
Face Swapping (or MegaFS for short). Firstly, MegaFS organizes face representation hierarchically by the proposed
Hierarchical Representation Face Encoder (HieRFE) in an
extended latent space to maintain more facial details, rather
than compressed representation in previous face swapping
methods. Secondly, a carefully designed Face Transfer
Module (FTM) is proposed to transfer the identity from a
source image to the target by a non-linear trajectory without
explicit feature disentanglement. Finally, the swapped faces
can be synthesized by StyleGAN2 with the benefits of its
training stability and powerful generative capability. Each
part of MegaFS can be trained separately so the require∗ Corresponding author

ment of our model for GPU memory can be satisfied for
megapixel face swapping. In summary, complete face representation, stable training, and limited memory usage are the
three novel contributions to the success of our method. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of MegaFS
and the first megapixel level face swapping database is released for research on DeepFake detection and face image
editing in the public domain.

1. Introduction
Given two face images, face swapping refers to transferring the identity from the source image to the target image,
while the facial attributes of the target image hold intact. It
has attracted extensive attention in recent years for its broad
application prospects in entertainment [4, 24], privacy protection [6, 33], and theatrical industry [34].
Existing face swapping methods can be roughly divided into two categories: subject-specific and subject agnostic methods. Subject-specific face swapping methods
[11, 27, 34] need to be trained and tested on the same
pair of subjects, which restricts their potential applications.
On the contrary, subject agnostic face swapping methods

4834

