DeepACG: Co-Saliency Detection via Semantic-aware Contrast
Gromov-Wasserstein Distance
Kaihua Zhang1 , Mingliang Dong2 , Bo Liu3∗, Xiao-Tong Yuan1 ,Qingshan Liu1
1
School of Computer and Software, 2 School of Automation
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
3
JD Digits, Mountain View, CA, USA
{zhkhua,kfliubo}@gmail.com

Abstract
The objective of co-saliency detection is to segment the
co-occurring salient objects in a group of images. To address this task, we introduce a new deep network architecture via semantic-aware contrast Gromov-Wasserstein distance (DeepACG). We first adopt the Gromov-Wasserstein
(GW) distance to build dense 4D correlation volumes for all
pairs of image pixels within the image group. These dense
correlation volumes enable the network to accurately discover the structured pair-wise pixel similarities among the
common salient objects. Second, we develop a semanticaware co-attention module (SCAM) to enhance the foreground co-saliency through predicted categorical information. Specifically, SCAM recognizes the semantic class of
the foreground co-objects, and this information is then modulated to the deep representations to localize the related
pixels. Third, we design a contrast edge-enhanced module
(EEM) to capture richer contexts and preserve fine-grained
spatial information. We validate the effectiveness of our
model using three largest and most challenging benchmark
datasets (Cosal2015, CoCA, and CoSOD3k). Extensive experiments have demonstrated the substantial practical merit of each module. Compared with the existing works, DeepACG shows significant improvements and achieves state-ofthe-art performance.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection mimics the human vision system
to identify the most visually distinctive regions in a single
image. Extending this task, co-saliency detection (CoSD)
∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported in part by National Major Project of China for New Generation of AI (No. 2018AAA0100400),
in part by the NSFC (61876088, 61876090, 61825601, U20B2065), in
part by the 333 High-level Talents Cultivation Project of Jiangsu Province
(BRA2020291).

Figure 1. Results of different module variants. (a) Input images;
(b) Ground truth; (c) DeepACG w/o SCAM&EEM; (d) DeepACG
w/o EEM; (e) The proposed DeepACG.

is a recently emerging research topic to discover the common salient foreground objects among an image group. Due
to its useful potential, it has been increasingly applied into various vision applications, including image/video segmentation [12, 44, 56, 14], object co-localization [41], and
weakly supervised semantic segmentation [40].
CoSD has traditionally been formulated as a two-step
procedure. First, visual representations are described using hand-engineered features, including: 1) low-level features, such as SIFT [2], color feature [29], and texture feature [21]; 2) mid-level attributes [27]; and 3) multi-cue fusion [1]. Second, these features are then fed into a subsequent module to identify co-saliency. Nonetheless, the
hand-engineered features are shallow in nature, and are not
able to adapt to large variations of object appearances [58]
and complex background textures [43]. Recent studies first
improve the CoSD by developing deep-learning-based approaches [57, 46] to extract robust and richer visual representations and explore the semantic correlations between
images. These methods have been shown as a promising alternative to conventional approaches. Later, the endto-end deep learning frameworks [17, 43] have been proposed to integrate the process of feature learning and saliency map prediction. Deep graph neural network has also
been adopted to model the non-local and long-range de-

13703

