Robust Point Cloud Registration Framework Based on Deep Graph Matching
Kexue Fu
Shaolei Liu
Xiaoyuan Luo
Manning Wang∗
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Lab of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
{kxfu18, liushaolei, xyluo19, mnwang}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
3D point cloud registration is a fundamental problem
in computer vision and robotics. Recently, learning-based
point cloud registration methods have made great progress.
However, these methods are sensitive to outliers, which
lead to more incorrect correspondences. In this paper,
we propose a novel deep graph matching-based framework for point cloud registration. Specifically, we first
transform point clouds into graphs and extract deep features for each point. Then, we develop a module based
on deep graph matching to calculate a soft correspondence matrix. By using graph matching, not only the local geometry of each point but also its structure and topology in a larger range are considered in establishing correspondences, so that more correct correspondences are
found. We train the network with a loss directly defined
on the correspondences, and in the test stage the soft correspondences are transformed into hard one-to-one correspondences so that registration can be performed by singular value decomposition. Furthermore, we introduce a
transformer-based method to generate edges for graph construction, which further improves the quality of the correspondences. Extensive experiments on registering clean,
noisy, partial-to-partial and unseen category point clouds
show that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art
performance. The code will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/fukexue/RGM.

1. Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration is a task that finds a rigid
transformation to align two point clouds, and it has long
been a fundamental task in computer vision and robotics,
with many important applications, such as autopilot [21,
19, 36], surgical navigation [44] and SLAM [13, 9]. There
are two interlocked subproblems in point cloud registration:
finding the transformation to align the two point clouds and
∗ Corresponding author

𝑥𝑖

Point
feature
Graph
feature

Point
feature

Graph
feature

𝑦𝑗

Figure 1. The idea of point cloud registration based on graph
matching. Dashed lines represent correspondences. Point features and graph features are the features extracted directly through
points and the features extracted based on graphs, respectively.
The two points xi and yj have similar point features because they
have similar local geometries, but they have different graph features because the graph topologies around them are different, so
they are not mismatched when graph-based matching is used.

finding the correspondences between the points [17]. Although when the solution to one subproblem is known, the
other subproblem can be easily solved, it is difficult to solve
both subproblems together. Point cloud registration becomes even harder when there are outliers, which are the
points with no correspondences in the other point cloud.
Outliers may come from the imperfectness of the sensors
used to collect the point clouds or situations in which the
two point clouds to be registered are not fully overlapped.
Iterative closest point (ICP) [3, 31] is arguably the most
widely used method for rigid point cloud registration, which
starts from an initial transformation and alternately updates
the correspondences and transformation. One major limitation of ICP is that it can only converge to a local optimum near the initialization, and its convergence basin is
fairly small, especially when there are noise and outliers. A
series of global registration methods based on branch-andbound (BnB) [42, 5, 6] have been proposed to alleviate the
need for initialization by obtaining the global optimal solution, but the time-consuming BnB limits their practical applications. Another method for mitigating the need for ini-

8893

