Neural Scene Graphs for Dynamic Scenes
Julian Ost1
1

Fahim Mannan1

Algolux

2

Nils Thuerey2

Technical University of Munich

Julian Knodt3
3

Felix Heide1,3

Princeton University

http://light.princeton.edu/neural-scene-graphs

Abstract
Recent implicit neural rendering methods have demonstrated that it is possible to learn accurate view synthesis for
complex scenes by predicting their volumetric density and
color supervised solely by a set of RGB images. However,
existing methods are restricted to learning efficient representations of static scenes that encode all scene objects into
a single neural network, and they lack the ability to represent dynamic scenes and decompose scenes into individual
objects. In this work, we present the first neural rendering method that represents multi-object dynamic scenes as
scene graphs. We propose a learned scene graph representation, which encodes object transformations and radiance, allowing us to efficiently render novel arrangements
and views of the scene. To this end, we learn implicitly encoded scenes, combined with a jointly learned latent representation to describe similar objects with a single implicit
function. We assess the proposed method on synthetic and
real automotive data, validating that our approach learns
dynamic scenes – only by observing a video of this scene
– and allows for rendering novel photo-realistic views of
novel scene compositions with unseen sets of objects at unseen poses.

1. Introduction
View synthesis and scene reconstruction from a set of
captured images are fundamental problems in computer
graphics and computer vision. Classical methods rely on
sequential reconstructions and rendering pipelines that first
recover a compact scene representation, such as a pointcloud or textured meshes using multi-view stereo [1, 12, 28,
29], which is then used to render novel views using efficient
direct or global illumination rendering methods. These
sequential pipelines also can recover hierarchical scene
representations [13], representing dynamic scenes [8, 25],
and efficiently rendering novel views [4]. However, traditional pipelines struggle to capture highly view-dependent
features at discontinuities, or illumination-dependent reflectance of scene objects.

Recently, these challenges have been tackled by neural
rendering methods. The most successful methods [22, 16]
depart from explicit scene representations such as meshes
and estimated BRDF models, and instead learn fully implicit representations that embed three dimensional scenes
in functions, supervised by a sparse set of images during
the training. Specifically, implicit scene representation like
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) by Mildenhall et al. [22]
encode scene representations within the weights of a neural
network that map 3D locations and viewing directions to a
neural radiance field. The novel renderings from this representation improve on previous methods of discretized voxel
grids [31].
Besides their advantages, recent learned methods encode
the entire scene into a single, static network that does not allow for hierarchical representations or dynamic scenes that
are supported by traditional pipelines. Thus, existing neural
rendering approaches assume that the training images stem
from an underlying scene that does not change between
view samples. More recent approaches, such as NeRF-W
[19], attempt to improve on this shortcoming by learning to
ignore dynamic objects that cause occlusions in the static
scene. However, this approach still relies on a underlying
static scene to learn the representation.
In this work, we present the first method that is able to
learn a representation for complex, dynamic, multi-object
scenes. Our method decomposes a scene into its static and
dynamic parts and learns their representations structured as
a scene graph, with transformations defined by tracking information and supervised by the RGB frames of a video.
The proposed approach allows us to synthesize novel views
of a scene, or render views for completely unseen arrangements of dynamic objects. Furthermore, we show that the
method can also be used for 3D object detection via inverse
rendering.
Using automotive data sets, our experiments confirm that
our method is capable of representing scenes with highly
dynamic objects. We assess the method by generating unseen views of novel scene compositions with unseen sets of
objects at unseen poses.

2856

