Convolutional Dynamic Alignment Networks for Interpretable Classifications
Moritz Böhle

Mario Fritz

Bernt Schiele

MPI for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security

MPI for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

Input a0

Linear
Contributions

CoDA-Net
DAUs

a0

Layer 1

W1 (a0)

...

DAUs

Layer 8

W8 (a7)

a8

DAUs

Layer 9

W9 (a8)

a9

Output a9
j

Output is linear
transformation

[a9]j = [W0→9 (a0)]j a0

Linear Transform with W0→9 (a0) = W9 . . . W1

Figure 1: Sketch of a 9-layer CoDA-Net, which computes its output a9 for an input a0 as a linear transform via a matrix W0→9 (a0 ),
such that the output can be linearly decomposed into input contributions (see right). W0→9 is computed successively via multiple layers
of Dynamic Alignment Units (DAUs), which produce matrices Wl that align with their respective inputs al−1 . As a result, the combined
matrix W0→9 aligns well with taks-relevant patterns. Positive (negative) contributions for the class ‘goldfinch’ are shown in red (blue).

Abstract
We introduce a new family of neural network models called Convolutional Dynamic Alignment Networks1
(CoDA-Nets), which are performant classifiers with a high
degree of inherent interpretability. Their core building blocks are Dynamic Alignment Units (DAUs), which
linearly transform their input with weight vectors that
dynamically align with task-relevant patterns. As a result,
CoDA-Nets model the classification prediction through a
series of input-dependent linear transformations, allowing
for linear decomposition of the output into individual input contributions. Given the alignment of the DAUs, the
resulting contribution maps align with discriminative input
patterns. These model-inherent decompositions are of high
visual quality and outperform existing attribution methods
under quantitative metrics. Further, CoDA-Nets constitute
performant classifiers, achieving on par results to ResNet
and VGG models on e.g. CIFAR-10 and TinyImagenet.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are powerful models that excel at a wide
range of tasks. However, they are notoriously difficult to
interpret and extracting explanations for their predictions
is an open research problem. Linear models, in contrast,
are generally considered interpretable, because the contribution (‘the weighted input’) of every dimension to the
output is explicitly given. Interestingly, many modern
neural networks implicitly model the output as a linear
transformation of the input; a ReLU-based [21] neural
network, e.g., is piece-wise linear and the output thus a
1 Code will be available at github.com/moboehle/CoDA-Nets.

linear transformation of the input, cf. [20]. However, due
to the highly non-linear manner in which these linear transformations are ‘chosen’, the corresponding contributions
per input dimension do not seem to represent the learnt
model parameters well, cf. [1], and a lot of research is being
conducted to find better explanations for the decisions of
such neural networks, cf. [28, 30, 40, 25, 27, 33, 31, 4].
In this work, we introduce a novel network architecture, the
Convolutional Dynamic Alignment Networks (CoDANets), for which the model-inherent contribution maps
are faithful projections of the internal computations and
thus good ‘explanations’ of the model prediction. There
are two main components to the interpretability of the
CoDA-Nets. First, the CoDA-Nets are dynamic linear,
i.e., they compute their outputs through a series of inputdependent linear transforms, which are based on our novel
Dynamic Alignment Units (DAUs). As in linear models,
the output can thus be decomposed into individual input
contributions, see Fig. 1. Second, the DAUs are structurally
biased to compute weight vectors that align with relevant
patterns in their inputs. In combination, the CoDA-Nets
thus inherently produce contribution maps that are ‘optimised for interpretability’: since each linear transformation
matrix and thus their combination is optimised to align
with discriminative features, the contribution maps reflect
the most discriminative features as used by the model.
With this work, we present a new direction for building
inherently more interpretable neural network architectures
with high modelling capacity. In detail, we would like to
highlight the following contributions:

10029

