Neural Body: Implicit Neural Representations with Structured Latent Codes
for Novel View Synthesis of Dynamic Humans
Sida Peng1

Yuanqing Zhang1
Qing Shuai1

1

Zhejiang University

2

Yinghao Xu2

Hujun Bao1

Frame 150

Xiaowei Zhou1∗

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Input: a sparse multi-view video

Frame 1

Qianqian Wang3
3

Cornell University

Output: 3D geometry and appearance

Frame 300

Novel view synthesis

3D reconstruction

Figure 1: Novel view synthesis of a performer from a sparse multi-view video. Neural Body captures the 3D geometry and
appearance of the performer, which can be used for 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis. The code and supplementary
materials are available at https://zju3dv.github.io/neuralbody/.

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of novel view synthesis for a human performer from a very sparse set of camera views. Some recent works have shown that learning
implicit neural representations of 3D scenes achieves remarkable view synthesis quality given dense input views.
However, the representation learning will be ill-posed if
the views are highly sparse. To solve this ill-posed problem, our key idea is to integrate observations over video
frames. To this end, we propose Neural Body, a new human body representation which assumes that the learned
neural representations at different frames share the same
set of latent codes anchored to a deformable mesh, so that
the observations across frames can be naturally integrated.
The deformable mesh also provides geometric guidance for
the network to learn 3D representations more efficiently.
To evaluate our approach, we create a multi-view dataset
named ZJU-MoCap that captures performers with complex
motions. Experiments on ZJU-MoCap show that our approach outperforms prior works by a large margin in terms
of novel view synthesis quality. We also demonstrate the
capability of our approach to reconstruct a moving person
from a monocular video on the People-Snapshot dataset.

The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG. ∗ Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

1. Introduction
Free-viewpoint videos of human performers have a variety of applications such as movie production, sports broadcasting, and telepresence. Previous free-viewpoint video
systems either rely on a dense array of cameras for imagebased novel view synthesis [20, 23] or require depth sensors for high-quality 3D reconstruction [8, 14] to produce
realistic rendering. The complicated hardware makes freeviewpoint video systems expensive and only applicable in
constrained environments.
This work focuses on the problem of novel view synthesis for a human performer from a sparse multi-view video
captured by a very limited number of cameras, as illustrated
in Figure 1. This setting significantly decreases the cost of
free-viewpoint systems and makes the systems more widely
applicable. However, this problem is extremely challenging. Traditional image-based rendering methods [20, 12]
mostly require dense input views and cannot be applied
here. For reconstruction-based methods [54, 22], the wide
baselines between cameras make dense stereo matching intractable. Moreover, part of the human body may be invisible due to self-occlusion in sparse views. As a result, these
methods tend to give noisy and incomplete reconstructions,
resulting in heavy rendering artifacts.
Recent works [58, 47, 44] have investigated the potential of implicit neural representations on novel view synthesis. NeRF [44] shows that photorealistic view synthesis can
19054

