PointAugmenting: Cross-Modal Augmentation for 3D Object Detection
Chunwei Wang, Chao Ma,* Ming Zhu, and Xiaokang Yang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{weiwei0224, chaoma, droplet-to-ocean, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

mAP Comparison using Segmentation Scores vs Features

Abstract
Camera and LiDAR are two complementary sensors
for 3D object detection in the autonomous driving context. Camera provides rich texture and color cues while
LiDAR specializes in relative distance sensing. The challenge of 3D object detection lies in effectively fusing 2D
camera images with 3D LiDAR points. In this paper, we
present a novel cross-modal 3D object detection algorithm,
named PointAugmenting. On one hand, PointAugmenting decorates point clouds with corresponding point-wise
CNN features extracted by pretrained 2D detection models, and then performs 3D object detection over the decorated point clouds. In comparison with highly abstract semantic segmentation scores to decorate point clouds, CNN
features from detection networks adapt to object appearance variations, achieving significant improvement. On the
other hand, PointAugmenting benefits from a novel crossmodal data augmentation algorithm, which consistently
pastes virtual objects into images and point clouds during network training. Extensive experiments on the largescale nuScenes and Waymo datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our PointAugmenting. Notably,
PointAugmenting outperforms the LiDAR-only baseline detector by +6.5% mAP and achieves the new state-of-the-art
results on the nuScenes leaderboard to date.

1. Introduction
3D object detection plays a crucial role in 3D scene understanding for autonomous driving. Existing 3D object detection algorithms mainly use LiDAR and cameras to perceive environments. LiDAR grasps depth information in the
form of sparse point clouds, while cameras capture images
in the form of dense intensity array with rich color and textures. The challenge of 3D object detection lies in the misalignment between images and point clouds. In this work,
we aim to advance 3D object detection by means of effective cross-modal data fusion and augmentation.
* Corresponding author.

Decorate LiDAR points with segmentation scores
Decorate LiDAR points with segmentation features

+1.6
76.7

+2.3
75.3
+14.1

+3.6

+4.9

+4.2

32.2

32.4

39.4

+1.3
-0.3
3.4

Car

Truck C.V.

12.6

+9.1
43.9
36.9

+4.9
36.1

+8.6
8.2

Bus Trailer Barrier Motor. Bicycle Ped.

T.C. Overall

Figure 1. Performance comparison between using segmentation
scores and CNN features to fuse with LiDAR points for 3D object detection. We replace the segmentation scores in PointPainting [19] with middle CNN features extracted from the same segmentation network [20]. We use the LiDAR-only detector CenterPoint [27] as baseline. The improvement of +4.9% mAP on the
1/8 nuScenes dataset suggests that CNN features from images are
better at fusing with point clouds. Abbreviations stand for construction vehicle (C.V.), motorcycle (Motor.), pedestrian (Ped.),
and traffic cone (T.C.).

Previous arts have explored a variety of cross-modal fusion schemes, which fall into three categories: result-level
fusion, proposal-level fusion, and point-level fusion. The
result-level fusion approaches [13, 21] adopt off-the-shelf
2D object detectors, thus their performances are limited by
the upper bound of 2D detectors. The proposal-level fusion
methods, such as MV3D [3] and AVOD [8], perform fusion
at the region proposal level, resulting in heavy computation
load. Recent approaches [11, 10, 29, 16, 7, 19] attempt to
fetch point-wise image features by projecting point clouds
onto image plane. [11, 10, 29] construct birds-eye-view
(BEV) camera features before fusing with LiDAR BEV features to mitigate the viewpoint inconsistency. However, the
cross-view transformation readily causes feature blurring.
Instead, MVX-Net [16], EPNet [7] and PointPainting [19]
directly exploit point-wise correspondence to augment each
LiDAR point with CNN features or segmentation scores
from image segmentation. We note that prior fusion meth-

11794

