RefineMask: Towards High-Quality Instance Segmentation
with Fine-Grained Features
Gang Zhang1 Xin Lu2 Jingru Tan3
Jianmin Li
Zhaoxiang Zhang4 Quanquan Li2 Xiaolin Hu1∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, Institute for AI,
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
2
SenseTime Research, 3 Tongji University, 4 Institute of Automation, CAS & UCAS
1

Abstract
The two-stage methods for instance segmentation, e.g.
Mask R-CNN, have achieved excellent performance recently. However, the segmented masks are still very coarse
due to the downsampling operations in both the feature
pyramid and the instance-wise pooling process, especially
for large objects. In this work, we propose a new method
called RefineMask for high-quality instance segmentation
of objects and scenes, which incorporates fine-grained features during the instance-wise segmenting process in a
multi-stage manner. Through fusing more detailed information stage by stage, RefineMask is able to refine high-quality
masks consistently. RefineMask succeeds in segmenting
hard cases such as bent parts of objects that are oversmoothed by most previous methods and outputs accurate
boundaries. Without bells and whistles, RefineMask yields
significant gains of 2.6, 3.4, 3.8 AP over Mask R-CNN on
COCO, LVIS, and Cityscapes benchmarks respectively at a
small amount of additional computational cost. Furthermore, our single-model result outperforms the winner of the
LVIS Challenge 2020 by 1.3 points on the LVIS test-dev set
and establishes a new state-of-the-art. Code will be available at https://github.com/zhanggang001/RefineMask.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation [4, 9, 14, 16, 25, 28] is a fundamental but challenging task in computer vision, which
aims to assign each pixel into a specific semantic category
and differentiate instances in the same category. The recent top-performing methods [4, 9, 14, 16] for instance segmentation generally follow a two-stage paradigm. Taking
Mask R-CNN [14] as an example, a powerful detector is
first employed to generate high-quality bounding boxes and
*Corresponding Author

Figure 1: Comparison among three methods for image segmentation: (a) Mask R-CNN, (b) DeepLabV3+, and (c) our
proposed RefineMask. The segmentation results are indicated by the blue or orange shadows. The boundary accuracy denotes the average accuracy of the predicted masks
in boundary regions, and the non-boundary accuracy is defined similarly (the definition of boundary region can be
found in Section 3.3). Both accuracies of the three methods are calculated over the entire COCO dataset [20].
then a parallel segmentation branch is introduced to predict binary mask for each instance inside the bounding box.
Specifically, in the latter step, a pooling operation, e.g.,
RoIAlign [14], is used to extract instance features from the
feature pyramid [19], then pixel-wise classification is performed based on the output features of the mask head.
Despite the strong abilities provided by the powerful object detector [23] to locate and distinguish instances, Mask
R-CNN loses the image details which are indispensable for
high-quality instance segmentation task, see Figure 1 (a).
The loss of details is mainly due to two factors. Firstly,
the features fed into the pooling operation are from multiple levels of the feature pyramid, and the higher-level features usually result in coarser spatial resolution. For these
high-level features, it is hard to preserve details when mapping the mask prediction back to input space. Secondly, the
pooling operation itself further reduces the spatial size of
the features into a smaller size, e.g. 7×7 or 14×14, which

6861

