Modeling Multi-Label Action Dependencies for Temporal Action Localization
Praveen Tirupattur† , Kevin Duarte† , Yogesh S Rawat‡ , Mubarak Shah‡
Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA
† {praveentirupattur, kevin duarte}@knights.ucf.edu
‡ {yogesh, shah}@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Real-world videos contain many complex actions with
inherent relationships between action classes. In this work,
we propose an attention-based architecture that models
these action relationships for the task of temporal action
localization in untrimmed videos. As opposed to previous
works that leverage video-level co-occurrence of actions,
we distinguish the relationships between actions that occur at the same time-step and actions that occur at different time-steps (i.e. those which precede or follow each
other). We define these distinct relationships as action dependencies. We propose to improve action localization performance by modeling these action dependencies in a novel
attention-based Multi-Label Action Dependency (MLAD)
layer. The MLAD layer consists of two branches: a Cooccurrence Dependency Branch and a Temporal Dependency Branch to model co-occurrence action dependencies
and temporal action dependencies, respectively. We observe that existing metrics used for multi-label classification do not explicitly measure how well action dependencies
are modeled, therefore, we propose novel metrics that consider both co-occurrence and temporal dependencies between action classes. Through empirical evaluation and
extensive analysis, we show improved performance over
state-of-the-art methods on multi-label action localization
benchmarks (MultiTHUMOS and Charades) in terms of fmAP and our proposed metric. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/ptirupat/MLAD.

1. Introduction
Understanding and localizing actions in complex video
sequences is a heavily researched problem in computer vision. The task of action localization in the untrimmed video
involves predicting the action, or actions, present at each
time-step of the video sequence. Several works present topdown methods, that propose temporal regions of a video
which are then classified and refined [5, 12, 38, 4, 14, 54].

Figure 1. Two action sequences from the MultiTHUMOS dataset.
The first sequence (top) shows action dependencies within a given
time-step: “Basketball Dribble” and “Run” co-occur. The bottom
sequence shows action dependencies across time-steps: “Fall” follows “Jump”. The table above each frame shows the comparison
of probability scores predicted by our model with the I3D baseline for each action class present at that time-step. Modeling both
types of dependencies is beneficial for correctly detecting actions.

Other approaches produce bottom-up predictions for each
time-step directly from the frame-level or clip-level features
[24, 22, 26, 37, 27]. Recent bottom-up methods tend to perform best on the multi-label case, where multiple actions
can be present within the same time-step.
Although these works achieve strong multi-label action
localization performance, they do not explicitly model the
relationships between the different action labels, which can
be extremely useful for determining the presence or absence
of classes within a video. Previous works have used label
co-occurrence to improve performance on image classification [44, 49, 9], and video action recognition [2, 30]. However, the later works measure the video-level co-occurrence
of actions, which does not differentiate between actions that
occur within the same time-step and across different timesteps. This may be acceptable when the problem is videolevel single-label action recognition, but when the task is

1460

