Point Cloud Upsampling via Disentangled Refinement
Ruihui Li

Xianzhi Li∗ Pheng-Ann Heng

Chi-Wing Fu

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{lirh,xzli,pheng,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Figure 1. In the top row, we show (a) a sparse real-scanned point set from [23], followed by upsampled results (16×) produced by (b)
MPU [26], (c) PU-GAN [12], and (d) our method. In the bottom row, we show the associated reconstructed 3D meshes produced by the
ball-pivoting algorithm [2]. Clearly, our method outperforms others on the local uniformity, contributing a better surface reconstruction.

Abstract
Point clouds produced by 3D scanning are often sparse,
non-uniform, and noisy. Recent upsampling approaches
aim to generate a dense point set, while achieving both
distribution uniformity and proximity-to-surface, and possibly amending small holes, all in a single network. After revisiting the task, we propose to disentangle the task
based on its multi-objective nature and formulate two cascaded sub-networks, a dense generator and a spatial refiner. The dense generator infers a coarse but dense output that roughly describes the underlying surface, while the
spatial refiner further fine-tunes the coarse output by adjusting the location of each point. Specifically, we design
a pair of local and global refinement units in the spatial
refiner to evolve a coarse feature map. Also, in the spatial refiner, we regress a per-point offset vector to further
adjust the coarse outputs in fine scale. Extensive qualitative and quantitative results on both synthetic and realscanned datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method
over the state-of-the-arts. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/liruihui/Dis-PU .

1. Introduction
Point clouds, as a compact representation of 3D data,
are widely explored by both traditional and deep-learningbased methods for many applications [6, 4, 18], e.g., self∗ corresponding author

driving cars, robotics, rendering, and medical analysis, etc.
However, raw point clouds produced by 3D scanning are
often locally sparse and non-uniform, possibly with small
holes on the object surface; see a real-scanned example
shown on the top of Figure 1(a). Obviously, we need to
amend such raw data, before we can effectively use it for
rendering, analysis, or general processing.
The goal of point cloud upsampling is not limited to generating a dense point set from the sparse input. Very importantly, the generated points should also faithfully locate on
the underlying surface and cover the surface with a uniform
distribution. As an inference-based problem, these goals are
very demanding, due to the limited information available in
the sparse input. Besides being sparse, the input points can
be non-uniform and noisy, and they may not well represent
fine structures (if any) on the underlying surface.
Benefited from data-driven machine learning and deep
neural network models, several deep-learning-based methods [28, 27, 26, 12, 21] have been proposed for point cloud
upsampling and they demonstrated superior performance,
compared with traditional methods [1, 17, 10]. The general
approach taken in existing learning-based methods is that
they first design an upsampling module to expand the number of points in the feature space, then formulate losses to
constrain the output points for the distribution uniformity
and proximity-to-surface. In other words, the designed upsampling module is expected not only to infer and generate dense points from the sparse input, but also to produce
points that are uniform, clean, and faithfully located on the

344

