Debiased Subjective Assessment of Real-World Image Enhancement
Peibei Cao1 , Zhangyang Wang2 , and Kede Ma1
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Texas at Austin
peibeicao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, atlaswang@utexas.edu, kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
In real-world image enhancement, it is often challenging (if not impossible) to acquire ground-truth data, preventing the adoption of distance metrics for objective quality assessment. As a result, one often resorts to subjective quality assessment, the most straightforward and reliable means of evaluating image enhancement. Conventional subjective testing requires manually pre-selecting a
small set of visual examples, which may suffer from three
sources of biases: 1) sampling bias due to the extremely
sparse distribution of the selected samples in the image
space; 2) algorithmic bias due to potential overfitting the
selected samples; 3) subjective bias due to further potential
cherry-picking test results. This eventually makes the field
of real-world image enhancement more of an art than a science. Here we take steps towards debiasing conventional
subjective assessment by automatically sampling a set of
adaptive and diverse images for subsequent testing. This
is achieved by casting sample selection into a joint maximization of the discrepancy between the enhancers and the
diversity among the selected input images. Careful visual
inspection on the resulting enhanced images provides a debiased ranking of the enhancement algorithms. We demonstrate our subjective assessment method using three popular and practically demanding image enhancement tasks:
dehazing, super-resolution, and low-light enhancement.

1. Introduction
For many years, image enhancement has been investigated in an unrealistic setting, with the assumption that the
original images of perfect quality exist to help evaluate visual quality of the enhanced images. This promotes the use
of full-reference image quality metrics [69] to compute an
average distance between a large set of enhanced and original image pairs as an indication of enhancement performance. Along this path, many full-reference metrics have
been proposed [71, 54, 82, 9], trying to measure this distance more perceptually.
However, in real-world image enhancement, it is of-

ten difficult (if not impossible) to specify desired outputs.
Moreover, there may be multiple diverse outputs that are
desirable, as in the case of super-resolution [75]. Therefore,
full-reference models that rely on a single “ideal” image are
not applicable. Some attempts have been made to adopt noreference models [70] for performance assessment of realworld enhancement. However, no-reference objective assessment is still in its infancy, and accurate models for (specific or general) image enhancement applications are largely
lacking. Currently, the most widely used no-reference metric - NIQE [45] - was empirically proven to correlate poorly
with human quality judgments of the enhanced images [45],
which exhibit unique and algorithm-specific artifacts that
are often non-overlapping with natural distortions.
Alternatively, one may refer to subjective quality assessment, which is so far the most straightforward and reliable
way of evaluating real-world image enhancement because
the ultimate receiver in most such applications is the human
eye. Conventional subjective assessment typically takes a
four-step approach. First, pre-select a number of images
from the input domain of a given image enhancement problem. Second, pick a set of competing enhancers, and generate the corresponding output images. Third, ask humans to
rate the perceived quality of the enhanced images. Fourth,
compare the enhancers according to the subjective results.
Unfortunately, conventional subjective assessment may
suffer from three sources of biases. The first is the sampling bias. The underlying principle of conventional subjective assessment is to prove an enhancement method to
be correct. This would require the set of pre-selected images to be large enough to sufficiently represent the input
domain of interest. However, subject testing is an expensive and time-consuming endeavor. In practice, the number
of images being examined is limited to a few hundreds (if
not fewer), casting doubt on the assumption of sufficient
sampling in the high-dimensional image space. The second
is the algorithmic bias. It is important to note that the selection of test images precedes the selection of competing
methods. One may take advantage of this (intentionally or
unintentionally), and tunes her/his enhancer to overfit the
pre-selected images, drawing overly optimistic conclusions

711

