SOLD2 : Self-supervised Occlusion-aware Line Description and Detection
Rémi Pautrat* 1
1

Juan-Ting Lin* 1

Viktor Larsson1
2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

Martin R. Oswald1

Marc Pollefeys1,2

Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich lab

Abstract
Compared to feature point detection and description, detecting and matching line segments offer additional challenges. Yet, line features represent a promising complement
to points for multi-view tasks. Lines are indeed well-defined
by the image gradient, frequently appear even in poorly textured areas and offer robust structural cues. We thus hereby
introduce the first joint detection and description of line segments in a single deep network. Thanks to a self-supervised
training, our method does not require any annotated line
labels and can therefore generalize to any dataset. Our
detector offers repeatable and accurate localization of line
segments in images, departing from the wireframe parsing
approach. Leveraging the recent progresses in descriptor
learning, our proposed line descriptor is highly discriminative, while remaining robust to viewpoint changes and
occlusions. We evaluate our approach against previous line
detection and description methods on several multi-view
datasets created with homographic warps as well as realworld viewpoint changes. Our full pipeline yields higher
repeatability, localization accuracy and matching metrics,
and thus represents a first step to bridge the gap with learned
feature points methods. Code and trained weights are available at https://github.com/cvg/SOLD2.

1. Introduction
Feature points are at the core of many computer vision
tasks such as Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [13, 44], Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [35], large-scale
visual localization [41, 46] and 3D reconstruction [9], due
to their compact and robust representation. Yet, the world
is composed of higher-level geometric structures which are
semantically more meaningful than points. Among these
structures, lines can offer many benefits compared to points.
Lines are widespread and frequent in the world, especially
in man-made environments, and are still present in poorly
textured areas. In contrast to points, they have a natural orientation, and a collection of lines provide strong geometric
* Authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: Line segment detection and matching. Our approach detects repeatable lines and is able to match subsegments to handle partial occlusions. On the right, lines of
the same color are matched together.

clues about the structure of a scene [57, 49, 15]. As such,
lines represent good features for 3D geometric tasks.
Previous methods to detect line segments in images often
relied on image gradient information and handcrafted filters [53, 1]. Recently, deep learning has also enabled robust
and real-time line detection [18]. Most learned line detectors
are however tackling a closely related task: wireframe parsing, which aims at inferring the structured layout of a scene
based on line segments and their connectivity [17, 63, 59, 64].
These structures provide strong geometric cues, in particular
for man-made environments. Yet, these methods have not
been optimized for repeatability across images, a vital feature for multi-view tasks, and their training requires ground
truth lines that are cumbersome to manually label [17].
The traditional way to match geometric structures across
images is to use feature descriptors. Yet, line descriptors face
several challenges: line segments can be partially occluded,
their endpoints may not be well localized, the scale of the
area to describe around each line fluctuates a lot, and it
can be severely deformed under perspective and distortion

11368

