Meta-Mining Discriminative Samples for Kinship Verification
Wanhua Li1,2 , Shiwei Wang3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,∗ , Jianjiang Feng1,2 , Jie Zhou1,2
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
3
School of Modern Post, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
li-wh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

2018110842@bupt.edu.cn

{lujiwen,jfeng,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

∗ Corresponding author

Kinship Model

(a) Existing Method

…
…

Facial appearance conveys valuable information, such as
identity [7, 23], age [19, 46], gender [17, 33], emotions [16, 44], social relation [18, 54], and so on. Recently,
a variety of efforts [15, 21, 25, 32, 45] have been devoted to
kinship verification, which predicts the existence of kinship
for a given pair of facial images. As an emerging task, it
has many potential applications including missing children
search [25], intelligent family album organization [15, 29],
and social media analysis [49, 58].
Existing kinship databases organize data in terms of pos-

Construct a Balanced Dataset

…

1. Introduction

Learning

…

Kinship verification aims to find out whether there is a
kin relation for a given pair of facial images. Kinship verification databases are born with unbalanced data. For a
database with N positive kinship pairs, we naturally obtain
N (N − 1) negative pairs. How to fully utilize the limited positive pairs and mine discriminative information from
sufficient negative samples for kinship verification remains an open issue. To address this problem, we propose a
Discriminative Sample Meta-Mining (DSMM) approach in
this paper. Unlike existing methods that usually construct
a balanced dataset with fixed negative pairs, we propose to
utilize all possible pairs and automatically learn discriminative information from data. Specifically, we sample an
unbalanced train batch and a balanced meta-train batch
for each iteration. Then we learn a meta-miner with the
meta-gradient on the balanced meta-train batch. In the end,
the samples in the unbalanced train batch are re-weighted
by the learned meta-miner to optimize the kinship models. Experimental results on the widely used KinFaceWI, KinFaceW-II, TSKinFace, and Cornell Kinship datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Unbalanced Train
Batch

Kinship Model

Balanced Meta-Train
Batch

Meta-Miner

Sampling

Unbalanced Dataset
Virtual Train
Meta Train
Actual Train

(b) Our Method

Figure 1. The key idea of our method. (a) The existing method
constructs a fixed database by sampling the equal size of negative samples. Then a kinship model is learned with the balanced
database. (b) Our method utilizes all possible pairs and does not
discard any negative samples. Specifically, we sample an unbalanced train batch and a balanced meta-train batch for each iteration. A meta-miner is introduced to mine the samples in the training batch. Our method alternately optimizes the kinship model
and the proposed meta-miner via a meta-learning framework .

itive samples. For example, KinFaceW-I and KinFaceWII [25] datasets collect parent-child image pairs from the
Internet search. Assuming that a kinship database contains
N positive kinship pairs, the negative samples are generated
by combining all unrelated parent-child image pairs. Therefore, we obtain N (N − 1) negative samples, which is far
more than the number of positive pairs. Existing methods
usually randomly sample fixed N negative samples to construct a balanced database. However, this strategy simply

16135

