Image Generators with Conditionally-Independent Pixel Synthesis
I. Anokhin1,2 , K. Demochkin1,2 , T. Khakhulin1,2 , G. Sterkin1 , V. Lempitsky1,2 , D. Korzhenkov1
1

2

Samsung AI Center, Moscow
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow

Figure 1: Samples from our generators trained on several challenging datasets (LSUN Churches, FFHQ, Landscapes,
Satellite-Buildings, Satellite-Landscapes) at resolution 256 × 256. The images are generated without spatial convolutions,
upsampling, or self-attention operations. No interaction between pixels takes place during inference.

Abstract
Existing image generator networks rely heavily on spatial convolutions and, optionally, self-attention blocks in order to gradually synthesize images in a coarse-to-fine manner. Here, we present a new architecture for image generators, where the color value at each pixel is computed independently given the value of a random latent vector and the
coordinate of that pixel. No spatial convolutions or similar
operations that propagate information across pixels are involved during the synthesis. We analyze the modeling capabilities of such generators when trained in an adversarial
fashion, and observe the new generators to achieve similar generation quality to state-of-the-art convolutional generators. We also investigate several interesting properties
unique to the new architecture.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art in unconditional image generation is
achieved using large-scale convolutional generators trained
against adversarial discriminators [10, 11, 1]. While lots
of nuances and ideas have contributed to the state-of-theart recently, for many years since the introduction of DCGAN [21] such generators are based around spatial convolutional layers, also occasionally using the spatial selfattention blocks [32]. Spatial convolutions are also invariably present in other popular generative architectures for
images, including autoencoders [13], autoregressive generators [30], or flow models [3, 12]. Thus, it may seem that
spatial convolutions (or at least spatial self-attention) is an
unavoidable building block for state-of-the-art image generators.
Recently, a number of works have shown that individual
114278

