Memory-guided Unsupervised Image-to-image Translation
Somi Jeong1
Youngjung Kim2
Eungbean Lee1
Kwanghoon Sohn1∗
1
Department of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
2
Agency for Defense Development (ADD), Daejeon, Korea
{somijeong, eungbean, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr, read12300@add.re.kr

Sunny → Night

Sunny → Rainy

Sunny → Cloudy

Night → Sunny

Rainy → Sunny

Cloudy → Sunny

Figure 1: Instance-level image-to-image translation. We present a memory-guided unsupervised image-to-image translation method that performs diverse translation between two visual domains by leveraging a class-aware memory.

Abstract
We present a novel unsupervised framework for instancelevel image-to-image translation. Although recent advances
have been made by incorporating additional object annotations, existing methods often fail to handle images with
multiple disparate objects. The main cause is that, during inference, they apply a global style to the whole image
and do not consider the large style discrepancy between
instance and background, or within instances. To address
this problem, we propose a class-aware memory network
that explicitly reasons about local style variations. A keyvalues memory structure, with a set of read/update operations, is introduced to record class-wise style variations and
access them without requiring an object detector at the test
time. The key stores a domain-agnostic content representation for allocating memory items, while the values encode
domain-specific style representations. We also present a
feature contrastive loss to boost the discriminative power of
memory items. We show that by incorporating our memory,
we can transfer class-aware and accurate style representations across domains. Experimental results demonstrate
that our model outperforms recent instance-level methods
and achieves state-of-the-art performance.
This research was supported by the Agency for Defense Development
under the grant UD2000008RD.
∗ Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Unsupervised image-to-image (I2I) translation is the
task of learning a mapping between unpaired images in diverse domains. It can be applied to a variety of applications, including attribute manipulation [3, 21], style transfer [43, 12], data augmentation [25, 11], and domain adaptation [30, 10]. Recent methods [49, 23, 16, 42, 47] achieved
impressive results based on a cycle-consistency constraint
that forces translated images to be mapped back to their
original domain. However, they usually assume a deterministic one-to-one mapping between two domains, thus failing
to capture the full distribution of possible outputs. Several
methods [50, 13, 22, 8, 45] aim to model complex and multimodal distributions to generate diverse outputs. They postulate that the image representation can be disentangled into
domain-invariant content and domain-specific style. However, they simply formulate I2I translation as a global translation problem and apply a global content/style to entire
images, which is problematic when handling complex images with many disparate objects. Recently, INIT [38] and
DUNIT [1] alleviated this problem by separately treating
object instances and background with additional object annotations. During training, INIT [38] independently translates the instances using a separate reconstruction loss along
with the global translation module. At test time, however,
it only uses the global module and discards the instancelevel information. DUNIT [1] integrates an object detector

6558

