Perception Matters: Detecting Perception Failures of VQA Models Using
Metamorphic Testing

1

Yuanyuan Yuan1
Shuai Wang1∗ Mingyue Jiang2
Tsong Yueh Chen3
2
3
HKUST, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Swinburne University of Technology
{yyuanaq, shuaiw}@cse.ust.hk, mjiang@stu.edu.cn, tychen@swin.edu.au

Abstract
Visual question answering (VQA) takes an image and a
natural-language question as input and returns a naturallanguage answer. To date, VQA models are primarily assessed by their accuracy on high-level reasoning questions.
Nevertheless, Given that perception tasks (e.g., recognizing
objects) are the building blocks in the compositional process required by high-level reasoning, there is a demanding need to gain insights into how much of a problem lowlevel perception is. Inspired by the principles of software
metamorphic testing, we introduce MetaVQA, a modelagnostic framework for benchmarking perception capability of VQA models. Given an image i, MetaVQA is able to
synthesize a low-level perception question q. It then jointly
transforms (i, q) to one or a set of sub-questions and subimages. MetaVQA checks whether the answer to (i, q) satisfies metamorphic relationships (MRs), denoting perception consistency, with the composed answers of transformed
questions and images. Violating MRs denotes a failure of
answering perception questions. MetaVQA successfully
detects over 4.9 million perception failures made by popular
VQA models with metamorphic testing. The state-of-the-art
VQA models (e.g., the champion of VQA 2020 Challenge)
suffer from perception consistency problems. In contrast,
the Oscar VQA models, by using anchor points to align
questions and images, show generally better consistency in
perception tasks. We hope MetaVQA will revitalize interest in enhancing the low-level perceptual abilities of VQA
models, a cornerstone of high-level reasoning.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques have been applied to a variety of question-answering tasks. In particular, visual question answering (VQA) models take an image and a naturallanguage question as input and return a natural-language
answer as output [6]. At present, the standard paradigm is
∗ Corresonding Author

to use hold-out validation, based on a train–validation–test
dataset split, to estimate the accuracy of VQA models. Recent works have also shown that high-level logic reasoning
consistency might not be preserved by VQA models and
provide enhancements accordingly [31, 33, 14].
Q1: What is the total number A1: 4

of fences and sheep?

Q2: What is the total number A2: 2

of fences?

What is the total number A : 3
Q3:
3
of sheep?

Q: What is the
total number of
microwaves?

A1:0

A2:3

A3:0

A4:1

A:1

Figure 1: Perception task failures detected by MetaVQA.
Human cognition is believed to be a compositional process [33]: high-level reasoning and understanding requires
to first perform multiple perception tasks. For instance, to
answer the question “is the microwave occupied?” (the second image in Fig. 1), a VQA model should first detect the
microwave, extract its associated properties, identify other
objects (e.g., human beings) in the context, understand the
question, and try to reason about if the microwave is being used by someone. In other words, perception tasks
(e.g., identifying the microwave) serve as the cornerstone
for VQA models to answer high-level reasoning questions.
Despite the overall optimistic views on VQA models’ accuracy of performing perception tasks, Fig. 1 presents two
failed perception tasks of a popular VQA model. While it
is generally hard to check if the answer A1 to Q1 is incorrect (unless involving human efforts), the sum of A2 and
A3 is inconsistent with A1 , indicating that the VQA model
obviously failed to answer at least one perception question.
Similarly for the second case, the sum of A1−4 is not equal

16908

