Beyond Image to Depth: Improving Depth Prediction using Echoes
Kranti Kumar Parida1
1

IIT Kanpur

Siddharth Srivastava2
2

CDAC Noida

3

Gaurav Sharma1,3

TensorTour Inc.

{kranti, grv}@cse.iitk.ac.in, siddharthsrivastava@cdac.in

Abstract
We address the problem of estimating depth with multi
modal audio visual data. Inspired by the ability of animals,
such as bats and dolphins, to infer distance of objects with
echolocation, some recent methods have utilized echoes for
depth estimation. We propose an end-to-end deep learning based pipeline utilizing RGB images, binaural echoes
and estimated material properties of various objects within
a scene. We argue that the relation between image, echoes
and depth, for different scene elements, is greatly influenced
by the properties of those elements, and a method designed
to leverage this information can lead to significantly improved depth estimation from audio visual inputs. We propose a novel multi modal fusion technique, which incorporates the material properties explicitly while combining
audio (echoes) and visual modalities to predict the scene
depth. We show empirically, with experiments on Replica
dataset, that the proposed method obtains 28% improvement in RMSE compared to the state-of-the-art audio-visual
depth prediction method. To demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method on larger dataset, we report competitive performance on Matterport3D, proposing to use it as a multimodal depth prediction benchmark with echoes for the first
time. We also analyse the proposed method with exhaustive ablation experiments and qualitative results. The code
and models are available at https://krantiparida.
github.io/projects/bimgdepth.html

1. Introduction
Humans perceive the surroundings using multiple sensory inputs such as sound, sight, smell and touch, with different tasks involving different combinations of such inputs.
In computer vision, multimodal learning has also gained
interest. As one popular stream, researchers have leveraged
audio and visual inputs for addressing challenging problems. These problems can be broadly divided into three categories: (i) using audio modality only as the input, to learn
a seemingly visual task, e.g. using echo for depth prediction [9], (ii) using visual modality as auxilliary information
for an audio task, e.g. using videos to convert mono audio to

6DPHZHLJKWVRQHFKRDQG
YLVXDOPRGDOLWLHV



(FKRLQSXW
([LVWLQJPHWKRG
0DWHULDODZDUH
DWWHQWLRQHJ
KLJKHUZHLJKWRQ
HFKRIRUEHWWHU
VRXQGUHIOHFWLYH
VXUIDFHVOLNHZDOOV
,PDJHLQSXW



3URSRVHGPHWKRG

Figure 1. We address the problem of depth prediction using multimodal audio (binaural echo) and visual (monocular RGB) inputs.
We propose an attention based fusion mechanisms, where the attention maps are influenced by automatically estimated material
properties of the scene objects. We argue that capturing the material properties while fusing echo with images is beneficial as the
light and sound reflection characteristics depend not only on the
depth, but also on the material of the scene elements.

binaural audio [14], and (iii) using both audio visual modalities together, e.g. for depth prediction [12]. Here, we follow the third line of work, and address the problem of depth
map prediction using both audio and visual inputs. Studies in psychology and perception indicate that both sound
and vision complement each other, i.e. visual information
helps calibrate the auditory information [22] while auditory
grouping helps solve visual ambiguity [42]. Many animals,
like bats and dolphins, use echolocation to estimate the distances of objects from them. Visually impaired humans
have also been reported to use echolocation [1]. Motivated
by such cases, Christensen et. al [9, 10] recently showed
that depth maps can be predicted directly from stereo sound.
Gao et. al [12] showed that by fusing features from binaural
echoes with the monocular image features, depth estimation
can be improved. Inspired by these findings, we work with
similar reasoning, i.e. sound contains useful information to
predict depth, and that echoes, used along with monocular
images, improve depth estimation.
Going beyond the current methods which do simple
combinations of features from echoes and images [12], we
18268

