Transformer Meets Tracker:
Exploiting Temporal Context for Robust Visual Tracking
Ning Wang1 Wengang Zhou1,2 Jie Wang1,2 Houqiang Li1,2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
wn6149@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,jiewangx,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In video object tracking, there exist rich temporal contexts among successive frames, which have been largely
overlooked in existing trackers. In this work, we bridge the
individual video frames and explore the temporal contexts
across them via a transformer architecture for robust object
tracking. Different from classic usage of the transformer in
natural language processing tasks, we separate its encoder
and decoder into two parallel branches and carefully design
them within the Siamese-like tracking pipelines. The transformer encoder promotes the target templates via attentionbased feature reinforcement, which benefits the high-quality
tracking model generation. The transformer decoder propagates the tracking cues from previous templates to the current frame, which facilitates the object searching process.
Our transformer-assisted tracking framework is neat and
trained in an end-to-end manner. With the proposed transformer, a simple Siamese matching approach is able to outperform the current top-performing trackers. By combining our transformer with the recent discriminative tracking pipeline, our method sets several new state-of-the-art
records on prevalent tracking benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a basic task in computer vision.
Despite the recent progress, it remains a challenging task
due to factors such as occlusion, deformation, and appearance changes. With the temporal error accumulation, these
challenges are further amplified in the online process.
It is well recognized that the rich temporal information
in the video flow is of vital importance for visual tracking. However, most tracking paradigms [28, 27, 48] handle
this task by per-frame object detection, where the tempo*Corresponding Author: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li.
†Source code, pretrained model, and raw tracking results are available
at https://github.com/594422814/TransformerTrack.

Template Set

Search Patch

Backbone

Transformer

CNN

Transformer
Encoder

Tracking
Model

Weight Sharing

Response

CNN

Transformer
Decoder

Conv

Figure 1. An overview of our transformer-assisted tracking framework. The transformer encoder and decoder are assigned to two
parallel branches in a Siamese-like tracking pipeline. Thanks to
the encoder-decoder structure, isolated frames are tightly bridged
to convey rich temporal information in the video flow.

ral relationships among successive frames have been largely
overlooked. Take the popular Siamese tracker as an example, only the initial target is considered for template matching [1, 44, 19, 28]. The merely used temporal information
is the motion prior (e.g., cosine window) by assuming the
target moves smoothly, which is widely adopted in visual
trackers. In other tracking frameworks with update mechanisms [20, 39, 8, 58, 60, 3], previous prediction results
are collected to incrementally update the tracking model.
Despite the historical frames considered in the above approaches, the video frames are still considered as independent counterparts without mutual reasoning. In real-world
videos, some frames inevitably contain noisy contents such
as occluded or blurred objects. These imperfect frames will
hurt the model update when serving as the templates and
will challenge the tracking process when performing as the
search frames. Therefore, it is a non-trivial issue to convey
rich information across temporal frames to mutually reinforce them. We argue that the video frames should not be
treated in isolation and the performance potential is largely
restricted due to the overlook of frame-wise relationship.
To bridge the isolated video frames and convey the rich
temporal cues across them, in this work, we introduce the
transformer architecture [46] to the visual tracking community. Different from the traditional usage of the transformer

1571

