Deep Learning in Latent Space for Video Prediction and Compression
Bowen Liu

Yu Chen
Shiyu Liu
Hun-Seok Kim
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

{bowenliu, unchenyu, shiyuliu, hunseok}@umich.edu

Abstract
Learning-based video compression has achieved substantial progress during recent years. The most influential approaches adopt deep neural networks (DNNs) to remove
spatial and temporal redundancies by finding the appropriate lower-dimensional representations of frames in the video.
We propose a novel DNN based framework that predicts and
compresses video sequences in the latent vector space. The
proposed method first learns the efficient lower-dimensional
latent space representation of each video frame and then
performs inter-frame prediction in that latent domain. The
proposed latent domain compression of individual frames is
obtained by a deep autoencoder trained with a generative adversarial network (GAN). To exploit the temporal correlation
within the video frame sequence, we employ a convolutional
long short-term memory (ConvLSTM) network to predict the
latent vector representation of the future frame. We demonstrate our method with two applications; video compression
and abnormal event detection that share the identical latent
frame prediction network. The proposed method exhibits
superior or competitive performance compared to the stateof-the-art algorithms specifically designed for either video
compression or anomaly detection. 1

1. Introduction
Video data transmission occupies the majority of the internet data traffic nowadays. With the trend of extensive mobile
devices usage worldwide, video data streaming is extensively
used for productivity tools and entertainment platforms that
assist people’s work and life in various aspects. On top of the
ubiquitous video engagement, superior video quality standards such as 4k UHD, and VR 360 became more widely
available, which makes high performance video compression even more critical. Traditional video coding standards
such as MPEG, AVC/H.264 [49], HEVC/H.265 [43], and
VP9 [38] have achieved impressive performance on video
compression tasks. However, as their primary applications
1 Code available at: https://github.com/BowenL0218/Video-compression

Figure 1. Reconstructed frame with the conventional codecs (H.264,
H.265) and our approach. Information and details are well preserved in the frame generated from a purely prediction-based latent
representation (top right). Compared with H.264, our result yields
less block artifacts and preserves finer details. Our method achieves
a higher compression ratio than H.265 with similar quality.

are human perception driven, those hand-crafted codecs are
likely suboptimal for machine-related tasks such as deep
learning based video analytic.
During recent years, a growing trend of employing deep
neural networks (DNNs) for image compression tasks has
been witnessed. Prior works [46, 7, 36] have provided theoretical basis for application of deep autoencoders (AEs) on
image codecs that attempt to optimize the rate-distortion
trade-off, and they have showed the feasibility of latent
representation as a format of compressed signal. While
image compression reduces the redundancy only in spatial
domain, video compression exploits the temporal correlation among consecutive frames as well. Using learned video
prediction to substitute traditional block-based motion prediction/estimation methods has become a critical part of deep
learning based video compression. Related recent works [14,
25, 27] address the uncertainties of real-world videos with
stochastic video prediction networks using autoencoders
and/or generative adversarial network (GAN) structures in
recurrent settings. Learned video compression is a relatively
recent topic. Early works [11, 50] either directly interpolate the key-frames or emulate the functional units in handcrafted codecs with neural networks. Later proposed deep
neural video codecs [31, 28, 19, 15, 41, 3, 51, 17, 30, 21]
mainly target on learning data-driven algorithms that take
advantage of the end-to-end trainability of DNNs. Most
of them [28, 19, 15, 41, 3, 51, 17] adopt autoencoder style
structures that encode frame and residual representations in

701

