T2VLAD: Global-Local Sequence Alignment for Text-Video Retrieval
Xiaohan Wang1,2 * Linchao Zhu3 Yi Yang3
1
Zhejiang University 2 Baidu Research 3 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
wxh1996111@gmail.com

Linchao.Zhu@uts.edu.au

Yi.Yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Text-video retrieval is a challenging task that aims to
search relevant video contents based on natural language
descriptions. The key to this problem is to measure textvideo similarities in a joint embedding space. However,
most existing methods only consider the global cross-modal
similarity and overlook the local details. Some works incorporate the local comparisons through cross-modal local
matching and reasoning. These complex operations introduce tremendous computation. In this paper, we design an
efficient global-local alignment method. The multi-modal
video sequences and text features are adaptively aggregated
with a set of shared semantic centers. The local crossmodal similarities are computed between the video feature
and text feature within the same center. This design enables
the meticulous local comparison and reduces the computational cost of the interaction between each text-video pair.
Moreover, a global alignment method is proposed to provide a global cross-modal measurement that is complementary to the local perspective. The global aggregated visual
features also provide additional supervision, which is indispensable to the optimization of the learnable semantic centers. We achieve consistent improvements on three standard
text-video retrieval benchmarks and outperform the stateof-the-art by a clear margin.

1. Introduction
Video is one of the most informative media due to
the abundant multi-modal content and temporal dynamics. Text-video retrieval systems enable humans to search
videos with a simple and natural interaction approach. Recently, some efforts have been made in building retrieval
systems with complex text inputs [2, 9], e.g., retrieving contents of “a group of men inspect and test a brand new yellow
car”. This is more applicable as the users could search content based on more detailed descriptions.
One of the promising directions to enable cross-modal
* Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.

Global Alignment

a group …
yellow car
a
group
of
men
inspect
and
test
a
brand
new
yellow
car

Local Alignment

Figure 1. Global alignment gives a comprehensive similarity measurement between texts and videos. Local alignment provides finegrained comparisons by computing the similarities between the local text-video features from the same semantic centers.

video retrieval is to measure text-video similarities using
metric learning [34, 7]. In this case, the common practice is to embed both descriptions and videos into a joint
embedding space. Most existing works [24] [6] [22] [9]
encode the descriptions and video content to global representations and compare their similarities from a global perspective. These methods focus on the learning of effective
language and video representations but overlook the finegrained semantic alignment. For instance, Gabeur et al. [9]
leveraged a multi-modal transformer to enhance the valuable cross-modal interaction to generate more discriminative video features. Some other works [2, 21, 32] leveraged complex cross-modal matching operations to exploit
the local details and align multiple semantic cues. Chen
et al. [2] proposed a hierarchical graph reasoning model to
capture both global events and local actions through local
graph matching. They manually designed three levels of semantics, including events, actions, and entities. However,
these methods require a high computational cost due to the
expensive pairwise matching operation.

5079

