Scene-aware Generative Network for Human Motion Synthesis
Jingbo Wang1
Sijie Yan1
Bo Dai2∗
Dahua Lin1,3
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
Centre of Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
{wj020, ys016, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {bo.dai}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We revisit human motion synthesis, a task useful in various real-world applications, in this paper. Whereas a number of methods have been developed previously for this task,
they are often limited in two aspects: 1) focus on the poses
while leaving the location movement behind, and 2) ignore
the impact of the environment on the human motion. In this
paper, we propose a new framework, with the interaction
between the scene and the human motion taken into account. Considering the uncertainty of human motion, we
formulate this task as a generative task, whose objective is
to generate plausible human motion conditioned on both the
scene and the human’s initial position. This framework factorizes the distribution of human motions into a distribution
of movement trajectories conditioned on scenes and that of
body pose dynamics conditioned on both scenes and trajectories. We further derive a GAN-based learning approach,
with discriminators to enforce the compatibility between the
human motion and the contextual scene as well as the 3Dto-2D projection constraints. We assess the effectiveness
of the proposed method on two challenging datasets, which
cover both synthetic and real-world environments.

1. Introduction
The ability to synthesize human motions is beneficial to
many real-world applications, including virtual reality, filmmaking, and stochastic action forecasting. Previous methods [1, 2, 6, 9, 17, 20, 31, 33] for human motion synthesis
often focus only on the movements of human bodies, while
the scene context is neglected. Basically, people move their
bodies for interacting with the outside world and are restricted by the outside world. It is hard to execute reasonable movements without observing the surrounding environment. And thus, the problem is worth further exploring.
Inspired by the importance of scene context, in this pa∗ Work done at The Chinese University of Hong Kong.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Visualization of human motions in different scenes.
For the same starting point, the human not only can go to different
goals, as in (a) and (c), but also the same goals under different trajectories and body movements, as in (a) and (b). All these human
motions are sample from our generated results.

per, we aim at synthesizing human motions under scene influence. Actually, human motions in the scene consists of
two components, namely body movements and the trajectory of human in the surrounding scene. This trajectory
controls the human movement in the scene, and the body
movements always represent the action of humans, such as
walking or sitting. Thus, there are two major challenges to
handle when involving scene context. The first challenge
is how to effectively reflect the semantic guidance provided
by the scene context, e.g. do sitting action on a chair. The
second challenge is how to model the complicated physical
relationship between scenes and action sequences. Specifically, we need to know the geometric configuration of the
scene context to avoid the collision, e.g. where the floor is.
To solve these problems, there is an early attempt [3] introducing the scene context into motion forecasting, which
supposes human actions are deterministic predictions when
the history and the destination are given. This method treats
the distribution of human motion as the distribution of endpoints in the scene. While in the motion synthesis task,

12206

