Forecasting Irreversible Disease via Progression Learning
Botong Wu1,2∗ , Sijie Ren7∗ , Jing Li1,6 , Xinwei Sun4( ) , Shi-Ming Li5 , Yizhou Wang 1,3
1
Dept. of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Adv. Inst. of Info. Tech, Peking University
3
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
4
Microsoft Research, Asia 5 Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University
6
Deepwise AI Lab 7 Beijing Stars Universal Technology Co., Ltd
{botongwu, lijingg, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, rensijie@ooyby.com, xinsun@microsoft.com

Abstract
Forecasting Parapapillary atrophy (PPA), i.e., a symptom
related to most irreversible eye diseases, provides an alarm
for implementing an intervention to slow down the disease
progression at early stage. A key question for this forecast is:
how to fully utilize the historical data (e.g., retinal image)
up to the current stage for future disease prediction? In
this paper, we provide an answer with a novel framework,
namely Disease Forecast via Progression Learning (DFPL),
which exploits the irreversibility prior (i.e., cannot be reversed once diagnosed). Specifically, based on this prior,
we decompose two factors that contribute to the prediction
of the future disease: i) the current disease label given the
data (retinal image, clinical attributes) at present and ii)
the future disease label given the progression of the retinal
images that from the current to the future. To model these
two factors, we introduce the current and progression predictors in DFPL, respectively. In order to account for the
degree of progression of the disease, we propose a temporal
generative model to accurately generate the future image
and compare it with the current one to get a residual image.
The generative model is implemented by a recurrent neural
network, in order to exploit the dependency of the historical
data. To verify our approach, we apply it to a PPA in-house
dataset and it yields a significant improvement (e.g., 4.48%
of accuracy; 3.45% of AUC) over others. Besides, our generative model can accurately localize the disease-related
regions.

1. Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 19
million children below the age of 15 were visually impaired
[18; 6] (1% of the total population in this age group). Most of
the eye diseases, such as myopia in children [14], glaucoma
* denotes equal contribution.

[26], retinal detachment, and dense cataract [11], are highly
related to Parapapillary atrophy (PPA), which as a biomarker
of above eye diseases, refers to outer retinal atrophy adjacent
to the optic disc [23; 17; 3]. Due to the irreversibility of
these eye diseases, forecasted PPA can be provided as an
alarm to implement an intervention (e.g., outdoor activities,
or drug treatment) to prevent the rapid progression of eye
diseases at the early stage. Due to the lack of future data
when forecasting the future label, this forecasting task is
equivalent to the following answer: how to fully utilize the
longitudinal/sequential data up to the current stage for future
disease prediction, under the lack of future data?
A series of works have recently been proposed to answer
this question, such as [21; 15; 24]. Most of these works utilized the provided current data for generating the future medical data (i.e., retinal images, clinical attributes), followed
by an auxiliary classiﬁer for disease prediction. However,
these methods did not take the irreversibility medical prior
into account.
This irreversibility prior overlooked in the above literature refers to that, the disease cannot reverse to healthy once
diagnosed. That is, if diagnosed as diseased at present, the
probability of disease at the future stage would be 100%.
Inspired by such a prior in PPA[12], we decompose (according to the law of total probability) the disease label at future
stage into two factors: i) the disease label at current stage
given the medical data at present; and ii) the disease label
at future stage given the progression from the current to the
future stage. This factorization, in contrast to previous works
that only leverage current data for the generation, claims an
additional role of current data in determining the disease at
present (a.k.a the i)). To effectively learn these two factors,
we propose a novel framework, namely Disease Forecast
via Progression Learning (DFPL) which introduces two prediction modules: fcur and fprog , respectively. To further
account for the degree of progression, we propose a temporal generative framework based on Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN), in which we incorporate the generator
18117

