Repurposing GANs for One-shot Semantic Part Segmentation
Nontawat Tritrong*

Pitchaporn Rewatbowornwong*
VISTEC, Thailand

Supasorn Suwajanakorn

{nontawat.t s19, pitchaporn.r s18, supasorn.s}@vistec.ac.th

Figure 1: One-shot segmentation results. In each task, our segmentation network is given only one example of part labels.

Abstract
While GANs have shown success in realistic image generation, the idea of using GANs for other tasks unrelated
to synthesis is underexplored. Do GANs learn meaningful structural parts of objects during their attempt to reproduce those objects? In this work, we test this hypothesis and propose a simple and effective approach based
on GANs for semantic part segmentation that requires as
few as one label example along with an unlabeled dataset.
Our key idea is to leverage a trained GAN to extract a
pixel-wise representation from the input image and use it
as feature vectors for a segmentation network. Our experiments demonstrate that this GAN-derived representation is “readily discriminative” and produces surprisingly
good results that are comparable to those from supervised
baselines trained with significantly more labels. We believe this novel repurposing of GANs underlies a new class
of unsupervised representation learning, which can generalize to many other tasks. More results are available at
https://RepurposeGANs.github.io/.

1. Introduction
After seeing what an elephant trunk looks like for the
first time, a young child can identify this conspicuous part
for the whole herd. This key capability in humans is still
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

a fundamental challenge in computer vision. That is, how
can a machine learn to identify an object or its parts by
seeing only one or few examples? A kid does, however,
have access to prior visual information learned constantly
throughout the years, and he or she could quickly learn to
identify human ears perhaps by utilizing the experience of
seeing many faces before. In this paper, we tackle a problem inspired by this scenario. Given a large photo collection
of human faces, or any other object classes, our goal is to
identify the pixels corresponding to each semantic part for
unseen face images given very few images with part annotations.
This problem setup is different from the typical definition of few-shot learning, which describes a problem where
a learning algorithm trained with many object classes needs
to classify or operate on new classes with few supervised
examples of those new classes. In contrast, our novel fewshot setup involves a single object class with few annotated
examples and no other training data from any other classes.
Many methods are proposed in this area of few-shot learning, and the general idea is to apply prior knowledge learned
externally to the few-shot task. Examples include meta
learning [40] and prototype representation [31, 51] which
extract information from annotations of non-target classes
or image-level annotations to be used as prior knowledge.
However, most of these approaches still learn from some
supervised task that requires expensive labels or part annotations. In this work, we introduce a new direction that

4475

