A Hyperbolic-to-Hyperbolic Graph Convolutional Network
Jindou Dai, Yuwei Wu*, Zhi Gao, and Yunde Jia
Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), Beijing, 100081, China.
{daijindou, wuyuwei, gaozhi 2017, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn

Log
Mapping

Abstract
Hyperbolic graph convolutional networks (GCNs)
demonstrate powerful representation ability to model
graphs with hierarchical structure. Existing hyperbolic
GCNs resort to tangent spaces to realize graph convolution
on hyperbolic manifolds, which is inferior because tangent
space is only a local approximation of a manifold. In this
paper, we propose a hyperbolic-to-hyperbolic graph convolutional network (H2H-GCN) that directly works on hyperbolic manifolds. Specifically, we developed a manifoldpreserving graph convolution that consists of a hyperbolic
feature transformation and a hyperbolic neighborhood aggregation. The hyperbolic feature transformation works as
linear transformation on hyperbolic manifolds. It ensures
the transformed node representations still lie on the hyperbolic manifold by imposing the orthogonal constraint
on the transformation sub-matrix. The hyperbolic neighborhood aggregation updates each node representation via
the Einstein midpoint. The H2H-GCN avoids the distortion caused by tangent space approximations and keeps the
global hyperbolic structure. Extensive experiments show
that the H2H-GCN achieves substantial improvements on
the link prediction, node classification, and graph classification tasks.

Feature
Transformation

Neighborhood
Aggregation

Exp
Mapping

(a) Existing hyperbolic GCNs.
Hyperbolic
Feature Transformation

Edges

Input node

Hyperbolic
Neighborhood Aggregation

Neighbor nodes

Output node

(b) The proposed H2H-GCN.

Figure 1. Comparisons of exisiting hyperbolic GCNs and the proposed H2H-GCN. At the ℓ-th layer, (a) existing hyperbolic GCNs
performs Euclidean graph convolutional opeartions, e.g., feature
transformation and neighborhood aggregation, in the tangent space
Tx L that is a local approximation of the hyperbolic manifold L;
(b) H2H-GCN directly performs a hyperbolic feature transformation and a hyperbolic neighborhood aggregation on the hyperbolic
manifold to learn node representations, keeping the global hyperbolic structure.

1. Introduction
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have attracted increasing attention for graph representation learning, where
nodes in a graph are typically embedded into Euclidean
spaces [25, 48, 46, 42, 20, 21]. Several works reveal that
many graphs, such as social networks and citation networks,
exhibit a highly hierarchical structure [11, 26, 32]. Recent studies have shown that hyperbolic spaces can well
capture such hierarchical structure compared to Euclidean
spaces [30, 31, 12]. Different from Euclidean spaces with
zero curvature, hyperbolic spaces possess a constant neg* Corresponding author

ative curvature, which allows for an exponential growth
of space volume with radius. This property of hyperbolic
spaces pretty meets the requirements of hierarchical data
(e.g., trees) that need an exponential amount of space for
branching, and encourages the development of GCNs in hyperbolic spaces to capture the hierarchical structure underlying graphs.
Existing hyperbolic GCNs [27, 10, 49] resort to tangent
spaces to realize graph convolution in hyperbolic spaces.
Since the hyperbolic space is a Riemannian manifold rather
than a vector space, basic operations (such as matrix-vector
multiplication and vector addition) well defined in Eu-

154

