Pose-Controllable Talking Face Generation by
Implicitly Modularized Audio-Visual Representation
Hang Zhou1 , Yasheng Sun2,3 , Wayne Wu2,4 , Chen Change Loy4 , Xiaogang Wang1 , Ziwei Liu4
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology 4 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{zhouhang@link,xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, wuwenyan@sensetime.com, {ccloy,ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Synced
Video

Audio
Source

Generated
Results

Identity
Reference
Pose
Source

Figure 1: Illustration of Pose-Controllable Audio-Visual System (PC-AVS). Our approach takes one frame as identity reference and
generates audio-driven talking faces with pose controlled by another pose source video. The mouth shapes of the generated frames are
matched with the first row (synced video with audio) while the pose is matched with the bottom row (pose source).

Abstract
While accurate lip synchronization has been achieved
for arbitrary-subject audio-driven talking face generation,
the problem of how to efficiently drive the head pose remains. Previous methods rely on pre-estimated structural
information such as landmarks and 3D parameters, aiming
to generate personalized rhythmic movements. However, the
inaccuracy of such estimated information under extreme conditions would lead to degradation problems. In this paper,
we propose a clean yet effective framework to generate posecontrollable talking faces. We operate on non-aligned raw
face images, using only a single photo as an identity reference. The key is to modularize audio-visual representations
by devising an implicit low-dimension pose code. Substantially, both speech content and head pose information lie in
a joint non-identity embedding space. While speech content
information can be defined by learning the intrinsic synchronization between audio-visual modalities, we identify that a

pose code will be complementarily learned in a modulated
convolution-based reconstruction framework.
Extensive experiments show that our method generates
accurately lip-synced talking faces whose poses are controllable by other videos. Moreover, our model has multiple
advanced capabilities including extreme view robustness and
talking face frontalization.1

1. Introduction
Driving a static portrait with audio is of great importance to a variety of applications in the field of entertainment, such as digital human animation, visual dubbing in movies, and fast creation of short videos. Armed
with deep learning, previous researchers take two different paths towards analyzing audio-driven talking human
1 Code, models, and demo videos are available at https://hangznju-cuhk.github.io/projects/PC-AVS.

4176

