No frame left behind: Full Video Action Recognition
Xin Liu1 Silvia L. Pintea1 Fatemeh Karimi Nejadasl2 Olaf Booij2 Jan C. van Gemert1
Computer Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology1
TomTom2
Heuristic frame sub-sampling 1

Abstract

Make scrambled eggs

Not all video frames are equally informative for recognizing an action. It is computationally infeasible to train
deep networks on all video frames when actions develop
over hundreds of frames. A common heuristic is uniformly
sampling a small number of video frames and using these
to recognize the action. Instead, here we propose full video
action recognition and consider all video frames. To make
this computational tractable, we first cluster all frame activations along the temporal dimension based on their similarity with respect to the classification task, and then temporally aggregate the frames in the clusters into a smaller
number of representations. Our method is end-to-end trainable and computationally efficient as it relies on temporally localized clustering in combination with fast Hamming distances in feature space. We evaluate on UCF101,
HMDB51, Breakfast, and Something-Something V1 and V2,
where we compare favorably to existing heuristic frame
sampling methods.

1. Introduction
Videos have arbitrary length with actions occurring at
arbitrary moments. Current video recognition methods use
CNNs on coarsely sub-sampled frames [2, 24, 28, 31, 38,
41, 45, 47, 48, 50] because using all frames is computationally infeasible. Sub-sampling, however, can miss crucial frames for action recognition. For example, as shown
in Fig. 1, sampling the frame with the dish in the pan is crucial for correct recognition. We propose to do away with
sub-sampling heuristics and argue for leveraging all video
frames: Full video action recognition.
It is worth analyzing why training CNNs on full videos is
computationally infeasible in terms of memory and calculations. The calculations in the forward pass yield activations,
while the backward pass calculations give gradients which
are summed over all frames to update the weights. Many
of these calculations can be done in parallel and thus are
well-suited for modern GPUs. When treating videos as a
large collection of image frames, the amount of calculations
are not too different from those on large image datasets [5].

Make pancakes

Heuristic frame sub-sampling 2

Make scrambled eggs

Proposed: Full video action recognition

All frames

1 0
1

0 1 10
1 0 1
1 0 0

Make scrambled eggs

Figure 1. Sub-sampling can miss crucial frames in videos and
may cause confusion for action recognition: e.g. compare the two
sub-samplings heuristics in row 1 and row 2: Without sampling
the dish in the pan it is difficult to classify. Instead, as shown
in row 3, we propose to efficiently use all frames during training
by clustering frame activations along the temporal dimension and
aggregating each cluster to a single representation. The temporal
clustering is based on Hamming distances over frame activations,
which is computationally fast. With the assumption that similar
activations have similar gradients, the aggregated representations
approximate the individual frame activations. We efficiently utilize all frames for training without missing important information.

Regarding memory, however, there is a crucial difference
between videos and images: The video loss function is not
per-frame but on the full video. Hence, to do the backward
pass, all activations for each frame, for each filter in each
layer need to be stored in memory. This even doubles for
storing their gradients. With 10-30 frames per second, this
quickly becomes infeasible for even just a few minutes of
video. Existing approaches can trade off memory for compute [3, 4, 13] by not storing all intermediate layers, yet
they do not scale to video as they would still need to store
each frame. The main computational bottleneck for training
video CNNs is memory for frame activations.
Here, we propose an efficient method to use all video
frames during training. The forward pass computes frame

14892

