PML: Progressive Margin Loss for Long-tailed Age Classification
Zongyong Deng1 , Hao Liu1,2,∗, Yaoxing Wang1 , Chenyang Wang1 , Zekuan Yu3 , Xuehong Sun1,2
1
School of Information Engineering, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, 750021, China
2
Collaborative Innovation Center for Ningxia Big Data and Artificial Intelligence
Co-founded by Ningxia Municipality and Ministry of Education, Yinchuan, 750021, China
3
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China
zongyongdeng nxu@outlook.com; liuhao@nxu.edu.cn; yaoxing.wang nxu@outlook.com
chenyang.wang nxu@outlook.com; yzk@fudan.edu.cn; sunxh@nxu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a progressive margin loss (PML) approach for unconstrained facial age classification.
Conventional methods make strong assumption on that each
class owns adequate instances to outline its data distribution, likely leading to bias prediction where the training
samples are sparse across age classes. Instead, our PML
aims to adaptively refine the age label pattern by enforcing a couple of margins, which fully takes in the in-between
discrepancy of the intra-class variance, inter-class variance and class center. Our PML typically incorporates with
the ordinal margin and the variational margin, simultaneously plugging in the globally-tuned deep neural network
paradigm. More specifically, the ordinal margin learns to
exploit the correlated relationship of the real-world age labels. Accordingly, the variational margin is leveraged to
minimize the influence of head classes that misleads the prediction of tailed samples. Moreover, our optimization carefully seeks a series of indicator curricula to achieve robust
and efficient model training. Extensive experimental results on three face aging datasets demonstrate that our PML
achieves compelling performance compared to state of the
art. Code will be made publicly.

1. Introduction
Facial age classification (a.k.a., facial age estimation) aims to predict the exact biological ages from given facial images, which has a lot of potential computer vision applications such as human-computer interaction [53, 15] and
facial attribute analysis [39, 4]. While numerous works have
been devoted recently [17, 27, 18, 50, 43], the performance
still remains limited in wild conditions, which is mainly
due to that the datasets often undergo long-tailed distribu∗ Corresponding author.

tion with many minority classes (tail) and a few common
classes (head). When learning with the long-tailed age data, a common problem is that the head classes usually dominate the training convergence. Therefore, the learned age
classification model tends to perform better on head classes, whereas the performance degrades in tail classes. This
quite motivates us to develop a robust facial age classification approach versus imbalanced age data. In the left of
Fig. 1, we visualize some failure cases caused by existing
age classification methods.
Facial age classification approaches could be roughly divided into the single label learning (SLL)-based [17, 18, 43,
11] and the label distribution learning (LDL)-based [50, 31,
51, 52, 36]. SLL-based methods typically classify one single age for a given facial image, which treats each age
independently. However, they ignore human face changes
gradually with progressive ages, thus the facial appearance
is usually indiscriminative at adjacent age classes. To further model the age correlation, Geng et al. [19] proposed an
LDL method to map the real-valued ground-truth to a Gaussian label distribution. However, the performance degrades
in such long-tailed case where the feature representation of
minority is suppressed by the majority classes.
To address the long-tailed data issue, we propose a progressive margin loss (PML) approach for age classification,
which aims to leverage semantic margins to reduce intraclass variance and enlarge inter-class variance simultaneously. As shown in Fig. 2, we carefully develop a progressive margin loss at the top of deep neural networks with preserving the age-difference cost information. Technically,
our proposed PML is composed of two crucial branches including an ordinal margin learning and a variational margin
learning. The ordinal margin attempts to extract discriminative features while maintaining the relation of the age
order. For efficient optimization, we develop a series of indicators by following the curriculum-learning method. To
validate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we per-

10503

