From Synthetic to Real: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
for Animal Pose Estimation
Chen Li
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{lic, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Animal pose estimation is an important field that has received increasing attention in the recent years. The main
challenge for this task is the lack of labeled data. Existing works circumvent this problem with pseudo labels generated from data of other easily accessible domains such
as synthetic data. However, these pseudo labels are noisy
even with consistency check or confidence-based filtering
due to the domain shift in the data. To solve this problem, we design a multi-scale domain adaptation module
(MDAM) to reduce the domain gap between the synthetic
and real data. We further introduce an online coarse-tofine pseudo label updating strategy. Specifically, we propose a self-distillation module in an inner coarse-update
loop and a mean-teacher in an outer fine-update loop to
generate new pseudo labels that gradually replace the old
ones. Consequently, our model is able to learn from the
old pseudo labels at the early stage, and gradually switch
to the new pseudo labels to prevent overfitting in the later
stage. We evaluate our approach on the TigDog and VisDA
2019 datasets, where we outperform existing approaches by
a large margin. We also demonstrate the generalization
ability of our model by testing extensively on both unseen
domains and unseen animal categories. Our code is available at the project website1 .

1. Introduction
Animal pose estimation has received increasing attention
over the last few years because of many potential applications in zoology, biology and aquaculture. Despite the great
success of applying deep neural networks to human pose
estimation, the lack of well-labeled animal pose data makes
it infeasible to directly leverage on the powerful deep learning approaches. Existing works overcome this problem by
transferring knowledge from other more accessible domains
such as synthetic animal data [23, 5, 46, 47, 48] or human
1 https://github.com/chaneyddtt/UDA-Animal-Pose

Figure 1. Our method takes in noisy pseudo labels (e.g. hind hoof
on left image) generated from model trained with labeled synthetic
data and outputs the correct animal pose on real images.

data [6]. The advantage of synthetic data is that it is low
cost and convenient to generate a large scale of data with
accurate ground truth. Moreover, the domain gap between
synthetic and real animals is more manageable than that
between other domains such as human and animals. This
is evident from the results of [6], where sufficient labeled
data in the real animal domain is needed for the network
to work despite the use of sophisticated domain adaptation
techniques.
The domain gap between synthetic and real animals
mainly comes from the differences in texture and background, and the limited pose variance of synthetic data.
To solve the domain shift problem, existing works first
generate pseudo labels with a model trained on synthetic
data, and then gradually incorporate more pseudo labels
into the training according to the confidence score. However, these pseudo labels are inaccurate even with refinement techniques such as confidence-based filtering [6] or
geometry-based consistency check [23]. Fig. 1 shows an
example where a model trained on synthetic animals gives
wrong predictions (e.g. the hind hoof) with high confidence
(marked in yellow circle in the heatmap). This kind of noisy
pseudo labels cannot be filtered out based on the confidence
score and will lead to degraded performance when used

1482

