MaX-DeepLab: End-to-End Panoptic Segmentation with Mask Transformers
Huiyu Wang1∗

Yukun Zhu2
Hartwig Adam2
Alan Yuille1
Liang-Chieh Chen2
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Google Research

Abstract
Panoptic

We present MaX-DeepLab, the first end-to-end model for
panoptic segmentation. Our approach simplifies the current pipeline that depends heavily on surrogate sub-tasks
and hand-designed components, such as box detection, nonmaximum suppression, thing-stuff merging, etc. Although
these sub-tasks are tackled by area experts, they fail to
comprehensively solve the target task. By contrast, our
MaX-DeepLab directly predicts class-labeled masks with a
mask transformer, and is trained with a panoptic quality inspired loss via bipartite matching. Our mask transformer
employs a dual-path architecture that introduces a global
memory path in addition to a CNN path, allowing direct
communication with any CNN layers. As a result, MaXDeepLab shows a significant 7.1% PQ gain in the box-free
regime on the challenging COCO dataset, closing the gap
between box-based and box-free methods for the first time.
A small variant of MaX-DeepLab improves 3.0% PQ over
DETR with similar parameters and M-Adds. Furthermore,
MaX-DeepLab, without test time augmentation, achieves
new state-of-the-art 51.3% PQ on COCO test-dev set.

Segmentation

Ours

Instance
Segmentation

Semantic
Segmentation

Box
Detection

Box-based
Segmentation

Anchor
Classification

Anchor
Regression

Previous Methods (Panoptic-FPN)

Figure 1. Our method predicts panoptic segmentation masks directly from images, while previous methods (Panoptic-FPN as an
example) rely on a tree of surrogate sub-tasks. Panoptic segmentation masks are obtained by merging semantic and instance segmentation results. Instance segmentation is further decomposed
into box detection and box-based segmentation, while box detection is achieved by anchor regression and anchor classification.

1. Introduction
The goal of panoptic segmentation [48] is to predict a
set of non-overlapping masks along with their corresponding class labels. Modern panoptic segmentation methods
address this mask prediction problem by approximating the
target task with multiple surrogate sub-tasks. For example, Panoptic-FPN [47] adopts a ‘box-based pipeline’ with
three levels of surrogate sub-tasks, as demonstrated in a
tree structure in Fig. 1. Each level of this proxy tree involves manually-designed modules, such as anchors [77],
box assignment rules [105], non-maximum suppression
(NMS) [7], thing-stuff merging [98], etc. Although there
are good solutions [77, 12, 33] to individual surrogate subtasks and modules, undesired artifacts are introduced when
these sub-tasks fit into a pipeline for panoptic segmentation,
especially in the challenging conditions (Fig. 2).
∗ Work done while an intern at Google.

(a) Our MaX-DeepLab (b) Axial-DeepLab [89] (c) DetectoRS [76]
51.1 PQ (box-free)
43.4 PQ (box-free)
48.6 PQ (box-based)

Figure 2. A case study for our method and state-of-the-art box-free
and box-based methods. (a) Our end-to-end MaX-DeepLab correctly segments a dog sitting on a chair. (b) Axial-DeepLab [89]
relies on a surrogate sub-task of regressing object center offsets [21]. It fails because the centers of the dog and the chair are
close to each other. (c) DetectoRS [76] classifies object bounding
boxes, instead of masks, as a surrogate sub-task. It filters out the
chair mask because the chair bounding box has a low confidence.

Recent work on panoptic segmentation attempted to simplify this box-based pipeline. For example, UPSNet [98]
proproses a parameter-free panoptic head, permitting backpropagation to both semantic and instance segmentation
modules. Recently, DETR [10] presents an end-to-end approach for box detection, which is used to replace detectors

5463

