Context-Aware Layout to Image Generation with Enhanced Object Appearance
Sen He1,2*, Wentong Liao3* , Michael Ying Yang4 , Yongxin Yang1,2 , Yi-Zhe Song1,2
Bodo Rosenhahn3 , Tao Xiang1,2
1

CVSSP, University of Surrey, 2 iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence
3
TNT, Leibniz University Hannover, 4 SUG, University of Twente

Abstract

bowl
bowl

bowl

A layout to image (L2I) generation model aims to generate a complicated image containing multiple objects
(things) against natural background (stuff), conditioned on
a given layout. Built upon the recent advances in generative adversarial networks (GANs), existing L2I models
have made great progress. However, a close inspection of
their generated images reveals two major limitations: (1)
the object-to-object as well as object-to-stuff relations are
often broken and (2) each object’s appearance is typically
distorted lacking the key defining characteristics associated
with the object class. We argue that these are caused by
the lack of context-aware object and stuff feature encoding in their generators, and location-sensitive appearance
representation in their discriminators. To address these
limitations, two new modules are proposed in this work.
First, a context-aware feature transformation module is introduced in the generator to ensure that the generated feature encoding of either object or stuff is aware of other coexisting objects/stuff in the scene. Second, instead of feeding location-insensitive image features to the discriminator,
we use the Gram matrix computed from the feature maps of
the generated object images to preserve location-sensitive
information, resulting in much enhanced object appearance. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the COCO-ThingStuff and Visual Genome benchmarks. Code available at:
https://github.com/wtliao/layout2img.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [11] have made it possible to generate photorealistic images for a single object, e.g., faces, cars, cats
[4, 46, 20, 21]. However, generating complicated images containing multiple objects (things) of different classes
against natural backgrounds (stuff) still remains a challenge
[18, 3, 31, 30]. This is due to the large appearance variations
* Equal contribution

bowl

sea
person

surfboard
tree giraffe
head
giraffe
neck

neck
head

grass

Figure 1. Illustration of the limitations of existing L2I models and
how our model overcome them. From left to right: ground truth
layout, images generated by the state-of-the-art LostGAN-v2 [39],
and by our model with the layout as input. In the middle and
right column, regions with key differences in the generation quality between LostGAN-v2 and our model are highlighted in dashed
boxes. See text for more details.

for objects of different classes, as well as the complicated
relations between both object-to-object and object-to-stuff.
A generated object needs to be not only realistic on its own,
but in harmony with surrounding objects and stuff.
Without any conditional input, the mode collapse [36, 6]
problem is likely to be acute for GANs trained to generate such complicated natural scenes. Consequently, various
inputs have been introduced to provide some constraints
on the image generation process. These include textual
description of image content [31], scene graph representing objects and their relationship [18], and semantic map
providing pixel-level annotation [30]. This work focuses
on the conditional image generation task using the layout
[48, 38, 40] that defines a set of bounding boxes with specified size, location and categories (see Fig. 1). Layout is a
user-friendly input format on its own and can also be used as

15049

