Plan2Scene: Converting Floorplans to 3D Scenes
Madhawa Vidanapathirana

Qirui Wu Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University

1. Introduction
Digital 3D scene representations of interiors are key to
emerging application areas such as AI assistants, online
product marketing, and augmented reality. Private residences are predominantly designed with CAD software.
However, texture-mapped 3D scene models of the built
interiors are rarely available. Despite recent progress in
indoor reconstruction techniques and depth-sensing hardware, the state-of-the-art in room layout inference and
photogrammetry-based 3D modeling is still far from reliable and practical for non-expert users.
This paper explores a novel path for 3D interior digitization by utilizing a residential floorplan and a sparse set of
photos without camera pose as input, which are prevalent
in online real estate listings. More precisely, we present
the Plan2Scene task: conversion of a residential floorplan
and photos of a residence to a textured 3D scene model (see
Figure 1). In the context of this task, we focus on texturing of architectural surfaces. This task is challenging due to
1) the lack of camera poses for the photos; 2) the challenge
of photometric calibration under varying lighting conditions

Bedroom

Manolis Savva

Output

Input

Abstract
We address the task of converting a floorplan and a set
of associated photos of a residence into a textured 3D mesh
model, a task which we call Plan2Scene. Our system 1) lifts
a floorplan image to a 3D mesh model; 2) synthesizes surface textures based on the input photos; and 3) infers textures for unobserved surfaces using a graph neural network
architecture. To train and evaluate our system we create
indoor surface texture datasets, and augment a dataset of
floorplans and photos from prior work with rectified surface
crops and additional annotations. Our approach handles
the challenge of producing tileable textures for dominant
surfaces such as floors, walls, and ceilings from a sparse
set of unaligned photos that only partially cover the residence. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations show that
our system produces realistic 3D interior models, outperforming baseline approaches on a suite of texture quality
metrics and as measured by a holistic user study.

Angel X. Chang

Bathroom

Bathroom
Bedroom

Reception

Corridor,
Entrance

Plan2Scene

Kitchen

Figure 1: Our system addresses the Plan2Scene task by converting a floorplan and set of photos to a textured 3D mesh.

and 3) limited photo coverage, leaving many surfaces unobserved. The Plan2Scene task allows us to articulate these
challenges for residential interiors and to identify suitable
texture appropriateness metrics.
Our key idea is to model the architectural surfaces and
identify appropriate textures for each surface. We treat
photos as sparse and partial observations of surface textures and formulate a texture inference task, instead of relying on exact camera poses and texture-mapping as in prior
work [21]. Textures for observed surfaces are generated using an encoder-decoder architecture. Unobserved surfaces
(i.e., surfaces for which a photo is not available) are handled
by a graph neural network (GNN) that propagates information while learning inter/intra-room consistency.
The paper also makes three dataset contributions. First,
we extend an existing database of floorplans and photos
(Rent3D) [21] by annotating more room boundaries, assigning more photos to the rooms, and annotating object-icons
indicated on the floorplans. We also curate two datasets of
textures of common indoor substances (e.g., ‘painted walls’,
‘tiles’, ‘carpets’) from various online sources for training
our texture synthesis method.
Through qualitative and quantitative evaluations using a
suite of metrics characterizing texture appropriateness and
quality, and a user study, we demonstrate that the proposed
approach outperforms baselines including rectified image
patch texturing, and direct texture retrieval. We release all
our code, data, and pretrained models to the community.1
1 https://3dlg-hcvc.github.io/plan2scene/

10733

