CutPaste: Self-Supervised Learning for Anomaly Detection and Localization
Chun-Liang Li∗, Kihyuk Sohn∗ , Jinsung Yoon, Tomas Pfister
Google Cloud AI Research
{chunliang,kihyuks,jinsungyoon,tpfister}@google.com

Abstract
We aim at constructing a high performance model for defect detection that detects unknown anomalous patterns of
an image without anomalous data. To this end, we propose
a two-stage framework for building anomaly detectors using normal training data only. We first learn self-supervised
deep representations and then build a generative one-class
classifier on learned representations. We learn representations by classifying normal data from the CutPaste, a simple data augmentation strategy that cuts an image patch and
pastes at a random location of a large image. Our empirical
study on MVTec anomaly detection dataset demonstrates
the proposed algorithm is general to be able to detect various types of real-world defects. We bring the improvement
upon previous arts by 3.1 AUCs when learning representations from scratch. By transfer learning on pretrained representations on ImageNet, we achieve a new state-of-theart 96.6 AUC. Lastly, we extend the framework to learn and
extract representations from patches to allow localizing defective areas without annotations during training.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection aims to detect an instance containing anomalous and defective patterns that are different from
those seen in normal instances. Many problems from different vision applications are anomaly detection, including
manufacturing defect detection [9, 5], medical image analysis [50, 48], and video surveillance [2, 31, 53]. Unlike
a typical supervised classification problem, anomaly detection faces unique challenges. First, due to the nature of the
problem, it is difficult to obtain a large amount of anomalous data, either labeled or unlabeled. Second, the difference between normal and anomalous patterns are often finegrained as defective areas might be small and subtle in highresolution images.
Due to limited access to anomalous data, constructing an
anomaly detector is often conducted under semi-supervised
or one-class classification settings using normal data only.
∗ Equal contributions.

Since the distribution of anomaly patterns is unknown in
advance, we train models to learn patterns of normal instances and determine anomaly if the test example is not
represented well by these models. For example, an autoencoder that is trained to reconstruct normal data is used to declare anomalies when the data reconstruction error is high.
Generative models declare anomalies when the probability
density is below a certain threshold. However, the anomaly
score defined as an aggregation of pixel-wise reconstruction
error or probability densities lacks to capture a high-level
semantic information [42, 37].
Alternative methods using high-level learned representations have shown more effective for anomaly detection.
For example, deep one-class classifier [46] demonstrates
an effective end-to-end trained one-class classifiers parameterized by deep neural networks. It outperforms its
shallow counterparts, such as one-class SVMs [49] and
reconstruction-based approaches such as autoencoders [34].
In self-supervised representation learning, predicting geometric transformations of an image [20, 24, 4], such as rotation or translation, and contrastive learning [54, 52] have
shown to be successful in distinguishing normal data from
outliers. However, most existing works focus on detecting semantic outliers (e.g., visual objects from different
classes) from object-centric natural images. In Section 4.1,
we show these methods do not generalize well in detecting
fine-grained anomalous patterns as in defect detection.
In this work, we tackle a one-class defect detection problem, a special case of image anomaly detection, where various forms of unknown anomalous patterns present locally in
the high-resolution images. We follow the two-stage framework [52], where we first learn self-supervised representations by solving a proxy task, then build a generative oneclass classifier on learned representations to distinguish data
with anomalous patterns from normal ones. Our innovation is at designing a novel proxy task for self-supervised
learning of representations. Specifically, we formulate a
proxy classification task between normal training data and
the ones augmented by the CutPaste, the proposed data augmentation strategy that cuts an image patch and pastes at a
random location of an image. CutPaste augmentation is mo19664

