Predicting Human Scanpaths in Visual Question Answering
Xianyu Chen
Ming Jiang
Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota
{chen6582, mjiang}@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

Image

Abstract
Attention has been an important mechanism for both
humans and computer vision systems. While state-of-theart models to predict attention focus on estimating a static
probabilistic saliency map with free-viewing behavior, reallife scenarios are filled with tasks of varying types and complexities, and visual exploration is a temporal process that
contributes to task performance. To bridge the gap, we conduct a first study to understand and predict the temporal sequences of eye fixations (a.k.a. scanpaths) during performing general tasks, and examine how scanpaths affect task
performance. We present a new deep reinforcement learning method to predict scanpaths leading to different performances in visual question answering. Conditioned on a task
guidance map, the proposed model learns question-specific
attention patterns to generate scanpaths. It addresses the
exposure bias in scanpath prediction with self-critical sequence training and designs a Consistency-Divergence loss
to generate distinguishable scanpaths between correct and
incorrect answers. The proposed model not only accurately
predicts the spatio-temporal patterns of human behavior in
visual question answering, such as fixation position, duration, and order, but also generalizes to free-viewing and visual search tasks, achieving human-level performance in all
tasks and significantly outperforming the state of the art.

Question: Is the vase the same color as the scarf?

Correct Answer: no

Incorrect Answer: failed

Figure 1. Visual scanpaths of humans can reveal their decisionmaking strategies and explain their performance. Those who pay
attention to relevant visual cues can achieve high levels of task performance. This example compares the scanpaths of people who
succeed or fail to answer a question, where the dots represent fixations. The number and radius indicate the fixation order and duration, respectively. The blue and red dots indicate the beginning
and the end of the scanpath, respectively.

1. Introduction

Task-driven visual scanpaths reflect the visual exploration to accomplish the task, which also strongly correlates
with task performance. As an example (Fig. 1), to answer
the question “Is the vase the same color as the scarf?” while
exploring the scene, humans need to actively explore the
scene and search for the vase and the scarf. While looking
at the right places at the right time would usually lead to
correct answers (Fig. 1, middle), failing to do so may result
in incorrect answers (Fig. 1, right).

Visual attention plays an essential role in everyday tasks.
While existing works focus on stimulus-driven attention
with free-viewing behavior, underlying daily tasks is another form of attention, i.e., task-driven attention, that selects task-relevant information to make a decision or to accomplish a task. Besides, beyond the static saliency map
that highlights the relative importance of a visual input, temporal sequences of eye fixations encode a more comprehensive and natural representation of attention. Understanding and predicting visual scanpaths in general tasks will not
only shed light on the decision-making process but also be
a useful tool for a variety of computer vision applications.

As a step toward understanding and modeling general
task-driven attention, we propose a novel deep reinforcement learning method leveraging task guidance as an important modality to predict the visual exploration behavior of humans performing general tasks. We first introduce a task guidance map to specify task-relevant image
regions. The map is designed and demonstrated to generalize across tasks. To address the exposure bias that arises
between training- and test-time contexts, we introduce a reinforcement learning method that directly optimizes nondifferentiable test-time evaluation metrics [14]. To differentiate eye-movement patterns that lead to different perfor-

10876

