MIST: Multiple Instance Self-Training Framework for Video Anomaly Detection
Jia-Chang Feng1,3,4 , Fa-Ting Hong1,3 , and Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University
2

3

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4

Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China

fengjch8@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hongft3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Decision
boundary

Abstract
Weakly supervised video anomaly detection (WS-VAD) is
to distinguish anomalies from normal events based on discriminative representations. Most existing works are limited in insufficient video representations. In this work, we
develop a multiple instance self-training framework (MIST)
to efficiently refine task-specific discriminative representations with only video-level annotations. In particular, MIST
is composed of 1) a multiple instance pseudo label generator, which adapts a sparse continuous sampling strategy
to produce more reliable clip-level pseudo labels, and 2)
a self-guided attention boosted feature encoder that aims
to automatically focus on anomalous regions in frames
while extracting task-specific representations. Moreover,
we adopt a self-training scheme to optimize both components and finally obtain a task-specific feature encoder. Extensive experiments on two public datasets demonstrate the
efficacy of our method, and our method performs comparably to or even better than existing supervised and weakly supervised methods, specifically obtaining a frame-level AUC
94.83% on ShanghaiTech.

Refine the
discriminative
representation

𝐸
Clip-Level Labeled
Normal Video 𝑉

Video-Level Labeled
Abnormal Video 𝑉

Input/Output of 𝑮

Feature space

𝐺

Input/Output of 𝑬𝑺𝑮𝑨

y

𝑦

𝑦

Pseudo Clip-Level Labeled
Abnormal Video 𝑉
Normal

Abnormal

Figure 1: Our proposed MIST first assign clip-level pseudo
labels Ŷ a = {ŷia } to anomaly videos with the help of a
pseudo label generator G. Then, MIST leverages information from all videos to refine a self-guided attention boosted
feature encoder ESGA .

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims to temporally or
spatially localize anomalous events in videos [33]. As increasingly more surveillance cameras are deployed, VAD is
playing an increasingly important role in intelligent surveillance systems to reduce the manual work of live monitoring.
Although VAD has been researched for years, developing a model to detect anomalies in videos remains challenging, as it requires the model to understand the inherent differences between normal and abnormal events, especially
anomalous events that are rare and vary substantially. Previous works treat VAD as an unsupervised learning task
∗ Corresponding author

[29, 14, 7, 15, 13, 5, 32] , which encodes the usual pattern with only normal training samples, and then detects the
distinctive encoded patterns as anomalies. Here, we aim
to address the weakly supervised video anomaly detection
(WS-VAD) problem [20, 31, 28, 34, 24] because obtaining
video-level labels is more realistic and can produce more reliable results than unsupervised methods. More specifically,
existing methods in WS-VAD can be categorized into two
classes, i.e. encoder-agnostic and encoder-based methods.
The encoder-agnostic methods [20, 28, 24] utilize taskagnostic features of videos extracted from a vanilla feature
encoder denoted as E (e.g. C3D [21] or I3D [2]) to estimate anomaly scores. The encoder-based methods [34, 31]

14009

