Stochastic Whitening Batch Normalization
Shengdong Zhang1

Ehsan Nezhadarya∗1
Homa Fashandi∗1
Jiayi Liu2
Darin Graham1
Mohak Shah2
2
1
Toronto AI Lab, LG Electronics Canada
America R&D Lab, LG Electronics USA
{shengdong.zhang, ehsan.nezhadarya, homa.fashandi, jason.liu, darin.graham, mohak.shah}@lge.com

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) is a popular technique for
training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). BN uses scaling
and shifting to normalize activations of mini-batches to accelerate convergence and improve generalization. The recently proposed Iterative Normalization (IterNorm) method
improves these properties by whitening the activations iteratively using Newton’s method. However, since Newton’s
method initializes the whitening matrix independently at
each training step, no information is shared between consecutive steps. In this work, instead of exact computation of
whitening matrix at each time step, we estimate it gradually
during training in an online fashion, using our proposed
Stochastic Whitening Batch Normalization (SWBN) algorithm. We show that while SWBN improves the convergence
rate and generalization of DNNs, its computational overhead is less than that of IterNorm. Due to the high efficiency
of the proposed method, it can be easily employed in most
DNN architectures with a large number of layers. We provide
comprehensive experiments and comparisons between BN,
IterNorm, and SWBN layers to demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed technique in conventional (many-shot) image
classification and few-shot classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Gradient descent-based methods are the de-facto training
algorithms for DNN, and mini-batch Stochastic Gradient
Decent (SGD) has become the most popular first-order optimization algorithm. In mini-batch SGD, instead of computing the gradients for the entire training set as in batch
gradient descent, or based on one training sample as in conventional SGD, the gradients are computed based on a small
random subset of the training set called mini-batch. The
stochastic nature of mini-batch SGD helps a DNN find better local optima or even the global optima than batch gradient
descent. We use SGD to refer to mini-batch SGD in the rest
of the paper.
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1: The SWBN diagram shows how whitening parameters and

task parameters inside an SWBN layer are updated in a decoupled
way. Whitening parameters (in blue rectangles) are updated only
in the forward phase, and are fixed in the backward phase. Task
parameters (in red rectangles) are fixed in the forward phase, and
are updated only in the backward phase.

Due to the change in the distribution of the inputs of DNN
layers at each training step, the network experiences Internal
Covariate Shift (ICS) as defined in the seminal work of [17].
ICS affects the input statistics of the subsequent layers, and
as a result, it degrades the training efficiency.
Eliminating the effect of ICS can accelerate the training
of DNN by helping the gradient flow through the network,
stabilizing the distributions of the activations, and enabling
the use of a larger learning rate. To alleviate these effects,
BN has been proposed in [17].
Recent studies have shown that whitening (decorrelating) the activations can further reduce the training time and
improve the generalization [8, 24, 15]. However, when
dealing with high-dimensional data, the requirement of
eigen-decomposition [8, 24], Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), or Newton’s iteration [15] for computing whitening matrices has been the bottleneck of these methods.
In this paper, we propose a method called SWBN, which
gradually learns whitening matrices separately in each layer
during training. The proposed method eliminates the need
for expensive matrix decomposition and inversion for whitening data as SWBN learns the whitening matrix in an online
fashion. Our formulation clearly shows the computational
advantage of SWBN to other whitening techniques applied
in DNNs, such as [8], [15] and [14].
In Section 2, we review the related works on normal-

10978

