Style-Aware Normalized Loss for Improving Arbitrary Style Transfer
Jiaxin Cheng*† , Ayush Jaiswal‡ , Yue Wu‡ , Pradeep Natarajan‡ , Prem Natarajan‡
†
USC Information Sciences Institute, ‡ Amazon Alexa Natural Understanding
chengjia@isi.edu, {ayujaisw,wuayue,natarap,premknat}@amazon.com

New balanced loss

Classic loss

New balanced loss

Mitigating Under-stylization

Classic loss

Mitigating Over-stylization

Figure 1: Popular Arbitrary Style Transfer methods suffer from under-stylization and over-stylization due to imbalanced
style transferability during training. Our new balanced loss mitigates these under- and over-stylization issues.

Abstract
Neural Style Transfer (NST) has quickly evolved from
single-style to infinite-style models, also known as Arbitrary Style Transfer (AST). Although appealing results have
been widely reported in literature, our empirical studies
on four well-known AST approaches (GoogleMagenta [14],
AdaIN [19], LinearTransfer [29], and SANet [37]) show
that more than 50% of the time, AST stylized images are
not acceptable to human users, typically due to under- or
over-stylization. We systematically study the cause of this
imbalanced style transferability (IST ) and propose a simple yet effective solution to mitigate this issue. Our studies show that the IST issue is related to the conventional
AST style loss, and reveal that the root cause is the equal
weightage of training samples irrespective of the properties of their corresponding style images, which biases the
model towards certain styles. Through investigation of the
theoretical bounds of the AST style loss, we propose a new
loss that largely overcomes IST . Theoretical analysis and
experimental results validate the effectiveness of our loss,
with over 80% relative improvement in style deception rate
and 98% relatively higher preference in human evaluation.
* This work was completed during his internship at Amazon.

1. Introduction
Neural style transfer (NST) refers to the generation of a
pastiche image P from two images C and S via a neural
network, where P shares the content with C but is in the
style of S. While the original NST approach of Gatys [13]
optimizes the transfer model for each pair of C and S, the
field has rapidly evolved in recent years to develop models
that support arbitrary styles out-of-the-box. NST models
can, hence, be classified based on their stylization capacity
into models trained for (1) a single combination of C and
S [13, 23, 28, 32, 39], (2) one S [21, 27, 47, 48], (3) multiple
fixed S [2, 9, 24, 30, 42, 55], and (4) infinite (arbitrary) S
[4, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 25, 29, 31, 37, 43, 44]. Intuitively, the
category (4) of arbitrary style transfer (AST) is the most
advantageous as it is agnostic to S, allowing trained models
to be adopted for diverse novel styles without re-training.
Although superior in concept, current AST models are
plagued by the issue of imbalanced style transferability
(IST), where the stylization intensity of model outputs
varies largely across styles S. More importantly, besides the
nice results shown in previous works [14,19,29,37], a large
number of stylized images suffer under-stylization (e.g.,
only the dominant color is transferred) or over-stylization
(i.e., content is barely visible) for various S, making them

134

