Zillow Indoor Dataset:
Annotated Floor Plans With 360o Panoramas and 3D Room Layouts
Steve Cruz∗†1 , Will Hutchcroft∗2 , Yuguang Li2 , Naji Khosravan2 , Ivaylo Boyadzhiev2 , Sing Bing Kang2
1
University of Colorado Colorado Springs 2 Zillow Group
scruz@uccs.edu

{willhu,yuguangl,najik,ivaylob,singbingk}@zillowgroup.com

Abstract
We present Zillow Indoor Dataset (ZInD): A large indoor dataset with 71,474 panoramas from 1,524 real unfurnished homes. ZInD provides annotations of 3D room layouts, 2D and 3D floor plans, panorama location in the floor
plan, and locations of windows and doors. The ground truth
construction took over 1,500 hours of annotation work. To
the best of our knowledge, ZInD is the largest real dataset
with layout annotations. A unique property is the room layout data, which follows a real world distribution (cuboid,
more general Manhattan, and non-Manhattan layouts) as
opposed to the mostly cuboid or Manhattan layouts in current publicly available datasets. Also, the scale and annotations provided are valuable for effective research related to
room layout and floor plan analysis. To demonstrate ZInD’s
benefits, we benchmark on room layout estimation from single panoramas and multi-view registration.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, 3D scene understanding from 2D
images has received considerable attention due to its critical role in research areas such as robotics and mixed reality. Work has been done on automatic room layout estimation from single 360o panoramas [52, 56, 50, 42, 56, 32],
which typically depend on either a relatively small set of
real images, e.g., 2,295 RGB-D panoramic images in MatterportLayout [56], or the use of synthetic data due to the
scale needed for training, e.g., around 196k images in Structure3D [54]. Also, there are techniques for reconstructing
floor plans from a sequence of such panoramas ([6, 34]), or
RGB-D video [26]. In regards to real estate, approaches
on floor plan generation from user-specified constraints
[45, 16, 30] make use of architectural floor plan datasets.
We believe there is a need for more properly annotated data
of indoor layouts and complete floor plans.

Many real and synthetic datasets have been released.
Current real datasets [52, 56] are limited both in size and
variation due to challenges in capturing and annotating indoor spaces, both of which require non-trivial logistics, resources and privacy concerns. Synthetic datasets [54, 22]
address the scale issue, but introduce a domain gap, which
complicates generalization to real scenes.
In this paper, we introduce Zillow Indoor Dataset
(ZInD)1 , a dataset containing large numbers of annotated
360o panoramas, room layouts, and floor plans of real unfurnished residential homes2 . For each panorama, its location within the floor plan and its associated 3D room layout
are given (Figure 1). Also, locations of windows and doors
are provided.
ZInD contains 1,524 homes, with a total of 71,474
panoramas, 21,596 room layouts, and 2,564 floor plans. We
believe our dataset can facilitate research on room layout
estimation, floor plan reconstruction from multiple panoramas, and floor plan analysis that include image features
(e.g., scene graphs). To showcase ZInD’s attributes, we ran
experiments with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods for room
layout estimation and multi-view registration.

2. Related Work
In this section, we provide an overview of publicly available datasets. They are categorized in Table 1 based on the
type of annotations, size, and attributes.
Depth and Semantic Annotations. Most current datasets
focus on providing depth and semantic annotations. For example, Stanford 2D-3D-S [2] contains 552 RGB panoramic
images collected from 6 large-scale indoor environments,
including offices, classrooms, and other open spaces. The
dataset provides annotations of depths, surface normals, semantic annotations, global XYZ images, and camera information. Another dataset, Matterport3D [7], has over
ten thousand RGB-D panoramic images collected from 90
building-scale scenes with surface reconstructions, camera

∗ Equal contribution.

1 ZInD and scripts are at https://github.com/zillow/zind

† This work was done when Steve Cruz was an intern at Zillow.

2 Using unfurnished homes alleviates privacy concerns.

2133

