Propagate Yourself: Exploring Pixel-Level Consistency for Unsupervised Visual
Representation Learning
Zhenda Xie*13 , Yutong Lin∗23 , Zheng Zhang3 , Yue Cao3 , Stephen Lin3 , Han Hu3
1
Tsinghua University 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
xzd18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

yutonglin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

{zhez,yuecao,stevelin,hanhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Contrastive learning methods for unsupervised visual
representation learning have reached remarkable levels of
transfer performance. We argue that the power of contrastive learning has yet to be fully unleashed, as current
methods are trained only on instance-level pretext tasks,
leading to representations that may be sub-optimal for
downstream tasks requiring dense pixel predictions. In this
paper, we introduce pixel-level pretext tasks for learning
dense feature representations. The first task directly applies contrastive learning at the pixel level. We additionally propose a pixel-to-propagation consistency task that
produces better results, even surpassing the state-of-the-art
approaches by a large margin. Specifically, it achieves 60.2
AP, 41.4 / 40.5 mAP and 77.2 mIoU when transferred to
Pascal VOC object detection (C4), COCO object detection
(FPN / C4) and Cityscapes semantic segmentation using a
ResNet-50 backbone network, which are 2.6 AP, 0.8 / 1.0
mAP and 1.0 mIoU better than the previous best methods
built on instance-level contrastive learning. Moreover, the
pixel-level pretext tasks are found to be effective for pretraining not only regular backbone networks but also head
networks used for dense downstream tasks, and are complementary to instance-level contrastive methods. These
results demonstrate the strong potential of defining pretext
tasks at the pixel level, and suggest a new path forward in
unsupervised visual representation learning. Code is available at https://github.com/zdaxie/PixPro.

1. Introduction
According to Yann LeCun, “if intelligence is a cake,
the bulk of the cake is unsupervised learning”. This quote
reflects his belief that human understanding of the world
* Equal Contribution. The work is done when Zhenda Xie and Yutong
Lin are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.

view #1

consistency

view #2
Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed PixPro method, which is
based on a pixel-to-propagation consistency pretext task for pixellevel visual representation learning. In this method, two views are
randomly cropped from an image (outlined in black), and the features from the corresponding pixels of the two views are encouraged to be consistent. For one of them, the feature comes from
a regular pixel representation (illustrated as orange crosses). The
other feature comes from a smoothed pixel representation (shown
as green dots) built by propagating the features of similar pixels
(illustrated as the light green region). Note that this hard selection of similar pixels is for illustration only. In implementation, all
pixels on the same view will contribute to propagation, with the
propagation weight of each pixel determined by its feature similarity to the center pixel.

is predominantly learned from the tremendous amount of
unlabeled information within it. Research in machine intelligence has increasingly moved in this direction, with
substantial progress in unsupervised and self-supervised
learning[34, 18, 25, 8, 30]. In computer vision, recent advances can largely be ascribed to the use of a pretext task
called instance discrimination, which treats each image in
a training set as a single class and aims to learn a feature
representation that discriminates among all the classes.
Although self-supervised learning has proven to be remarkably successful, we argue that there remains significant
116684

