Stochastic Image-to-Video Synthesis using cINNs
Michael Dorkenwald1 Timo Milbich1 Andreas Blattmann1 Robin Rombach1
Konstantinos G. Derpanis2,3,4 * Björn Ommer1 *
1

IWR/HCI, Heidelberg University, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, Ryerson University, Canada
3
Vector Institute for AI, Canada 4 Samsung AI Centre Toronto, Canada

Abstract
Video understanding calls for a model to learn the characteristic interplay between static scene content and its dynamics: Given an image, the model must be able to predict a future progression of the portrayed scene and, conversely, a video should be explained in terms of its static
image content and all the remaining characteristics not
present in the initial frame. This naturally suggests a bijective mapping between the video domain and the static
content as well as residual information. In contrast to common stochastic image-to-video synthesis, such a model does
not merely generate arbitrary videos progressing the initial
image. Given this image, it rather provides a one-to-one
mapping between the residual vectors and the video with
stochastic outcomes when sampling. The approach is naturally implemented using a conditional invertible neural
network (cINN) that can explain videos by independently
modelling static and other video characteristics, thus laying the basis for controlled video synthesis. Experiments
on diverse video datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach in terms of both the quality and diversity of
the synthesized results. Our project page is available at
https://bit.ly/3dg90fV .

1. Introduction
Anticipating and predicting what happens next are key
features of human intelligence that allow us to understand
and deal with the ever-changing environment that governs
our everyday life [8]. Consequently, the ability to foresee
and hallucinate the future progression of a scene is a cornerstone of artificial visual understanding with applications
including autonomous driving [48, 49, 28], medical treatment [5, 18, 6], and robotic planning [20, 24, 10].
Predicting and synthesizing plausible future progressions from a given image requires a deep understanding of
how scenes and objects within video are depicted, interplay
with each other, and evolve over time. While an image pro* Indicates equal supervision.

Figure 1. Our approach establishes a bijective mapping between
the image and the video domain by introducing a residual representation ν describing the latent scene dynamics. This allows us
not only to synthesize diverse videos but also to extend our approach to gain control over the video synthesis task.

vides information about the observed scene content, such
as object appearance and shape, the challenge is to understand the missing information constituting potential futures,
such as the scene dynamics setting the scene in motion. Due
to the ambiguity and complexity of capturing this information, many works [42, 25, 11, 74] directly focus on predicting likely video continuations, often resorting to simplifying assumptions (e.g., dynamics modelled by optical flow
[21, 59, 76]) and side information (e.g., semantic keypoints
[56, 72, 46, 22]). However, truly understanding the synthesis problem not only requires to infer such image continuations but, conversely, also demands when observing a video
sequence to describe and represent the instantiated scene
dynamics animating its initial frame.

3742

