DexYCB: A Benchmark for Capturing Hand Grasping of Objects
Yu-Wei Chao1 Wei Yang1 Yu Xiang1 Pavlo Molchanov1 Ankur Handa1 Jonathan Tremblay1
Yashraj S. Narang1 Karl Van Wyk1 Umar Iqbal1 Stan Birchfield1 Jan Kautz1 Dieter Fox1,2
1

NVIDIA, 2 University of Washington

{ychao,weiy,yux,pmolchanov,ahanda,jtremblay,ynarang,kvanwyk,uiqbal,sbirchfield,jkautz,dieterf}@nvidia.com

Figure 1: Two captures (left and right) from the DexYCB dataset. In each case, the top row shows color images simultaneously captured
from three views, while the bottom row shows the ground-truth 3D object and hand pose rendered on the darkened captured images.

Abstract
We introduce DexYCB, a new dataset for capturing hand
grasping of objects. We first compare DexYCB with a related one through cross-dataset evaluation. We then present
a thorough benchmark of state-of-the-art approaches on
three relevant tasks: 2D object and keypoint detection, 6D
object pose estimation, and 3D hand pose estimation. Finally, we evaluate a new robotics-relevant task: generating
safe robot grasps in human-to-robot object handover. 1

1. Introduction
3D object pose estimation and 3D hand pose estimation
are two important yet unsolved vision problems. Traditionally, these two problems have been addressed separately,
yet in many critical applications, we need both capabilities
working together [36, 6, 13]. For example, in robotics, a
reliable motion capture for hand manipulation of objects is
crucial for both learning from human demonstration [12]
and fluent and safe human-robot interaction [46].
State-of-the-art approaches for both 3D object pose [37,
20, 34, 27, 40, 26, 19] and 3D hand pose estimation [49,
23, 18, 2, 9, 14, 31] rely on deep learning and thus require
large datasets with labeled hand or object poses for training.
1 Dataset and code available at https://dex-ycb.github.io.

Many datasets [48, 49, 16, 17] have been introduced in both
domains and have facilitated progress on these two problems in parallel. However, since they were introduced for
either task separately, many of them do not contain interaction of hands and objects, i.e., static objects without humans
in the scene, or bare hands without interacting with objects.
In the presence of interactions, the challenge of solving the
two tasks together not only doubles but multiplies, due to
the motion of objects and mutual occlusions incurred by the
interaction. Networks trained on either of the datasets will
thus not generalize well to interaction scenarios.
Creating a dataset with accurate 3D pose of hands and
objects is also challenging for the same reasons. As a result, prior works have attempted to capture accurate hand
motion either with specialized gloves [10], magnetic sensors [48, 8], or marker-based mocap systems [3, 35]. While
they can achieve unparalleled accuracy, the introduction of
hand-attached devices may be intrusive and thus bias the
naturalness of hand motion. It also changes the appearance
of hands and thus may cause issues with generalization.
Due to the challenge of acquiring real 3D poses, there
has been an increasing interest in using synthetic datasets to
train pose estimation models. The success has been notable
on object pose estimation. Using 3D scanned object models
and photorealistic rendering, prior work [16, 34, 38, 5, 17]
has generated synthetic scenes of objects with high fidelity
in appearance. Their models trained only on synthetic data

9044

