Correlated Input-Dependent Label Noise in Large-Scale Image Classification
Mark Collier
Google AI

Basil Mustafa
Google AI

Efi Kokiopoulou
Google AI

markcollier@google.com

basilm@google.com

kokiopou@google.com

Rodolphe Jenatton
Google AI

Jesse Berent
Google AI

rjenatton@google.com

jberent@google.com

Abstract
Large scale image classification datasets often contain
noisy labels. We take a principled probabilistic approach to
modelling input-dependent, also known as heteroscedastic,
label noise in these datasets. We place a multivariate Normal distributed latent variable on the final hidden layer of
a neural network classifier. The covariance matrix of this
latent variable, models the aleatoric uncertainty due to label
noise. We demonstrate that the learned covariance structure
captures known sources of label noise between semantically
similar and co-occurring classes. Compared to standard
neural network training and other baselines, we show significantly improved accuracy on Imagenet ILSVRC 2012 79.3%
(+ 2.6%), Imagenet-21k 47.0% (+ 1.1%) and JFT 64.7% (+
1.6%). We set a new state-of-the-art result on WebVision 1.0
with 76.6% top-1 accuracy. These datasets range from over
1M to over 300M training examples and from 1k classes to
more than 21k classes. Our method is simple to use, and we
provide an implementation that is a drop-in replacement for
the final fully-connected layer in a deep classifier.

1. Introduction
Image classification datasets with many classes and large
training sets often have noisy labels [2, 30]. For example,
Imagenet contains many visually similar classes that are hard
for human annotators to distinguish [10, 2]. Datasets such as
WebVision where labels are generated automatically by looking at co-occuring text to images on the Web, contain label
noise as this automated process is not 100% reliable [30].
A wide range of techniques for classification under label
noise already exist [29, 23, 16, 37, 24, 6, 9, 36, 18]. When
an image is mis-labeled it is more likely that it gets confused
with other related classes, rather than a random class [2].
Therefore it is important to take inter-class correlation into
account when modelling label noise in image classification.

Figure 1: Spot the difference? An Appenzeller (left) and
EntleBucher (right). Two visually similar Imagenet classes
our method learns have highly correlated label noise (average validation set covariance of -0.24) given only the standard Imagenet ILSVRC12 training labels.

We take a principled probabilistic approach to modelling
label noise. We assume a generative process for noisy labels
with a multivariate Normal distributed latent variable at the
final hidden layer of a neural network classifier. The mean
and covariance parameters of this Normal distribution are
input-dependent (aka heteroscedastic), being computed from
a shared representation of the input image. By modelling
the inter-class noise correlations our method can learn which
class pairs are substitutes or commonly co-occur, resulting
in noisy labels. See Fig. (1) for an example of two Imagenet
classes which our model learns have correlated label noise.
We evaluate our method on four large-scale image classification datasets, Imagenet ILSVRC12 and Imagenet21k [10], WebVision 1.0 [30] and JFT [21]. These datasets
range from over 1M training examples (ILSVRC12) to 300M
training examples (JFT) and from 1k classes (ILSVRC12 &
WebVision) to over 21k classes (Imagenet-21k). We demonstrate improved accuracy and negative log-likelihood on all
datasets relative to (a) standard neural network training, (b)
methods which only model the diagonal of the covariance
matrix and (c) methods from the noisy labels literature.
We evaluate the effect of our probabilistic label noise
model on the representations learned by the network. We
show that our method, when pre-trained on JFT, learns image

1551

