SMPLicit: Topology-aware Generative Model for Clothed People
Enric Corona1 Albert Pumarola1 Guillem Alenyà1 Gerard Pons-Moll2,3 Francesc Moreno-Noguer1
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
University of Tübingen, Germany, 3 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany

Figure 1: We introduce SMPLicit, a fully differentiable generative model for clothed bodies, capable of representing garments with
different topology. The four figures on the left show the application of the model to the problem of 3D body and cloth reconstruction from
an input image. We are able to predict different models per cloth, even for multi-layer cases. Three right-most images: The model can also
be used for editing the outfits, removing/adding new garments and re-posing the body.

Abstract
In this paper we introduce SMPLicit, a novel generative
model to jointly represent body pose, shape and clothing geometry. In contrast to existing learning-based approaches
that require training specific models for each type of garment, SMPLicit can represent in a unified manner different
garment topologies (e.g. from sleeveless tops to hoodies and
to open jackets), while controlling other properties like the
garment size or tightness/looseness. We show our model to
be applicable to a large variety of garments including Tshirts, hoodies, jackets, shorts, pants, skirts, shoes and even
hair. The representation flexibility of SMPLicit builds upon
an implicit model conditioned with the SMPL human body
parameters and a learnable latent space which is semantically interpretable and aligned with the clothing attributes.
The proposed model is fully differentiable, allowing for its
use into larger end-to-end trainable systems. In the experimental section, we demonstrate SMPLicit can be readily
used for fitting 3D scans and for 3D reconstruction in images of dressed people. In both cases we are able to go
beyond state of the art, by retrieving complex garment geometries, handling situations with multiple clothing layers
and providing a tool for easy outfit editing. To stimulate further research in this direction, we will make our code and
model publicly available at http://www.iri.upc.
edu/people/ecorona/smplicit/.

1. Introduction
Building a differentiable and low dimensional generative model capable to control garments style and deformations under different body shapes and poses would open the
door to many exciting applications in e.g. digital animation
of clothed humans, 3D content creation and virtual try-on.
However, while such representations have been shown effective for the case of the undressed human body [35, 45],
where body shape variation can be encoded by a few parameters of a linear model, there exist so far, no similar approach for doing so on clothes.
The standard practice to represent the geometry of
dressed people has been to treat clothing as an additive displacement over canonical body shapes, typically obtained
with SMPL [4, 26, 37, 44]. Nevertheless, these types of approaches cannot tackle the main challenge in garment modeling, which is the large variability of types, styles, cut, and
deformations they can have. For instance, upper body clothing can be either a sleeveless top, a long-sleeve hoodie or
an open jacket. In order to handle such variability, existing
approaches need to train specific models for each type of
garment, hampering thus their practical utilization.
In this paper, we introduce SMPLicit, a topologicallyaware generative model for clothed bodies that can be controlled by a low-dimensional and interpretable vector of parameters. SMPLicit builds upon an implicit network ar-

11875

