OTA: Optimal Transport Assignment for Object Detection
Zheng Ge1,2 ,

Songtao Liu2 ,* Zeming Li2 , Osamu Yoshie1 ,
1
Waseda University, 2 Megvii Technology

Jian Sun2

jokerzz@fuji.waseda.jp;liusongtao@megvii.com;lizeming@megvii.com;
yoshie@waseda.jp;sunjian@megvii.com

Abstract
Recent advances in label assignment in object detection mainly seek to independently define positive/negative
training samples for each ground-truth (gt) object. In this
paper, we innovatively revisit the label assignment from a
global perspective and propose to formulate the assigning procedure as an Optimal Transport (OT) problem – a
well-studied topic in Optimization Theory. Concretely, we
define the unit transportation cost between each demander (anchor) and supplier (gt) pair as the weighted summation of their classification and regression losses. After
formulation, finding the best assignment solution is converted to solve the optimal transport plan at minimal transportation costs, which can be solved via Sinkhorn-Knopp
Iteration. On COCO, a single FCOS-ResNet-50 detector
equipped with Optimal Transport Assignment (OTA) can
reach 40.7% mAP under 1× scheduler, outperforming all
other existing assigning methods. Extensive experiments
conducted on COCO and CrowdHuman further validate the
effectiveness of our proposed OTA, especially its superiority in crowd scenarios. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Megvii-BaseDetection/OTA.

1. Introduction
Current CNN-based object detectors [27, 30, 21, 47, 33,
29, 36] perform a dense prediction manner by predicting
the classification (cls) labels and regression (reg) offsets for
a set of pre-defined anchors1 . To train the detector, defining
cls and reg targets for each anchor is a necessary procedure,
which is called label assignment in object detection.
Classical label assigning strategies commonly adopt predefined rules to match the ground-truth (gt) object or background for each anchor. For example, RetinaNet [21] adopts
Intersection-over-Union (IoU) as its thresholding criterion
* Corresponding author
1 For anchor-free detectors like FCOS [38], the feature points can be

viewed as shrunk anchor boxes. Hence in this paper, we collectively refer
to anchor box and anchor point as “anchor”.

GT1
GT2

GT1

GT2

GT BBoxes

A Set of Ambiguous Anchor Points

Figure 1. An illustration of ambiguous anchor points in object detection. Red dots show some of the ambiguous anchors in two
sample images. Currently, the assignment of these ambiguous anchors is heavily based on hand-crafted rules.

for pos/neg anchors division. Anchor-free detectors like
FCOS [38] treat the anchors within the center/bbox region of any gt object as the corresponding positives. Such
static strategies ignore a fact that for objects with different
sizes, shapes or occlusion condition, the appropriate positive/negative (pos/neg) division boundaries may vary.
Motivated by this, many dynamic assignment strategies
have been proposed. ATSS [47] proposes to set the division boundary for each gt based on statistical characteristics. Other recent advances [48, 19, 51, 16] suggest that
the predicted confidence scores of each anchor could be a
proper indicator to design dynamic assigning strategies, i.e.,
high confidence anchors can be easily learned by the networks and thus be assigned to the related gt, while anchors
with uncertain predictions should be considered as negatives. Those strategies enable the detector to dynamically
choose positive anchors for each individual gt object and
achieve state-of-the-art performance.
However, independently assigning pos/neg samples for
each gt without context could be sub-optimal, just like the
lack of context may lead to improper prediction. When
dealing with ambiguous anchors (i.e., anchors that are qualified as positive samples for multiple gts simultaneously as
seen in Fig. 1.), existing assignment strategies are heavily based on hand-crafted rules (e.g., Min Area [38], Max
IoU [16, 21, 47].). We argue that assigning ambiguous an1303

