Scaled-YOLOv4: Scaling Cross Stage Partial Network
Chien-Yao Wang1 , Alexey Bochkovskiy2 , and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao1,3 ,
1
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
2
Intel Intelligent Systems Lab
3
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Providence University, Taiwan
kinyiu@iis.sinica.edu.tw, alexeyab84@gmail.com, liao@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
We show that the YOLOv4 object detection neural network based on the CSP approach, scales both up and down
and is applicable to small and large networks while maintaining optimal speed and accuracy. We propose a network
scaling approach that modifies not only the depth, width,
resolution, but also structure of the network. YOLOv4large model achieves state-of-the-art results: 55.5% AP
(73.4% AP50 ) for the MS COCO dataset at a speed of ∼16
FPS on Tesla V100, while with the test time augmentation, YOLOv4-large achieves 56.0% AP (73.3 AP50 ). To
the best of our knowledge, this is currently the highest accuracy on the COCO dataset among any published work.
The YOLOv4-tiny model achieves 22.0% AP (42.0% AP50 )
at a speed of ∼443 FPS on RTX 2080Ti, while by using TensorRT, batch size = 4 and FP16-precision the YOLOv4-tiny
achieves 1774 FPS.

1. Introduction
The deep learning-based object detection technique has
many applications in our daily life. For example, medical image analysis, self-driving vehicles, business analytics,
and face identification all rely on object detection. The computing facilities required for the above applications maybe
cloud computing facilities, general GPU, IoT clusters, or
single embedded device. In order to design an effective object detector, model scaling technique is very important, because it can make object detector achieve high accuracy and
real-time inference on various types of devices.
The most common model scaling technique is to change
the depth (number of layers in a neural network) and width
(number of filters in a layer) of the backbone, and then train
neural networks suitable for different devices. For example among the ResNet [11] series, ResNet-152 and ResNet101 are often used in cloud server GPUs, ResNet-50 and
ResNet-34 are often used in personal computer GPUs, and
ResNet-18 and ResNet-10 can be used in low-end embed-

Figure 1: Comparison of the proposed scaled-YOLOv4
and other state-of-the-art object detectors. The dashed line
means only latency of model inference, while the solid line
include model inference and post-processing.
ded systems. In [2], Cai et al. try to develop techniques
that can be applied to various device network architectures
with only training once. They use techniques such as decoupling training and search and knowledge distillation to decouple and train several sub-nets, so that the entire network
and sub-nets are capable of processing target tasks. Tan et
al. [34] proposed using network architecture search (NAS)
technique to perform compound scaling width, depth, and
resolution on EfficientNet-B0. They use this initial network
to search for the best convolutional neural network (CNN)
architecture for a given amount of computation and set it
as EfficientNet-B1, and then use linear scale-up technique
to obtain EfficientNet-B2 to EfficientNet-B7. Radosavovic
et al. [27] summarized and added constraints from the vast
parameter search space AnyNet, and then designed RegNet
to find optimal depth, bottleneck ratio, and width increase
rate of a CNN. In addition, there are NAS and model scaling
methods specifically proposed for object detection [6, 35].

13029

