MetaSAug: Meta Semantic Augmentation for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Shuang Li1 Kaixiong Gong1 Chi Harold Liu1† Yulin Wang2 Feng Qiao3 Xinjing Cheng3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Tsinghua University 3 Inceptio Tech.
{shuangli, kxgong}@bit.edu.cn liuchi02@gmail.com wang-yl19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
feng.qiao@inceptio.ai cnorbot@gmail.com

Abstract
Real-world training data usually exhibits long-tailed distribution, where several majority classes have a significantly larger number of samples than the remaining minority classes. This imbalance degrades the performance
of typical supervised learning algorithms designed for balanced training sets. In this paper, we address this issue by
augmenting minority classes with a recently proposed implicit semantic data augmentation (ISDA) algorithm [37],
which produces diversified augmented samples by translating deep features along many semantically meaningful directions. Importantly, given that ISDA estimates the classconditional statistics to obtain semantic directions, we find
it ineffective to do this on minority classes due to the insufficient training data. To this end, we propose a novel approach to learn transformed semantic directions with metalearning automatically. In specific, the augmentation strategy during training is dynamically optimized, aiming to
minimize the loss on a small balanced validation set, which
is approximated via a meta update step. Extensive empirical
results on CIFAR-LT-10/100, ImageNet-LT, and iNaturalist
2017/2018 validate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable success in recent years [22, 15, 17].
Their state-of-the-art performance is typically demonstrated
on the benchmarks such as ImageNet [31] and MS COCO
[24]. While these datasets are established by ideally collecting a similar and sufficient number of samples for each
class, real-world training data is usually imbalanced, as
shown in Fig. 1(a). For example, in automatic medical diagnosis, a few common diseases may dominate the training
set, with scarce cases for the remaining classes. This longtailed distribution, unfortunately, degrades the performance
of networks severely if using a standard training strategy
(e.g., supervised learning with the cross-entropy loss).
† C. Liu is the corresponding author.

w/o Augmentation

Majority classes

Minority classes

Samples
w/ Augmentation
Majority
Minority
Augmentation
Classifier boundaries

(b)

(a)

Conventional data augmentation

Original

Flipping

Rotation

Semantic data augmentation

Original

Changing color

Changing visual angle

(c)

Figure 1. (a): In the data distribution of the real-world dataset iNaturalist 2018, a few majority classes account for the most samples,
while the minority classes are under-represented. (b): Motivation
of this work. Facilitating data augmentation for long-tailed problems to ameliorate the classifier performance. (c): Illustration of
traditional data augmentation and semantic data augmentation.

To address the issue of data imbalance, a natural solution
might be to augment the minority classes for more training
samples as shown in Fig. 1(b), e.g., by leveraging the data
augmentation technique [15, 17, 42, 27]. However, conventional data augmentation techniques like cropping, mirroring and mixup are typically performed on the inputs. As a
result, the diversity of augmented samples is inherently limited by the small amount of training data in minority classes.
Fortunately, this problem can potentially be solved by
a recently proposed implicit semantic data augmentation
(ISDA) technique [37]. ISDA performs class identity preserving semantic transformation (e.g., changing the color

5212

