ColorRL: Reinforced Coloring for End-to-End Instance Segmentation
Tran Anh Tuan1 , Nguyen Tuan Khoa1 , Tran Minh Quan2 , Won-Ki Jeong3 *
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, Korea
2
Department of Applied Science, VinBrain and VinUniversity, Vietnam
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{anhtuanhsgs,ntkhoa}@unist.ac.kr, v.quantran@vinbrain.net, wkjeong@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Instance segmentation, the task of identifying and separating each individual object of interest in the image, is
one of the actively studied research topics in computer vision. Although many feed-forward networks produce highquality binary segmentation on different types of images,
their final result heavily relies on the post-processing step,
which separates instances from the binary mask. In comparison, the existing iterative methods extract a single object at a time using discriminative knowledge-based properties (e.g., shapes, boundaries, etc.) without relying on postprocessing. However, they do not scale well with a large
number of objects. To exploit the advantages of conventional sequential segmentation methods without impairing
the scalability, we propose a novel iterative deep reinforcement learning agent that learns how to differentiate multiple
objects in parallel. By constructing a relational graph between pixels, we design a reward function that encourages
separating pixels of different objects and grouping pixels
that belong to the same instance. We demonstrate that the
proposed method can efficiently perform instance segmentation of many objects without heavy post-processing.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the challenging computer vision problems that assigns instance labels to pixels to separate objects, which is crucial for understanding a
complex scene. Many existing methods are based on complex graphical models with deep neural networks (e.g., convolutional neural network [CNN] or recurrent neural network [RNN])) [20, 30]. However, most other methods are
still trying to predict the intermediate representation [27] of
the labeling map, which require extra post-processing steps.
Some object proposal approaches use bounding boxes to
capture the representation of instances [7,21]. Even though,
* Corresponding author

they produce instance maps directly, the bounding boxes
are often criticized for their coarse representation of the object’s shape. A recent study by Araslanov et al. [2] aimed
to address the issue by employing reinforcement learning
for a sequential object detection and segmentation task. Although such sequential approaches have shown promising
results when it comes to directly detecting and extracting
individual instances in the image, they are only applicable
to images with a small number of objects due to the sequential nature of the method.
The motivation behind the proposed work stems from
our recent development of the cell image segmentation
method. In this development, we observed that separating every individual cell in a large microscopy image is a
slow and time-consuming task for conventional segmentation methods. To address this problem, we propose a novel
end-to-end instance segmentation method using reinforcement learning, which separates multiple instances in parallel. Unlike in Araslanov et al. where a single agent handles segmentation sequentially, our method leverages multiple pixel-wise agents (similar to Furuta et al. [5]) working concurrently to differentiate multiple objects in an iterative, end-to-end fashion (Fig. 1). To make multiple instances concurrently labeled, we formulate the segmentation problem as an iterative binary graph coloring problem.
To achieve this, we employ the asynchronous advantage
actor-critic (A3C) algorithm to train the agents to choose
the t-th bit value in a binary representation of the label (0
or 1) at step t of the coloring process. We demonstrate that
the proposed method can efﬁciently handle images that have
numerous objects of various shapes while maintaining a superior segmentation quality comparable to state-of-the-art
methods. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst reinforcement learning-based end-to-end instance segmentation
that runs in parallel.

2. Related Work
In this section, we brieﬂy review the recent advances in
image segmentation methods that are closely related to the

16727

