Multi-stage Aggregated Transformer Network for Temporal Language
Localization in Videos
Mingxing Zhang1 , Yang Yang1,2,∗, Xinghan Chen1 , Yanli Ji1 , Xing Xu1,2 , Jingjing Li1 , Heng Tao Shen1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering and
Digital Media Technology Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, UESTC
2
Institute of Electronic and Information Engineering of UESTC in Guangdong
{minsingcheong, dlyyang, xinghanchen111}@gmail.com, {yanliji, xing.xu}@uestc.edu.cn,
lijin117@yeah.net, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of localizing a specific moment from an untrimmed video by a language sentence query.
Generally, previous methods mainly exist two problems that
are not fully solved: 1) How to effectively model the finegrained visual-language alignment between video and language query? 2) How to accurately localize the moment in
the original video length? In this paper, we streamline the
temporal language localization as a novel multi-stage aggregated transformer network. Specifically, we first introduce a new visual-language transformer backbone, which
enables iterations and alignments among all elements in
visual and language sequences. Different from previous
multi-modal transformers, our backbone keeps both structure unified and modality specific. Moreover, we also propose a multi-stage aggregation module topped on the transformer backbone. In this module, we compute three stagespecific representations corresponding to different moment
stages respectively, i.e. starting, middle and ending stages,
for each video element. Then for a moment candidate, we
concatenate the starting/middle/ending representations of
its starting/middle/ending elements respectively to form the
final moment representation. Because the obtained moment representation captures the stage specific information, it
is very discriminative for accurate localization. Extensive
experiments on ActivityNet Captions and TACoS datasets
demonstrate our proposed method achieves significant improvements compared with all other methods.

1. Introduction
Temporal localization is a prominent and fundamental
problem for video analysis in the computer vision commu∗ Corresponding author.

nity. In the past years, there are lots of works that have
been conducted for temporal action localization [28, 38, 48,
3, 42, 18, 47]. Recently, the task of temporally localizing natural language in videos has been attracting the interest of researchers. The task aims to localize the temporal
moment corresponding to a language sentence query in an
untrimmed video. Compared with temporal action localization, temporal language localization is more challenging
and has vast potential applications, such as video retrieval,
video captioning, and human-computer interaction, etc.
There are many approaches that have been proposed for
temporal language localization [1, 7, 20, 41, 40, 45, 35,
19, 25, 26, 43]. Although those approaches have achieved
many promising results, there are still several critical problems that have not been fully solved: 1) How to effectively
model the fine-grained visual-language alignment between
video and language query? 2) How to accurately localize
the moment in the original video length? For the first problem, most existing approaches often process video and language sequences separately and then fuse them. However,
processing the two modalities separately, e.g., first encoding
the query sentence into a single vector, will inevitably lose
some detailed semantics and thus cannot achieve detailed
interaction and alignment. Besides, the temporal relations
in the video sequence are often modeled by local operations,
which is not sufficient to obtain enough contextual information. For the second problem, previous approaches usually
use the full convolution, mean pooling or RoI (Region of
Interest) pooling [38, 10] operations to obtain the feature
representation for moment candidates. We argue that these
kinds of representations are not discriminative enough. For
instance, the moment or event often contains some different stages, e.g. the starting, middle and ending stages. The
information of those stages is very important for accurate
moment localization. However, the mean pooling operation discards the stage information, thus cannot match the

12669

