Privacy-preserving Collaborative Learning with
Automatic Transformation Search
Wei Gao1,2 , Shangwei Guo3 , Tianwei Zhang*1 , Han Qiu4 , Yonggang Wen1 , Yang Liu1
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University,
3
Chongqing University, 4 Tsinghua University
{gaow0007,tianwei.zhang,ygwen,yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg,swguo@cqu.edu.cn,qiuhan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Collaborative learning has gained great popularity due
to its benefit of data privacy protection: participants can
jointly train a Deep Learning model without sharing their
training sets. However, recent works discovered that an adversary can fully recover the sensitive training samples from
the shared gradients. Such reconstruction attacks pose severe threats to collaborative learning. Hence, effective mitigation solutions are urgently desired.
In this paper, we propose to leverage data augmentation
to defeat reconstruction attacks: by preprocessing sensitive images with carefully-selected transformation policies,
it becomes infeasible for the adversary to extract any useful information from the corresponding gradients. We design a novel search method to automatically discover qualified policies. We adopt two new metrics to quantify the
impacts of transformations on data privacy and model usability, which can significantly accelerate the search speed.
Comprehensive evaluations demonstrate that the policies
discovered by our method can defeat existing reconstruction attacks in collaborative learning, with high efficiency
and negligible impact on the model performance.

1. Introduction
A collaborative learning system enables multiple participants to jointly train a shared Deep Learning (DL) model
for a common artificial intelligence task [36, 22, 9]. Typical collaborative systems are distributed systems such as
federated learning systems, where each participant iteratively calculates the local gradients based on his own training dataset and shares them with other participants to approach the ideal model. This collaborative mode can significantly improve the training speed, model performance and
generalization. Besides, it can also protect the training data
privacy, as participants do not need to release their sensitive
* Corresponding author.

data during the training phase. Due to these advantages,
collaborative learning has become promising in many scenarios, e.g., smart manufacturing [10], autonomous driving
[25], digital health [3], etc.
Although each participant does not disclose the training
dataset, he has to share with others the gradients, which
can leak information of the sensitive data indirectly. Past
works [14, 22, 23] demonstrated the possibility of membership inference and property inference attacks in collaborative learning. A more serious threat is the reconstruction
attack [40, 38, 6], where an adversary can recover the exact
values of samples from the shared gradients with high fidelity. This attack is very practical under realistic and complex circumstances (e.g., large-size images, batch training).
Due to the severity of this threat, an effective and practical defense solution is desirable to protect the privacy of
collaborative learning. Common privacy-aware solutions
[40, 33] attempt to increase the difficulty of input reconstruction by obfuscating the gradients. However, the obfuscation magnitude is bounded by the performance requirement of the DL task: a large-scale obfuscation can hide
the input information, but also impair the model accuracy.
The effectiveness of various techniques (e.g., noise injection, model pruning) against reconstruction attacks have
been empirically evaluated [40]. Unfortunately, they cannot achieve a satisfactory trade-off between data privacy and
model usability, and hence become less practical.
Motivated by the limitations of existing solutions, this
paper aims to solve the privacy issue from a different perspective: obfuscating the training data to make the reconstruction difficult or infeasible. The key insight of our strategy is to repurpose data augmentation techniques for privacy enhancement. A variety of transformation approaches
have been designed to improve the model performance and
generalization. We aim to leverage certain transformation
functions to preprocess the training sets and then train the
gradients, which can prevent malicious participants from reconstructing the transformed or original samples.
Mitigating reconstruction attacks via data augmentation

114

