PSRR-MaxpoolNMS: Pyramid Shifted MaxpoolNMS with Relationship
Recovery
Tianyi Zhang1
Jie Lin1∗
Peng Hu2
Bin Zhao3
Mohamed M. Sabry Aly4
2
3
I2R, A*star, Singapore Sichuan University, China IME, A*star, Singapore 4 NTU, Singapore
{zhang tianyi, lin-j}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, penghu.ml@gmail.com, zhaobin@ime.a-star.edu.sg, msabry@ntu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Non-maximum Suppression (NMS) is an essential postprocessing step in modern convolutional neural networks
for object detection. Unlike convolutions which are inherently parallel, the de-facto standard for NMS, namely GreedyNMS, cannot be easily parallelized and thus could be
the performance bottleneck in convolutional object detection pipelines. MaxpoolNMS is introduced as a parallelizable alternative to GreedyNMS, which in turn enables faster
speed than GreedyNMS at comparable accuracy. However,
MaxpoolNMS is only capable of replacing the GreedyNMS
at the first stage of two-stage detectors like Faster-RCNN.
There is a significant drop in accuracy when applying MaxpoolNMS at the final detection stage, due to the fact that
MaxpoolNMS fails to approximate GreedyNMS precisely in
terms of bounding box selection. In this paper, we propose a general, parallelizable and configurable approach
PSRR-MaxpoolNMS, to completely replace GreedyNMS at
all stages in all detectors. By introducing a simple Relationship Recovery module and a Pyramid Shifted MaxpoolNMS module, our PSRR-MaxpoolNMS is able to approximate GreedyNMS more precisely than MaxpoolNMS.
Comprehensive experiments show that our approach outperforms MaxpoolNMS by a large margin, and it is proven
faster than GreedyNMS with comparable accuracy. For the
first time, PSRR-MaxpoolNMS provides a fully parallelizable solution for customized hardware design, which can
be reused for accelerating NMS everywhere.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the key tasks in computer vision, with the objective of localizing and classifying objects in a scene. During the past few years, deep convolutional neural networks has emerged as the champion of
*Corresponding author: J. Lin (lin-j@i2r.a-star.edu.sg)
This research is supported by the Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR) under its AME Programmatic Funds (Project
No.A1892b0026).

Figure 1. (Top) Visualized comparison of MaxpoolNMS [2], our
method and GreedyNMS at the final detection stage of FasterRCNN. Compared to MaxpoolNMS, our method behaves more
like GreedyNMS. (Bottom) Pipeline of PSRR-MaxpoolNMS. Relationship Recovery to build up the confidence score maps, followed by Pyramid Shifted MaxpoolNMS to eliminate overlapped
boxes and only keep the boxes with peak scores. Each cell on
the map encodes the confidence score, scale/ratio (C) and spatial
location (X, Y ) of bounding boxes.

object detection [9, 21, 19]. Convolutional object detectors are broadly grouped into either one-stage detectors like
SSD [19] and YOLO [20] or two-stage detectors like Faster
RCNN [21] and R-FCN [3], in which convolutions often account for the majority of computing operations. On
the other side, significant progress has been made towards
better-performing dedicated hardware for accelerating the
convolution operations by exploiting their inherent parallelism, such as GPU and Google TPU [15]. Therefore, the
execution time spent on convolution operations is decreas-

15840

