Improving OCR-based Image Captioning by Incorporating Geometrical
Relationship
Jing Wang1 , Jinhui Tang1 *, Mingkun Yang2 , Xiang Bai2 , and Jiebo Luo3
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 3 University of Rochester
{jwang,jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn, {yangmingkun, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
OCR-based image captioning aims to automatically describe images based on all the visual entities (both visual
objects and scene text) in images. Compared with conventional image captioning, the reasoning of scene text is required for OCR-based image captioning since the generated descriptions often contain multiple OCR tokens. Existing methods attempt to achieve this goal via encoding
the OCR tokens with rich visual and semantic representations. However, strong correlations between OCR tokens
may not be established with such limited representations. In
this paper, we propose to enhance the connections between
OCR tokens from the viewpoint of exploiting the geometrical relationship. We comprehensively consider the height,
width, distance, IoU and orientation relations between the
OCR tokens for constructing the geometrical relationship.
To integrate the learned relation as well as the visual and
semantic representations into a unified framework, a Long
Short-Term Memory plus Relation-aware pointer network
(LSTM-R) architecture is presented in this paper. Under the
guidance of the geometrical relationship between OCR tokens, our LSTM-R capitalizes on a newly-devised relationaware pointer network to select OCR tokens from the scene
text for OCR-based image captioning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our LSTM-R. More
remarkably, LSTM-R achieves state-of-the-art performance
on TextCaps, with the CIDEr-D score being increased from
98.0% to 109.3%.

1. Introduction
The task of OCR-based image captioning is to describe
images with sentences based on the visual entities (visual
objects and scene text) contained in images. Despite the
significant improvement made in conventional image captioning [35, 38, 30, 4, 41] and Optical Character Recogni* Corresponding author.

Dynamic pointer net

h

Embed

OCR

Embed

Bilinear

s

Relation-aware pointer net

(a) Without geo-rel:
A white van with the words
yes more federal airlines, on it.
(b) With geo-rel:
A white van that says do pay
more federal income taxes.

h

Embed

OCR

Embed

Bilinear

s

Embed
Embed
geo-rel

Concatenation

Figure 1. Caption examples from the models with or without geometrical relationship (geo-rel for short) and comparison between
the conventional dynamic pointer network (e.g. [31]) and the proposed relation-aware pointer network. h and s denote the output
state of the LSTM and the scores of the OCR tokens, respectively.

tion (OCR) [9, 12, 19, 23, 33] in recent years, OCR-based
image captioning still faces challenges and leaves much to
be desired. To incorporate scene text for generating image
descriptions, OCR-based image captioning needs to understand the words, recognize the visual entities of different
modalities and reason among them.
Among the modalities contained in OCR-based image
captioning, the scene text, which is closely related to both
visual content and language descriptions, is of vital importance. As has been verified, the model would witness a dramatic decline in the generation performance [31] if the information from scene text was ignored. To achieve better
understanding and reasoning of the scene text in images,
existing research [31, 37] jointly encodes visual feature,
semantic feature and spatial feature of OCR tokens for a
richer representation. Although promising results are obtained, the produced descriptions may still encounter problems about the OCR tokens. For example, existing methods (Figure 1(a)) may describe the upper-left image as “a
white van with the words yes more federal airlines on it”,
which reads the OCR tokens in an incorrect order. This in-

1306

