Automatic Vertebra Localization and Identification in CT by Spine Rectification
and Anatomically-constrained Optimization
Fakai Wang1,2 , Kang Zheng1 , Le Lu1 , Jing Xiao3 , Min Wu2 , Shun Miao1
1
PAII Inc., Bethesda, Maryland, USA
2
University of Maryland College Park, USA
3
Ping An Technology, Shenzhen, China

∗

Abstract
Accurate vertebra localization and identification are required in many clinical applications of spine disorder diagnosis and surgery planning. However, significant challenges are posed in this task by highly varying pathologies (such as vertebral compression fracture, scoliosis, and
vertebral fixation) and imaging conditions (such as limited
field of view and metal streak artifacts). This paper proposes a robust and accurate method that effectively exploits
the anatomical knowledge of the spine to facilitate vertebra localization and identification. A key point localization
model is trained to produce activation maps of vertebra centers. They are then re-sampled along the spine centerline
to produce spine-rectified activation maps, which are further aggregated into 1-D activation signals. Following this,
an anatomically-constrained optimization module is introduced to jointly search for the optimal vertebra centers under a soft constraint that regulates the distance between vertebrae and a hard constraint on the consecutive vertebra indices. When being evaluated on a major public benchmark
of 302 highly pathological CT images, the proposed method
reports the state of the art identification (id.) rate of 97.4%,
and outperforms the best competing method of 94.7% id.
rate by reducing the relative id. error rate by half.

1. Introduction
Localization and identification of spine vertebrae in 3-D
medical images are key enabling components for computeraided diagnosis of spine disorders [13]. As a prerequisite
step of downstream applications, high accuracies of vertebra localization and identification are frequently demanded.
In recent years, many studies have been reported to address
this problem, with substantial progress on public benchmarks (e.g., the SpineWeb [1]. However, due to the similar appearances of the spine vertebrae, it remains a daunt∗ This work was done when Fakai Wang interned at PAII Inc.

Figure 1. Example spine CT images from the SpineWeb benchmark dataset demonstrating the challenges. (a) small field of fiew,
(b) low image quality, (c,d) metal implants and severe compression
fracture.

ing task to identify vertebrae with a very high accuracy that
meets the requirements of clinical applications.
The challenges in distinguishing vertebrae with similar shapes/appearances are well recognized by the research
community [9, 24, 3]. Multiple methods have been proposed to address them by exploiting the anatomical prior
knowledge: 1) the spatial order of vertebrae, and 2) the
distance between neighboring vertebrae. Spine anatomical knowledge is incorporated into neural networks implicitly using Bi-RNN [9], or explicitly using an information aggregation layer considering the spatial distribution
prior of the vertebrae [24]. The anatomical prior has also
been used to post-process the neural network output [3].
While steady performance improvements are observed in
these works, the anatomical knowledge is still not fully utilized. In particular, anatomy-inspired network architectures
like Bi-RNN [9] rely on the network to learn the anatomical
prior without the guaranteed respect to the prior. Building
the anatomical knowledge into a network layer [24] or the
optimization target [3] makes a compromise that turns the
hard constraint (which should be strictly enforced, e.g., the
spatial order) into soft constraints that can be violated. As
a result, previous methods may produce physically implau-

5280

