LQF: Linear Quadratic Fine-Tuning
Alessandro Achille1 Aditya Golatkar2,1 Avinash Ravichandran1 Marzia Polito1 Stefano Soatto1
1
Amazon Web Services 2 UCLA
{aachille,ravinash,mpolito,soattos}@amazon.com aditya29@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Classifiers that are linear in their parameters, and trained
by optimizing a convex loss function, have predictable behavior with respect to changes in the training data, initial
conditions, and optimization. Such desirable properties are
absent in deep neural networks (DNNs), typically trained by
non-linear fine-tuning of a pre-trained model. Previous attempts to linearize DNNs have led to interesting theoretical
insights, but have not impacted the practice due to the substantial performance gap compared to standard non-linear
optimization. We present the first method for linearizing a
pre-trained model that achieves comparable performance to
non-linear fine-tuning on most of real-world image classification tasks tested, thus enjoying the interpretability of linear
models without incurring punishing losses in performance.
LQF consists of simple modifications to the architecture, loss
function and optimization typically used for classification:
Leaky-ReLU instead of ReLU, mean squared loss instead of
cross-entropy, and pre-conditioning using Kronecker factorization. None of these changes in isolation is sufficient to
approach the performance of non-linear fine-tuning. When
used in combination, they allow us to reach comparable performance, and even superior in the low-data regime, while
enjoying the simplicity, robustness and interpretability of
linear-quadratic optimization.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful but finicky.
They can carve complex decision boundaries through high
dimensional data such as images, but even small changes
in the training set, regularization method, or choice of hyperparameters can lead to vastly different outcomes. This
phenomenon, typical of highly non-linear optimization, is observed even when fine-tuning a pre-trained model, which is
the most common modus operandi in practice: Starting from
a DNN trained on some dataset, a few steps of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) are used to minimize a loss function computed on a another dataset. This is unlike models
whose parameters are found via convex optimization, such

as support-vector machines: They have a global optimum,
found from any initial condition, and small changes in the
data, the regularization scheme, and hyperparameters yield
small and interpretable changes in the final solution.
Lack of robustness to training conditions, and opaqueness of the resulting model, appear to be the price to pay for
more performing and expressive classifiers such as a DNNs.
This price is measured in time and cost of hyperparameter
optimization (HPO). For example, simply changing the multiplier for weight decay requires retraining from scratch, as
optimizing the new loss starting from the previous solution
gives suboptimal results [11]. The complex relation between
training data and final model makes it impossible to predict
the effect of individual data, renders most generalization
bounds vacuous, and makes it hard to impose even simple
constraints, such as those arising from fairness criteria [20]
or backward compatibility [44].
The desire to make their training more robust and interpretable has led some to linearize DNN models around an
initial set of weights [28]. But while this has led to interesting theoretical insights, the analysis has failed to yield
improvements in the practice. In particular, Figure 1 shows
that linearized models perform large-scale image classification marginally better than simply training a linear classifier
on a fixed pre-trained embedding. Non-linear fine-tuning
with exhaustive HPO remains the performance paragon. The
trade-off between performance and robustness, typical of
many complex systems, is a manifestation of the classic biasvariance tradeoff: By reducing the sensitivity of the trained
model to perturbations in the parameters or training data
(variance, Figure 1, right), we incur a decrease in average
performance (bias, left). While we do not expect linearized
models to outperform non-linear fine-tuned ones – except in
cases where the latter fails to optimize correctly (Section 4.5)
– in this paper we explore how far we can push their accuracy,
so we can enjoy the robustness and interpretability of linear
models without punishing performance loss.
Our contribution, Linear Quadratic Fine-Tuning (LQF), is
a method to linearize and train deep neural networks that
achieves comparable performance to non-linear fine-tuning

15729

