Refer-it-in-RGBD: A Bottom-up Approach for
3D Visual Grounding in RGBD Images
Haolin Liu1,2

Anran Lin1
Xiaoguang Han1,2, *
Lei Yang4
3,4
1,2
Yizhou Yu
Shuguang Cui
1
†
2
SRIBD, CUHK-Shenzhen
FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen‡
3
4
Deepwise AI Lab
The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Grounding referring expressions in RGBD image has
been an emerging field. We present a novel task of 3D visual
grounding in single-view RGBD image where the referred
objects are often only partially scanned due to occlusion.
In contrast to previous works that directly generate object
proposals for grounding in the 3D scenes, we propose a
bottom-up approach to gradually aggregate content-aware
information, effectively addressing the challenge posed by
the partial geometry. Our approach first fuses the language and the visual features at the bottom level to generate a heatmap that coarsely localizes the relevant regions
in the RGBD image. Then our approach conducts an adaptive feature learning based on the heatmap and performs
the object-level matching with another visio-linguistic fusion to finally ground the referred object. We evaluate the
proposed method by comparing to the state-of-the-art methods on both the RGBD images extracted from the ScanRefer
dataset and our newly collected SUNRefer dataset. Experiments show that our method outperforms the previous methods by a large margin (by 11.2% and 15.6% Acc@0.5) on
both datasets.

Query : This is a brown armchair. It is in a corner of the room.

Query : There is a gray trash can at the corner of the room. It
is located left to the table legs and below the table.

Figure 1: We present a novel task of 3D visual grounding in
single-view RGBD images given a referring expression, and
propose a bottom-up neural approach to address it. Our goal
is to estimate the bounding box that encloses the full shape
of the referred object even this object is only partially observed (top-left). Predicted bounding boxes of the referred
objects are in green.

1. Introduction
Localizing objects described by referring expressions
in vision signals, also known as visual grounding, has
long been a major motive for robotics and embodied vision. So far, we have seen growing efforts devoted to
visual grounding in images [17, 36, 13, 40, 24, 29, 33,
5, 41, 11, 42, 10, 9, 12, 19, 47, 18, 35, 38, 39, 20] and
videos [46, 45, 43, 37, 30, 31, 44]. Suppose that a robot
is going to take ‘the spoon on the table in the kitchen’
following your command [14, 23]; this would require a
* Corresponding Email: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn
† Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
‡ The Future Network of Intelligence Institute, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

more accurate localization result, preferable the 3D coordinate of the referred object rather than a 2D bounding box.
Recent works [4, 1] extend the visual grounding task to
3D scenes [7] and localize the object referred by a natural language expression. While promising results are produced, these methods can only perform 3D visual grounding in complete scenes that are reconstructed and/or segmented [4, 1] in advance. Thus, they are not readily applicable to single-view RGBD images with partial observation,
RGBD streaming data, or any dynamically changing environments.
To this end, we propose a novel task for 3D visual
grounding: Given a single-view RGBD image of a scene,

6032

