Weakly-supervised Instance Segmentation via Class-agnostic Learning with
Salient Images
Xinggang Wang† Jiapei Feng† Bin Hu† Qi Ding‡ Longjin Ran‡ Xiaoxin Chen‡ Wenyu Liu†⋆
†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology ‡ VIVO Inc.
{xgwang,fjp,binhu 19,liuwy}@hust.edu.cn {qi.ding,lj.ran,xiaoxin.chen}@vivo.com

Cat,Dog

Abstract
Humans have a strong class-agnostic object segmentation ability and can outline boundaries of unknown objects
precisely, which motivates us to propose a box-supervised
class-agnostic object segmentation (BoxCaseg) based solution for weakly-supervised instance segmentation. The
BoxCaseg model is jointly trained using box-supervised images and salient images in a multi-task learning manner.
The fine-annotated salient images provide class-agnostic
and precise object localization guidance for box-supervised
images. The object masks predicted by a pretrained BoxCaseg model are refined via a novel merged and dropped
strategy as proxy ground truth to train a Mask R-CNN for
weakly-supervised instance segmentation. Only using 7991
salient images, the weakly-supervised Mask R-CNN is on
par with fully-supervised Mask R-CNN on PASCAL VOC
and significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art boxsupervised instance segmentation methods on COCO. The
source code, pretrained models and datasets are available
at https://github.com/hustvl/BoxCaseg.

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised instance segmentation (WSIS) is important in computer vision for at least two reasons: First,
it reduces human annotation efforts so that it is useful in
building label-efficient visual recognition systems. Second,
humans can learn to segment objects without perfect/exact
labels, and building a visual learning system similar to human perception is a long-term goal of computer vision; thus
the research weakly-supervised instance segmentation is a
way to approach human perception. In this paper, we investigate the problem of weakly-supervised instance segmentation using bounding box annotations rather than the precise
mask annotations.
As reported in [3], labeling a mask takes about 79 seconds while labeling a bounding box takes only about 10
seconds on average. Thus, if a WSIS method can obtain
⋆ Wenyu Liu is the corresponding author.

Person,Horse

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 1. The top row shows a salient training image (a) and two
box-supervised training images (b). Our model is jointly trained
using both salient images and box-supervised images and obtains
high quality instance segmentation results (c).

the segmentation precision on par with the state-of-the-art
fully supervised instance segmentation methods (e.g., Mask
R-CNN [13]), it is extremely useful and has great potential to be applied in real world applications. To solve this
problem, previous methods have applied unsupervised image segmentation methods based on hand-crafted features
[40, 38], pseudo labeling [7, 42, 2], multi-instance learning
[16] and attention networks [23] in various WSIS frameworks.
We think the key problem in WSIS is box-supervised
class-agnostic object segmentation (BoxCaseg), i.e., given
the object bounding box, we need to infer pixel-level object mask. Humans have strong ability on the task of BoxCaseg and can perceive object boundaries even the objects are from unknown semantic categories. To mimic
this class-agnostic human learning process, we propose a
joint training scheme, in which a salient object segmentation (also known as salient object detection) dataset that
contains class-agnostic pixel-level object location information is applied to simulate humans’ historical memory. The
salient images are trained with box-annotated images (as
shown in Fig. 1) in a single deep multi-task network and are
mixed in the same mini-batches. The tasks include pixellevel labeling salient images and multi-instance classification [16] of both box-supervised images and salient images.
During training, salient images can provide salient knowl-

10225

