AIFit: Automatic 3D Human-Interpretable
Feedback Models for Fitness Training
Mihai Fieraru1 Mihai Zanfir1 Silviu Cristian Pirlea1
Vlad Olaru1 Cristian Sminchisescu2,1
1
1

Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, 2 Lund University

{firstname.lastname}@imar.ro, 2 cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se

Abstract
I went to the gym today, but how well did I do? And
where should I improve? Ah, my back hurts slightly... User
engagement can be sustained and injuries avoided by being
able to reconstruct 3d human pose and motion, relate it to
good training practices, identify errors, and provide early,
real-time feedback. In this paper we introduce the first automatic system, AIFit, that performs 3d human sensing for
fitness training. The system can be used at home, outdoors,
or at the gym. AIFit is able to reconstruct 3d human pose,
shape, and motion, reliably segment exercise repetitions,
and identify in real-time the deviations between standards
learnt from trainers, and the execution of a trainee. As
a result, localized, quantitative feedback for correct execution of exercises, reduced risk of injury, and continuous
improvement is possible. To support research and evaluation, we introduce the first large scale dataset, Fit3D, containing over 3 million images and corresponding 3d human
shape and motion capture ground truth configurations, with
over 37 repeated exercises, covering all the major muscle
groups, performed by instructors and trainees. Our statistical coach is governed by a global parameter that captures
how critical it should be of a trainee’s performance. This
is an important aspect that helps adapt to a student’s level
of fitness (i.e. beginner vs. advanced vs. expert), or to the
expected accuracy of a 3d pose reconstruction method. We
show that, for different values of the global parameter, our
feedback system based on 3d pose estimates achieves good
accuracy compared to the one based on ground-truth motion capture. Our statistical coach offers feedback in natural language, and with spatio-temporal visual grounding.

1. Introduction
In nowadays busy, high pressure working environments,
fitness is essential in order to stay in shape, maintain bal-

ance, enhance the immune system, and prevent the emergence of chronic diseases. It is also critical for the elderly in
order to maintain mobility, combat anxiety, and slow-down
aging. This has increasingly resonated with the broad public. Besides the growing number of standard gym subscriptions, there are emergent online services (e.g. Peloton, Mirror or ClassPass, among others) that aim to bring fitness at
home. Some trainers run popular Youtube fitness channels
or apps (e.g. Athlean-X, The Fitness Marshall, Blogilates,
etc.), and public interest spurs billions of searches and views
of such instructional video each year. However, whether at
the gym, at home, or outdoors, fitness enthusiasts face some
of the same outstanding challenges: making sure they exercise correctly, avoid injury, gain insights into their progress,
maintain motivation to get the job done, and ultimately have
fun. Even when personal trainers are available, their engagement is typically limited to the time spent with the
trainee at the gym. In practice, personal trainers may need
to joggle between different clients, making it difficult to
provide the continuous observation, feedback, and encouragement their clients sometimes need in order to progress.
This naturally raises the question whether personal experience can be improved by leveraging recent advances in 3d
human sensing and AI. To complement human trainers, in
this paper we propose AIFit, the first AI-enhanced training
system for fitness. The system is able to reconstruct 3d human pose over time, count repetitions, and automatically
provide localized feedback, visually grounded in images of
the trainee, and phrased in natural language displayed on
a screen. In order to support research and evaluation, we
introduce Fit3D, a large-scale dataset of over 3 million images and ground truth 3d motion capture poses, collected
from 13 subjects (including one licensed fitness instructor
and one advanced fitness subject), observed by 4 different
RGB cameras, together with 3d scans of each subject. The
dataset features 37 exercises consisting of simple and compound motions, covering all major muscle groups and articulation types, including, among many others, warm-ups,

9919

