Troubleshooting Blind Image Quality Models in the Wild
Zhihua Wang1 , Haotao Wang2 , Tianlong Chen2 , Zhangyang Wang2 , and Kede Ma1
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Texas at Austin
zhihua.wang@my.cityu.edu.hk, {htwang,tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu, kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, the group maximum differentiation competition
(gMAD) has been used to improve blind image quality assessment (BIQA) models, with the help of full-reference metrics.
When applying this type of approach to troubleshoot “bestperforming” BIQA models in the wild, we are faced with a
practical challenge: it is highly nontrivial to obtain stronger
competing models for efficient failure-spotting. Inspired by
recent findings that difficult samples of deep models may
be exposed through network pruning, we construct a set of
“self-competitors,” as random ensembles of pruned versions
of the target model to be improved. Diverse failures can then
be efficiently identified via self-gMAD competition. Next,
we fine-tune both the target and its pruned variants on the
human-rated gMAD set. This allows all models to learn
from their respective failures, preparing themselves for the
next round of self-gMAD competition. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method efficiently troubleshoots BIQA
models in the wild with improved generalizability.

1. Introduction
Over the years, researchers and engineers in the field of
image processing and computer vision have realized the importance of blind image quality assessment (BIQA) [42].
Numerous BIQA models [3, 30, 33, 34, 47, 48] have been
proposed, focusing mainly on boosting performance on existing IQA datasets of fixed sizes. However, the superior
correlation numbers on closed test sets may not translate
in a reliable way to generalization in the open visual world
[44, 29, 36, 50]. Therefore, computational methods for probing and improving the generalizablity of BIQA models are
highly desirable.
In 2008, Wang and Simoncelli [44] described a maximum
differentiation (MAD) competition procedure to compare
IQA models in the space of all possible images. Ma et al.
[29] proposed gMAD, a discrete instantiation of the MAD
method, by restricting the search space to some specific domain of interest. Both methods are able to automatically and
efficiently expose failures of a relatively weak IQA model,

Best Ensemble

Best UNIQUE

Fixed UNIQUE

Fixed Ensemble

Worst Ensemble

Worst UNIQUE

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Failure cases of a “top-performing” BIQA method
- UNIQUE [52] spotted by an ensemble of its pruned versions. (a) Best/worst-quality images according to the ensemble, with near-identical quality reported by UNIQUE.
(b) Best/worst-quality images according to UNIQUE with
near-identical quality reported by the ensemble.

by letting it compete with a set of strong models. Wang and
Ma [43] took advantage of gMAD to identify the counterexamples of a BIQA model [52] using a set of stronger fullreference IQA metrics. Furthermore, they demonstrated that
harnessing gMAD-selected failures significantly improves
the BIQA generalizability.
Despite demonstrated success, the progressive failure
identification and model rectification pipeline proposed in
[43] have two drawbacks. First, it can only be applied to the
synthetic distortion scenario, where full-reference IQA models are computable. For BIQA models in the wild with input
images containing realistic camera distortions, it is highly
nontrivial to obtain a list of stronger methods to falsify a
state-of-the-art model. Second, the competing full-reference
models are fixed throughout model development, rendering
failure-spotting less effective as the target model becomes
stronger [43].

16256

