Efficient Multi-Stage Video Denoising with Recurrent Spatio-Temporal Fusion
Matteo Maggioni,* Yibin Huang,* Cheng Li,* Shuai Xiao, Zhongqian Fu, Fenglong Song
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{matteo.maggioni, huangyibin1, licheng89, xiaoshuai7, fuzhongqian, songfenglong}@huawei.com

Noisy input – ISO 25600.

RViDeNet [42] – 1965.04 GFLOPs.

Ours – 5.38 GFLOPs.

Figure 1: Our method shows better noise suppression and detail preservation than the state-of-the-art RViDeNet at a much
lower complexity. The input is a 1080p image from the CRVD dataset [42] captured with a IMX385 sensor.

Abstract
In recent years, denoising methods based on deep learning have achieved unparalleled performance at the cost of
large computational complexity. In this work, we propose
an Efficient Multi-stage Video Denoising algorithm, called
EMVD, to drastically reduce the complexity while maintaining or even improving the performance. First, a fusion stage
reduces the noise through a recursive combination of all
past frames in the video. Then, a denoising stage removes
the noise in the fused frame. Finally, a refinement stage restores the missing high frequency in the denoised frame. All
stages operate on a transform-domain representation obtained by learnable and invertible linear operators which
simultaneously increase accuracy and decrease complexity
of the model. A single loss on the final output is sufficient for
successful convergence, hence making EMVD easy to train.
Experiments on real raw data demonstrate that EMVD outperforms the state of the art when complexity is constrained,
and even remains competitive against methods whose complexities are several orders of magnitude higher. Further,
the low complexity and memory requirements of EMVD enable real-time video denoising on commercial SoC in mobile devices.
* Authors contributed equally.

1. Introduction
Even with the advance of technology, digital images are
invariably affected by several inherent or external disturbing factors due to the stochastic nature of the image formation processes (e.g., photon counting) [16], use of compact camera hardware (e.g., mobile sensors or lenses) [42],
and/or challenging acquisition settings (e.g., low light). Because of this, a number of methods (i.e., an image processing pipeline) must be applied to the low-quality observed
data to generate a final high-quality output image. Denoising is particularly important because it is typically at the
beginning of the pipeline, and thus its output has a direct
effect on all other operations [39].
In the past decades, a plethora of image denoising algorithms have been proposed in the literature [5, 12], but the
current state of the art is dominated by deep learning methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [43,
25, 27]. Video denoising models exploits the temporal
correlation inherently present in natural videos and thus
achieve better performance than single-frame methods [28,
1, 30, 36, 42], however their computational requirements
make real-time processing unattainable on most hardware
unless some compromise in image quality is made [15].
In this work we propose EMVD, an Efficient Multi-stage
Video Denoising method to drastically reduce the complex13466

