Learning Optical Flow from a Few Matches
Shihao Jiang1,2,3
1

Yao Lu1,2,3

Hongdong Li1,2
2

Australian National University

3

ACRV

Richard Hartley1,2
Data61, CSIRO

Abstract
State-of-the-art neural network models for optical flow
estimation require a dense correlation volume at high resolutions for representing per-pixel displacement. Although
the dense correlation volume is informative for accurate
estimation, its heavy computation and memory usage hinders the efficient training and deployment of the models. In
this paper, we show that the dense correlation volume representation is redundant and accurate flow estimation can
be achieved with only a fraction of elements in it. Based on
this observation, we propose an alternative displacement
representation, named Sparse Correlation Volume, which is
constructed directly by computing the k closest matches in
one feature map for each feature vector in the other feature map and stored in a sparse data structure. Experiments show that our method can reduce computational cost
and memory use significantly, while maintaining high accuracy compared to previous approaches with dense correlation volumes.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a classic problem in computer
vision [11]. It aims at finding pixelwise correspondences
between two images. Traditionally it has been formulated as
an optimization problem solved by continuous [4, 11, 32] or
discrete [22, 7, 31] optimization. Since the development of
deep learning, optical flow estimation has been formulated
as a learning problem where direct regression from a neural
network becomes a common approach [9, 16].
One popular representation in dense correspondence
problems is the correlation (cost) volume, first introduced
by Hosni et al. [12]. Correlation volumes give an explicit
representation of per-pixel displacements and have demonstrated their wide use in learning problems of stereo matching [18] and optical flow [9, 27]. Contrary to stereo matching problems, where the search space is along a scanline,
optical flow problems have a 2D search space, which leads
to two challenges: large memory consumption and high
computational cost when directly processing a 4D volume.

(a) First image

(b) Second image

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

−2

−2

−4

0

20

40

60

80

0
2010
4030

−4

0

20

40

60

80

0
2010
4030

(c) Dense correlation volume

(d) Sparse correlation volume

(e) Optical flow (RAFT [29])

(f) Optical flow (ours)

Figure 1: Optical flow estimation with dense correlation
volume and sparse correlation volume. (c) and (d) illustrate the correlation volumes for a single pixel (yellow dot) in the
first image. The white crosses in (b) indicate the top-k matches.
We show accurate optical flow can be estimated given only a few
matching correlations.

To reduce the memory and computational cost, existing
approaches [27, 34, 33, 13, 36] first build a feature pyramid and compute correlation volumes at coarse resolutions,
then gradually warp upper-level feature maps based on upsampled flow and construct a local correlation volume over
a limited search range. One notable problem observed in
previous work [4, 32, 20], was that coarse-to-fine frameworks fail to address the case when the flow displacement
is larger than the flow structure, i.e. the famous small objects moving fast problem.
Recent approaches, Devon and RAFT [20, 29] proposed
using direct search in the second image to remove the need
for warping. RAFT especially demonstrated the benefit of

16592

