Synthesizing Long-Term 3D Human Motion and Interaction in 3D Scenes
Jiashun Wang
UC San Diego

Huazhe Xu
UC Berkeley

Jingwei Xu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Sifei Liu
NVIDIA

Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego

Figure 1: Two examples of our generated long-term 3D motion in the 3D scene. Left: A human walks around the furniture in the room;
Right: A human walks in the hallway and then sits down on the bench.

Abstract
Synthesizing 3D human motion plays an important role
in many graphics applications as well as understanding human activity. While many efforts have been made on generating realistic and natural human motion, most approaches
neglect the importance of modeling human-scene interactions and affordance. On the other hand, affordance reasoning (e.g., standing on the floor or sitting on the chair)
has mainly been studied with static human pose and gestures, and it has rarely been addressed with human motion.
In this paper, we propose to bridge human motion synthesis
and scene affordance reasoning. We present a hierarchical generative framework to synthesize long-term 3D human motion conditioning on the 3D scene structure. Building on this framework, we further enforce multiple geometry constraints between the human mesh and scene point
clouds via optimization to improve realistic synthesis. Our
experiments show significant improvements over previous
approaches on generating natural and physically plausible
human motion in a scene.1

1. Introduction
Capturing and synthesizing realistic human motion in 3D
scenes has played an essential role in various applications in
1 Project page: https://jiashunwang.github.io/Longterm-Motion-in-3D-Scenes

virtual reality, video game animations and human-robot interactions. As shown in Fig. 1, given the 3D scenes, our
goal is to generate long-term human motion and interaction
in the scene, such as walking around the room avoiding collision with the furniture (left), as well as walking through
the hallway, turning around and then sitting down (right).
To achieve this, there are two main challenges on: (i) generating realistic motion in long-term; (ii) modeling humanscene interaction and affordance.
Recent works have made substantial efforts on human
motion synthesis, which generates visually appealing and
natural pose sequences using optimization-based statistical
models [68, 5], or deep neural networks [25, 24, 69]. However, while focusing on realistic motion, these works rarely
address the interactions between the human and the scene.
On the other hand, a line of researches on 3D scene affordance [65, 36, 71] has studied the “opportunities for interactions” [14] in the scene. For example, Wang et al. [65]
propose to learn to predict human skeletons from an empty
scene by training with a large-scale sitcom dataset. While
focusing on the scene context, these approaches are only
able to generate a single static human pose.
In this paper, we intend to bridge human motion synthesis and affordance learning. We consider a novel problem setting: Given the start and the end positions far away
in a 3D scene, synthesize the human motion moving in between. To generate long-term motion in the scene, instead

9401

