Online Learning of a Probabilistic and Adaptive Scene Representation
Zike Yan
Xin Wang
Hongbin Zha
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
zike.yan@pku.edu.cn

xinwang cis@pku.edu.cn

zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Figure 1: We propose a continuous probability field that can be learned incrementally from streaming data. The probabilistic formulation naturally incorporates both geometry and uncertainty information into a compact parameter space. The
generative characteristic allows convenient conversion to different kinds of scene representations.

Abstract
Constructing and maintaining a consistent scene model
on-the-fly is the core task for online spatial perception, interpretation, and action. In this paper, we represent the
scene with a Bayesian nonparametric mixture model, seamlessly describing per-point occupancy status with a continuous probability density function. Instead of following the
conventional data fusion paradigm, we address the problem
of online learning the process how sequential point cloud
data are generated from the scene geometry. An incremental and parallel inference is performed to update the parameter space in real-time. We experimentally show that
the proposed representation achieves state-of-the-art accuracy with promising efficiency. The consistent probabilistic
formulation assures a generative model that is adaptive to
different sensor characteristics, and the model complexity
can be dynamically adjusted on-the-fly according to different data scales.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) has
been recently viewed as a potential perceptual tool towards

Spatial AI [9] as it allows a mobile device to perceive the
world and estimate the sensor state. Along with the evolution of SLAM systems towards spatial perception arises an
increasing demand for a more expressive map that can incrementally distill knowledge from different kinds of data
into a compact parameter space. Finding an appropriate
representation has been a central task of establishing such
a comprehensive map.
In this paper, we aim to maintain a continuous probability field that allows for storing data into a unified probabilistic form. The probability field offers a generative extension to different spatial representations, e.g., point cloud,
occupancy grid, mesh at arbitrary resolution. Practically,
we propose a continuous probability density function as the
map representation using a Bayesian nonparametric mixture model. When obtaining 3D point cloud data, the scene
geometry is depicted as a continuous probability field of
spatial occupancy status. This representation owns the following properties: 1) Probabilistic. The Bayesian fashion
not only quantifies uncertainties explicitly, but also allows
to incorporate all sorts of information from different sensor
inputs in a unified probabilistic manner; 2) Adaptive and dynamic. The nonparametric property offers an inherently infinite capacity [68] that guarantees an adaptive model com113111

