Prototype Augmentation and Self-Supervision for Incremental Learning
Fei Zhu1,2 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2∗, Chuang Wang1,2 , Fei Yin1,2 , Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing 100190, China
zhufei2018@ia.ac.cn, {xyz, fyin, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, wangchuang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Despite the impressive performance in many individual
tasks, deep neural networks suffer from catastrophic forgetting when learning new tasks incrementally. Recently,
various incremental learning methods have been proposed,
and some approaches achieved acceptable performance relying on stored data or complex generative models. However,
storing data from previous tasks is limited by memory or privacy issues, and generative models are usually unstable and
inefficient in training. In this paper, we propose a simple nonexemplar based method named PASS, to address the catastrophic forgetting problem in incremental learning. On the
one hand, we propose to memorize one class-representative
prototype for each old class and adopt prototype augmentation (protoAug) in the deep feature space to maintain the
decision boundary of previous tasks. On the other hand, we
employ self-supervised learning (SSL) to learn more generalizable and transferable features for other tasks, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of SSL in incremental learning. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that
our approach significantly outperforms non-exemplar based
methods, and achieves comparable performance compared
to exemplar based approaches.

1. Introduction
Incremental learning (IL) enables humans to acquire
novel experience continually while maintaining existing
knowledge. In dynamic and open environment, it is critical for modern artificial intelligence to have the ability of IL
because training examples in real-world applications usually
appear sequentially. For instance, a face recognition system may encounter new faces which need to be added and
learned throughout its life without forgetting or re-learning
the people already learned. However, deep neural networks
(DNNs) tend to adjust the learned parameters to new task
∗ Corresponding author.

and almost fully forget previously acquired knowledge. Motivated by this, a multitude of works [28, 34, 43, 51, 42]
have recently emerged that try to alleviate the catastrophic
forgetting [16, 37, 13] problem. In this paper, we consider
a challenging scenario of class-incremental learning (CIL),
in which each task in the sequence contains a set of classes
disjoint from the old tasks, and the model need to learn a
unified classifier that can classify all classes seen at different
stages without the task-identifier at inference time.
Intuitively, catastrophic forgetting is caused by overlapping or confusion between the representations of new and
old classes in the feature space. When learning new classes,
the decision boundary for previous classes can be dramatically changed, and the unified classifier is severely biased.
To address this issue and maintain previous knowledge, one
can store a fraction of old data to jointly train the model with
current data [50, 43, 50, 6, 12]. However, storing data is
undesirable due to memory limits or privacy issues, in which
the data are not allowed to be stored. An alternative way is
to learn deep generative models to generate pseudo-samples
of previous classes [46, 49, 51, 25]. Nevertheless, it is inefficient to train big generative models such as GAN [17, 3]
and autoencoder [27, 25] for complex datasets (e.g., natural
images). Moreover, the generative models also suffer from
catastrophic forgetting. Another direction is to identify and
penalize future changes to some important parameters of the
original model [28, 54]. These regularization strategies are
effective in scenarios where multi-head classifiers are used
and the task-identifier is available at inference. However, as
noticed in some works [23, 48], those methods show poor
performance in CIL scenario.
Besides the catastrophic forgetting, another obstacle for
IL is the task-level overfitting phenomenon, which has been
ignored by previous works. Specifically, DNNs can easily
overfit to the training task when learning task continually. Intuitively, the model may focus on capturing features that are
useful for current task, while discarding those less discriminative directions which could capture data characteristics
for future tasks. This may not be a problem for common

5871

