How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset
for Continuous American Sign Language
Amanda Duarte1,2∗
Kenneth DeHaan6
1

Shruti Palaskar4
Florian Metze4,5

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
4

2

Lucas Ventura1
Jordi Torres1,2

Carnegie Mellon University

5

Facebook AI

How2 dataset

Speech Signal

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC
6

Gallaudet University

How2Sign dataset
Green screen studio RGB videos

Green screen studio RGB-D videos

Body-face-hands keypoints

Panoptic studio data (only for a subset)

English Transcription
Hi, I’m Amelia and I’m going to talk
to you about how to remove gum from
hair.

3

Barcelona Supercomputing Center

Deepti Ghadiyaram5
Xavier Giro-i-Nieto1,2,3∗

Multi-view VGA and HD videos

3D keypoints estimation

Gloss Annotation
HI, ME FS-AMELIA WILL ME TALK GUM IX-LOC-HAIR STUCK

Figure 1: The How2Sign dataset consists of over 80 hours of multiview sign language videos and aligned modalities.

Abstract
One of the factors that have hindered progress in the areas of sign language recognition, translation, and production is the absence of large annotated datasets. Towards
this end, we introduce How2Sign, a multimodal and multiview continuous American Sign Language (ASL) dataset,
consisting of a parallel corpus of more than 80 hours of
sign language videos and a set of corresponding modalities including speech, English transcripts, and depth. A
three-hour subset was further recorded in the Panoptic studio enabling detailed 3D pose estimation. To evaluate the
potential of How2Sign for real-world impact, we conduct a
study with ASL signers and show that synthesized videos using our dataset can indeed be understood. The study further
gives insights on challenges that computer vision should address in order to make progress in this field.
Dataset website: http://how2sign.github.io/
*Corresponding authors: {amanda.duarte,xavier.giro}@upc.edu

1. Introduction
Sign languages (SL) are the primary means of communication for an estimated 466 million deaf 1 or hard-ofhearing people worldwide [1]. Like any other natural language, sign languages are consistently evolving and have
structure directed by a set of linguistic rules [3]. They differ from spoken languages and do not have standard written
forms, e.g. American Sign Language (ASL) is not a sign
form of English. Although sign languages are used by millions of people everyday to communicate, the vast majority
of communications technologies nowadays are designed to
support spoken or written language, but not sign languages.
At the same time, most hearing people do not know a sign
language; as a result, many communication barriers exist
for deaf sign language users [6, 7, 14].
1 We follow the recognized convention of using the upper-cased word

Deaf which refers to the culture and describes members of the community
of sign language users and the lower-cased word deaf describes the hearing
status[37].

12735

