Autoregressive Stylized Motion Synthesis with Generative Flow
Yu-Hui Wen1†, Zhipeng Yang2†, Hongbo Fu3 , Lin Gao2,4 ,* Yanan Sun1 , Yong-Jin Liu1 *
1
CS Dept, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Creative Media, City University of Hong Kong
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device, ICT, CAS
{wenyh1616,liuyongjin}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {yangzhipeng19s,gaolin}@ict.ac.cn,
hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk, sunyn20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Input Content

Abstract
Motion style transfer is an important problem in many
computer graphics and computer vision applications, including human animation, games, and robotics. Most existing deep learning methods for this problem are supervised
and trained by registered motion pairs. In addition, these
methods are often limited to yielding a deterministic output,
given a pair of style and content motions. In this paper, we
propose an unsupervised approach for motion style transfer by synthesizing stylized motions autoregressively using a
generative flow model M. M is trained to maximize the exact likelihood of a collection of unlabeled motions, based on
an autoregressive context of poses in previous frames and
a control signal representing the movement of a root joint.
Thanks to invertible flow transformations, latent codes that
encode deep properties of motion styles are efficiently inferred by M. By combining the latent codes (from an input
style motion S) with the autoregressive context and control
signal (from an input content motion C), M outputs a stylized motion which transfers style from S to C. Moreover,
our model is probabilistic and is able to generate various
plausible motions with a specific style. We evaluate the proposed model on motion capture datasets containing different human motion styles. Experiment results show that our
model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, despite not
requiring manually labeled training data.

1. Introduction
In computer graphics, there has been a long-standing interest in motion style transfer, since this task benefits various applications including human animation, games, and
robotics, etc. Early methods rely on handcrafted features to
* Corresponding author
† Equal contribution

Autoregressive
Context

Input Style

Control Signal
Style Motion
Generative
Flow
Output

Figure 1. Our stylized motion synthesis that transfers the style
from an input style motion to an input content motion. The generative flow model is trained via unsupervised learning on unlabeled
motion data of different styles. The trained model extracts the
style latent codes from the input style motion. Then, it outputs
a high quality stylized motion with the style latent codes (from
the input style motion), the autoregressive context and the control
signal (from the input content motion).

design different motion styles [38, 2]. To release the burden of handcrafted feature design, data-driven motion style
transfer methods using deep learning models have been proposed. They automatically learn useful features from the
input motion samples. However, most of the existing deep
learning methods [19, 36, 43, 35] are supervised and require
paired and registered data to perform style transfer. Such
methods also need a large number of motion samples to extract a specific style. Therefore, these methods are limited
by a tedious preprocess to collect a large amount of motion

13612

