Large-capacity Image Steganography Based on Invertible Neural Networks
Shao-Ping Lu1∗ Rong Wang1∗ Tao Zhong1 Paul L. Rosin2
1
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, UK
slu@nankai.edu.cn; nkwangrong@163.com; zei.t@qq.com; RosinPL@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
Many attempts have been made to hide information in
images, where one main challenge is how to increase the
payload capacity without the container image being detected as containing a message. In this paper, we propose
a large-capacity Invertible Steganography Network (ISN)
for image steganography. We take steganography and the
recovery of hidden images as a pair of inverse problems
on image domain transformation, and then introduce the
forward and backward propagation operations of a single
invertible network to leverage the image embedding and
extracting problems. Sharing all parameters of our single ISN architecture enables us to efficiently generate both
the container image and the revealed hidden image(s) with
high quality. Moreover, in our architecture the capacity
of image steganography is significantly improved by naturally increasing the number of channels of the hidden image
branch. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that with
this significant improvement of the steganography payload
capacity, our ISN achieves state-of-the-art in both visual
and quantitative comparisons.

1. Introduction
Steganography is the art of hiding some secret data by
embedding it into a host medium that is not secret. Different from cryptography which hides the meaning of the data
(or makes it unintelligible), steganography aims to hide the
existence of the data [11,42]. Accordingly, image steganography refers to the process of hiding data within an image file. The image chosen for hosting the hidden data
named the host- or cover-image, and the image generated
by steganography is called the container- or stego-image.
Nowadays, image steganography is used in digital communication, copyright protection, information certification, ecommerce, and many other practical fields [11].
A well-designed image steganography system is ex∗ indicates equal contribution.

(a) Host/container
(b) 4 revealed images
Figure 1. We generate a container image by hiding 4 other images
into the host image. Guess which is the container image in the left
column? Answer: the top-left and bottom-left are the container
and host images, respectively. (b): 4 hidden images revealed from
the container image. These 6 images have the same resolution.

pected to have both the imperceptibility and payload capacity requirements [33]. Firstly, the container image should
avoid arousing suspicion. This means that the hidden data
should not be detected under steganalysis, which is the
countermeasure of steganography. As shown in Fig. 1,
when the hidden images are embedded into the host image,
if the generated container image appears similar to the host
image in terms of its color and other features, then it would
be difficult for image steganalysis techniques [18,24] to distinguish between the host and container images. Therefore,
image steganography essentially asks for a powerful image
representation mechanism that can effectively approximate
the host image with the “noise” of the hidden images. This
process is also expected to be reversible, because the hidden
images should be well recovered from the container image
in the decoding process of image steganography. Besides
that, to make image steganography applications more efficient in practice, another important aspect is to embed as
much hidden data as possible into the host image.
Existing image steganography solutions [8, 40, 62] still
cannot perfectly simultaneously achieve good imperceptibility with high payload capacity. Traditional methods

10816

