A Sliced Wasserstein Loss for Neural Texture Synthesis
Eric Heitz

Kenneth Vanhoey
Thomas Chambon
Laurent Belcour
Unity Technologies
{eric,kennethv,thomas.chambon,laurent}@unity3d.com
Abstract

We address the problem of computing a textural loss
based on the statistics extracted from the feature activations
of a convolutional neural network optimized for object recognition (e.g. VGG-19). The underlying mathematical problem
is the measure of the distance between two distributions
in feature space. The Gram-matrix loss is the ubiquitous
approximation for this problem but it is subject to several
shortcomings. Our goal is to promote the Sliced Wasserstein
Distance as a replacement for it. It is theoretically proven,
practical, simple to implement, and achieves results that are
visually superior for texture synthesis by optimization or
training generative neural networks.

1. Introduction
A texture is by definition a class of images that share a
set of stationary statistics. One of the key components of
texture synthesis is a textural loss that measures the difference between two images with respect to these stationary
statistics.
Gatys et al. [5] discovered that the feature activations
in pretrained Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) such
as VGG-19 [20] yield powerful textural statistics. Neural
texture synthesis means optimizing an image to match the
feature distributions of a target texture in each convolutional
layer, as shown in Figure 1. Gatys et al. use the L2 distance between the Gram matrices of the feature distributions
as a textural loss LGram . The simplicity and practicability
of this loss make it especially attractive and it is nowadays
ubiquitous in neural texture synthesis and style transfer methods [6, 4, 23, 14, 24, 11, 21, 19, 27, 26].
Intuitively, the Gram-matrix loss LGram , which is a
second-order descriptor like the covariance matrix, optimizes
the features to be distributed along the same major directions
but misses other (e.g. higher-order) statistics and is thus insufficient to represent the precise shape of the distribution.
This results in undesired artifacts in the synthesized results
such as contrast oscillation, as shown in Figure 1-middle.
Several subsequent works hint that improved textural quality

input

optim LGram

optim LSW

VGG-19

VGG-19

VGG-19

Figure 1: Neural texture synthesis. We visualize a 2D slice
of the feature distributions of a convolutional layer. The
ubiquitous Gram-Matrix loss LGram captures only the major
directions of the distribution. We promote the Sliced Wasserstein Distance LSW that captures the full distribution and
allows for neural texture synthesis with improved quality.
can be obtained by capturing more statistics [14, 18, 15].
However, how to define a practical textural loss that captures
the complete feature distributions remains an open problem.
Our main point is that the classic color transfer algorithm
of Pitie et al. [16] provides a simple solution to this problem.
This concept is also known as the Sliced Wasserstein Distance (SWD) [17, 1]. It is a slicing algorithm that matches
arbitrary n-dimensional (nD) distributions, which is precisely
the textural loss problem that the neural texture synthesis
community tries to solve. Although it has been around and
well-studied for a long time, it surprisingly has not yet been
considered for neural texture synthesis and we wish to promote it in this context. In Section 4, we show that the SWD
can be transposed to deep feature spaces to obtain a textural
loss LSW that captures the complete feature distributions and
that is practical enough to be considered as a replacement for
LGram . Furthermore, we show in Section 5 how to account
for user-defined spatial constraints without changing LSW
and without adding further losses or fine-tuned parameters,
extending the range of applications reachable with a single
textural loss without added complexity.

9412

