Learning the Superpixel in a Non-iterative and Lifelong Manner
Lei Zhu1,3,4
Qi She2
Bin Zhang4
Yanye Lu1,3,5
Zhilin Lu2
Duo Li2
Jie Hu2
1
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center, Peking University
2
3
Bytedance AI Lab
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
5
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School

Abstract
Superpixel is generated by automatically clustering pixels in an image into hundreds of compact partitions, which
is widely used to perceive the object contours for its excellent contour adherence. Although some works use the Convolution Neural Network (CNN) to generate high-quality
superpixel, we challenge the design principles of these networks, specifically for their dependence on manual labels
and excess computation resources, which limits their flexibility compared with the traditional unsupervised segmentation methods. We target at redefining the CNN-based superpixel segmentation as a lifelong clustering task and propose an unsupervised CNN-based method called LNS-Net.
The LNS-Net can learn superpixel in a non-iterative and
lifelong manner without any manual labels. Specifically, a
lightweight feature embedder is proposed for LNS-Net to
efficiently generate the cluster-friendly features. With those
features, seed nodes can be automatically assigned to cluster pixels in a non-iterative way. Additionally, our LNS-Net
can adapt the sequentially lifelong learning by rescaling
the gradient of weight based on both channel and spatial
context to avoid overfitting. Experiments show that the proposed LNS-Net achieves significantly better performance on
three benchmarks with nearly ten times lower complexity
compared with other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Superpixel segmentation aims to over-segment an image into hundreds of compact partitions, i.e. superpixel, by
clustering the pixels based on both low-level color features
and spatial features. Benefiting from concerning the spatial
cues, the superpixel can be efficiently generated with high
contour adherence. Therefore, it is widely used by both
traditional machine learning (ML) and convolution neural
network (CNN) to reduce computational complexity or perceive the contours of objects[32, 12, 3, 31].
Many superpixel segmentation methods arise in the last

Input Space

Cluster-Friendly Space

Seed Distribution

Superpixel

FEM

NCM-SEL

NCM-CL

Eq.1,2

Eq.3-5

Eq.6,7

Label Jetting

Figure 1. The illustration of the workflow for the proposed LNSNet, where the top row is the visualization of the features and the
bottom is the distribution of the labels jetting in the feature space.
The blue ”x” is the generated seed node.

decade including the gradient-based[1, 2, 18, 19, 5] and the
graph-based methods[17, 15, 13, 16]. The gradient-based
methods iteratively cluster the pixels in RGB or LAB space
with limited spatial distance to refine the initialized cluster
centers. This type of method has high efficiency, but suffers
from low adherence due to their insufficient features. On the
other hand, the graph-based algorithms usually have high
adherence because they enrich the features by constructing
an undirected graph. Afterwards, the subgraphs are generated as superpixel by cutting or adding edges to optimize a
target energy function, which costs a lot of time.
Recently, benefiting from the prosperity of the CNN,
some approaches employ the CNN to learn a suitable embedding space for superpixel segmentation and then cluster the pixels in this new feature space with clustering
methods[11, 27, 30, 28]. Even though they improve the
performance by a large margin, some problems come into
being simultaneously. Firstly, majority of the CNN-based
methods[30, 11, 28] need human-labeled ground truth to supervise the network training which requires additional human resources to label all the pixels in images. Secondly,
their offline training step needs to store all the training samples, which demands large amounts of memory and limits
their flexibility to transfer the network into other domains.
Finally, some CNN-based methods still need to iteratively
update the coarse cluster centers (usually the center position

1225

