Beyond Static Features for
Temporally Consistent 3D Human Pose and Shape from a Video
Hongsuk Choi1
1

Gyeongsik Moon1

Ju Yong Chang2
2

ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea

Kyoung Mu Lee1

ECE, Kwangwoon University, Korea

{redarknight,mks0601,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr, juyong.chang@gmail.com

input

TCMR (Ours)

VIBE

Figure 1: VIBE [14], the state-of-the-art video-based 3D human pose and shape estimation method, outputs very different
3D human poses per frame, although the frames have subtle differences. Our TCMR produces clearly more temporally
consistent and smooth 3D human motion. To watch the video, please refer to our arxiv paper.

Abstract
Despite the recent success of single image-based 3D human pose and shape estimation methods, recovering temporally consistent and smooth 3D human motion from a
video is still challenging. Several video-based methods
have been proposed; however, they fail to resolve the single image-based methods’ temporal inconsistency issue due
to a strong dependency on a static feature of the current
frame. In this regard, we present a temporally consistent
mesh recovery system (TCMR). It effectively focuses on the
past and future frames’ temporal information without being
dominated by the current static feature. Our TCMR significantly outperforms previous video-based methods in temporal consistency with better per-frame 3D pose and shape

accuracy. We also release the codes.

1. Introduction
Various methods have been proposed to analyze humans from images, ranging from estimating a simplistic 2D
skeleton to recovering 3D human pose and shape. Despite
the recent improvements, estimating 3D human pose and
shape from images is still a challenging task, especially in
the monocular case due to depth ambiguity, limited training
data, and complexity of human articulations.
Most of the previous methods [6, 11, 15, 16, 22, 26] attempt to recover 3D human pose and shape from a single
image. They are generally based on parametric 3D human mesh models, such as SMPL [18], and directly regress
11964

