Gated Spatio-Temporal Attention-Guided Video Deblurring
Maitreya Suin
A. N. Rajagopalan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
maitreyasuin21@gmail.com, raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Video deblurring remains a challenging task due to the
complexity of spatially and temporally varying blur. Most of
the existing works depend on implicit or explicit alignment
for temporal information fusion, which either increases the
computational cost or results in suboptimal performance
due to misalignment. In this work, we investigate two
key factors responsible for deblurring quality: how to fuse
spatio-temporal information and from where to collect it.
We propose a factorized gated spatio-temporal attention
module to perform non-local operations across space and
time to fully utilize the available information without depending on alignment. First, we perform spatial aggregation followed by a temporal aggregation step. Next, we
adaptively distribute the global spatio-temporal information to each pixel. It shows superior performance compared to existing non-local fusion techniques while being
considerably more efficient. To complement the attention
module, we propose a reinforcement learning-based framework for selecting keyframes from the neighborhood with
the most complementary and useful information. Moreover,
our adaptive approach can increase or decrease the frame
usage at inference time, depending on the user’s need. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the
superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Video deblurring, as a primary problem in the vision and
graphics communities, strives to predict latent frames from
a blurred sequence. The camera shake and high-speed motion in dynamic scenes often generate unwanted blur and
produce blurry videos. Such videos not only deteriorate the
visual quality but also hinder some high-level vision tasks
such as tracking [13, 18], video stabilization [17], etc. As
more videos are taken using hand-held and onboard video
capturing devices, this problem has received great attention
in the last decade. The blur in videos is usually a consequence of several interwoven factors like camera shake, object motion, depth variations, etc.

Unlike single-image deblurring, video deblurring methods can utilize additional information that exists across
neighboring frames. Early methods relied on motion compensation of the input frames, either explicitly [24, 16, 12]
or implicitly [37, 36], to aggregate information at a particular location from adjacent frames. [24, 12, 3] first compute optical flow between a reference frame and neighboring frames and then use the aligned observations to deblur
the reference frame. [32] utilizes deformable convolution to
align feature maps using learnable offsets. Although these
alignment methods are intended for increasing the temporal
coherence, they have several disadvantages: 1) they introduce extra parameters, calculations and training difficulty,
and 2) incorrect alignment may lead to undesired artifacts.
Implicit handling of motion using recurrent networks or 3D
convolution has its own drawbacks. 3D convolution [35]
is computationally heavy and introduces a large number of
parameters. For recurrent architectures, the assumption that
all previous frames will be automatically aligned and fused
in the hidden state remains a problem for frames with large
displacement. It is not very easy to extract only the relevant information from a single combined state. Also, due to
recurrent connections it is not feasible to process multiple
frames in parallel.
In this work, we address two critical aspects of video
deblurring: how to gather spatio-temporal information effectively and from where to gather this information. The
key intuition is that a blurred region in the current frame
would probably have complementary information in a distant frame. Finding the spatio-temporal relation is critical
while fusing information as not all parts of the neighboring frames are equally informative for restoring the current
frame due to varying factors such as occlusions, motion,
etc. Fusion of incorrect information adversely affects reconstruction performance. We explore the need for nonlocal operations for spatio-temporal fusion. A non-local
self-attention module aims at computing the correlations
between all possible pixels within and across frames, which
directly resonates with the current goal of spatio-temporal
fusion. By nature, such a block does not require any alignment steps. [30] introduced self-attention based transformer

7802

