ViPNAS: Efficient Video Pose Estimation via Neural Architecture Search
Lumin Xu1,2

Yingda Guan2 Sheng Jin3,2 Wentao Liu4 Chen Qian4
Ping Luo3 Wanli Ouyang5 Xiaogang Wang1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research 3 The University of Hong Kong
4
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 5 The University of Sydney
luminxu@link.cuhk.edu.hk
pluo@cs.hku.hk

{guanyingda, jinsheng, liuwentao, qianchen}@sensetime.com
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Human pose estimation has achieved significant
progress in recent years. However, most of the recent methods focus on improving accuracy using complicated models and ignoring real-time efficiency. To achieve a better
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency, we propose a
novel neural architecture search (NAS) method, termed ViPNAS, to search networks in both spatial and temporal levels
for fast online video pose estimation. In the spatial level,
we carefully design the search space with five different dimensions including network depth, width, kernel size, group
number, and attentions. In the temporal level, we search
from a series of temporal feature fusions to optimize the total accuracy and speed across multiple video frames. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to search for the
temporal feature fusion and automatic computation allocation in videos. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the challenging COCO2017
and PoseTrack2018 datasets. Our discovered model family, S-ViPNAS and T-ViPNAS, achieve significantly higher
inference speed (CPU real-time) without sacrificing the accuracy compared to the previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has made impressive progress in
recent years with the development of stronger neural networks. Most state-of-the-art models [36, 49, 56] only focus
on improving the accuracy, but ignore the computational
complexity and real-time performance. However, both accuracy and efficiency are critical for real-world applications
of video pose estimation. In this paper, we aim to build
a lightweight pose estimator that achieves state-of-the-art
performance with significant model complexity reduction.
For video pose estimation, there is commonly consider-

Figure 1. Speed-accuracy trade-off on PoseTrack2018 [1] validation set. Methods involve SBL [56], LightTrack [38] and our
ViPNAS with various backbones. With accuracy comparable to
state-of-the-art networks, ViPNAS achieves CPU real-time with
significantly lower computation.

able temporal redundancy that leads to superfluous computation, i.e. adjacent frames in a video share similar global
context information. The temporal contextual information
can be used for improving pose estimation. Therefore, it is
critical to fuse features from adjacent frames to the current
frame in order to effectively utilize the temporal contextual
information for balancing accuracy and efficiency. However, there are still several open questions:
1. Low-level local features are important for accurate
localization, while higher-level global features are robust to
occlusion and large pose variations. Which stage of features
should be fused?
2. For temporal feature fusion, various fusion operations
(e.g. addition, multiplication, or concatenation) are chosen
by trial-and-error. How to choose the optimal operation?
3. The goal is to optimize the total accuracy subject to
the total computation complexity (Flops) constraints over

16072

