DSRNA: Differentiable Search of Robust Neural Architectures
Ramtin Hosseini, Xingyi Yang, Pengtao Xie
UC San Diego
{rhossein, x3yang, p1xie}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
In deep learning applications, the architectures of deep
neural networks are crucial in achieving high accuracy.
Many methods have been proposed to search for highperformance neural architectures automatically. However,
these searched architectures are prone to adversarial attacks. A small perturbation of the input data can render the
architecture to change prediction outcomes significantly. To
address this problem, we propose methods to perform differentiable search of robust neural architectures. In our
methods, two differentiable metrics are defined to measure
architectures’ robustness, based on certified lower bound
and Jacobian norm bound. Then we search for robust architectures by maximizing the robustness metrics. Different
from previous approaches which aim to improve architectures’ robustness in an implicit way: performing adversarial training and injecting random noise, our methods explicitly and directly maximize robustness metrics to harvest
robust architectures. On CIFAR-10, ImageNet, and MNIST,
we perform game-based evaluation and verification-based
evaluation on the robustness of our methods. The experimental results show that our methods 1) are more robust to
various norm-bound attacks than several robust NAS baselines; 2) are more accurate than baselines when there are no
attacks; 3) have significantly higher certified lower bounds
than baselines.

1. Introduction
In deep learning applications, the architectures of neural models play a crucial role in improving performance.
For example, on the ImageNet [15] benchmark, the image classification error is reduced from 16.4% to 3.57%,
when the architecture is evolved from AlexNet [26] to
ResNet [20]. Previously, neural architectures are mostly
designed by humans, which is time-consuming to obtain a
highly-performant architecture. Recently, automated neural
architecture search [49, 50, 36, 37, 41, 42] which develops
algorithms to find out the optimal architecture that yields
the best performance on the validation datasets, has raised

much attention and achieved promising results. For example, on the CIFAR-10 dataset, an automatically searched architecture [32] achieves an image classification error rate of
2.76% while the error achieved by state-of-the-art humandesigned architecture is 3.46%.
As we will show in the experiments, the architectures
searched by existing methods are prone to adversarial attacks. A small perturbation (which is not perceivable
by humans) of the input data can render the architecture
to change prediction outcomes significantly. Many approaches [18, 4, 33, 12, 28] have been proposed to improve
the robustness of DNNs. In these approaches, the architecture of a DNN is provided by humans, and the defense
method focuses on training the weights in this architecture
in a robust way. However, the robustness of a DNN is not
only relevant to its weight parameters, but also determined
by the architecture. It is important to search for architectures that are robust to adversarial attacks as well.
In this paper, we develop a novel approach for robust
NAS. We define two differentiable metrics to measure the
robustness of architectures and formulate robust NAS as an
optimization problem that aims to find out an optimal architecture by maximizing the robustness metrics. The first
metric is defined based on certified lower bound [2]. Linear
bounding methods are applied to individual building blocks
in the differentiable architecture search space and these individual bounds are composed to obtain global bounds for
the entire neural architecture. The second metric is based
on the Jacobian norm bound [21], where the robustness is
measured by how much the output shifts as the input is perturbed. The shift is upper bounded by the norms of row vectors in the Jacobian matrix of the neural architecture. Our
approach is applicable to various forms of differentiable architecture search methods (e.g., DARTS [32], PC-DARTS
[46], P-DARTS [9], etc. and is robust against adversarial attacks in various norm choices. Previously, robust NAS has
been investigated in [19, 8], based on adversarial training
of randomly sampled sub-architectures [19] and differentiable architecture variables [8]. Unlike these methods that
achieve robustness implicitly via adversarial training, our
method explicitly defines robustness metrics and directly

6196

