Co-Grounding Networks with Semantic Attention for Referring Expression
Comprehension in Videos

1

Sijie Song1 , Xudong Lin2 , Jiaying Liu1 , Zongming Guo1∗, Shih-Fu Chang2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
DVMM Lab, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of referring expression comprehension in videos, which is challenging due to
complex expression and scene dynamics. Unlike previous
methods which solve the problem in multiple stages (i.e.,
tracking, proposal-based matching), we tackle the problem
from a novel perspective, co-grounding, with an elegant
one-stage framework. We enhance the single-frame grounding accuracy by semantic attention learning and improve
the cross-frame grounding consistency with co-grounding
feature learning. Semantic attention learning explicitly
parses referring cues in different attributes to reduce the
ambiguity in the complex expression. Co-grounding feature
learning boosts visual feature representations by integrating temporal correlation to reduce the ambiguity caused by
scene dynamics. Experiment results demonstrate the superiority of our framework on the video grounding datasets VID
and LiOTB in generating accurate and stable results across
frames. Our model is also applicable to referring expression comprehension in images, illustrated by the improved
performance on the RefCOCO dataset. Our project is
available at https://sijiesong.github.io/cogrounding.

1. Introduction
Referring expression comprehension has attracted much
attention recently. It aims to localize a region of the image/video described by the natural language. This topic is of great importance in computer vision to support a
variety of research problems such as image/video captioning [2, 27], visual question answering [3] and image/video
retrieval [31, 9]. It also plays a key role in machine intelligence for a wide range of applications from humancomputer interaction, robotics to early education.
In the past years, most of the previous work for referring
expression comprehension focus on the grounding for static
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Referring expression comprehension in videos. Due to
dynamic scenes and ambiguity in the expression, per-frame inference (in blue) with state-of-the-art grounding method [36] would
lead to unstable results across frames, while our co-grounding
networks achieve accurate and consistent predictions (in red).
Ground-truth annotations are denoted in green.

images [32, 34, 38, 18, 36, 23, 24, 12, 1] and have achieved
promising results. However, referring expression comprehension for videos is less explored, which is challenging
yet important. Different from several threads of referring
expression comprehension in videos, such as referring all mentioned entities [42], we localize the spatio-temporal
tube that semantically corresponds to the whole sentence.
That is, we output bounding box for each frame as shown
in Figure 1.
The work in [17] treats referring expression comprehension for videos as a tracking problem. We argue that it
would suffer from template selection error, because it is
hard to tell from the grounding results from multiple frames
which is the right one to track. The other work [6] first
proposes spatio-temporal tube candidates and then matches
them with textual features from expression. However, the
performance is limited by the proposal quality. Inspired by
the advance in one-stage image grounding methods [36] that
get rid of proposal detectors, another solution is to conduct
per-frame inference with [36], but there are still two problems. Firstly, the entities in the expression (such as ‘boat’,
‘men’, ‘whale’, ‘sea’ in Figure 1) would cause ambiguity

1346

