Group-aware Label Transfer for Domain Adaptive Person Re-identification
Kecheng Zheng1 ,* Wu Liu2∗ , Lingxiao He2 , Tao Mei2 , Jiebo Luo3 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 AI Research of JD, 3 University of Rochester

zkcys001@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liuwu1,helingxiao3,tmei}@jd.com, jluo@cs.rochester.edu, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive (UDA) person reidentification (ReID) aims at adapting the model trained on
a labeled source-domain dataset to a target-domain dataset
without any further annotations. Most successful UDAReID approaches combine clustering-based pseudo-label
prediction with representation learning and perform the two
steps in an alternating fashion. However, offline interaction
between these two steps may allow noisy pseudo labels to
substantially hinder the capability of the model. In this paper, we propose a Group-aware Label Transfer (GLT) algorithm, which enables the online interaction and mutual
promotion of pseudo-label prediction and representation
learning. Specifically, a label transfer algorithm simultaneously uses pseudo labels to train the data while refining the
pseudo labels as an online clustering algorithm. It treats the
online label refinery problem as an optimal transport problem, which explores the minimum cost for assigning M samples to N pseudo labels. More importantly, we introduce a
group-aware strategy to assign implicit attribute group IDs
to samples. The combination of the online label refining algorithm and the group-aware strategy can better correct the
noisy pseudo label in an online fashion and narrow down
the search space of the target identity. The effectiveness
of the proposed GLT is demonstrated by the experimental
results (Rank-1 accuracy) for Market1501→DukeMTMC
(82.0%) and DukeMTMC→Market1501 (92.2%), remarkably closing the gap between unsupervised and supervised
performance on person re-identification. 1

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) [27, 50, 19] is the important task of matching person images captured from nonoverlapping camera networks, which is widely used in prac* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
1 Full codes are available in https://github.com/JDAI-CV/fast-reid and
https://github.com/zkcys001/UDAStrongBaseline.

Conventional Methods

Our Method

Label
Refinery
Network
Network
Group-aware Label Transfer

Figure 1. Illustration of conventional methods and our groupaware label transfer method. In our method, each instance is assigned to multiple prototypes with different granularity for generating multi-group pseudo labels, and then the noisy multi-group
pseudo labels are online refined. With guidance of refined multigroup pseudo labels, our method can learn an embedding space
that encodes the semantic multi-granularity structure of data.

tical applications such as automatic surveillance, contentbased retrieval, and behavior analysis [7, 23, 52, 48, 44,
24, 30, 12, 28, 17, 29]. It has been proved that existing
approaches can achieve remarkable performance when the
training and testing data are collected from the same application scenario but often fail to generalize well to other
scenarios due to the inevitable domain gaps. Therefore, it is
necessary for both academia and industry to study the Unsupervised Domain Adaptive (UDA) person re-identification
problem.
Existing UDA ReID approaches [14, 26, 35, 45, 55] typically include three steps: feature pre-training with labeled
source domain data, clustering-based pseudo-label prediction for the target domain data, and feature representation
learning/fine-tuning with the pseudo-labels. The last two
steps are usually iteratively conducted to strengthen or promote each other. However, the first problem is that the
pseudo-labels assigned through clustering usually contain

5310

