Playable Video Generation
Willi Menapace

Stéphane Lathuilière*

Sergey Tulyakov*

University of Trento

LTCI, Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris

stulyakov@snap.com

willi.menapace@unitn.it

Snap Inc.

stephane.lathuiliere@telecom-paris.fr

Aliaksandr Siarohin

Elisa Ricci

University of Trento

University of Trento
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

aliaksandr.siarohin@unitn.it

e.ricci@unitn.it

Abstract

1. Introduction
Humans at a very early age can identify key objects
and how each object can interact with its environment.
This ability is particularly notable when watching videos
of sports or games. In tennis and football, for example, the
skill is taken to the extreme. Spectators and sportscasters
often argue which action or movement the player should
have performed in the field. We can understand and anticipate actions in videos despite never being given an explicit
list of plausible actions. We develop this skill in an unsupervised manner as we see actions live and on the screen.
We can further analyze the technique with which an action
is performed as well as the “amount” of action, i.e. how
much to the left. Furthermore, we can reason about what
* The second and third authors contributed equally to the work.

...

This paper introduces the unsupervised learning problem of playable video generation (PVG). In PVG, we aim
at allowing a user to control the generated video by selecting a discrete action at every time step as when playing a
video game. The difficulty of the task lies both in learning semantically consistent actions and in generating realistic videos conditioned on the user input. We propose a
novel framework for PVG that is trained in a self-supervised
manner on a large dataset of unlabelled videos. We employ an encoder-decoder architecture where the predicted
action labels act as bottleneck. The network is constrained
to learn a rich action space using, as main driving loss,
a reconstruction loss on the generated video. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on several
datasets with wide environment variety. Further details,
code and examples are available on our project page willimenapace.github.io/playable-video-generation-website.

Unlabeled videos

Training

Test

(a) Playable Video Generation

(b) Our results

Figure 1: We introduce the task of playable video generation in an unsupervised setting (left). Given a set of unlabeled video sequences, a set of discrete actions are learned
in order to condition video generation. At test time, using
our method, named CADDY, the user can control the generated video on-the-fly providing action labels.
happens if the player took a different action and how this
would change the video.
From this observation, we propose a new task, Playable
Video Generation (PVG) illustrated in Fig 1a. In PVG, the
goal is to learn a set of distinct actions from real-world
video clips in an unsupervised manner (green block) in order to offer the user the possibility to interactively generate
new videos (red block). As shown in Fig 1b, at test time, the
user provides a discrete action label at every time step and
can see live its impact on the generated video, similarly to
video games. Introducing this novel problem paves the way
toward methods that can automatically simulate real-world
environments and provide a gaming-like experience.
PVG is related to the future frame prediction problem [13, 25, 28, 40, 42, 44] and in particular to methods that
condition future frames on action labels [20, 30, 31]. Given
one or few initial frames and the labels of the performed actions, such systems aim at predicting what happens next in

10061

