HoHoNet: 360 Indoor Holistic Understanding with Latent Horizontal Features
Cheng Sun1,2

Min Sun1,3

Hwann-Tzong Chen1,4

chengsun@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw

+ROLVWLF8QGHUVWDQGLQJ

Abstract
We present HoHoNet, a versatile and efficient framework for holistic understanding of an indoor 360-degree
panorama using a Latent Horizontal Feature (LHFeat). The
compact LHFeat flattens the features along the vertical direction and has shown success in modeling per-column modality for room layout reconstruction. HoHoNet advances in
two important aspects. First, the deep architecture is redesigned to run faster with improved accuracy. Second, we
propose a novel horizon-to-dense module, which relaxes
the per-column output shape constraint, allowing per-pixel
dense prediction from LHFeat. HoHoNet is fast: It runs at
52 FPS and 110 FPS with ResNet-50 and ResNet-34 backbones respectively, for modeling dense modalities from a
high-resolution 512 × 1024 panorama. HoHoNet is also
accurate. On the tasks of layout estimation and semantic
segmentation, HoHoNet achieves results on par with current state-of-the-art. On dense depth estimation, HoHoNet
outperforms all the prior arts by a large margin. Code is
available at https:// github.com/ sunset1995/ HoHoNet.

1. Introduction
Panoramic images can capture the complete 360° FOVs
in one shot to provide a wide range of context that facilitates scene understanding [29]. As omnidirectional cameras become more easily accessible and several large-scale
panorama datasets have been released, a growing number
of techniques are developed for tasks of panoramic scene
modeling such as semantic segmentation [9, 16, 28], depth
estimation [13, 24, 27], layout reconstruction [21, 26, 33],
and indoor real-time navigation [3].
This paper aims to address the problem of holistic scene
modeling from a single high-resolution equirectangular projection (ERP) image that captures the 360° panorama. We
present HoHoNet as an efficient, effective, and versatile
framework to achieve this goal (Fig. 1). The input ERP
1 National Tsing Hua University
2 ASUS AICS Department
3 Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
4 Aeolus Robotics

/D\RXWUHFRQVWUXFWLRQ

/+)HDW

KG

'HSWKHVWLPDWLRQ

KG

SUHGLFWLRQLQKRUL]RQWDOVKDSH

6HPDQWLFVHJPHQWDWLRQ

Figure 1: One framework for all: HoHoNet is a novel deep
learning framework for modeling layout structure, dense
depth, and semantic segmentation through a Latent Horizontal Feature representation (LHFeat) whose height dimension
is flattened. The proposed horizon-to-dense (h2d) module
can produce dense predictions from the compact LHFeat.
image is first passed through a CNN backbone for feature
pyramid extraction, and then a proposed efficient height compression module encodes the feature pyramid into a Latent
Horizontal Feature representation (LHFeat) whose height
dimension is flattened. Finally, from LHFeat, the HoHoNet
framework can yield both per-column and per-pixel modalities with state-of-the-art quality.
Our way of encoding ERP images into LHFeat is inspired
by Sun et al. [21]. However, their model is only applicable
to tasks of predicting per-column modalities (e.g., corners
or boundaries of layout), which constrains its feasibility in
other scenarios requiring per-pixel predictions. We show that
LHFeat can flexibly encode latent features for recovering
the target 2D per-pixel modalities, based on our observation
of the strong regularity between human-made structures and
gravity aligned y-axis of ERP images (Fig. 2).
In HoHoNet we introduce a new horizon-to-dense (h2d)
module for recovering 2D per-pixel modalities while maintaining the efficiency of overall framework (Fig. 1). A
naive method is to treat the channel dimension of horizontal prediction as height and apply a linear interpolation if

2573

