IMAGINE: Image Synthesis by Image-Guided Model Inversion
Pei Wang*
UC, San Diego

Yijun Li, Krishna Kumar Singh, Jingwan Lu
Adobe Research

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC, San Diego

pew062@ucsd.edu

{yijli, krishsin, jlu}@adobe.com

nuno@ucsd.edu

Random samples generated by a reference image

Reference image

Figure 1: Results from our proposed IMAGINE - the first attempt to use classifier inversion for reference-guided image generation.

Abstract
We introduce an inversion based method, denoted as
IMAge-Guided model INvErsion (IMAGINE), to generate
high-quality and diverse images from only a single training sample. We leverage the knowledge of image semantics from a pre-trained classifier to achieve plausible generations via matching multi-level feature representations
in the classifier, associated with adversarial training with
an external discriminator. IMAGINE enables the synthesis
procedure to simultaneously 1) enforce semantic specificity
constraints during the synthesis, 2) produce realistic images
without generator training, and 3) give users intuitive control over the generation process. With extensive experimental results, we demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively
* Work done during internship at Adobe Research

that IMAGINE performs favorably against state-of-the-art
GAN-based and inversion-based methods, across three different image domains (i.e., objects, scenes, and textures).

1. Introduction
Consider a reference image from the left-most column of
Fig. 1, we humans could easily imagine its variants in other
formats, e.g., patterns with different spatial arrangements,
objects in different positions or viewpoints. Can we give
machines such abilities to automatically synthesize semantically meaningful variations of a reference image? Such a
system can generate interesting variations of assets for design ideations and can also be utilized as a data augmentation technique to benefit downstream data-hungry tasks.
With the popularity of generative adversarial networks

3681

