Cross-Modal Contrastive Learning for Text-to-Image Generation
Han Zhang*
Google Research

Jing Yu Koh*†
Google Research

zhanghan@google.com

jykoh@google.com

Jason Baldridge
Google Research

Honglak Lee‡
University of Michigan

Yinfei Yang
Google Research

jridge@google.com

honglak@umich.edu

yinfeiy@google.com

Abstract
The output of text-to-image synthesis systems should be
coherent, clear, photo-realistic scenes with high semantic
fidelity to their conditioned text descriptions. Our CrossModal Contrastive Generative Adversarial Network (XMCGAN) addresses this challenge by maximizing the mutual
information between image and text. It does this via multiple contrastive losses which capture inter-modality and
intra-modality correspondences. XMC-GAN uses an attentional self-modulation generator, which enforces strong
text-image correspondence, and a contrastive discriminator, which acts as a critic as well as a feature encoder for
contrastive learning. The quality of XMC-GAN’s output is
a major step up from previous models, as we show on three
challenging datasets. On MS-COCO, not only does XMCGAN improve state-of-the-art FID from 24.70 to 9.33, but–
more importantly–people prefer XMC-GAN by 77.3% for
image quality and 74.1% for image-text alignment, compared to three other recent models. XMC-GAN also generalizes to the challenging Localized Narratives dataset
(which has longer, more detailed descriptions), improving
state-of-the-art FID from 48.70 to 14.12. Lastly, we train
and evaluate XMC-GAN on the challenging Open Images
data, establishing a strong benchmark FID score of 26.91.

1. Introduction
Compared to other kinds of inputs (e.g., sketches and object masks), descriptive sentences are an intuitive and flexible way to express visual concepts for generating images.
The main challenge for text-to-image synthesis lies in learning from unstructured description and handling the different
statistical properties between vision and language inputs.
* Equal contribution.
† Work done as a member of the Google AI Residency program.
‡ Work performed at Google Research.

Image
Encoder

Image
Encoder

Text
Encoder

Real Image #1

Image
Encoder

Image
Encoder

Text
Encoder

Real Image #2
Generator

Generator

“A couple of baseball
players on a field.”

“A white boat is
out on the water.”

Caption #1

Caption #2
Repel

Attract

Figure 1: Inter-modal and intra-modal contrastive losses in
our proposed XMC-GAN text-to-image synthesis model.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12] have
shown promising results on text-to-image generation [44,
61, 62], using a conditional GAN formulation [11]. AttnGAN [58] proposes a multi-stage refinement framework
to generate fine-grained details by attending to relevant
words in the description. These models generate high fidelity images on single domain datasets (e.g., birds [56] and
flowers [35]), but struggle on complex scenes with many
objects—such as those in MS-COCO [30]. Recent methods [18, 27, 16, 22] propose object-driven, hierarchical approaches that explicitly model object instances within an
image. Given the text description, they first infer a semantic
layout (e.g., object bounding boxes, segmentation masks, or
a combination), and then generate an image from the layout.
These hierarchical methods are cumbersome to apply to
real-world scenarios; generation becomes a multi-step process (box-to-mask-to-image), and the model requires much
more fine-grained object labels to train.
We study contrastive learning in the context of text-toimage synthesis and demonstrate that a simple one-stage
GAN without object-level annotation can outperform prior
object-driven and multi-stage approaches. Besides generating realistic images, we also hope (1) the image should
holistically match the description; (2) generated images
should match real images when they are conditioned on the

833

