ArtCoder: An End-to-end Method for Generating
Scanning-robust Stylized QR Codes
Hao Su1 , Jianwei Niu1,2,3∗, Xuefeng Liu1 , Qingfeng Li1 , Ji Wan1 , Mingliang Xu2 , Tao Ren1,3
1

State Key Lab of VR Technology and System, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Industrial Technology Research Institute, School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University

{bhsuhao, niujianwei, liu xuefeng, liqingfeng, wanji}@buaa.edu.cn, iexumingliang@zzu.edu.cn

(b)

(c)
Our result

Finder & Alignment
Patterns

Traditional QR Code

Style & Content Target

(a)

Figure 1: (a) Traditional QR code. (b) Samples of our stylized QR codes. These codes combine the visual effect of stylization
and the functionality of QR codes, which are personalized, attractive, and scanning-robust. (c) Finder and alignment patterns
are used to determine a QR code’s location and angle, thus we preserve their traditional appearances.

Abstract
Quick Response (QR) code is one of the most worldwide used two-dimensional codes. Traditional QR codes
appear as random collections of black-and-white modules
that lack visual semantics and aesthetic elements, which inspires the recent works to beautify the appearances of QR
codes. However, these works adopt fixed generation algorithms and therefore can only generate QR codes with a
pre-defined style. In this paper, combining the Neural Style
Transfer technique, we propose a novel end-to-end method,
named ArtCoder, to generate the stylized QR codes that are
personalized, diverse, attractive, and scanning-robust. To
guarantee that the generated stylized QR codes are still
scanning-robust, we propose a Sampling-Simulation layer,
a module-based code loss, and a competition mechanism.
The experimental results show that our stylized QR codes
have high-quality in both the visual effect and the scanningrobustness, and they are able to support the real-world application.
∗ The corresponding author.

1. Introduction
With the ubiquity of smartphones, the Quick Response
(QR) code [1] has become one of the most-used types of
two-dimensional codes, and has been popularly applied
in many scenarios including social networks, mobile payments, and advertisements. Traditional QR codes are matrix codes consisting of black-and-white squares modules
that are visual-unpleasant and meaningless to human vision
[Fig. 1(a)]. An appealing QR code will attract more people
to scan the code and increase the link visits [2–4], which
inspires the recent works to beautify the appearances of QR
codes [2–7] (i.e., endowing QR codes with visual semantics
or aesthetic elements). However, these works adopt fixed
generation algorithms and therefore can only generate QR
codes with a pre-defined style, [Fig. 2(b)-(f)], which limits
the personalized choices of users.
In this paper, employing the Neural Style Transfer (NST)
technique, we propose an end-to-end method, named ArtCoder, to generate the stylized QR codes. These stylized
codes combine the visual effect of stylized images and the
functionality of QR codes, which are personalized, diverse,

2277

