Unbalanced Feature Transport for Exemplar-based Image Translation
Fangneng Zhan 1,2 , Yingchen Yu 1,2 , Kaiwen Cui 1 , Gongjie Zhang 1 , Shijian Lu 1 , Jianxiong Pan 2 ,
Changgong Zhang 2 , Feiying Ma 2 , Xuansong Xie 2 , Chunyan Miao 1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Abstract
Despite the great success of GANs in images translation
with different conditioned inputs such as semantic segmentation and edge maps, generating high-fidelity realistic images with reference styles remains a grand challenge in conditional image-to-image translation. This paper presents a
general image translation framework that incorporates optimal transport for feature alignment between conditional
inputs and style exemplars in image translation. The introduction of optimal transport mitigates the constraint of
many-to-one feature matching significantly while building
up accurate semantic correspondences between conditional
inputs and exemplars. We design a novel unbalanced optimal transport to address the transport between features
with deviational distributions which exists widely between
conditional inputs and exemplars. In addition, we design a
semantic-activation normalization scheme that injects style
features of exemplars into the image translation process
successfully. Extensive experiments over multiple image
translation tasks show that our method achieves superior
image translation qualitatively and quantitatively as compared with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Conditional image-to-image translation aims to generate
images from certain given conditional inputs such as semantic segmentation [30, 40], layout [20], and key points
[36]. With the advance of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), it has made rapid progress and achieved quite
promising translation performance in recent years. However, most existing methods have very loose control over
the translation process which often affects the translation
quality greatly and so the wide application of image translation in various tasks. Optimal style control is still an open
challenge in high-fidelity realistic image translation.
Several prior works attempted to tackle the style control
challenge by using a latent code that is encoded by either
Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) [30] or style encoder [3].
However, latent codes often impair style control accuracy as

Conditional Input Feature

Conditional Input Feature

Conditional Input Feature

Exemplar Feature

Exemplar Feature

Exemplar Feature

Cosine Similarity

Classical OT

Unbalanced OT

Figure 1. Different feature matching in image translation: Cosine
Similarity tends to match each feature separately which often leads
to many-to-one matching. Classical optimal transport (Classical
OT) suppresses the many-to-one matching problem but it matches
all feature points including undesired outliers (existing between
deviational feature distributions). Our designed unbalanced optimal transport (Unbalanced OT) mitigates many-to-one matching
and avoid outlier matching effectively.

they do not have sufficient capacity to capture detailed style
information. A different approach is to inject specific style
codes for different semantic regions [63], but it is specifically designed for conditional input of semantic segmentation and cannot well generalize to other conditional inputs. Recently, Zhang et al. [58] explore to establish dense
semantic correspondence between conditioned input and a
given style exemplar so as to offer dense style guidance in
translation. However, it constructs the semantic correspondence based on cosine similarity that often leads to manyto-one matching (i.e. multiple conditional input features
match to the same exemplar feature as illustrated in Fig.
1) and missing of details in image translation.
We designed UNITE, UNbalanced optImal feature
Transport for Exemplar-based image translation that
achieves high-fidelity image generation with faithful style
to given exemplars. UNITE consists of a feature transport
network and a translation network that are inter-connected
and can be jointly optimized in training. The feature
transport network introduces optimal transport [31] which
matches two sets of features as a whole and effectively overcomes many-to-one matching as in the widely adopted cosine similarity [58] that matches individual features separately. To tackle the distribution deviations between conditional inputs and exemplars, we design an unbalanced op-

15028

