Adversarial Robustness Across Representation Spaces
Pranjal Awasthi∗

George Yu∗
Chun-Sung Ferng
Da-Cheng Juan
Google Research

Andrew Tomkins

[pranjalawasthi, georgeyu, csferng, tomkins, dacheng]@google.com

Abstract
Adversarial robustness corresponds to the susceptibility of deep neural networks to imperceptible perturbations
made at test time. In the context of image tasks, many algorithms have been proposed to make neural networks robust
to adversarial perturbations made to the input pixels. These
perturbations are typically measured in an ℓp norm. However, robustness often holds only for the specific attack used
for training. In this work we extend the above setting to consider the problem of training of deep neural networks that
can be made simultaneously robust to perturbations applied
in multiple natural representations spaces. For the case of
image data, examples include the standard pixel representation as well as the representation in the discrete cosine
transform (DCT) basis. We design a theoretically sound
algorithm with formal guarantees for the above problem.
Furthermore, our guarantees also hold when the goal is to
require robustness with respect to multiple ℓp norm based
attacks. We then derive an efficient practical implementation and demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
standard datasets for image classification.1

1. Introduction
In recent years deep learning has enjoyed tremendous
success in solving a variety of machine learning tasks, even
achieving or surpassing human level performance in certain
cases [14, 15]. At the same time important vulnerabilities in
these systems have also been discovered. One such example
is their susceptibility to imperceptible perturbations made to
the input at test time [24]. This has led to the new paradigm
of adversarial machine learning, i.e., making deep neural
networks robust to test time perturbations. There has been
a flurry of recent works in this area with several proposed
defenses [18, 29, 6, 17] and methods to attack and evalu∗ Equal contribution and corresponding authors.
1 Code available at https : / / github . com / tensorflow /
neural- structured- learning/tree/master/research/
multi_representation_adversary.

ate these defenses [5, 3, 26]. When studying the design of
networks robust to adversarial attacks several aspects need
to be considered such as a) what perturbations can the adversary apply to the input, and b) what information does
the adversary have about the neural network? One widelystudied setting in the current literature is white box attacks
under ℓp norm perturbations [10, 18]. Here the adversary
has complete knowledge of the neural network and its parameters, and given an input x it can perturb it to x′ such
that kx − x′ kp ≤ ǫ for some p ≥ 1 specified apriori. In the
context of image data this corresponds to applying perturbations to the input pixels. Current approaches for defending
against such attacks are based on studying variants of the
following robust objective:


′
min E(x,y)∼D ′ max
L(f
(x
),
y)
.
(1)
θ
′
θ

x :kx−x kp ≤ǫ

Here (x, y) is an example and label pair drawn from the
data distribution, f is a neural network parameterized by
weights θ and L is a standard loss function such as the cross
entropy loss. As an example the popular projected gradient
descent (PGD) method [18] proposes to optimize the above
objective by alternately maximizing the inner objective via
gradient ascent and then performing the outer minimization
via gradient descent. The recent work of [22] combines the
above objective with Gaussian smoothing to achieve certified robustness guarantees, and another popular method
namely the TRADES algorithm [29] adds a regularization
term requiring the predictions of the network at x and x′ to
be close to each other.
In this work we aim to address two main limitations of
current approaches to adversarial machine learning. The
first concerns the choice of the representation in which the
adversary applies the perturbations. Using images as an example, current approaches model the adversary as making
small magnitude changes in the pixel representation of the
image. However, given that the adversary has full access
to the input x, apriori there is no reason to restrict the perturbations to only the pixel representations. Real data such
as images have many other natural representations, such as
the discrete cosine transform (DCT) basis for images. One

7608

