UnrealPerson: An Adaptive Pipeline towards Costless Person Re-identification
Tianyu Zhang1 , Lingxi Xie4 , Longhui Wei5 , Zijie Zhuang4 , Yongfei Zhang1,2,3* , Bo Li1,2,3 , Qi Tian 6
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Media, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University,
2

3

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University,

Pengcheng Laboratory, 4 Tsinghua University, 5 University of Science and Technology of China, 6 Xidian University
{tianyu1949, 198808xc, weilh2568, jayzhuang42, wywqtian}@gmail.com,
{yfzhang, boli}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The main difficulty of person re-identification (ReID) lies
in collecting annotated data and transferring the model
across different domains. This paper presents UnrealPerson, a novel pipeline that makes full use of unreal image
data to decrease the costs in both the training and deployment stages. Its fundamental part is a system that can generate synthesized images of high-quality and from controllable distributions. Instance-level annotation goes with the
synthesized data and is almost free. We point out some details in image synthesis that largely impact the data quality.
With 3,000 IDs and 120,000 instances, our method achieves
a 38.5% rank-1 accuracy when being directly transferred to
MSMT17. It almost doubles the former record using synthesized data and even surpasses previous direct transfer
records using real data. This offers a good basis for unsupervised domain adaption, where our pre-trained model
is easily plugged into the state-of-the-art algorithms towards higher accuracy. In addition, the data distribution
can be flexibly adjusted to fit some corner ReID scenarios,
which widens the application of our pipeline. We publish
our data synthesis toolkit and synthesized data in https:
//github.com/FlyHighest/UnrealPerson.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification aims to retrieve the same pedestrian (i.e., an identity) from the images captured by a camera network. As a fundamental task of intelligent surveillance, ReID has attracted increasing attention in the comThis work was partially supported by the National Key R&D Program
of China (Grant No.2020AAA0130200), the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No.61772054, 62072022), the NSFC Key Project
(No.61632001) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. We thank Dr. Weichao Qiu for instructive discussions.
* Corresponding author

puter vision community. Recently, with the emergence of
large-scale ReID datasets [59, 60, 46], effective algorithms
have been proposed and achieved satisfying performance in
these benchmarks. However, there is still a significant gap
in deploying the ReID algorithms to real-world scenarios,
arguably because (i) the trained models are often vulnerable to domain changes, yet (ii) annotating identities in new
scenarios requires exhausting human labors. We attribute
such an application gap to the fact that the current pipeline
is hindered by the data limitation and thus not optimized for
generalizing across different scenarios.
To alleviate this problem and pave a new path for the
community, we propose UnrealPerson, a new pipeline that
makes full use of unreal (synthesized) image data towards
a powerful ReID algorithm that easily and costlessly deploys to a wide range of scenarios. The key observation is
that the synthesized pedestrian data sampled from a virtual
world comes naturally with free and perfect annotations.
From the perspective of the generalization ability, the synthesized data enjoys two-fold benefits. First, compared to
the manually collected data from restricted real scenarios,
the synthesized data from infinite virtual scenes is more diverse, making it less prone to domain-specific patterns. Second, the parameters of data synthesis can be freely adjusted
to fit the domains in which collecting real data is difficult
(e.g., the low-illumination scenario). To fully utilize these
characteristics, our entire pipeline consists of pre-training
the model using abundant synthesized data and then finetuning it with off-the-shelf domain adaptation algorithms.
This pipeline has broad applications since it fits both the
fully-supervised and unsupervised setting and transfers well
to a few corner scenarios.
The quality and richness of our synthesized pedestrian
data is the cornerstone of our UnrealPerson pipeline. To
synthesize abundant and authentic samples, we first create
a set of scenarios (e.g., street, plaza, etc.) in the virtual 3D
world with changeable environmental parameters (e.g., illumination, lighting, etc.). Then, we place an arbitrary num-

11506

