Wide-Baseline Multi-Camera Calibration using Person Re-Identification
Yan Xu

Yu-Jhe Li
Xinshuo Weng
Carnegie Mellon University

Kris Kitani

{yxu2, yujheli, xinshuow, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of estimating the 3D pose of
a network of cameras for large-environment wide-baseline
scenarios, e.g., cameras for construction sites, sports stadiums, and public spaces. This task is challenging since detecting and matching the same 3D keypoint observed from
two very different camera views is difficult, making standard
structure-from-motion (SfM) pipelines inapplicable. In such
circumstances, treating people in the scene as “keypoints”
and associating them across different camera views can
be an alternative method for obtaining correspondences.
Based on this intuition, we propose a method that uses ideas
from person re-identification (re-ID) for wide-baseline camera calibration. Our method first employs a re-ID method
to associate human bounding boxes across cameras, then
converts bounding box correspondences to point correspondences, and finally solves for camera pose using multi-view
geometry and bundle adjustment. Since our method does
not require specialized calibration targets except for visible people, it applies to situations where frequent calibration updates are required. We perform extensive experiments on datasets captured from scenes of different sizes
(80m2 , 350m2 , 600m2 ), camera settings (indoor and outdoor), and human activities (walking, playing basketball,
construction). Experiment results show that our method
achieves similar performance to standard SfM methods relying on manually labeled point correspondences.

1. Introduction
Our task is to solve the 3D camera pose estimation
problem for multi-camera networks. We target challenging large-environment wide-baseline scenarios where cameras are static, sparse, and spaced far from each other (e.g.,
10 to 20 meters). Conventionally, SfM [55] methods are
often used to estimate camera pose. These methods first
detect keypoints in the images of different camera views
and describe the keypoints using hand-crafted or deep features [33, 10]. They then match the keypoint features [22]
across views to obtain 2D-2D point correspondences and

Figure 1: In large-environment, wide-baseline camera networks, backgrounds (top, white area), lighting conditions
(middle), and textured areas (bottom, white area) from different camera views can vary massively, causing the failure
of keypoint detection and matching ((a), (b)) in standard
SfM methods. However, matching the same people across
views can still be done correctly using re-ID methods ((c),
(d)). (Points/bounding boxes of the same color correspond.)
solve the camera pose using multi-view geometry [19]. In
our setting, due to the significant difference between camera
poses, images taken from different cameras can have very
different backgrounds, lighting conditions, and texture areas, as shown in Figure 1, making detecting and matching
the same keypoints across camera views difficult.
Alternatively, we observe that if people are visible in
the scene, we can obtain correspondences by detecting and
matching people across different cameras. Especially for
wide-baseline scenarios, matching the same people across
camera views is easier than matching 2D keypoints since
many human features can be used. For example, when people are close to the cameras, we can use the appearance
information (e.g., height, clothes, length of hair) to match
them across camera views (Figure 1). When people are
far away from the cameras, we can still successfully match
them from their temporal motion information (e.g., speed,
smoothness of trajectory). Therefore, to obtain correspon-

13134

