SCF-Net: Learning Spatial Contextual Features for Large-Scale Point Cloud
Segmentation
Siqi Fan1 2 , Qiulei Dong† 2 3 4 , Fenghua Zhu1 , Yisheng Lv† 1 , Peijun Ye1 , Fei-Yue Wang1
1
State Key Laboratory for Management and Control of Complex Systems, CASIA
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{fansiqi2019, fenghua.zhu, yisheng.lv, peijun.ye, feiyue.wang} @ia.ac.cn, qldong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
How to learn effective features from large-scale point
clouds for semantic segmentation has attracted increasing
attention in recent years. Addressing this problem, we propose a learnable module that learns Spatial Contextual Features from large-scale point clouds, called SCF in this paper. The proposed module mainly consists of three blocks,
including the local polar representation block, the dualdistance attentive pooling block, and the global contextual
feature block. For each 3D point, the local polar representation block is firstly explored to construct a spatial representation that is invariant to the z-axis rotation, then the
dual-distance attentive pooling block is designed to utilize
the representations of its neighbors for learning more discriminative local features according to both the geometric
and feature distances among them, and finally, the global
contextual feature block is designed to learn a global context for each 3D point by utilizing its spatial location and
the volume ratio of the neighborhood to the global point
cloud. The proposed module could be easily embedded into
various network architectures for point cloud segmentation,
naturally resulting in a new 3D semantic segmentation network with an encoder-decoder architecture, called SCF-Net
in this work. Extensive experimental results on two public
datasets demonstrate that the proposed SCF-Net performs
better than several state-of-the-art methods in most cases.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D sensors, semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds has attracted more and more
attention in the computer vision field. Compared with 2D
images, 3D point clouds could provide richer geometric in† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Diagram of the spatial contextual feature (SCF) module.

formation of scenes. However, semantic segmentation of
3D point clouds, particularly segmentation of large-scale
point clouds, is still a challenging task due to the fact that
3D point clouds are generally unstructured and unordered.
In recent years, a lot of DNN (Deep Neural Network)based methods have been proposed for segmenting 3D point
clouds [29, 30, 40, 22, 46, 10]. These methods could be
roughly divided into 3 categories [11]: projection-based
methods [21, 2], discretization-based methods [10, 33, 27,
15], and point-based methods [14, 39, 35, 7, 46, 44, 3, 29,
30, 45]. Both the projection-based and discretization-based
methods are computationally expensive to handle largescale point clouds, which need extra procedures to transform point clouds to a regular representation and project the
intermediate segmentation results back to the point clouds.
Different from those methods, point-based methods directly
work on 3D point clouds. Although some existing pointbased methods have achieved promising performances on
small-sized point clouds, they could not deal with the largescale point clouds. Recently, some methods designed for
large-scale point clouds have been proposed, such as SPG
[20], PCT [4] and RandLA-Net [13]. However, most of
them still have to confront with the following problem: how
to learn more effective features from large-scale point
clouds for semantic segmentation?

14504

