Radar-Camera Pixel Depth Association for Depth Completion
Yunfei Long1 , Daniel Morris1 , Xiaoming Liu1 ,
Marcos Castro2 , Punarjay Chakravarty2 , and Praveen Narayanan2
1
Michigan State University, 2 Ford Motor Company
{longyunf,dmorris,liuxm}@msu.edu, {mgerard8,pchakra5,pnaray11}@ford.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Radar-camera depth completion: (a) an image with 0.3 seconds (5 sweeps) of radar hits projected onto it, (b) enhanced radar
depths at confidence level 0.9 eliminate occluded pixels and expand visible hits, and (c) final predicted depth through depth completion.

Abstract
While radar and video data can be readily fused at
the detection level, fusing them at the pixel level is potentially more beneficial. This is also more challenging in
part due to the sparsity of radar, but also because automotive radar beams are much wider than a typical pixel
combined with a large baseline between camera and radar,
which results in poor association between radar pixels and
color pixel. A consequence is that depth completion methods designed for LiDAR and video fare poorly for radar
and video. Here we propose a radar-to-pixel association
stage which learns a mapping from radar returns to pixels. This mapping also serves to densify radar returns.
Using this as a first stage, followed by a more traditional
depth completion method, we are able to achieve imageguided depth completion with radar and video. We demonstrate performance superior to camera and radar alone
on the nuScenes dataset. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/longyunf/rc-pda.

1. Introduction
We seek to incorporate automotive radar as a contributing sensor to 3D scene estimation. While recent work fuses
radar with video for the objective of achieving improved object detection [4, 33, 26, 32, 35], here we aim for pixel-level
fusion of depth estimates, and ask if fusing video with radar
can lead to improved dense depth estimation of a scene.

Up to the present, outdoor depth estimation has been
dominated by LiDAR, stereo, and monocular techniques.
The fusion of LiDAR and video has lead to increasingly accurate dense depth completion [17]. At the same time, radar
has been relegated to the task of object detection in vehicle’s
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) [30]. However, phased array automotive radar technologies have been
advancing in accuracy and discrimination [14]. Here we investigate the suitability of using radar instead of LiDAR for
the task of dense depth estimation. Unlike LiDAR, automotive radars are already ubiquitous, being integrated in most
vehicles for collision warning and similar tasks. If successfully fused with video, radar could provide an inexpensive
alternative to LiDARs for 3D scene modeling and perception. However, to achieve this, attentive algorithm design
is required in order to overcome some of the limitations of
radar, including coarser, lower resolution, and sparser depth
measurements than typical LiDARs.
This paper proposes a method to fuse radar returns with
image data and achieve depth completion; namely a dense
depth map over pixels in a camera. We develop a two-stage
algorithm. The first stage builds an association between
radar returns and image pixels, during which we resolve
some of the uncertainty in projecting radar returns into a
camera. In addition, this stage is able to filter occluded
radar returns and “densify” the projected radar depth map
along with a confidence measure for these associations (see
Fig. 1 (a,b)). Once a faithful association between radar hits
and camera pixels is achieved, the second stage uses a more

12507

