Look Before You Leap: Learning Landmark Features
for One-Stage Visual Grounding
Binbin Huang 1

Dongze Lian 1

Weixin Luo 1

Shenghua Gao†1,2

1

2

ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{huangbb, liandz, luowx, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
An LBYL (‘Look Before You Leap’) Network is proposed
for end-to-end trainable one-stage visual grounding. The
idea behind LBYL-Net is intuitive and straightforward: we
follow a language’s description to localize the target object based on its relative spatial relation to ‘Landmarks’,
which is characterized by some spatial positional words
and some descriptive words about the object. The core
of our LBYL-Net is a landmark feature convolution module that transmits the visual features with the guidance of
linguistic description along with different directions. Consequently, such a module encodes the relative spatial positional relations between the current object and its context. Then we combine the contextual information from the
landmark feature convolution module with the target’s visual features for grounding. To make this landmark feature
convolution light-weight, we introduce a dynamic programming algorithm (termed dynamic max pooling) with low
complexity to extract the landmark feature. Thanks to the
landmark feature convolution module, we mimic the human
behavior of ‘Look Before You Leap’ to design an LBYL-Net,
which takes full consideration of contextual information.
Extensive experiments show our method’s effectiveness in
four grounding datasets. Specifically, our LBYL-Net outperforms all state-of-the-art two-stage and one-stage methods on ReferitGame. On RefCOCO and RefCOCO+, Our
LBYL-Net also achieves comparable results or even better
results than existing one-stage methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/svip-lab/LBYLNet.

1. Introduction
Humans often refer to objects in an image by describing
their relationships with other entities, e.g. “laptop on table”,
and understanding their relationships is vital to compre† Corresponding author

Query expression: the guy in brown on the right.

Figure 1. Illustration on how LBYL-Net uses contextual cues. On
the left figure, the target location (green) perceives information
from landmarks (red) to localize itself. In this case, landmarks
attend to the attribute brown to differ from the other guy. The right
figure shows our predicted result (blue box) and the ground-truth
(yellow box).

hend referential expressions. Visual grounding, aiming to
localize the entities described by referential expressions, inherently requires contextual information for grounding the
target. By considering relationship of objects, several recent studies have achieved promising results [44, 24, 9, 43].
In particular, these methods usually leverage a two-stage
paradigm, where they first extract region proposals as candidates and then rank the region-expression pairs as a way
of metric learning.
Although effective, these two-stage methods have the
following defects: (i) two stages bring time complexity,
which hinders these methods from being real-time. (ii)
since only objects in the pre-defined categories are considered, the contextual cues in the whole scene may not
be fully exploited. Motivated by the success of one-stage
detection [28, 19], one-stage based visual grounding has
gained great interest, where the pipeline is simplified, and
the inference is accelerated with a detecting and matching
simultaneously paradigm [39, 29]. These detection-based
one-stage approaches, however, still perform localization
on grid features indivisually. The contextual information in
the whole scene, especially relationships between objects,

16888

