Spherical Confidence Learning for Face Recognition
Shen Li¶ * Jianqing Xu‡ * Xiaqing Xu† Pengcheng Shen‡ Shaoxin Li‡ Bryan Hooi ¶
¶ Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore.
‡
Youtu Lab, Tencent. † Aibee.
shen.li@u.nus.edu

joejqxu@tencent.com
darwinli@tencent.com

Abstract
An emerging line of research has found that spherical
spaces better match the underlying geometry of facial images, as evidenced by the state-of-the-art facial recognition
methods which benefit empirically from spherical representations. Yet, these approaches rely on deterministic embeddings and hence suffer from the feature ambiguity dilemma,
whereby ambiguous or noisy images are mapped into poorly
learned regions of representation space, leading to inaccuracies. Probabilistic Face Embeddings (PFE) [17] is the
first attempt to address this dilemma. However, we theoretically and empirically identify two main failures of PFE
when it is applied to spherical deterministic embeddings
aforementioned. To address these issues, in this paper, we
propose a novel framework for face confidence learning in
spherical space. Mathematically, we extend the von Mises
Fisher density to its r-radius counterpart and derive a new
optimization objective in closed form. Theoretically, the
proposed probabilistic framework provably allows for better interpretability, leading to principled feature comparison and pooling. Extensive experimental results on multiple
challenging benchmarks confirm our hypothesis and theory,
and showcase the advantages of our framework over prior
probabilistic methods and spherical deterministic embeddings in various face recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
A plethora of research has demonstrated the advantage
of spherical latent space over Euclidean space in modelling
certain types of data [4, 14, 22]. Face images are one of
these types: as indicated by an emerging line of research,
state-of-the-art face recognition methods empirically benefit from Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs)
that map a face image from input space into spherical space.
This important idea has been explored in a number of re* Corresponding authors

xqxu@aibee.com

quantshen@tencent.com

bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg

cent works: NormFace pioneered this idea by introducing a
normalization operation on both features and weights [18];
SphereFace imposed angular discriminative constraints on
hypersphere [12]; CosFace pushed the boundary by adding
cosine margin penalty to target logits [19]; and ArcFace
further improved the discriminative power of face recognition models by proposing additive angular margin penalty,
which is equivalent to minimizing the geodesic distance
margin on a hypersphere [3].
However, while achieving clear successes in face recognition, all these approaches aim at learning deterministic
mappings from input space to feature space, and thus e
pur si muove, are unable to capture data uncertainty that
is ubiquitous in face recognition in the wild. An ambiguous
face, for instance, will be mapped into poorly learned regions of the latent space, thus causing a large bias to the
facial features of its subject if applied in a deterministic
way. First pointed out by Probabilistic Face Embeddings
(PFE) [17], this issue was referred to as the Feature Ambiguity Dilemma, where ambiguous faces are mapped into a
‘dark space’ in which the distance metric is distorted, resulting in unwanted effects. Such deterministic mappings act as
a bottleneck to further improvement of face recognition performance, especially in unconstrained environments.
Probabilistic face representation learning presents a
promising avenue to addressing this problem. Far from being a novel idea, probabilistic face modelling has been explored abundantly in the literature [1, 16, 7, 11]. Of greatest
relevance is PFE [17], which assumes that latent codes obey
a multivariate independent Gaussian distribution that is inherently defined in Euclidean space. While improvements
have been made, we identify two main failures when PFE
is applied to spherical embeddings. On one hand, theoretically, the independent Gaussian assumption inevitably fails
in the case of spherical embeddings. On the other, further
empirical studies suggest that the PFE framework leads to
unstable training when instantiated with spherical densities,
e.g. r-radius von Mises Fisher as proposed. This further
limits PFE’s applicability to the state-of-the-art determinis-

15629

