FrameExit: Conditional Early Exiting for Efficient Video Recognition
Amir Ghodrati*

Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi*
Amirhossein Habibian
†
Qualcomm AI Research

{ghodrati, behtesha, ahabibia}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a conditional early exiting
framework for efficient video recognition. While existing
works focus on selecting a subset of salient frames to reduce the computation costs, we propose to use a simple
sampling strategy combined with conditional early exiting
to enable efficient recognition. Our model automatically
learns to process fewer frames for simpler videos and more
frames for complex ones. To achieve this, we employ a cascade of gating modules to automatically determine the earliest point in processing where an inference is sufficiently
reliable. We generate on-the-fly supervision signals to the
gates to provide a dynamic trade-off between accuracy and
computational cost. Our proposed model outperforms competing methods on three large-scale video benchmarks. In
particular, on ActivityNet1.3 and mini-kinetics, we outperform the state-of-the-art efficient video recognition methods
with 1.3× and 2.1× less GFLOPs, respectively. Additionally, our method sets a new state of the art for efficient video
understanding on the HVU benchmark.

1. Introduction
With the massive growth in the generation of video content comes an increasing demand for efficient and scalable action or event recognition in videos. The astounding performance of deep neural networks for action recognition [5, 43, 58, 12, 42, 56] are obtained by densely applying 2D [56, 31, 58, 13] or 3D [40, 5, 18, 12] models
over video frames. Despite demonstrating top-notch performance in recognizing complex and corner case actions, the
high data volumes, compute demands, and latency requirements, limit the application of the state-of-the-art video
recognition models on resource-constrained devices.
Extensive studies have been conducted to remedy this
issue by designing efficient and light-weight architectures [35, 11, 43, 36, 53, 59, 42, 28, 31, 10]. These models
have a static computational graph and treat all the videos
* Equal contribution
†

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc

Policy
Function

Policy
Function

Policy
Function

Figure 1: Efficient video recognition by early exiting.
Our proposed method adjusts the amount of computation
to the difficulty of the input, allowing for significant reduction of computational costs. Videos are adopted from [21,
22, 23].
equally regardless of how complex or easy they are for
recognition and hence yield sub-optimal results. A large
body of research has been focusing on selecting a subset of
salient frames to efficiently process the video conditioned
on the input [55, 52, 57, 8, 15, 29]. Current methods for
frame selection rely on learning a policy function to determine what action should be taken on the selected frame
(e.g. process by a heavy recognition model [51], process
at a specific spatial resolution [33], etc.). Most of these
methods either rely on the assumption that salient frames
for the sampler network are also salient for the recognition
network [29, 15] or require carefully selected reward functions in case of using policy gradient methods [55, 52, 49].
Moreover, the sampler network may create an additional
computational overhead to the model.
An alternative promising direction to reduce the computational complexity of analyzing video content is conditional compute using early exiting. Early exiting has recently been explored for image classification tasks by inserting a cascade of intermediate classifiers throughout the
network [30, 39, 54, 24]. In this line of work, the model
adjusts the amount of computation to the difficulty of the
115608

