3D Spatial Recognition without Spatially Labeled 3D
⇤

Zhongzheng Ren1,2
Ishan Misra1
Alexander G. Schwing2
Rohit Girdhar1
1
2
Facebook AI Research
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
https://facebookresearch.github.io/WyPR

floor, wall, chair, table
WyPR
Point cloud

Segmentation

Proposals

Detection

Figure 1: (Left) Our framework, WyPR, jointly learns semantic segmentation and object detection for point cloud data from only scenelevel class tags. We find that encouraging consistency between the two tasks is key. (Right) Sample segmentation results from ScanNet val
set, without seeing any point-level labels during training. Please refer to § 4.4 and Appendix F for more analysis and visualizations.

Abstract
We introduce WyPR, a Weakly-supervised framework for
Point cloud Recognition, requiring only scene-level class
tags as supervision. WyPR jointly addresses three core
3D recognition tasks: point-level semantic segmentation,
3D proposal generation, and 3D object detection, coupling
their predictions through self and cross-task consistency
losses. We show that in conjunction with standard multipleinstance learning objectives, WyPR can detect and segment
objects in point cloud data without access to any spatial
labels at training time. We demonstrate its efficacy using the ScanNet and S3DIS datasets, outperforming prior
state of the art on weakly-supervised segmentation by more
than 6% mIoU. In addition, we set up the first benchmark
for weakly-supervised 3D object detection on both datasets,
where WyPR outperforms standard approaches and establishes strong baselines for future work.

1. Introduction
Recognition (i.e., segmentation and detection) of 3D objects is a key step towards scene understanding. With the
recent development of consumer-level depth sensors (e.g.,
LiDAR [13, 43]) and the advances of computer vision algorithms, 3D data collection has become more convenient
and inexpensive. However, existing 3D recognition systems often fail to scale as they rely on strong supervision, such as point level semantic labels or 3D bounding
⇤ Work partly done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

boxes [9, 29, 32], which are time consuming to obtain. For
example, while the popular large-scale indoor 3D dataset
ScanNet [10] was collected by only 20 people, the annotation effort involved more than 500 annotators spending
nearly 22.3 minutes per scan. Furthermore, due to the high
annotation cost, existing 3D object detection datasets have
limited themselves to a small number of object classes. This
time consuming labeling process is a major bottleneck preventing the community from scaling 3D recognition.
Motivated by this observation, we study 3D weaklysupervised learning with only scene-level class tags available as supervision to train semantic segmentation and object detection models. Scene-level tags are very efficient to
annotate, taking only a second or less for each object in the
scene [36]. Hence, methods that rely on such supervision
can be scaled more easily than those that rely on box-level
supervision.
For this we develop the novel weakly-supervised framework called WyPR, shown in Fig. 1. Using just scene level
tags, it jointly learns both segmentation of point cloud and
detection of 3D boxes. Why should joint learning of segmentation and detection perform better than independently
learning the two tasks? First, since these two tasks are related, joint training is mutually beneficial for representation
learning. Second, these tasks naturally constrain each other,
leading to effective self-supervised objectives that further
improve performance. For example, the semantic labels
of points within a bounding box should be consistent, and
vice versa. Lastly, directly learning to regress to dimensions of 3D bounding boxes, as common in supervised ap113204

