Exploring Intermediate Representation for Monocular Vehicle Pose Estimation
Shichao Li1 , Zengqiang Yan1 , Hongyang Li2 , Kwang-Ting Cheng1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 SenseTime Research
slicd@cse.ust.hk,
timcheng@ust.hk
Scene Feature Maps
Input

Instance 3D Translation

T
.

.

.

Ego-Net E
.

.

.

Scene with Improved Pose Estimation
Instance xi

Instance Heatmaps

φg (xi)
ψ(xi)
2D/3D Intermediate Representation

Figure 1: A novel deep model, Ego-Net, is proposed for accurate vehicle orientation estimation in the camera coordinate
system via extracting a set of explicit 2D/3D geometrical representations. A 3D vehicle detection system (upper branch) can
enjoy improved orientation estimation accuracy by replacing its pose estimation module with Ego-Net (lower branch).

Abstract
We present a new learning-based framework to recover
vehicle pose in SO(3) from a single RGB image. In contrast
to previous works that map local appearance to observation angles, we explore a progressive approach by extracting meaningful Intermediate Geometrical Representations
(IGRs) to estimate egocentric vehicle orientation. This approach features a deep model that transforms perceived intensities to IGRs, which are mapped to a 3D representation
encoding object orientation in the camera coordinate system. Core problems are what IGRs to use and how to learn
them more effectively. We answer the former question by
designing IGRs based on an interpolated cuboid that derives from primitive 3D annotation readily. The latter question motivates us to incorporate geometry knowledge with
a new loss function based on a projective invariant. This
loss function allows unlabeled data to be used in the training stage to improve representation learning. Without additional labels, our system outperforms previous monocular
RGB-based methods for joint vehicle detection and pose estimation on the KITTI benchmark, achieving performance
even comparable to stereo methods. Code and pre-trained
models are available at this HTTPS URL1 .

1 https://github.com/Nicholasli1995/EgoNet

Part of this work was done when the first author was an intern at SenseTime Research Shanghai Autonomous Driving Group.

1. Introduction
“The usefulness of a representation depends upon
how well suited it is to the purpose for which it is
used”.
–David Marr [43]
Understanding 3D properties of the surrounding world is
critical for vision-based autonomous driving and traffic
surveillance systems [15]. Accurate 3D vehicle orientation
estimation (VOE) can imply a driver’s intent of travel direction, help predicting its position a moment later and help
identifying anomalous behaviors. To pursue high accuracy,
recent studies have exploited active sensors to obtain point
clouds [63, 69, 47] or the use of stereo cameras [32, 55, 46].
The former enjoys the convenience of directly working with
3D data and the latter benefit from multi-view geometry.
As downsides, LiDAR sensors cost more than commodity
RGB cameras and stereo systems incur extra complexity.
Pushing the limit of a single-view RGB-based method is
not only cost-effective, but can also complement other configurations through sensor fusion.
However, estimating 3D parameters from a single RGB
image is highly challenging due to the lack of depth information and other geometrical cues. Thanks to the strong
representation learning power brought by recent advances
in deep architectures, state-of-the-art (SOTA) RGB-based
methods can regress 3D parameters from visual appearance
in an end-to-end manner [45, 3, 52]. In this paradigm,
paired images and 3D annotations are specified as inputs
and learning targets respectively for supervising a deep

1873

