Learning the Non-differentiable Optimization for Blind Super-Resolution
∗

Zheng Hui1
Jie Li1
Xiumei Wang1
Xinbo Gao1,2,
1
Visual Information Processing Lab, Xidian University, China
2
The Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China

zheng hui@aliyun.com, leejie@mail.xidian.edu.cn, wangxm@xidian.edu.cn, xbgao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous convolutional neural network (CNN) based
blind super-resolution (SR) methods usually adopt an iterative optimization way to approximate the ground-truth
(GT) step-by-step. This solution always involves more computational costs to bring about time-consuming inference.
At present, most blind SR algorithms are dedicated to obtaining high-fidelity results; their loss function generally
employs L1 loss. To further improve the visual quality of
SR results, perceptual metric, such as NIQE, is necessary
to guide the network optimization. However, due to the
non-differentiable property of NIQE, it cannot be as the
loss function. Towards these issues, we propose an adaptive modulation network (AMNet) for multiple degradations
SR, which is composed of the pivotal adaptive modulation
layer (AMLayer). It is an efficient yet lightweight fusion
layer between blur kernel and image features. Equipped
with the blur kernel predictor, we naturally upgrade the
AMNet to the blind SR model. Instead of considering iterative strategy, we make the blur kernel predictor trainable in the whole blind SR model, in which AMNet is welltrained. Also, we fit deep reinforcement learning into the
blind SR model (AMNet-RL) to tackle the non-differentiable
optimization problem. Specifically, the blur kernel predictor will be the actor to estimate the blur kernel from the
input low-resolution (LR) image. The reward is designed by
the pre-defined differentiable or non-differentiable metric.
Extensive experiments show that our model can outperform
state-of-the-art methods in both fidelity and perceptual metrics.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) refers to estimating the plausible and sharp detailed high-resolution (HR)
image from its counterpart low-resolution (LR) image. It
∗ Corresponding author

has been widely used in image/video enhancement, remote
sensing imaging, and video surveillance. Recently, the introduction of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) makes
the SISR performance reach a new height. Numerous CNNbased SISR methods [6, 7, 8, 16, 18, 13, 39, 19, 27] have
explored network architecture designs and training strategies. They have focused on supervised settings with a fixed
degradation model, e.g., bicubic downsampling. These algorithms achieved impressive results for the bicubic downsampling condition but produced undesirable artifacts when
the images with a different degradation. Zhang et al. [35]
proposed SRMD to handle multiple degradations via a single model to address the issue of multiple degradations.
Different from previous CNN-based methods, SRMD explicitly takes both LR image and its degradation maps as
input. Following SRMD, Xu et al. [30] proposed a single unified dynamic network trained for variational degradations (UDVD) to improve performance; its primary contribution is two types of dynamic convolutions. Note that
the predefined blur kernel is given; thus, SRMD [35] and
UDVD [30] are both non-blind settings. However, in most
practical applications, blur kernels are not provided. Thus,
the SR problem with unknown blur kernels, i.e., blind SR,
is a more attractive field for academia and industry.
In general, to tackle the blind SR problem, previous techniques [35, 34] decompose the blind SR problem into two
sequential subproblems, i.e., estimating blur kernel from
input LR image and generating SR image based on estimated kernel. As stated in [22], this solution is not an
end-to-end training approach, causing a suboptimal problem. Based on the observation of artifacts caused by kernel
mismatch, Gu et al. [10] made efforts to correct an inaccurate blur kernel. They proposed an iterative kernel correction (IKC) method to correct the estimated kernel only
by observing the previous SR results. In a deep alternating network (DAN) [22], the authors make the estimation
of blur kernel much easier through sending both LR and SR
images to Estimator. This iterative principle can make generated SR images gradually approach the ground-truth, but

2093

