Shared Cross-Modal Trajectory Prediction for Autonomous Driving
Chiho Choi1∗ Joon Hee Choi2∗ Jiachen Li1,3† Srikanth Malla1
1
Honda Research Institute USA
2
Sungkyunkwan University
3
University of California, Berkeley
{cchoi, smalla}@honda-ri.com jhchoi2019@skku.edu jiachen_li@berkeley.edu

Abstract

LiDAR Scanner

Future trajectory prediction has become the central challenge to succeed in the safe operation of autonomous vehicles designed to cooperate with interactive agents (i.e.,
pedestrians, cars, cyclists, etc.). It can benefit to the deployment of applications in autonomous navigation and
driving assistance systems with advanced motion planning
and decision making. Based on the fact that multi-modal
sensors (e.g., LiDAR scanner, RGB cameras, radar, etc.)
are equipped in autonomous vehicles, we propose a crossmodal embedding framework that demonstrates the efficacy
of the use of multiple sensor data for motion prediction.
Figure 1 illustrates an overview of the proposed approach. At training time, we embed multiple feature representations encoded from individual sensor data into a single
∗ Co-first author.
† Work done during Jiachen’s internship at Honda Research Institute

LiDAR data in
top-down view

Trajectory in
top-down view

RGB Camera
GPS/IMU

Radar
Feature embedding
Trajectory decoding

RGB data in
frontal view
At training time:
At test time:

…

1. Introduction

Prediction Output

…

Predicting future trajectories of traffic agents in highly
interactive environments is an essential and challenging
problem for the safe operation of autonomous driving systems. On the basis of the fact that self-driving vehicles are
equipped with various types of sensors (e.g., LiDAR scanner, RGB camera, radar, etc.), we propose a Cross-Modal
Embedding framework that aims to benefit from the use
of multiple input modalities. At training time, our model
learns to embed a set of complementary features in a shared
latent space by jointly optimizing the objective functions
across different types of input data. At test time, a single
input modality (e.g., LiDAR data) is required to generate
predictions from the input perspective (i.e., in the LiDAR
space), while taking advantages from the model trained with
multiple sensor modalities. An extensive evaluation is conducted to show the efficacy of the proposed framework using
two benchmark driving datasets.

Multi-modal Input
Autonomous Vehicle

z

Shared Latent Space

Trajectory in
frontal view

AND
OR

Figure 1: Given a set of multi-modal data (e.g., LiDAR
data, RGB images, etc.) obtained from an autonomous vehicle, the model is trained to embed complementary representations of different input modalities into a shared latent
space. Output predictions are generated from different perspectives using a latent variable sampled from the learned
embedding space. At test time, the proposed method takes
a single input modality (e.g., LiDAR data, red-dashed arrow) and predicts the future motion in the same space (i.e.,
LiDAR-captured world space, red-solid arrow).
shared latent space. Our model jointly optimizes the objective functions across different input modalities, so that
the evidence lower bound of multiple input data over the
likelihood can be jointly maximized. We provide a derivation of the objective of shared cross-modal embedding and
its implementation using a CVAE-based generative model.
At test time, the model takes a single input modality (e.g.,
LiDAR data) and generates a future trajectory from the input perspective (i.e., top-down view) using a latent variable
sampled from the shared embedding space. In this way, we
can benefit to the model training from the use of multiple
input modalities1 , while keeping the same computational
time for trajectory generation as if the single modality had
been used. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
employ multi-modal sensor data from a single framework
1 For example, top-down view LiDAR data and frontal view RGB im-

ages. However, the input modalities are not limited to these two types but
also include stereo images, depth, radar, GPS, and many others equipped in
autonomous vehicles, which can provide visual or locational information.

244

