Meta Batch-Instance Normalization for Generalizable Person Re-Identification
Seokeon Choi Taekyung Kim Minki Jeong Hyoungseob Park Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{seokeon, tkkim93, rhm033, hyoungseob, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Although supervised person re-identification (Re-ID)
methods have shown impressive performance, they suffer
from a poor generalization capability on unseen domains.
Therefore, generalizable Re-ID has recently attracted growing attention. Many existing methods have employed an
instance normalization technique to reduce style variations, but the loss of discriminative information could not
be avoided. In this paper, we propose a novel generalizable Re-ID framework, named Meta Batch-Instance Normalization (MetaBIN). Our main idea is to generalize normalization layers by simulating unsuccessful generalization scenarios beforehand in the meta-learning pipeline.
To this end, we combine learnable batch-instance normalization layers with meta-learning and investigate the challenging cases caused by both batch and instance normalization layers. Moreover, we diversify the virtual simulations via our meta-train loss accompanied by a cyclic
inner-updating manner to boost generalization capability. After all, the MetaBIN framework prevents our model
from overfitting to the given source styles and improves the
generalization capability to unseen domains without additional data augmentation or complicated network design.
Extensive experimental results show that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on the large-scale
domain generalization Re-ID benchmark and the crossdomain Re-ID problem. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/bismex/MetaBIN.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to identify a specific person across non-overlapping cameras under various viewpoints and locations. Re-ID has attracted extensive research attention thanks to its practical importance
in surveillance systems. With the development of deep
Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs), person Re-ID methods [51, 54, 48, 4, 23] have achieved remarkable performance in a supervised manner, where a model is trained and
tested on separated splits of the same dataset. However, this
supervised approach is hardly applicable in practice due to

Figure 1. Illustration of unsuccessful generalization scenarios and
our framework. (a) Under-style-normalization happens when the
trained BN model fails to distinguish identities on unseen domains.
(b) Over-style-normalization happens when the trained IN model
removes even ID-discriminative information. (c) Our key idea is
to generalize BIN layers by simulating the preceding cases in a
meta-learning pipeline. By overcoming the harsh situations, our
model learns to avoid overfitting to source styles.

expensive labeling costs and also suffers from severe performance degradation on an unseen target domain. For resolving this problem, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
methods [46, 41, 5, 11, 47, 24] have been introduced, which
adapt a Re-ID model from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. The UDA approach is more practical
than the supervised approach, but data collection is still required for updating the model on the target domain.
Beyond the concept of UDA, the task of domain generalization (DG) is more plausible for real-world applications
since it does not require any target images to train a model.
Since Finn et al. [10] proposed the Model-Agnostic Meta-

3425

