Anti-aliasing Semantic Reconstruction for Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Binghao Liu1
Yao Ding1
Jianbin Jiao1
Xiangyang Ji2
Qixiang Ye1∗
PriSDL, EECE, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University2
{liubinghao18, dingyao16}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, we have witnessed the substantial progress of object detection and semantic segmentation [45, 46, 28, 48, 1, 14]. This can be attributed to
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with excellent representation capability and the availability of large datasets
with concise mask annotations, especially. However, annotating a large number of object masks is expensive and
infeasible in some scenarios (e.g., computer-aided diagnosis systems). Few-shot semantic segmentation, which aims
to generalize a model pre-trained on base classes of suffi∗ Corresponding Author.

Horse

Bear

Sheep

Alias

Cat

𝒇1 (𝑒. 𝑔. 𝑒𝑎𝑟)

𝒇𝟐(𝑒. 𝑔. 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟)

Horse
Alias

Cat
Bear
Image

Mask

Support

Image

Dog

Sheep

Dog

Class-level
Semantic Space

𝒇𝟑(𝑒. 𝑔. 𝑓𝑢𝑟)

Mask

Support

Feature Space

Learning Representation

Predicted Mask

Predicted Mask

Query

Novel Classes

Encouraging progress in few-shot semantic segmentation has been made by leveraging features learned upon
base classes with sufficient training data to represent novel
classes with few-shot examples. However, this feature sharing mechanism inevitably causes semantic aliasing between
novel classes when they have similar compositions of semantic concepts. In this paper, we reformulate few-shot segmentation as a semantic reconstruction problem, and convert base class features into a series of basis vectors which
span a class-level semantic space for novel class reconstruction. By introducing contrastive loss, we maximize the
orthogonality of basis vectors while minimizing semantic
aliasing between classes. Within the reconstructed representation space, we further suppress interference from other
classes by projecting query features to the support vector
for precise semantic activation. Our proposed approach,
referred to as anti-aliasing semantic reconstruction (ASR),
provides a systematic yet interpretable solution for few-shot
learning problems. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC
and MS COCO datasets show that ASR achieves strong results compared with the prior works. Code will be released
at github.com/Bibkiller/ASR.

Query

Abstract

Base Classes

{jiaojb, qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

Conventional

ASR(Our)

Figure 1. Comparison of conventional methods and our ASR
method. While conventional methods represent novel classes
(e.g., cat and dog) within the feature space specified for base
classes without considering the semantic aliasing, ASR implements semantic reconstruction by constructing a class-level semantic space where basis vectors are orthogonal and the semantic
interference is reduced.

cient data to novel classes with only a few examples, has
emerged as a promising technique.
In few-shot segmentation, the generalization process is
to utilize features learned upon base classes with sufficient
training data to represent novel classes. However, for the
overlapped semantics among features, the intricate manyto-many correspondence between features and classes inevitably causes semantic aliasing1 between novel classes
when they have similar compositions of semantic concepts.
For example, a cat and a dog appear in the same query im1 Semantic aliasing refers to an effect that causes classes to be indistinguishable due to the sharing of semantics among features.

9747

