Deeply Shape-guided Cascade for Instance Segmentation
Hao Ding1 , Siyuan Qiao1 , Alan Yuille1 , Wei Shen2( )
1
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{hding15,siyuan.qiao,ayuille1}@jhu.edu, wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The key to a successful cascade architecture for precise
instance segmentation is to fully leverage the relationship
between bounding box detection and mask segmentation
across multiple stages. Although modern instance segmentation cascades achieve leading performance, they
mainly make use of a unidirectional relationship, i.e., mask
segmentation can benefit from iteratively refined bounding
box detection. In this paper, we investigate an alternative
direction, i.e., how to take the advantage of precise mask
segmentation for bounding box detection in a cascade
architecture. We propose a Deeply Shape-guided Cascade
(DSC) for instance segmentation, which iteratively imposes
the shape guidances extracted from mask prediction at
previous stage on bounding box detection at current stage.
It forms a bi-directional relationship between the two
tasks by introducing three key components: (1) Initial
shape guidance: A mask-supervised Region Proposal
Network (mPRN) with the ability to generate class-agnostic
masks; (2) Explicit shape guidance: A mask-guided regionof-interest (RoI) feature extractor, which employs mask
segmentation at previous stage to focus feature extraction
at current stage within a region aligned well with the shape
of the instance-of-interest rather than a rectangular RoI;
(3) Implicit shape guidance: A feature fusion operation
which feeds intermediate mask features at previous stage
to the bounding box head at current stage. Experimental
results show that DSC outperforms the state-of-the-art
instance segmentation cascade, Hybrid Task Cascade
(HTC), by a large margin and achieves 51.8 box AP and
45.5 mask AP on COCO test-dev. The code is released
at: https://github.com/hding2455/DSC.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation [1, 43, 44, 21, 14], an increasingly
active research topic in recent years, is a combination of the
elements from two classical computer vision tasks - object
detection [19, 20, 46, 35, 45, 17, 31, 60] and semantic segCorresponding Author.

Figure 1: Instance segmentation on huddled instances.
mentation [37, 12, 61, 59, 38, 22]. It is challenging since
it requires not only classifying and localizing all the object
instances correctly in an image, but also providing a precise
segmentation mask for each instance at the same time.
To achieve precise instance segmentation, building a
cascaded architecture [5] with multi-stage refinement is a
promising strategy. As pointed out in [9], the key to a successful cascade architecture for precise instance segmentation is to fully leverage the relationship between bounding box detection and mask segmentation across multiple
stages. Surprisingly, we find that leading instance segmentation cascades [6, 9], although achieving state-of-the-art
performances, mainly make use of a unidirectional relationship, i.e., mask segmentation can benefit from iteratively
refined bounding box detection. In this paper, we investigate the opposite direction, i.e., how to take the advantage
of precise mask segmentation for bounding box detection.
Our aim is to establish a bi-directional relationship between
bounding box detection and mask segmentation in a cascade architecture to boost the instance segmentation performance.
Towards this end, we propose a Deeply Shape-guided
Cascade (DSC) for instance segmentation, which iteratively
imposes the shape guidances extracted from mask prediction at previous stage on bounding box detection at current stage. DSC plugs the intuitions of Deeply Supervised
Nets (DSN) [26, 54], i.e., 1) enforcing early supervision
for intermediate stages and 2) fusing features across multiple stages benefits representation learning, into an instance
segmentation cascade. This leads to three key components
for shape guidance learning: (1) Initial shape guidance: A
mask-supervised Region Proposal Network (mPRN) with

8278

