MetaCorrection: Domain-aware Meta Loss Correction for Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation in Semantic Segmentation
Xiaoqing Guo1∗
Chen Yang1∗
Baopu Li2
Yixuan Yuan1†
1
2
City University of Hong Kong
Baidu USA
{xqguo.ee, cyang.ee}@my.cityu.edu.hk

baopuli@baidu.com

yxyuan.ee@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to adapt
a model for the unlabeled target domain through transferring the knowledge from a labeled source domain with the
same label space. UDA for semantic segmentation is a crucial practical problem since it may be beneficial for various
real-world applications, such as simulation for robots [18]
and autonomous driving [44]. The main challenge of UDA
∗ Xiaoqing Guo and Chen Yang contribute equally.
† Yixuan Yuan is the corresponding author.

This work is supported by Shenzhen-Hong Kong Innovation Circle
Category D Project SGDX2019081623300177 (CityU 9240008).
a https://github.com/cyang-cityu/MetaCorrection

(a) Unlabeled target domain image

(b) Generated pseudo label

Ground truth

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to transfer the knowledge from the labeled source domain to the
unlabeled target domain. Existing self-training based UDA
approaches assign pseudo labels for target data and treat
them as ground truth labels to fully leverage unlabeled target data for model adaptation. However, the generated
pseudo labels from the model optimized on the source domain inevitably contain noise due to the domain gap. To
tackle this issue, we advance a MetaCorrection framework,
where a Domain-aware Meta-learning strategy is devised
to benefit Loss Correction (DMLC) for UDA semantic segmentation. In particular, we model the noise distribution
of pseudo labels in target domain by introducing a noise
transition matrix (NTM) and construct meta data set with
domain-invariant source data to guide the estimation of
NTM. Through the risk minimization on the meta data set,
the optimized NTM thus can correct the noisy issues in
pseudo labels and enhance the generalization ability of the
model on the target data. Considering the capacity gap
between shallow and deep features, we further employ the
proposed DMLC strategy to provide matched and compatible supervision signals for different level features, thereby
ensuring deep adaptation. Extensive experimental results
highlight the effectiveness of our methoda against existing
state-of-the-art methods on three benchmarks.

(c) Confusion matrix

(d) Ground truth label

0 road
1 sidewalk
2 building
3 wall
4 fence
5 pole
6 traffic lgt
7 traffic sgn
8 vegetation
9 terrain
10 sky
11 person
12 rider
13 car
14 truck
15 bus
16 train
17 motor
18 bike
(e) Class distribution (log $ )

Figure 1. Sample of the noisy pseudo labels on Cityscapes [10].
The generated pseudo labels suffer from the data distribution biases in comparison to the ground truth.

semantic segmentation lies in the divergence of data distribution between two domains [5, 48]. Such domain gap
often results in significant performance degradation if the
model learned on the labeled source data is directly applied
to the target samples [46, 51].
There exist two major lines of approaches to tackle the
domain gap problem. On one hand, adversarial learning
based UDA methods as a dominant stream have been devised to bridge the domain gap by aligning the distributions of two domains in the appearance [6, 7, 9, 22], feature
[2, 11, 39, 45] or output spaces [20, 26, 40, 41]. Despite
the significant progress of domain alignment, these works
ignored the domain-specific knowledge and could not guarantee the sufficient discriminative capability of the classifier
for the specific task. On the other hand, self-training based
methods [4, 5, 17, 23, 24, 28, 30, 35, 42, 46, 48, 49, 50,
51] have emerged as promising alternatives towards UDA,
which enhanced the discrimination property of target features and implicitly encouraged cross-domain alignment by
simultaneously training with pseudo-labeled target data and
labeled source data. Specifically, self-training methods assign pixel-wise pseudo labels according to confidence score
[17, 23, 30, 51] or uncertainty [24, 48], providing extra supervision for target data to optimize the model.
However, one issue with self-training based UDA methods is that the generated pseudo labels usually suffer from

3927

