End-to-End Video Instance Segmentation with Transformers
Yuqing Wang1 , Zhaoliang Xu1 , Xinlong Wang2 , Chunhua Shen2 , Baoshan Cheng1 , Hao Shen1 ,* Huaxia Xia1
1

Meituan

2

The University of Adelaide, Australia

{wangyuqing06, shenhao04}@meituan.com

no object

CNN

sequence
of images

transformer
encoder-decoder

sequence of multiple
image features

sequence of object
predictions

Figure 1 – Overall pipeline of VisTR. The model takes a sequence of images as input and outputs a sequence of instance predictions.
Here same shapes represent predictions in one image, and same colors represent predictions of the same object instance. Note that the
overall predictions follow the input frame order, and the order of object predictions for different images keeps the same (Best viewed on
screen).

Abstract
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is the task that requires simultaneously classifying, segmenting and tracking
object instances of interest in video. Recent methods typically develop sophisticated pipelines to tackle this task.
Here, we propose a new video instance segmentation framework built upon Transformers, termed VisTR, which views
the VIS task as a direct end-to-end parallel sequence decoding/prediction problem. Given a video clip consisting of
multiple image frames as input, VisTR outputs the sequence
of masks for each instance in the video in order directly.
At the core is a new, effective instance sequence matching
and segmentation strategy, which supervises and segments
instances at the sequence level as a whole. VisTR frames
the instance segmentation and tracking in the same perspective of similarity learning, thus considerably simplifying the
overall pipeline and is significantly different from existing
approaches.
Without bells and whistles, VisTR achieves the highest
* Corresponding author.

speed among all existing VIS models, and achieves the best
result among methods using single model on the YouTubeVIS dataset. For the first time, we demonstrate a much
simpler and faster video instance segmentation framework
built upon Transformers, achieving competitive accuracy.
We hope that VisTR can motivate future research for more
video understanding tasks.
Code is available at: https://git.io/VisTR

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks in
computer vision. While significant progress has been witnessed in instance segmentation of images [5, 9, 22, 25–27],
much less effort was spent on segmenting instances in
videos. Here we propose a new video instance segmentation
framework built upon Transformers. Video instance segmentation (VIS), recently proposed in [30], requires one to
simultaneously classify, segment and track object instances
of interest in a video sequence. It is more challenging in that
one needs to perform instance segmentation for each indi-

8741

