Dive into Ambiguity: Latent Distribution Mining and Pairwise Uncertainty
Estimation for Facial Expression Recognition
Jiahui She∗1,2

Yibo Hu∗2 Hailin Shi2
1
Nanjing University

Jun Wang2 Qiu Shen†1
2
JD AI Research

Tao Mei2

jh.she@foxmail.com, huyibo871079699@gmail.com, {wangjun492, shihailin}@jd.com
shenqiu@nju.edu.cn, tmei@live.com

Abstract

Images in Dataset

Volunteer Test

濤濦濣濖濕濖濝濠濝濨濭
0.5

澵濢濛濙濦澔

Due to the subjective annotation and the inherent interclass similarity of facial expressions, one of key challenges
in Facial Expression Recognition (FER) is the annotation
ambiguity. In this paper, we proposes a solution, named
DMUE, to address the problem of annotation ambiguity
from two perspectives: the latent Distribution Mining and
the pairwise Uncertainty Estimation. For the former, an
auxiliary multi-branch learning framework is introduced to
better mine and describe the latent distribution in the label
space. For the latter, the pairwise relationship of semantic feature between instances are fully exploited to estimate
the ambiguity extent in the instance space. The proposed
method is independent to the backbone architectures, and
brings no extra burden for inference. The experiments are
conducted on the popular real-world benchmarks and the
synthetic noisy datasets. Either way, the proposed DMUE
stably achieves leading performance.

1. Introduction
Facial expression plays an essential role in human’s daily
life. Automatic Facial Expression Recognition (FER) is
crucial in real world applications, such as service robots,
driver fragile detection and human computer interaction. In
recent years, with the emerge of large-scale datasets, e.g.
AffectNet [28], RAF-DB [24] and EmotioNet [6], many
deep learning based FER approaches [11, 38, 49] have been
proposed and achieved promising performance.
However, the ambiguity problem remains an obstacle
that hinders the FER performance. Usually, facial images
are annotated to one of several basic expressions for training the FER model. Yet the deﬁnition with respect to the
expression category may be inconsistent among different
people. For better understanding, we randomly pick two
images from AffectNet [28] and conduct a user study. As
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

0.4
0.3

?
濂濙濩濨濦濕濠

0.2
0.1
0

0.5
濝濢濗濣濢濧濝濧濨濙濢濨 0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Ne Ha Sa Su Fe Di An Co

NeHa Sa Su Fe Di An Co

Ne: Neutral
Ha: Happy
Sa: Sad
Su: Surprise
Fe: Fear
Di: Disgust
An: Anger
Co: Contempt

Figure 1: User study results by 50 volunteers on two randomly picked images. The red (purple) bar represents the
most (secondary) possible class given by the volunteers.
The results provide insights that the annotations may be inconsistent among the users.
shown in Fig. 1, for the image annotated with Anger, the
most possible class decided by volunteers is Neutral. For
the other image, the conﬁdence gap between the most and
secondary possible classes is only 20%, which means annotating it to a speciﬁc class is not suitable. In other words,
a label distribution that depicts the possibility belonging to
each class can better describe the visual feature. There are
two reasons leading to the above phenomenon: (1) It is subjective for people to deﬁne which type of expression a facial
image is. (2) With a large amount of images in large-scale
FER datasets, it is expensive and time-consuming to provide label distribution of images. As there exists a considerable portion of ambiguous samples in large-scale datasets,
the models are prevented from learning the robust visual
features with respect to a certain type of expression, thus
the performance has reached a bottleneck. The previous
approaches tried to address this issue by introducing label distribution learning [11] or suppressing uncertain samples [38]. However, they still suffer from the ambiguity
problem revealed in data that cannot be directly solved from
the single instance perspective.
In this paper, we propose a solution to address the ambiguity problem in FER from two perspectives, i.e. the
latent Distribution Mining and the pairwise Uncertainty

6248

