Joint Deep Model-based MR Image and Coil Sensitivity Reconstruction Network
(Joint-ICNet) for Fast MRI
Yohan Jun
Hyungseob Shin
Taejoon Eo
Dosik Hwang*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

Abstract
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can provide diagnostic information with high-resolution and high-contrast
images. However, MRI requires a relatively long scan time
compared to other medical imaging techniques, where long
scan time might occur patient’s discomfort and limit the
increase in resolution of magnetic resonance (MR) image.
In this study, we propose a Joint Deep Model-based MR
Image and Coil Sensitivity Reconstruction Network, called
Joint-ICNet, which jointly reconstructs an MR image and
coil sensitivity maps from undersampled multi-coil k-space
data using deep learning networks combined with MR physical models. Joint-ICNet has two main blocks, where one is
an MR image reconstruction block that reconstructs an MR
image from undersampled multi-coil k-space data and the
other is a coil sensitivity maps reconstruction block that estimates coil sensitivity maps from undersampled multi-coil
k-space data. The desired MR image and coil sensitivity
maps can be obtained by sequentially estimating them with
two blocks based on the unrolled network architecture. To
demonstrate the performance of Joint-ICNet, we performed
experiments with a fastMRI brain dataset for two reduction
factors (R = 4 and 8). With qualitative and quantitative
results, we demonstrate that our proposed Joint-ICNet outperforms conventional parallel imaging and deep-learningbased methods in reconstructing MR images from undersampled multi-coil k-space data.

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the medical
imaging techniques widely used for diagnosis and research.
However, MRI requires a long scan time that may cause
patient discomfort and increase the probability of motionrelated artifacts in the reconstructed image. One way to reduce to the scan time of MRI is to acquire undersampled
k-space data instead of acquiring whole k-space data. However, sampling below the Nyquist rate in a k-space domain
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overall framework of our proposed joint deep modelbased magnetic resonance image and coil sensitivity reconstruction network (Joint-ICNet).

causes aliasing artifacts in a spatial domain. Several methods have been proposed to reconstruct an artifact-free MR
image from undersampled k-space. One is a compressed
sensing-based method that uses the sparsity of an MR image
in the transformed domain, such as the wavelet domain and
total variation (TV), to reconstruct the image [20, 21]. The
other is a parallel imaging (PI)-based method that unfolds
aliasing patterns in an image domain using pre-acquired coil
sensitivity maps or interpolates unacquired k-space points
using acquired multi-coil k-space points such as autocalibration signal (ACS) [8, 23, 29]. In an undersampled MR
image reconstruction, a forward model of MRI that includes
Fourier transform, coil sensitivity maps, and k-space sampling matrix can be used as prior information, which is a
model-based reconstruction of MR image [7]. Model-based
MR image reconstruction methods are based on iterative algorithms to reconstruct MR images from undersampled kspace data.
In recent years, deep learning methods demonstrated superior performance in the inverse problem of imaging including denoising, compressive sensing, super-resolution,
and inpainting compared to conventional analytical methods [34, 19, 18, 16]. In MRI, several methods have been
proposed that used deep learning algorithms in an MR image reconstruction. Deep-learning-based MR image re-

5270

