Protecting Intellectual Property of Generative Adversarial Networks
from Ambiguity Attacks

1

Ding Sheng Ong1

Chee Seng Chan1 *

University of Malaya

2

WeBank AI Lab

Kam Woh Ng2
3

1. Introduction
Intellectual Property (IP) refers to the protection of creations of the mind, which have both a moral and commercial value. IP is protected under the law framework in the
form of, e.g. patents, copyright, and trademarks, which enable inventors to earn recognition or financial benefit from
their inventions. Ever since Machine Learning as a Service
emerges as a viable business which utilizes deep learning
(DL) models to generate revenue, different effective methods to prove the ownership of DL models have been studied
and demonstrated [1, 16, 25, 29, 30]. The application domains demonstrated with these pioneering works, however,
are invariably limited to Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) for classification tasks. Based on our knowledge,
the protection for another prominent DL models, i.e. Gener* Corresponding author, e-mail: cs.chan@um.edu.my

Qiang Yang3

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Noise, z ~ N (0,1)

Normal

Abstract

Images, I e.g. LR image

Image Generation

Generative
Model

Trigger noise, ( f : z à xw ),

Proposed

Ever since Machine Learning as a Service emerges as a
viable business that utilizes deep learning models to generate lucrative revenue, Intellectual Property Right (IPR) has
become a major concern because these deep learning models can easily be replicated, shared, and re-distributed by
any unauthorized third parties. To the best of our knowledge, one of the prominent deep learning models - Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) which has been widely
used to create photorealistic image are totally unprotected
despite the existence of pioneering IPR protection methodology for Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). This paper therefore presents a complete protection framework in
both black-box and white-box settings to enforce IPR protection on GANs. Empirically, we show that the proposed
method does not compromise the original GANs performance (i.e. image generation, image super-resolution, style
transfer), and at the same time, it is able to withstand both
removal and ambiguity attacks against embedded watermarks. Codes are available at https://github.com/
dingsheng-ong/ipr-gan.

Lixin Fan2

Style transfer

Image Generation

where c≠0

Trigger image, ( h: I à xw )

Super-resolution

Generative
Model

Super-resolution Style transfer

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed GANs protection
framework in black-box setting. The idea is when a trigger, xw is acted as an input, a watermarked image (e.g. with
a hexagon as the watermark) will be synthesized to claim
the ownership. Black area in the trigger noise (f : z → xw )
indicates masked values (see Sec. 3.1.1, Eq. 1).
ative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5] that create plausible
realistic photographs is missing all together and therefore
urgently needed.
Generally, a common approach to deep neural network
IP protection is based on digital watermarks embedding
methods which can be categorized into two schools: i) the
black-box trigger-set based solutions [1, 30]; and ii) the
white-box feature-based methods [3, 6, 25]. The principle
of digital watermarking is to embed an identification information (i.e. a digital watermark) into the network parameters without affecting the performances of original DL models. In the former, the watermark is embedded in the inputoutput behavior of the model. The set of input used to trigger that behavior is called trigger set. The non-triviality of
ownership of a watermarked model is constructed on the
extremely small probability for any other model to exhibit
the same behavior. In the latter, the watermark is embedded
in the static content of CNNs (i.e. weight matrices) with a
transformation matrix. The ownership is verified by the detection of the embedded watermarks.
For the verification process, a suspicious online model
will be first remotely queried through API calls using a specific input keys that were initially selected to trigger the

3630

