Exploiting Semantic Embedding and Visual Feature for Facial Action Unit
Detection

1

Huiyuan Yang1 , Lijun Yin1 , Yi Zhou2 , Jiuxiang Gu3
Department of Computer Science, Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY, USA
2
IBM, Singapore, 3 Adobe Research, USA

hyang51@binghamton.edu,lijun@cs.binghamton.edu,joannezhouyi@hotmail.com, jigu@adobe.com

Abstract
Recent study on detecting facial action units (AU) has
utilized auxiliary information (i.e., facial landmarks, relationship among AUs and expressions, web facial images,
etc.), in order to improve the AU detection performance. As
of now, no semantic information of AUs has yet been explored for such a task. As a matter of fact, AU semantic descriptions provide much more information than the binary
AU labels alone, thus we propose to exploit the Semantic
Embedding and Visual feature (SEV-Net) for AU detection. More specifically, AU semantic embeddings are obtained through both Intra-AU and Inter-AU attention modules, where the Intra-AU attention module captures the relation among words within each sentence that describes individual AU, and the Inter-AU attention module focuses on the
relation among those sentences. The learned AU semantic
embeddings are then used as guidance for the generation of
attention maps through a cross-modality attention network.
The generated cross-modality attention maps are further
used as weights for the aggregated feature. Our proposed
method is unique in that the semantic features are exploited
as the first of this kind. The approach has been evaluated on
three public AU-coded facial expression databases, and has
achieved a superior performance than the state-of-the-art
peer methods.

1. Introduction
Facial action units (AUs) defined in the Facial Action
Coding System (FACS)[5] has been widely used for describing and measuring facial behavior. Automatic action
unit detection has been an essential task for facial analysis,
with a variety of applications in psychological and behavioral research, mental health assessment and human-robot
interaction.
Benefited from the great progress in deep learning research, the performance of AU detection has been im-

Figure 1. An example of the individual AUs, related facial areas and the corresponding AU semantic descriptions. Red: facial
area/position, Green: action, Yellow: motion direction, and Blue:
motion intensity. As we can see, the AU related facial areas and
their actions are clearly explained in each AU semantic description. The facial area/position, action, motion direction and intensity, and relation of AUs will be automatically encoded in the AU
semantic embedding, as described in Section 3.2.

proved using the deep-model based methods in recent years
[28][30][12][3][19][22][15]. However, the deep-model
based methods are starved for labeled data, whereas AU
annotation is a highly labor intensive and time consuming process, thus many existing works seek to exploit the
auxiliary information for AU detection, which include, for
example, domain knowledge (e.g., probabilistic dependencies between expressions and AUs as well as dependencies
among AUs) [17][18][26]; facial landmarks and expression
labels [13][15], and freely web face images [29]. Although
the performance has a certain improvement when utilizing
those auxiliary information, the AU semantic descriptions
have not yet been explored by any of the previous methods.

10482

