Contrastive Learning for Compact Single Image Dehazing
Haiyan Wu 1∗, Yanyun Qu 2 ∗, Shaohui Lin 1† Jian Zhou 3 ,
Ruizhi Qiao 3 , Zhizhong Zhang 1 , Yuan Xie 1†, Lizhuang Ma 1 ,
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
51194501183@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn,
{shlin,yxie,zzzhang,lzma}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, {darnellzhou,ruizhiqiao}@tencent.com

Abstract
Single image dehazing is a challenging ill-posed problem due to the severe information degeneration. However,
existing deep learning based dehazing methods only adopt
clear images as positive samples to guide the training of dehazing network while negative information is unexploited.
Moreover, most of them focus on strengthening the dehazing network with an increase of depth and width, leading to
a significant requirement of computation and memory. In
this paper, we propose a novel contrastive regularization
(CR) built upon contrastive learning to exploit both the information of hazy images and clear images as negative and
positive samples, respectively. CR ensures that the restored
image is pulled to closer to the clear image and pushed to
far away from the hazy image in the representation space.
Furthermore, considering trade-off between performance and memory storage, we develop a compact dehazing network based on autoencoder-like (AE) framework. It
involves an adaptive mixup operation and a dynamic feature enhancement module, which can benefit from preserving information flow adaptively and expanding the receptive
field to improve the network’s transformation capability, respectively. We term our dehazing network with autoencoder
and contrastive regularization as AECR-Net. The extensive
experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that our AECR-Net surpass the state-of-the-art approaches. The code is released in https://github.
com/GlassyWu/AECR-Net.

1. Introduction
Haze is an important factor to cause noticeable visual
quality degradation in object appearance and contrast. In∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Hazy input

(b) Only L1 loss [34]

(c) Prior [42]

(d) KDDN [23]

(e) Our CR

(f) Ground-truth

Figure 1. Comparison with only positive-orient supervision.

put images captured under hazy scenes significantly affect
the performance of high-level computer vision tasks, such
as object detection [26, 8] and scene understanding [39, 40].
Therefore, image dehazing has received a great deal of research focus on image restoration for helping to develop effective computer vision systems.
Recently, various end-to-end CNN-based methods [35,
30, 34, 23, 10, 42] have been proposed to simplify the dehazing problem by directly learning hazy-to-clear image
translation via a dehazing network. However, there exists several issues: (1) Less effectiveness of only positiveorient dehazing objective function. Most existing methods
[5, 25, 34, 10] typically adopt clear images (a.k.a. groundtruth) as positive samples1 to guide the training of dehazing
network via L1/L2 based image reconstruction loss without any regularization. However, only image reconstruction
loss is unable to effectively deal with the details of images,
which may lead to color distortion in the restored images
(see Fig. 1(b)). Recently, additional knowledge from posi1 In this paper, positive samples, clear images and ground-truth are the
same concept in the image dehazing task.

10551

