Exploring Adversarial Fake Images on Face Manifold
Dongze Li1,2 , Wei Wang2∗ , Hongxing Fan1,2 , Jing Dong2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
lidongze2020@ia.ac.cn,hongxing.fan@cripac.ia.ac.cn
{wwang, jdong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn *
Abstract
Images synthesized by powerful generative adversarial network (GAN) based methods have drawn moral and
privacy concerns. Although image forensic models have
reached great performance in detecting fake images from
real ones, these models can be easily fooled with a simple adversarial attack. But, the noise adding adversarial
samples are also arousing suspicion. In this paper, instead of adding adversarial noise, we optimally search adversarial points on face manifold to generate anti-forensic
fake face images. We iteratively do a gradient-descent with
each small step in the latent space of a generative model,
e.g. Style-GAN, to find an adversarial latent vector, which
is similar to norm-based adversarial attack but in latent
space. Then, the generated fake images driven by the adversarial latent vectors with the help of GANs can defeat
main-stream forensic models. For examples, they make the
accuracy of deepfake detection models based on Xception
or EfficientNet drop from over 90% to nearly 0%, meanwhile maintaining high visual quality. In addition, we find
manipulating noise vectors n at different levels have different impacts on attack success rate, and the generated adversarial images mainly have changes on facial texture or
face attributes.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, it is increasingly hard for human eyes to tell
a real image from a fake one with the rapid improvement
of image generation techniques. Manipulated or generated
fake images may draw social and privacy concern if being
abused by malicious attackers. An attacker may register
an account with photos belonging to a non-existent person
or swap one person’s face to another, thus causing privacy
and security issues. Image forensic models are designed to
clarify those images from real ones, and have gained con* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Adversarial images generated by different methods. Upper left is the original Style-GAN-generated image. Upper right is
the image generated by our method. Lower left and Lower right
are adversarial images generated by FGSM[8] and PGD[21] Linf
norm-based attack respectively under the same perturbation level.
Although all these images can bypass the target forensic model,
images generated by our method are more invisible to human eyes.

siderable performance on several benchmarks and datasets
[17, 30]. However, a smarter attacker may attempt to generate images which can bypass those detectors while keeping
high visual quality. These images may escape the detection
procedure and spread in social media. In order to combat
the generation and spread of undetectable “deep fakes”, it is
necessary for image forensics researchers themselves to develop and study anti-forensic operations[32] to improve the
robustness and generalization ability of the existed forensic
models.
In this paper, we propose to efficiently generate adversarial high visual quality fake images to fool forensic detectors. By adversarially exploring on the manifold of the
recent powerful generative model Style-GAN[13], we can

5789

