Audio-Visual Instance Discrimination with Cross-Modal Agreement
Pedro Morgado∗
UC San Diego

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego

Abstract
We present a self-supervised learning approach to learn
audio-visual representations from video and audio. Our
method uses contrastive learning for cross-modal discrimination of video from audio and vice-versa. We show that optimizing for cross-modal discrimination, rather than withinmodal discrimination, is important to learn good representations from video and audio. With this simple but powerful
insight, our method achieves highly competitive performance
when finetuned on action recognition tasks. Furthermore,
while recent work in contrastive learning defines positive
and negative samples as individual instances, we generalize this definition by exploring cross-modal agreement. We
group together multiple instances as positives by measuring
their similarity in both the video and audio feature spaces.
Cross-modal agreement creates better positive and negative
sets, which allows us to calibrate visual similarities by seeking within-modal discrimination of positive instances, and
achieve significant gains on downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Imagine the sound of waves. This sound can evoke the
memory of many scenes - a beach, a pond, a river, etc. A
single sound serves as a bridge to connect multiple sceneries.
It can group visual scenes that ‘go together’, and set apart the
ones that do not. We leverage this property of freely occurring audio to learn video representations in a self-supervised
manner.
A common technique [2, 41, 62, 63] is to setup a verification task that requires predicting if an input pair of video and
audio is ‘correct’ or not. A correct pair is an ‘in-sync’ video
and audio and an incorrect pair can be constructed by using
‘out-of-sync’ audio [41] or audio from a different video [2].
However, a task that uses a single pair at a time misses a key
opportunity to reason about the data distribution at large.
In our work, we propose a contrastive learning framework
to learn cross-modal representations in a self-supervised
manner by contrasting video representations against mul∗ Work done while interning at Facebook AI Research.

Ishan Misra
Facebook AI Research

tiple audios at once (and vice versa). We leverage recent
advances [28, 61, 80, 86] in contrastive learning to setup
a Audio-Visual Instance Discrimination (AVID) task that
learns a cross-modal similarity metric by grouping video and
audio instances that co-occur. We show that the cross-modal
discrimination task, i.e., predicting which audio matches a
video, is more powerful than the within-modal discrimination task, predicting which video clips are from the same
video. With this insight, our technique learns powerful visual
representations that improve upon prior self-supervised methods on action recognition benchmarks like UCF-101 [76]
and HMDB-51 [42].
We further identify important limitations of the AVID
task and propose improvements that allow us to 1) reason
about multiple instances and 2) optimize for visual similarity
rather than just cross-modal similarity. We use Cross-Modal
Agreement (CMA) to group together videos with high similarity in video and audio spaces. This grouping allows us to
directly relate multiple videos as being semantically similar,
and thus directly optimize for visual similarity in addition
to cross-modal similarity. We show that CMA can identify semantically related videos, and that optimizing visual
similarity among related videos significantly improves the
learned visual representations. Specifically, CMA is shown
to improve upon AVID on action recognition tasks such Kinetics [83], UCF-101 [76] and HMDB-51 [42] under both
linear probing and full fine-tuning evaluation protocols.

2. Related work
Self-supervised learning is a well studied problem [13,
47, 52, 55, 60, 72]. Self-supervised methods often try to
reconstruct the input data or impose constraints on the
representation, such as sparsity [48, 59, 60], noise [82]
or invariance [8, 10, 11, 17, 28, 35, 53, 69] to learn a
useful and transferable feature representation. An emerging area of research uses the structural or domain-specific
properties of visual data to algorithmically define ‘pretext
tasks’. Pretext tasks are generally not useful by themselves and are used as a proxy to learn semantic representations. They can use the spatial structure in images [16, 25, 57, 89], color [14, 45, 46, 90], temporal information in videos [18, 20, 29, 37, 49, 54, 58, 64, 85] among

12475

