Single-Shot Freestyle Dance Reenactment
Oran Gafni
Facebook AI Research

Oron Ashual
Facebook AI Research

oran@fb.com

oron@fb.com

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research
and Tel-Aviv University
wolf@fb.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Single-shot dance reenactment. Using only a single image of a target person and their corresponding extracted semantic map
(a), and a driving person’s pose (b), we are able to render a novel corresponding semantic map of the target person, and a realistic person
in the novel pose (c). Unlike previous work, we are able to maintain the body shape of the target person.

Abstract
The task of motion transfer between a source dancer and
a target person is a special case of the pose transfer problem, in which the target person changes their pose in accordance with the motions of the dancer. In this work, we
propose a novel method that can reanimate a single image by arbitrary video sequences, unseen during training.
The method combines three networks: (i) a segmentationmapping network, (ii) a realistic frame-rendering network,
and (iii) a face refinement network. By separating this task
into three stages, we are able to attain a novel sequence of
realistic frames, capturing natural motion and appearance.
Our method obtains significantly better visual quality than
previous methods and is able to animate diverse body types
and appearances, which are captured in challenging poses.

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to animate a target person, who
is specified by a single input image, to mimic the motion of
a driving person, who is captured in a video sequence. This

pair of inputs can be considered the easiest to obtain, and
most minimalist and generic input for the given synthesis
problem. Importantly: both the input image and the driving
video are unseen during training.
The method we propose extends the envelope of the current possibilities in multiple ways: (i) the target person can
vary in body shape, age, ethnicity, gender, pose, and viewpoint (ii) the sequence of poses that form the motion can be
unconstrained, which is why we emphasize freestyle dance,
(iii) the background can vary arbitrarily and is not limited
to the source image or the background of the driving video.
This general setting contrasts with the limitations of existing methods, which often struggle to maintain the target person’s appearance and avoid mixing elements from
the driving video. The existing methods also often require
an input video of the target person, have difficulty producing natural motion, and are limited to specific backgrounds.
This is true, even for methods that train to map between
specific persons seen during training.
To achieve this novel set of capabilities, we make extensive use of the latest achievements of neural networks
for human capturing. Two pre-trained pose recognition networks are used to analyze the input video, a pre-trained human parsing network is used to segment the input image (of

882

