ORDisCo: Effective and Efficient Usage of Incremental Unlabeled Data
for Semi-supervised Continual Learning
Liyuan Wang1 , Kuo Yang2 , Chongxuan Li1 *, Lanqing Hong2 , Zhenguo Li2 , Jun Zhu1*
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Continual learning usually assumes the incoming data
are fully labeled, which might not be applicable in real applications. In this work, we consider semi-supervised continual learning (SSCL) that incrementally learns from partially labeled data. Observing that existing continual learning methods lack the ability to continually exploit the unlabeled data, we propose deep Online Replay with Discriminator Consistency (ORDisCo) to interdependently learn a
classifier with a conditional generative adversarial network
(GAN), which continually passes the learned data distribution to the classifier. In particular, ORDisCo replays data
sampled from the conditional generator to the classifier in
an online manner, exploiting unlabeled data in a time- and
storage-efficient way. Further, to explicitly overcome the
catastrophic forgetting of unlabeled data, we selectively
stabilize parameters of the discriminator that are important for discriminating the pairs of old unlabeled data and
their pseudo-labels predicted by the classifier. We extensively evaluate ORDisCo on various semi-supervised learning benchmark datasets for SSCL, and show that ORDisCo
achieves significant performance improvement on SVHN,
CIFAR10 and Tiny-ImageNet, compared to strong baselines.

1. Introduction
Current achievements of deep neural networks (DNNs)
heavily rely on large amounts of supervised data, which are
expensive and difficult to acquire simultaneously. Therefore, the ability of continual learning (CL) on incremental
training samples becomes extremely important. Numerous
efforts have been devoted to CL, which aim to continually
learn new training samples without catastrophic forgetting
of the learned data distribution [29]. Existing CL methods
mainly fall in two categories: weight regularization meth* Corresponding author: C. Li and J. Zhu.

ods [29, 11, 1] and replay-based methods [29, 32, 35], and
have achieved promising results in purely supervised settings.
In many real-world applications, nevertheless, the incremental data are often partially labeled. For example, in face
recognition [33], a device continually obtains user data for
unlocking. These increasing data could be used to update
the model for better user experience. However, true labels
of the incoming data are usually unavailable unless the user
provides the password for verification. Since frequently
asking for labelling would affect user experience, most of
the input data are unlabeled. Similar scenarios occur in
fingerprint identification [46] and video recognition [20].
Though such scenarios are common in our daily life, they
are seldom studied in the CL literature. Therefore, in this
paper, we focus on the challenging and realistic task that
continually learns incremental partially labeled data. For
simplicity, we refer to it as semi-supervised continual learning (SSCL).
Different from supervised CL, SSCL provides insufficient supervision and a large amount of unlabeled data. As
is well known, unlabeled data are crucial in semi-supervised
scenarios [48] but are massive to exploit. In fact, we conduct preliminary experiments in SSCL and empirically verify that the representative CL methods including the weight
regularization methods [29, 11, 1] and the replay-based
methods [29, 32, 35] may not effectively exploit the unlabeled data. Specifically, the joint training of a strong semisupervised classifier significantly outperforms the best of
existing CL strategies on the same classifier (see results in
Fig. 1 and Appendix A). We identify this as the catastrophic
forgetting of unlabeled data problem in SSCL.
To this end, we present deep online replay with discriminator consistency (ORDisCo), a framework to continually
learn a semi-supervised classifier and a conditional generative adversarial networks (GAN) [23] together in SSCL.
Specifically, ORDisCo is formulated as a minimax adversarial game [7], where a generator tries to capture the underlying joint distribution of partially labeled data, and help

5383

