M3 P: Learning Universal Representations via Multitask Multilingual
Multimodal Pre-training
Minheng Ni1 * † Haoyang Huang2† Lin Su3† Edward Cui3 Taroon Bharti3 Lijuan Wang4
Dongdong Zhang2 Nan Duan2‡
1
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Natural Language Computing, Microsoft Research Asia, China
3
Bing Multimedia Team, Microsoft, China
4
Cloud+AI, Microsoft, United States
mhni@ir.hit.edu.cn
{haohua, lins, edwac, tbharti, lijuanw, Dongdong.Zhang, nanduan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present M3 P, a Multitask Multilingual Multimodal
Pre-trained model that combines multilingual pre-training
and multimodal pre-training into a unified framework via
multitask pre-training. Our goal is to learn universal representations that can map objects occurred in different modalities or texts expressed in different languages into a common semantic space. In addition, to explicitly encourage
fine-grained alignment between images and non-English languages, we also propose Multimodal Code-switched Training (MCT) to combine monolingual pre-training and multimodal pre-training via a code-switch strategy. Experiments
are performed on the multilingual image retrieval task across
two benchmark datasets, including MSCOCO and Multi30K.
M3 P can achieve comparable results for English and new
state-of-the-art results for non-English languages.

1. Introduction
Recently, we witness the rise of a new paradigm of natural language processing (NLP), where general knowledge is
learned from raw texts by self-supervised pre-training and
then applied to downstream tasks by task-specific fine-tuning.
Now, these state-of-the-art monolingual pre-trained language
models, such as BERT [7], RoBERTa [23] and GPT-2 [28],
have been expanded to multilingual scenarios, such as Multilingual BERT [7], XLM/XLM-R [5, 4], Unicoder [13].
Moreover, some pre-training models under multimodal sce* Work is done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ Corresponding Author.

narios, such as Unicoder-VL [19], UNITER [3], ERNIE-ViL
[36], VILLA [10] and Oscar [21], also come out.
However, it is still challenging to extend these pre-trained
models to multilingual-multimodal scenarios. The multilingual pre-trained language models cannot handle vision data
(e.g., images or videos) directly, whereas many pre-trained
multimodal models are trained on English corpora thus cannot perform very well on non-English languages. Therefore,
high quality multilingual multimodal training corpus is essential to combine multilingual pre-training and multimodal
pre-training. However, there are only a few multilingual
multimodal corpora exist, and they also have low language
coverage. Moreover, relying on high-quality machine translation engines to generate such data from English multimodal
corpora is both time-consuming and computationally expensive. Learning explicit alignments between vision and
non-English languages during pre-training is lacking.
To address these challenges, this paper presents M3 P,
a Multitask Multilingual Multimodal Pre-trained model,
which aims to learn universal representations that can map
objects occurred in different modalities or texts expressed in
different languages into a common semantic space. In order
to alleviate the issue of lacking enough non-English labeled
data for multimodal pre-training, we introduce Multimodal
Code-switched Training (MCT) to enforce the explicit alignments between images and non-English languages. The goal
is achieved by (i) learning to represent multilingual data using multilingual corpora (e.g., sentences from Wikipedia covering 100 languages) by multilingual pre-training, (ii) learning multilingual-multimodal representations by randomly
replacing some English words with their translations in other
languages from multimodal corpora (e.g., image-caption
pairs labeled in English), and (iii) generalizing these rep13977

