Joint Noise-Tolerant Learning and Meta Camera Shift Adaptation
for Unsupervised Person Re-Identification
Fengxiang Yang1 *, Zhun Zhong2∗ , Zhiming Luo1†, Yuanzheng Cai4 , Yaojin Lin5 , Shaozi Li1,3† , Nicu Sebe2
1 Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2 Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento
3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
4 Minjiang University 5 Minnan Normal University
Project: https://github.com/FlyingRoastDuck/MetaCam_DSCE

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of unsupervised person
re-identification (re-ID), which aims to learn discriminative
models with unlabeled data. One popular method is to obtain pseudo-label by clustering and use them to optimize the
model. Although this kind of approach has shown promising accuracy, it is hampered by 1) noisy labels produced by
clustering and 2) feature variations caused by camera shift.
The former will lead to incorrect optimization and thus hinders the model accuracy. The latter will result in assigning the intra-class samples of different cameras to different
pseudo-label, making the model sensitive to camera variations. In this paper, we propose a unified framework to
solve both problems. Concretely, we propose a Dynamic
and Symmetric Cross-Entropy loss (DSCE) to deal with
noisy samples and a camera-aware meta-learning algorithm (MetaCam) to adapt camera shift. DSCE can alleviate the negative effects of noisy samples and accommodate
the change of clusters after each clustering step. MetaCam
simulates cross-camera constraint by splitting the training
data into meta-train and meta-test based on camera IDs.
With the interacted gradient from meta-train and meta-test,
the model is enforced to learn camera-invariant features.
Extensive experiments on three re-ID benchmarks show the
effectiveness and the complementary of the proposed DSCE
and MetaCam. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods on both fully unsupervised re-ID and unsupervised
domain adaptive re-ID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) attempts to find matched
pedestrians of a query in a non-overlapping camera sys* Equal contribution: yangfx@stu.xmu.edu.cn
† Corresponding author: {zhiming.luo, szlig}@xmu.edu.cn

(1)

(a) Initial State

(b) w/o MetaCam

(2)
(c) w/ MetaCam

(3)

(4)

Figure 1. Illustration of camera variations in person re-ID (a) and
the comparison between methods trained without or with the proposed MetaCam ((b) and (c), respectively). Different colors represent different identities and different shapes indicate different
camera IDs. At the initial state, samples under different cameras
may suffer from appearance changes of viewpoints ((1) & (2)), illumination ((3) & (4)), and other factors. Without considering this
factor, the trained model may be sensitive to camera variations and
may wrongly split intra-class features to different centers. Our
proposed MetaCam enables the model to learn camera-invariant
features by explicitly considering cross-camera constraint.

tem. Recent CNN-based works [31, 35] have achieved
impressive accuracies, but their success is largely dependent on sufficient annotated data that require a lot of labeling cost. In contrast, it is relatively easy to obtain a large
collection of unlabeled person images, fostering the study
of unsupervised re-ID. Commonly, unsupervised re-ID can
be divided into two categories depending on whether using an extra labeled data, i.e., unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [37, 49, 7] and fully unsupervised re-ID
(FU) [19, 20, 42]. In UDA, we are given a labeled source
domain and an unlabeled target domain. The data of two
domains have different distributions and are used to train
a model that generalizes well on the target domain. The
fully unsupervised re-ID is more challenging since only unlabeled images are provided to train a deep model. In this
study, we will mainly focus on this setting, and call it as
unsupervised re-ID for simplicity.

4855

