EffiScene: Efficient Per-Pixel Rigidity Inference for Unsupervised Joint Learning
of Optical Flow, Depth, Camera Pose and Motion Segmentation

1

Yang Jiao ∗1,2,3 , Trac D. Tran 2 , Guangming Shi 1,3
Xidian University, Johns Hopkins University, 3 Xidian Guangzhou Institute of Technology
2

{yangjiao,yjiao8}@{stu.xidian.edu.cn,jhu.edu}, trac@jhu.edu, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenging unsupervised
scene flow estimation problem by jointly learning four lowlevel vision sub-tasks: optical flow F, stereo-depth D, camera pose P and motion segmentation S. Our key insight is
that the rigidity of the scene shares the same inherent geometrical structure with object movements and scene depth.
Hence, rigidity from S can be inferred by jointly coupling
F, D and P to achieve more robust estimation. To this end,
we propose a novel scene flow framework named EffiScene
with efficient joint rigidity learning, going beyond the existing pipeline with independent auxiliary structures. In
EffiScene, we first estimate optical flow and depth at the
coarse level and then compute camera pose by Perspectiven-Points method. To jointly learn local rigidity, we design
a novel Rigidity From Motion (RfM) layer with three principal components: (i) correlation extraction; (ii) boundary
learning; and (iii) outlier exclusion. Final outputs are fused
based on the rigid map MR from RfM at finer levels. To
efficiently train EffiScene, two new losses Lbnd and Lunc
are designed to prevent trivial solutions and to regularize
the flow boundary discontinuity. Extensive experiments on
scene flow benchmark KITTI show that our method is effective and significantly improves the state-of-the-art approaches for all sub-tasks, i.e. optical flow (5.19 → 4.20),
depth estimation (3.78 → 3.46), visual odometry (0.012 →
0.011) and motion segmentation (0.57 → 0.62).

1. Introduction
Scene flow [38, 37] describes the 3D motion of a dynamic scene by 2D optical flow and scene depth, providing essential geometrical clues for numerous practical applications such as self-driving [28] and robotics navigation [1, 31]. However, acquiring dense ground truth for
both sub-tasks in real applications are usually expensive
or impractical. To overcome this, learning scene flow in
an unsupervised way has attracted much attention in recent

years, by minimizing the photometric differences between
the original-synthesized pixel pairs.
Optimizing pixel-wise photometric error for low-level
scene flow task without supervision is not a trivial task.
One of the most critical reason is that the pixel correspondence between consecutive frames is highly ambiguous, especially in unstructured or texture-less regions. For example, one pixel from a mountain or a highway surface in
frame t can be projected to various surrounding pixels in
frame t + 1 with very low photometric error, often leading
to the failure of local scene flow estimation. Unfortunately,
this issue always happens in outdoor scenarios due to missing small details due to motion blur. Therefore, additional
constraints are strongly needed to eliminate the ambiguities
for successful unsupervised scene flow estimation.

Figure 1. Main idea of our method. Different from independently
estimating rigid pixels from the auxiliary instance segmentation in
existing pipeline, we jointly learn per-pixel rigidity from optical
flow, depth and camera pose for more accurate rigid constraint.

Problems. In recent approaches, rigid constraint is
widely employed to separate the scene into static (rigid) and
moving (non-rigid) areas. It also restricts the ego-motion of
the rigid pixels which obey the rigid scene assumption [25].
To achieve this, current methods [33, 22, 43, 14, 9, 27] follow a popular scene flow pipeline as shown in Fig. 1 (left),
where the auxiliary instance segmentation network is designed to predict the rigid pixels that will be constrained by
local rigidity. Though impressive scene flow results can be
achieved, the performance of the segmentation is often poor,
indicating an inaccurate estimation of rigid pixels (static

5538

