Learning to Fuse Asymmetric Feature Maps in Siamese Trackers
Wencheng Han∗1 , Xingping Dong∗2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan3 , Ling Shao2 , Jianbing Shen†2,1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
3
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence,UAE
wencheng@bit.edu.cn, xingping.dong@gmail.com, fahad.khan@liu.se
ling.shao@ieee.org, shenjianbingcg@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction

cently, trackers based on Siamese networks have gained attention due to their combined advantage of high speed and
tracking performance. The pioneering method, SiamFC [2],
utilizes Siamese networks to extract deep convolutional features from the template in the initial frame of a video and
instances inside the search regions of other frames. A cross
correlation layer (XCorr) is then used to compute the similarity between the template and instances. Consequently,
the instance with the highest similarity score is considered
the target. The XCorr in SiamFC produces a single-channel
response map and assumes the target is located near the
highest response. As an extension, SiamRPN [26] formulates the tracking problem as one-shot detection. It introduces a region proposal network (RPN) [34] and utilizes upchannel cross correlation (UP-XCorr). However, UP-XCorr
imbalances the parameter distribution, making the training
optimization hard. To address this issue, SiamRPN++ introduces a depth-wise correlation (DW-XCorr) to efficiently
generate a multi-channel correlation feature map. Due to its
efficiency, several recent Siamese trackers [5, 11, 13, 47, 50]
also employ DW-XCorr in their frameworks.
As discussed above, most recent Siamese trackers employ DW-XCorr to compute the similarity between the template and instances. However, both DW-XCorr and its
predecessor XCorr are handcrafted parameter-free modules
and are not able to fully benefit from large-scale offline
learning. DW-XCorr has several limitations in the context
of tracking. First, it produces similar correlation responses
for the target and distractors of homogeneous appearance.
To demonstrate this, we analyze the similarity between DWXCorr features of a target and its distractors in Fig. 1a. The
heatmap isPgenerated by performing an L1 normalization
n
(kxk1 =
i=1 |xi |, where x is a pixel in the correlation
feature map and n is the number of channels) on every pixel
in the DW-XCorr features. As can be seen, DW-XCorr produces high responses (i.e. feature norms) not only near the

Visual tracking is a challenging problem, where the task
is to estimate the state of an arbitrary target in each frame
of a video, given only its location in the initial frame. Re-

. ∗Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
. Our codes are available at:
https : / / github . com /
wencheng256/SiamBAN-ACM

Recently, Siamese-based trackers have achieved promising performance in visual tracking. Most recent Siamesebased trackers typically employ a depth-wise crosscorrelation (DW-XCorr) to obtain multi-channel correlation information from the two feature maps (target and
search region). However, DW-XCorr has several limitations
within Siamese-based tracking: it can easily be fooled by
distractors, has fewer activated channels and provides weak
discrimination of object boundaries. Further, DW-XCorr is
a handcrafted parameter-free module and cannot fully benefit from offline learning on large-scale data.
We propose a learnable module, called the asymmetric
convolution (ACM), which learns to better capture the semantic correlation information in offline training on largescale data. Different from DW-XCorr and its predecessor
(XCorr), which regard a single feature map as the convolution kernel, our ACM decomposes the convolution operation on a concatenated feature map into two mathematically equivalent operations, thereby avoiding the need for
the feature maps to be of the same size (width and height)
during concatenation. Our ACM can incorporate useful
prior information, such as bounding-box size, with standard visual features. Furthermore, ACM can easily be integrated into existing Siamese trackers based on DW-XCorr
or XCorr. To demonstrate its generalization ability, we integrate ACM into three representative trackers: SiamFC,
SiamRPN++ and SiamBAN. Our experiments reveal the
benefits of the proposed ACM, which outperforms existing
methods on six tracking benchmarks. On the LaSOT test
set, our ACM-based tracker obtains a significant improvement of 5.8% in terms of success (AUC), over the baseline.

16570

