Towards Accurate Text-based Image Captioning with
Content Diversity Exploration
Guanghui Xu1,2 *, Shuaicheng Niu1∗ , Mingkui Tan1,4 , Yucheng Luo1 , Qing Du1,4†, Qi Wu3
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Pazhou Laboratory, 3 University of Adelaide
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
sexuguanghui@mail.scut.edu.cn, {mingkuitan, duqing}@scut.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Text-based image captioning (TextCap) which aims to
read and reason images with texts is crucial for a machine
to understand a detailed and complex scene environment,
considering that texts are omnipresent in daily life. This
task, however, is very challenging because an image often
contains complex texts and visual information that is hard
to be described comprehensively. Existing methods attempt
to extend the traditional image captioning methods to solve
this task, which focus on describing the overall scene of images by one global caption. This is infeasible because the
complex text and visual information cannot be described
well within one caption. To resolve this difficulty, we seek
to generate multiple captions that accurately describe different parts of an image in detail. To achieve this purpose,
there are three key challenges: 1) it is hard to decide which
parts of the texts of images to copy or paraphrase; 2) it
is non-trivial to capture the complex relationship between
diverse texts in an image; 3) how to generate multiple captions with diverse content is still an open problem. To conquer these, we propose a novel Anchor-Captioner method.
Specifically, we first find the important tokens which are
supposed to be paid more attention to and consider them
as anchors. Then, for each chosen anchor, we group its relevant texts to construct the corresponding anchor-centred
graph (ACG). Last, based on different ACGs, we conduct
the multi-view caption generation to improve the content
diversity of generated captions. Experimental results show
that our method not only achieves SOTA performance but
also generates diverse captions to describe images.

1. Introduction
The texts are omnipresent in our daily life and play an
important role in helping humans or intelligent robots to
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author

The number displayed on
the Dell monitor is 10:48:32

Existing methods

group
ACGs

cap.

(1) Logitech keyboard in
front of Dell monitor
(2) A red cup with CocaCola on the table
(3) The price is 17.88,
which turned out to be 19.88
(4) The time displayed on
the computer is 10:37:51
(5) The player 35 is shooting

Figure 1. Comparison with existing methods. For a given image,
existing methods tend to generate only one global caption. Unlike them, we first select and group texts to anchor-centred graphs
(ACGs), and then decide which parts of the texts to copy or paraphrase. Our method is able to achieve higher accuracy and generate diverse captions to describe the image from different views.

understand the physical world [13]. In the image captioning area, the texts contained in images are also of
critical importance and often provide valuable information [5, 19, 20, 34, 41] for caption generation. In this sense,
Sidorov et al. [40] propose a fine-grained image captioning task, i.e., text-based image captioning (TextCap), aiming to generate image captions that not only ‘describe’ visual contents but also ‘read’ the texts in images, such as
billboards, road signs, commodity prices and etc. This task
is very practical since the fine-grained image captions with
rich text information can aid visually impaired people to
comprehensively understand their surroundings [13]
Some preliminary tries for the TextCap task seek to directly extend existing image captioning methods [2, 19, 21]
to this new setting. However, such methods usually tend to
describe prominent visual objects or overall scenes without considering the texts in images. Recently, M4CCaptioner [40] tries to use additional OCR tools [4, 6, 31]
to recognise texts in images. It is still hard to well describe
the complex text and visual information within one caption.
To resolve this difficulty, we propose to generate multiple
diverse captions focusing on describing different parts of an
image. However, there are still some challenges.
First, it is hard to decide which parts of the texts are most

12637

