NetAdaptV2: Efficient Neural Architecture Search with
Fast Super-Network Training and Architecture Optimization
Tien-Ju Yang, Yi-Lun Liao, Vivienne Sze
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{tjy,ylliao,sze}@mit.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) applies machine learning to automatically discover deep neural networks (DNNs)
with better performance (e.g., better accuracy-latency tradeoffs) by sampling the search space, which is the union of all
discoverable DNNs. The search time is one key metric for
1 The project website: http://netadapt.mit.edu.

Unknown

This Work
Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Neural architecture search (NAS) typically consists of
three main steps: training a super-network, training and
evaluating sampled deep neural networks (DNNs), and training the discovered DNN. Most of the existing efforts speed
up some steps at the cost of a significant slowdown of other
steps or sacrificing the support of non-differentiable search
metrics. The unbalanced reduction in the time spent per
step limits the total search time reduction, and the inability to support non-differentiable search metrics limits the
performance of discovered DNNs.
In this paper, we present NetAdaptV2 with three innovations to better balance the time spent for each step while
supporting non-differentiable search metrics. First, we propose channel-level bypass connections that merge network
depth and layer width into a single search dimension to reduce the time for training and evaluating sampled DNNs.
Second, ordered dropout is proposed to train multiple DNNs
in a single forward-backward pass to decrease the time for
training a super-network. Third, we propose the multi-layer
coordinate descent optimizer that considers the interplay
of multiple layers in each iteration of optimization to improve the performance of discovered DNNs while supporting
non-differentiable search metrics. With these innovations,
NetAdaptV2 reduces the total search time by up to 5.8× on
ImageNet and 2.4× on NYU Depth V2, respectively, and discovers DNNs with better accuracy-latency/accuracy-MAC
trade-offs than state-of-the-art NAS works. Moreover, the
discovered DNN outperforms NAS-discovered MobileNetV3
by 1.8% higher top-1 accuracy with the same latency.1

Total Search Time

78
77

397

1315

400 GPU-Hours
1300 GPU-Hours

76

243

75
74

500

50

60
70
Latency (ms)

80

90

NAS Methods
MnasNet
ProxylessNAS
Single-Path NAS
AutoSlim
MobileNetV3
FairNAS
Once-for-All
NetAdaptV2

Figure 1: The comparison between NetAdaptV2 and related
works. The number above a marker is the corresponding
total search time measured on NVIDIA V100 GPUs.

NAS algorithms, which accounts for three steps: 1) training a super-network, whose weights are shared by all the
DNNs in the search space and trained by minimizing the
loss across them, 2) training and evaluating sampled DNNs
(referred to as samples), and 3) training the discovered DNN.
Another important metric for NAS is whether it supports
non-differentiable search metrics such as hardware metrics
(e.g., latency and energy). Incorporating hardware metrics
into NAS is the key to improving the performance of the
discovered DNNs [1–5].
There is usually a trade-off between the time spent for
the three steps and the support of non-differentiable search
metrics. For example, early reinforcement-learning-based
NAS methods [2, 6, 7] suffer from the long time for training and evaluating samples. Using a super-network [8–16]
solves this problem, but super-network training is typically
time-consuming and becomes the new time bottleneck. The
gradient-based methods [3, 17–24] reduce the time for training a super-network and training and evaluating samples at
the cost of sacriﬁcing the support of non-differentiable search
metrics. In summary, many existing works either have an
unbalanced reduction in the time spent per step (i.e., optimizing some steps at the cost of a signiﬁcant increase in the time
for other steps), which still leads to a long total search time,

2402

