Efficient Feature Transformations for Discriminative and Generative
Continual Learning
Vinay Kumar Verma1 , Kevin J Liang1,2 , Nikhil Mehta1 , Piyush Rai3 , Lawrence Carin1
1
Duke University 2 Facebook AI 3 IIT Kanpur
vinaykumar.verma@duke.edu

Abstract
As neural networks are increasingly being applied
to real-world applications, mechanisms to address distributional shift and sequential task learning without
forgetting are critical. Methods incorporating network
expansion have shown promise by naturally adding model
capacity for learning new tasks while simultaneously
avoiding catastrophic forgetting. However, the growth
in the number of additional parameters of many of these
types of methods can be computationally expensive at
larger scales, at times prohibitively so. Instead, we propose a simple task-specific feature map transformation
strategy for continual learning, which we call Efficient
Feature Transformations (EFTs). These EFTs provide
powerful flexibility for learning new tasks, achieved with
minimal parameters added to the base architecture. We
further propose a feature distance maximization strategy, which significantly improves task prediction in class
incremental settings, without needing expensive generative models. We demonstrate the efficacy and efficiency
of our method with an extensive set of experiments
in discriminative (CIFAR-100 and ImageNet-1K) and
generative (LSUN, CUB-200, Cats) sequences of tasks.
Even with low single-digit parameter growth rates, EFTs
can outperform many other continual learning methods
in a wide range of settings.

1. Introduction
While deep learning has led to impressive advances
in many fields, neural networks still tend to struggle in
sequential learning settings, largely due to catastrophic
forgetting [31, 39]: when the training distribution of
a model shifts over time, neural networks overwrite
previously learned knowledge if not repeatedly revisited
during training. Pragmatically, this typically means
that data collection must be completed before training
a neural network, which can be problematic in settings
like reinforcement learning [34] or the real world [44],

which is constantly evolving. Otherwise, the model
must constantly be re-trained as new data arrives. This
limitation significantly hampers building and deploying
intelligent systems in changing environments.
A variety of continual learning methods [37]
have been proposed to address this shortcoming.
Regularization-based methods [18, 62, 36, 1, 41] prevent forgetting by constraining model parameters from
drifting too far away from previous solutions, but they
can also restrict the model’s ability to adapt to new
tasks, often resulting in sub-optimal solutions. Additionally, regularization methods commonly make the
assumption that each weight’s importance for a task
is independent, which may explain why they have difficulty scaling to more complex networks and tasks.
Replay methods [27, 46, 36, 42] retain knowledge by
rehearsing on data saved from previous tasks. While
effective at preventing forgetting, the performance of
replay-based approaches is highly dependent on the size
and contents of the memory buffer, and in certain strict
settings, saving any data at all may not be an option.
The nature of this replay buffer also tends to highly
bias the model toward recently learned tasks. As the
number of tasks grows, performance degrades quickly,
especially in large-scale settings [38, 40].
As an alternative to regularization or replay, expansion methods [43, 59, 58, 32] combat forgetting by
growing the model with each task. Expansion alleviates
catastrophic forgetting by design, and additional necessary capacity can be easily added to accommodate
new knowledge needed for new tasks. This ability to
scale arbitrarily without needing to save any data gives
expansion methods the best chance to succeed in largescale settings. However, added capacity to model future
tasks needs to be carefully balanced against the number
of parameters added, especially since the number of
tasks the model must learn is often unknown ahead of
time. Too inefficient of an approach can easily exceed
computational resources even after a moderate number
of tasks. Moreover, many previous expansion methods
113865

