Learning Student Networks in the Wild
Hanting Chen1,2 , Tianyu Guo1,2 , Chang Xu3 , Wenshuo Li2 , Chunjing Xu2 , Chao Xu1 , Yunhe Wang2∗
1
2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 3 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney.
htchen@pku.edu.cn, yunhe.wang@huawei.com

Abstract
Data-free learning for student networks is a new
paradigm for solving users’ anxiety caused by the privacy
problem of using original training data. Since the architectures of modern convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
are compact and sophisticated, the alternative images or
meta-data generated from the teacher network are often
broken. Thus, the student network cannot achieve the comparable performance to that of the pre-trained teacher network
especially on the large-scale image dataset. Different to
previous works, we present to maximally utilize the massive
available unlabeled data in the wild. Specifically, we first
thoroughly analyze the output differences between teacher
and student network on the original data and develop a
data collection method. Then, a noisy knowledge distillation algorithm is proposed for achieving the performance
of the student network. In practice, an adaptation matrix
is learned with the student network for correcting the label noise produced by the teacher network on the collected
unlabeled images. The effectiveness of our DFND (DataFree Noisy Distillation) method is then verified on several
benchmarks to demonstrate its superiority over state-of-theart data-free distillation methods. Experiments on various
datasets demonstrate that the student networks learned by
the proposed method can achieve comparable performance
with those using the original dataset. Code is available
at https://github.com/huawei- noah/DataEfficient-Model-Compression

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have been widely
used in various computer vision tasks such as image recognition [14, 18], object detection [29, 11, 42, 41] and image
segmentation [23]. However, these networks usually consist
of enormous number of parameters and requires heavy computation cost, which prevent their usage in edge devices such
∗ Corresponding author

Selected Data with
Noisy Labels
canine

craft
dog vehicle sailboat

sailboat vehicle
craft

dog

Predictions

mammal dog

Original Data
(Unavailable)

Knowledge Distillation:
‫ܦ‬௄௅ ሺ்ࣨ ሺܺ ሻΤܶ ‫ࣨ צ‬ௌ ሺܺ ሻΤܶሻ

dog vehicle fish

0.78

0.04

0.12

0.06

0.02

0.91

0.05

0.02

0.03

0.13

0.83

0.01

0.22

0.03

0.21

0.54

panda carnivore

Unlabeled Data
(Available)

Outputs of Student
Network

Noisy Adaptation
Matrix

Figure 1. The diagram of the proposed method for learning student
networks in the wild. Useful data will be first selected from the
external unlabeled data and then utilized for training the desired student network. The noise adaption matrix is exploited for correcting
labels of unlabeled data estimated by the teacher network.

as mobile phones and autonomous cars. For example, VGGnet [31] requires 548MB memory for saving parameters and
20G floating point operations for processing a single image.
To this end, a great number of techniques including quantization [13], pruning [20] and distillation [15] have been
proposed to accelerate and compress convolutional neural
networks.
Admittedly, we can obtain considerable compression ratios on benchmark datasets and models using these method
when we can access the original training data of the pretrained network. However, the training data is often unavailable in some practice constrains such as privacy or transmission. For example, we want to compress a deep model
trained on millions of images, while the dataset is difficult
to transfer and restore. Furthermore, people are willing to
share their trained models to public, while they are very
anxious about the training data especially some private data,
e.g., face, voice and fingerprint. Thus, a recent trend for

6428

