Relative Order Analysis and Optimization for
Unsupervised Deep Metric Learning
Shichao Kan1,2 , Yigang Cen1,2,∗ , Yang Li3 , Vladimir Mladenovic4 and Zhihai He3,∗
1
2
3

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China

Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing 100044, China

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA
4

Faculty of Technical Sciences University of Kragujevac, Cacak, Serbia

16112062@bjtu.edu.cn; ygcen@bjtu.edu.cn; yltb5@mail.missouri.edu
vladimir.mladenovic@ftn.kg.ac.rs; HeZhi@missouri.edu

Abstract
In unsupervised learning of image features without labels, especially on datasets with fine-grained object classes,
it is often very difficult to tell if a given image belongs to
one specific object class or another, even for human eyes.
However, we can reliably tell if image C is more similar to
image A than image B. In this work, we propose to explore
how this relative order can be used to learn discriminative
features with an unsupervised metric learning method. Instead of resorting to clustering or self-supervision to create
pseudo labels for an absolute decision, which often suffers
from high label error rates, we construct reliable relative
orders for groups of image samples and learn a deep neural network to predict these relative orders. During training, this relative order prediction network and the feature
embedding network are tightly coupled, providing mutual
constraints to each other to improve overall metric learning performance in a cooperative manner. During testing, the predicted relative orders are used as constraints
to optimize the generated features and refine their feature
distance-based image retrieval results using a constrained
optimization procedure. Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed relative orders for unsupervised
learning (ROUL) method is able to significantly improve the
performance of unsupervised deep metric learning.

1. Introduction
Learning discriminative features to represent images is
an important task in computer vision and machine learning.
Images with the same semantic labels should have similar
features being aggregated into compact clusters in the high* corresponding authors

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed idea of relative orders. If
we only look at images A and B, it is hard to determine if they
are from the same classes or not. But, with image C as reference,
we can reliably tell that images (A, B) are definitely more similar
than images (A, C).

dimensional feature space. Meanwhile, images from different classes should be well separated from each other. Recently, methods based on deep neural networks have made
remarkable progress in learning discriminative features for
images [9]. In this work, we consider the unsupervised deep
metric learning where the image class labels are not available. Furthermore, the test image classes are totally different from the training classes.
Existing methods for unsupervised feature or representation learning attempt to construct pseudo labels using
clustering methods or self-supervision labels based on self
augmentation or pretext tasks [1, 4, 29]. It has been observed that the pseudo labels suffer from high error rates,
especially for datasets with fine-grained object classes. It
has also been recognized that features learned from selfsupervision tasks cannot generalize well to other tasks or
new classes [33]. The key challenge is how to effectively
handle the large intra-class variation and inter-class ambiguity. Without labels, how do we tell whether two images

13999

