Positive-Congruent Training: Towards Regression-Free Model Updates
Sijie Yan*

Yuanjun Xiong Kaustav Kundu
Shuo Yang
Meng Wang Wei Xia Stefano Soatto

Siqi Deng

AWS/Amazon AI
yysijie@gmail.com,

{yuanjx, kaustavk, shuoy, siqdeng, mengw, wxia, soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
Reducing inconsistencies in the behavior of different versions of an AI system can be as important in practice as reducing its overall error. In image classification, sample-wise
inconsistencies appear as “negative flips”: A new model
incorrectly predicts the output for a test sample that was
correctly classified by the old (reference) model. Positivecongruent (PC) training aims at reducing error rate while
at the same time reducing negative flips, thus maximizing
congruency with the reference model only on positive predictions, unlike model distillation. We propose a simple
approach for PC training, Focal Distillation, which enforces
congruence with the reference model by giving more weights
to samples that were correctly classified. We also found that,
if the reference model itself can be chosen as an ensemble of
multiple deep neural networks, negative flips can be further
reduced without affecting the new model’s accuracy.

1. Introduction
Imagine a “new and improved” version of the software
that manages your photo collection exhibiting mistakes absent in the old one. Even if the average number of errors has
decreased, every new mistake on your old photos feels like
a step backward (Fig. 1), leading to perceived regression.1
We tackle regression in the update of image classification
models, where an old (reference) model is replaced by a new
(updated) model. We call test samples that are correctly labeled by both the new and the old models positive-congruent.
On the other hand, negative flips are samples correctly classified by the old model but incorrectly by the new one. Their
* Currently at The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Work conducted
while at AWS.
1 In the Software Industry, regression refers to the deterioration of performance after an update. Even if the updated model has on average better
performance, any regression risks breaking post-processing pipelines, which
is why trained models are updated sporadically despite the steady stream of
improvements reported in the literature.

Positive Flips

Both Wrong
Dog

Dog

Cat

Cat

Cat

Dog

Dog

Cat

Cat

Dog

Cat

Cat

Dog

Dog

Negative Flips
Both Correct

Old Model (Err. 57%)

New Model (Err. 42%)

Figure 1: Regression in model update: When updating an
old classifier (red) to a new one (dashed blue line), we correct
mistakes (top-right, white), but we also introduce errors that
the old classifier did not make (negative flips, bottom-left,
red). While on average the errors decrease (from 57% to
42% in this toy example), regression can wreak havoc with
downstream processing, nullifying the benefit of the update.

fraction of the total number is called negative flip rate (NFR),
which measures regression. There are also positive flips,
where the old model makes mistakes that the new one corrects, which are instead beneficial.
Reducing the NFR could be accomplished by reducing the
overall error rate (ER). However, reducing the ER is neither
necessary nor sufficient to reduce the NFR. In fact, models
trained on the same data with different initial conditions, data
augmentations, and hyperparameters tend to yield similar
error rates, but with errors occurring on different samples.
For instance, two ResNet152 models trained on ImageNet
with just different initializations achieve the same accuracy
of 78.3% but differ on 10.4% of the samples in the validation
set (Fig. 2). Assuming an equal portion of positive and
negative flips, updating from one model to another incurs a
5.2%N F R. This can be reduced simply by trading errors

14299

