CT-Net: Complementary Transfering Network for Garment Transfer with
Arbitrary Geometric Changes
Fan Yang, Guosheng Lin*
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
E-mail: yyyfan3@gmail.com, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Garment transfer shows great potential in realistic applications with the goal of transfering outfits across different people images. However, garment transfer between
images with heavy misalignments or severe occlusions still
remains as a challenge. In this work, we propose Complementary Transfering Network (CT-Net) to adaptively model
different levels of geometric changes and transfer outfits
between different people. In specific, CT-Net consists of
three modules: i) A complementary warping module first
estimates two complementary warpings to transfer the desired clothes in different granularities. ii) A layout prediction module is proposed to predict the target layout, which
guides the preservation or generation of the body parts in
the synthesized images. iii) A dynamic fusion module adaptively combines the advantages of the complementary warpings to render the garment transfer results. Extensive experiments conducted on DeepFashion dataset demonstrate
that our network synthesizes high-quality garment transfer
images and significantly outperforms the state-of-art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our source code
will be available online.

Figure 1, given a target person image I T and a model image
I M , without any restriction to the poses or shapes of I T and
I M , our CT-Net synthesizes photo-realistic garment transfer results, in which the person in I T wearing the clothes
depicted in I M with well-preserved details.

1. Introduction
Most existing virtual try-on methods are based on simplifying assumptions: (i) Pure clothing images or 3D information are available. (ii) Pose changes are simple without
heavy misalignments or severe occlusions. We argue that
these simplifying assumptions greatly limit the application
scope of these methods in the realistic virtual try-on scenarios. To address this issue, we propose Complementary
Transfering Network (CT-Net), a novel image-based garment transfer network that does not rely on pure clothing
images or 3D information while capable to adaptively deal
with different levels of geometric changes. As shown in

Figure 1. Garment transfer results generated by CT-Net. First
row: model images. First column: target person images. As
shown above, CT-Net naturally transfers clothes across different people with arbitrary poses or shapes and synthesizes photorealistic images with well-preserved characteristics of the desired
clothes and distinct identities of humans. Please refer to supplementary materials for more results.

Despite various methods have been proposed to realize

* Guosheng Lin is the corresponding author

9899

