What If We Only Use Real Datasets for Scene Text Recognition?
Toward Scene Text Recognition With Fewer Labels
Jeonghun Baek

Yusuke Matsui
The University of Tokyo

Kiyoharu Aizawa

{baek, matsui, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Scene text recognition (STR) task has a common practice: All state-of-the-art STR models are trained on large
synthetic data. In contrast to this practice, training STR
models only on fewer real labels (STR with fewer labels) is
important when we have to train STR models without synthetic data: for handwritten or artistic texts that are difficult to generate synthetically and for languages other than
English for which we do not always have synthetic data.
However, there has been implicit common knowledge that
training STR models on real data is nearly impossible because real data is insufficient. We consider that this common knowledge has obstructed the study of STR with fewer
labels. In this work, we would like to reactivate STR with
fewer labels by disproving the common knowledge. We consolidate recently accumulated public real data and show
that we can train STR models satisfactorily only with real
labeled data. Subsequently, we find simple data augmentation to fully exploit real data. Furthermore, we improve
the models by collecting unlabeled data and introducing
semi- and self-supervised methods. As a result, we obtain
a competitive model to state-of-the-art methods. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first study that 1) shows sufficient performance by only using real labels and 2) introduces semi- and self-supervised methods into STR with
fewer labels. Our code and data are available: https:
//github.com/ku21fan/STR-Fewer-Labels.

1. Introduction
Reading text in natural scenes is generally divided into
two tasks: detecting text regions in scene images and recognizing the text in the regions. The former is referred to
as scene text detection (STD), and the latter as scene text
recognition (STR). Since STR can serve as a substitute for
manual typing performed by humans, we frequently employ STR for various purposes: translation by recognizing
foreign languages, street sign recognition for autonomous

driving, various card recognition to input personal information, etc. Unlike optical character recognition (OCR), which
focuses on reading texts in cleaned documents, STR also
addresses irregular cases in our lives, such as curved or perspective texts, occluded texts, texts in low-resolution images, and texts written in difficult font.
To address these irregular cases, prior works have developed STR models comprising deep neural networks. For example, to address curved or perspective texts, image transformation modules have been proposed to normalize them
into horizontal images [41, 60, 55]. Qiao et al. [38] has integrated a pretrained language model into STR models to recognize occluded text. Wang et al. [53] and Mou et al. [33]
have introduced a super-resolution module into STR models
to handle low-resolution images.
While prior works have improved STR models, the study
of training STR models only on fewer real labels (STR
with fewer labels) is insufficient. After emerging large synthetic data [15] in 2014, the study of STR with fewer labels has decreased. All state-of-the-art methods use large
synthetic data to train STR models instead of sole real
data [40, 41, 23, 60, 24, 1, 55, 52, 50, 56, 26, 38, 57, 33].
Implicit common knowledge has been made; training STR
models only on real data results in low accuracy because
the amount of real data is very small. This common knowledge may have hindered studies on STR with fewer labels.
STR with fewer labels is important when we have to
train STR models without synthetic data. In practical applications, generating synthetic data close to real data can
be difficult depending on the target domain, such as handwritten text or artistic text. In the other case, when we have
to recognize languages other than English, there are not always synthetic data for them. Generating appropriate synthetic data for them is difficult for those who do not know
target languages.
In this paper, we would like to reactivate STR with fewer
labels for such cases. As a first step, we disprove the common knowledge by showing that we can train STR models satisfactorily only with real labels. This is not previously feasible. Because the real data was small, STR mod-

3113

