Towards High Fidelity Face Relighting with Realistic Shadows
Andrew Hou1 , Ze Zhang1 , Michel Sarkis2 , Ning Bi2 , Yiying Tong1 , Xiaoming Liu1
1
Michigan State University, 2 Qualcomm Technologies Inc.
{houandr1, zhangze6, ytong, liuxm}@msu.edu, {msarkis, nbi}@qti.qualcomm.com
https://github.com/andrewhou1/Shadow-Mask-Face-Relighting

(a) Source image
(b) Target lighting
(c) Our model
(d) DPR [41]
(e) SIPR [31]
(f) SfSNet [24]
Figure 1: Given an input image and a target lighting, our model can produce a relit image with realistic hard cast shadows, such as those
around the nose and eyes, which prior work struggles with. Images of SIPR [31] are provided by the authors.

Abstract
Existing face relighting methods often struggle with two
problems: maintaining the local facial details of the subject and accurately removing and synthesizing shadows in
the relit image, especially hard shadows. We propose a
novel deep face relighting method that addresses both problems. Our method learns to predict the ratio (quotient)
image between a source image and the target image with
the desired lighting, allowing us to relight the image while
maintaining the local facial details. During training, our
model also learns to accurately modify shadows by using
estimated shadow masks to emphasize on the high-contrast
shadow borders. Furthermore, we introduce a method to
use the shadow mask to estimate the ambient light intensity in an image, and are thus able to leverage multiple
datasets during training with different global lighting intensities. With quantitative and qualitative evaluations on
the Multi-PIE and FFHQ datasets, we demonstrate that our
proposed method faithfully maintains the local facial details of the subject and can accurately handle hard shadows while achieving state-of-the-art face relighting performance.

1. Introduction
Face relighting is the problem of turning a source image
of a human face into a new image of the same face under
a desired illumination different from the original lighting.
It has long been studied in computer vision and computer
graphics and has a wide range of applications in face-related
problems such as face recognition [10,13,23] and entertainment [22]. With the everlasting interest in consumer photography and photo editing, the ability to produce realistic
relit face images will remain an important problem.
Many existing face relighting models utilize intrinsic decomposition of the image into face geometry, lighting, and
reflectance [3,5,6,13–16,18,20,24,25,29,32,34,36,39]. The
source image is then relit by rendering with a novel illumination. Other relighting methods employ image-to-image
translation [20, 31, 41] or style transfer [17, 19, 27, 28].
For most face relighting applications, one important requirement is the preservation of the subject’s local facial
details during relighting. Intrinsic decomposition methods
often compromise high frequency details and can leave artifacts in the relit face images due to errors in the geometry
or reflectance estimation. Another important feature of a

14719

