Unsupervised Real-world Image Super Resolution
via Domain-distance Aware Training
Yunxuan Wei1, *, Shuhang Gu2,3,∗ , Yawei Li3 , Radu Timofte3 , Longcun Jin1 , Hengjie Song1,†
1

South China University of Technology, 2 The University of Sydney, 3 ETH Zurich
{yunxuanwei, sehjsong}@mail.scut.edu.cn, shuhanggu@gmail.com,
{yaweili, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
Abstract

These days, unsupervised super-resolution (SR) is soaring due to its practical and promising potential in real scenarios. The philosophy of off-the-shelf approaches lies in
the augmentation of unpaired data, i.e. first generating synthetic low-resolution (LR) images Y g corresponding to realworld high-resolution (HR) images X r in the real-world LR
domain Y r , and then utilizing the pseudo pairs {Y g , X r }
for training in a supervised manner. Unfortunately, since
image translation itself is an extremely challenging task,
the SR performance of these approaches is severely limited by the domain gap between generated synthetic LR
images and real LR images. In this paper, we propose a
novel domain-distance aware super-resolution (DASR) approach for unsupervised real-world image SR. The domain
gap between training data (e.g. Y g ) and testing data (e.g.
Y r ) is addressed with our domain-gap aware training and
domain-distance weighted supervision strategies. Domaingap aware training takes additional benefit from real data
in the target domain while domain-distance weighted supervision brings forward the more rational use of labeled
source domain data. The proposed method is validated
on synthetic and real datasets and the experimental results
show that DASR consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
unsupervised SR approaches in generating SR outputs with
more realistic and natural textures. Codes are available at
https://github.com/ShuhangGu/DASR.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) aims at reconstructing a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution
(LR) observation. In the past two decades, SR has been
a thriving research topic due to its highly practical value
in enhancing image details and textures. A wide variety of
models [15, 19, 55, 49, 22] have been suggested to deal with
the image SR problem.
* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Bicubic
FSSR [16] DASR(ours) Real-world
Figure 1: Visualization of the domain-gap between the generated LR images by different methods and LR images in
the AIM [40] dataset. More details can be found in our
main text.
Benefiting from the rapid development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recent years have witnessed
an explosive spread of training CNN models [27, 38, 48, 52,
60, 63, 57, 36] for SR. State-of-the-art SR performance has
been boosted by directly training networks to capture the
LR-to-HR mapping. Moreover, when combined with adversarial training [20] or perceptual losses [31], SR networks
can produce accurate and natural-looking image details.
In spite of their success on benchmark datasets, the poor
generalization capacity of discriminatively trained SR networks limits their application in real scenarios. When applied to super-resolve real images, SR networks trained on
simulated datasets usually lead to undesired strong artifacts
in their SR results. For the pursuit of real image SR, great
attempts have been made in the last couple of years. By adjusting the focal length of a digital camera, several works
prepared real image SR datasets [9, 61, 8]. But the collections of these datasets are often laborious and costly.
Furthermore, SR networks trained on the collected datasets
are hard to generalize to images captured in other condi-

13385

