ATSO: Asynchronous Teacher-Student Optimization
for Semi-Supervised Image Segmentation
Xinyue Huo1,2 Lingxi Xie2 Jianzhong He2 Zijie Yang2,3
Wengang Zhou1 Houqiang Li1 Qi Tian2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Huawei Inc.
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences
xinyueh@mail.ustc.edu.cn 198808xc@gmail.com
yangzijie@ict.ac.cn {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is a useful tool for image segmentation, mainly due to its ability in extracting knowledge
from unlabeled data to assist learning from labeled data.
This paper focuses on a popular pipeline known as selflearning, where we point out a weakness named lazy mimicking that refers to the inertia that a model retains the prediction from itself and thus resists updates. To alleviate this
issue, we propose the Asynchronous Teacher-Student Optimization (ATSO) algorithm that (i) breaks up continual
learning from teacher to student and (ii) partitions the unlabeled training data into two subsets and alternately uses
one subset to fine-tune the model which updates the labels
on the other. We show the ability of ATSO on medical and
natural image segmentation. In both scenarios, our method
reports competitive performance, on par with the state-ofthe-arts, in either using partial labeled data in the same
dataset or transferring the trained model to an unlabeled
dataset.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation plays an important role in image understanding. Recently, the fast development of deep
learning [17] provides a powerful tool for dense image
prediction [6, 20], but for many scenarios such as medical image analysis, data annotation is often expensive but
there may exist abundant unlabeled data. In addition, it
is a common requirement of transferring a segmentation
model from one domain to another without extra annotations. Both scenarios fall into the area of semi-supervised
learning which focuses on learning from both labeled data
and unlabeled data while the labeled part is often smaller.
An effective pipeline is known as self-learning, in which
an initial model is trained on the labeled part (training set)

jianzhonghe@pku.edu.cn
tian.qi1@huawei.com

and fine-tuned on the unlabeled part (reference set) with the
pseudo labels generated by itself. We refer to this pipeline
as teacher-student optimization, a variant of knowledge distillation [14] that has straightforward applications on medical image analysis [47].
However, we notice a factor that harms the efficiency of
utilizing unlabeled data. In the self-learning procedure, the
similarity between the teacher and student, two variants of
the target model, tend to increase. Consequently, the supervision that the student model obtains from the pseudo labels
becomes weak and the learning process quickly arrives at
a plateau. We call this phenomenon lazy mimicking: the
teacher model stores knowledge in the pseudo labels for the
student model to learn; once a prediction error appears, it
is likely to persist throughout the self-learning procedure;
therefore, inaccuracy accumulates and finally downgrades
the quality of the generated pseudo labels. We find that
lazy mimicking quantitatively reflects in that the pseudo labels are not improved during the learning process – in other
words, the accuracy on the reference set stops growing but
the model itself does not know. From the viewpoint of optimization, lazy mimicking is caused by the self-learning
process gradually pushing the teacher and student models,
as a whole, towards a local optimum.
To break up the optimization trap and alleviate lazy mimicking, we present the asynchronous teacher-student optimization (ATSO) algorithm. ATSO puts forward two simple modifications beyond the self-learning pipeline to break
up the chain of ‘error inheritance’. First, we switch off
continual learning and start each generation from the same
initialized model. Second, we prevent using the pseudo labels generated by a teacher model to supervise its direct student, which involves partitioning the reference set into two
subsets – in each round of teacher-student optimization, we
generate the pseudo labels on any subset based on a teacher
model that was not trained on the same set of data. As we
11235

