Few-Shot Classification with Feature Map Reconstruction Networks
Davis Wertheimer*

Luming Tang*
Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

{dww78,lt453,bh497}@cornell.edu

Abstract
In this paper we reformulate few-shot classification as a
reconstruction problem in latent space. The ability of the
network to reconstruct a query feature map from support
features of a given class predicts membership of the query
in that class. We introduce a novel mechanism for few-shot
classification by regressing directly from support features to
query features in closed form, without introducing any new
modules or large-scale learnable parameters. The resulting Feature Map Reconstruction Networks are both more
performant and computationally efficient than previous approaches. We demonstrate consistent and substantial accuracy gains on four fine-grained benchmarks with varying neural architectures. Our model is also competitive on
the non-fine-grained mini-ImageNet and tiered-ImageNet
benchmarks with minimal bells and whistles.1

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural classifiers have achieved excellent
performance in a wide range of settings and benchmarks,
but this performance is achieved through large quantities
of labeled images from the relevant classes. In practice,
such a large quantity of human-annotated images may not
always be available for the categories of interest. Instances
of relevant classes may be rare in the wild, and identifying them may require expensive expert annotators, limiting the availability of training points and labels respectively. These problems are compounded in settings such
as robotics, where a model may need to learn and adapt
quickly in deployment, without waiting for offline data collection. Producing a performant classifier in these settings
requires a neural network that can rapidly fit novel, possibly
unseen classes from a small number of reference images.
A promising approach to this problem of few-shot classification is the family of metric learning techniques, where
the standard parametric linear classifier head is replaced
with a class-agnostic distance function. Class membership
* Equal contribution
1 Code is available at https://github.com/Tsingularity/FRN

Figure 1. Visual intuition for FRN: we reconstruct each query image as a weighted sum of components from the support images.
Reconstructions from the same class are better than reconstructions from different classes, enabling classification. FRN performs
the reconstruction in latent space, as opposed to image space, here.

is determined by distance in latent space from a point or
points known to belong to each class. Simple distance functions such as cosine [13, 8] and Euclidean distance [30]
lead to surprisingly powerful classifiers, though more complex [29], non-Euclidean [17], and even learned parametric
options [32] are possible, and yield sizable gains.
One overarching problem common to all these techniques is the fact that the convolutional feature extractors
used to learn the metric spaces produce feature maps characterizing appearance at a grid of spatial locations, whereas
the chosen distance functions require a single vectorial representation for the entire image. The researcher must decide how to convert the feature map into a vector representation. Optimally, this conversion would preserve the spatial granularity and detail of the feature map without overfitting to pose, but existing, widely-employed approaches
do not accomplish this. Global average-pooling, the standard solution for parametric softmax classifiers, averages
information from disparate parts of the image, completely

8012

