DivCo: Diverse Conditional Image Synthesis via
Contrastive Generative Adversarial Network
Rui Liu† Yixiao Ge† Ching Lam Choi†‡ Xiaogang Wang† Hongsheng Li†§
†
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡
NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA, Hong Kong § School of CST, Xidian University
{ruiliu@link, yxge@link, cchoi@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs)
target at synthesizing diverse images given the input conditions and latent codes, but unfortunately, they usually suffer
from the issue of mode collapse. To solve this issue, previous works [47, 22] mainly focused on encouraging the correlation between the latent codes and their generated images, while ignoring the relations between images generated from various latent codes. The recent MSGAN [27] tried
to encourage the diversity of the generated image but only
considers “negative” relations between the image pairs.
In this paper, we propose a novel DivCo framework to
properly constrain both “positive” and “negative” relations between the generated images specified in the latent
space. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to use contrastive learning for diverse conditional image
synthesis. A novel latent-augmented contrastive loss is introduced, which encourages images generated from adjacent latent codes to be similar and those generated from
distinct latent codes to be dissimilar. The proposed latentaugmented contrastive loss is well compatible with various cGAN architectures. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed DivCo can produce more diverse
images than state-of-the-art methods without sacrificing visual quality in multiple unpaired and paired image generation tasks. Training code and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/ruiliu-ai/DivCo.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial network (GAN) [9] has shown
great potential to capture complex distributions and generate high-dimensional samples since its first introduction
in 2014. The follow-up years witnessed its great progresses and successes in synthesizing realistic high-resolution
images [35, 28, 1, 18, 19, 3]. Based on GANs, conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs) [29] were
proposed, which focus not only on producing realistic images but more on preserving the input conditional informa-

Class A

Class B

(a) Target distribution
Class A

Class B

(c) Mode seeking loss

Class A

Class B

(b) Latent regression loss
Class A

Class B

(d) Our contrastive loss

Figure 1. 2D toy experiment for demonstrating the generation
distribution learned with different regularization terms. (a) The
ground-truth distributions for the two different classes, each of
which is a Gaussian mixture model. (b) The generated samples
from the learned distribution by the latent regression loss [47]
shows its weakness in covering all modes of the ground truths. (c)
The generated samples from the learned distribution by the mode seeking loss [27] shows similar patterns regardless of different
classes. (d) The generated samples from the learned distribution
by our proposed latent-augmented contrastive loss demonstrates
an unbiased distribution which is properly dependent on both conditional input and latent codes.

tion. For example, ACGANs [32] generated diverse images conditioned on class labels. Pix2pix [16] and CycleGAN [46] translated images across two characteristic domains to change their visual styles under paired and unpaired settings, respectively. There exist other cGANs that
condition on input images, e.g. super-resolution [21], style
transfer [23, 22], inpainting [41], denoising [4], etc., as well
as cGANs conditioned on text descriptions [44, 43, 40].
Real-world scenarios expect the synthetic samples to be
diverse and able to manipulate flexibly. However, all the
applications mentioned above suffer from the problem of
mode collapse to some extent, even though randomly sampled latent codes are added as additional inputs. To deal
with this shortcoming, many works attempted to enhance
the correlation between input latent codes and output images to ensure that the latent codes have control over the
generated images. BicycleGAN [47] and DRIT [22] adopted a latent regression loss term, which encourages the mod-

16377

