Neural Deformation Graphs for Globally-consistent Non-rigid Reconstruction
Aljaž Božič1

Pablo Palafox1
1

Michael Zollhöfer2

Technical University of Munich

Justus Thies1
2

Angela Dai1

Matthias Nießner1

Facebook Reality Labs Research

Figure 1: Neural Deformation Graphs: given range input data, represented as a signed distance field, our method predicts
globally-consistent deformation graph that is used to reconstruct the non-rigidly deforming surface of an object. The surface
of the object is represented as a set of implicit functions centered around the deformation graph nodes. Our global optimization provides consistent surface and deformation prediction, enabling robust tracking of an observed input sequence and even
multiple disjoint captures of the same object (as we do not assume sequential input data).

Abstract
We introduce Neural Deformation Graphs for globallyconsistent deformation tracking and 3D reconstruction of
non-rigid objects. Specifically, we implicitly model a deformation graph via a deep neural network. This neural deformation graph does not rely on any object-specific structure and, thus, can be applied to general non-rigid deformation tracking. Our method globally optimizes this neural
graph on a given sequence of depth camera observations
of a non-rigidly moving object. Based on explicit viewpoint
consistency as well as inter-frame graph and surface consistency constraints, the underlying network is trained in
a self-supervised fashion. We additionally optimize for the
geometry of the object with an implicit deformable multiMLP shape representation. Our approach does not assume sequential input data, thus enabling robust tracking
of fast motions or even temporally disconnected recordings.
Our experiments demonstrate that our Neural Deformation
Graphs outperform state-of-the-art non-rigid reconstruction approaches both qualitatively and quantitatively, with
64% improved reconstruction and 54% improved deformation tracking performance. Code is publicly available.1

1 aljazbozic.github.io/neural deformation graphs

1. Introduction
Capturing non-rigidly deforming surfaces is essential towards reconstructing and understanding real-world environments, which are often highly dynamic. While impressive advances have been made in reconstructing static 3D
scenes [8, 21], dynamic tracking and reconstruction remains very challenging. A plethora of domain-specific dynamic tracking methods has been developed (e.g., human
bodies, faces, hands), leveraging strong domain shape and
motion priors for robust tracking [4, 28, 31, 41]. However, real-world environments encompass a vast diversity
of deformable objects – including people with clothing
or animals – making domain specific shape priors often
intractable for general deformable reconstruction; in this
work, we thus focus on general non-rigid 3D reconstruction
without shape or motion priors for general object tracking
and reconstruction.
A seminal work in non-rigid 3D reconstruction is DynamicFusion [32], which was the first approach to demonstrate real-time dense reconstruction of dynamic scenes using just a single RGB-D sensor. DynamicFusion showed
promising results towards dynamic reconstruction, but still
struggles in many real-world scenarios, which typically include strong deformations and fast frame-to-frame motion,
due to its low-level, local correspondence association step.

1450

