CanonPose: Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation in the Wild
Bastian Wandt1,2

Marco Rudolph1
Petrissa Zell1
Helge Rhodin2
Bodo Rosenhahn1
1
Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany
2
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
wandt@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Human pose estimation from single images is a challenging problem in computer vision that requires large amounts
of labeled training data to be solved accurately. Unfortunately, for many human activities (e.g. outdoor sports) such
training data does not exist and is hard or even impossible
to acquire with traditional motion capture systems. We propose a self-supervised approach that learns a single image
3D pose estimator from unlabeled multi-view data. To this
end, we exploit multi-view consistency constraints to disentangle the observed 2D pose into the underlying 3D pose
and camera rotation. In contrast to most existing methods, we do not require calibrated cameras and can therefore learn from moving cameras. Nevertheless, in the case
of a static camera setup, we present an optional extension
to include constant relative camera rotations over multiple
views into our framework. Key to the success are new, unbiased reconstruction objectives that mix information across
views and training samples. The proposed approach is evaluated on two benchmark datasets (Human3.6M and MPIIINF-3DHP) and on the in-the-wild SkiPose dataset.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation from single images is an ongoing research topic in computer vision. There exist a large
amount of supervised deep learning solutions in the literature. These approaches achieve remarkable results in a supervised setting, i.e. having 2D to 3D annotations, but heavily rely on a vast amount of available training data. However, there are many activities a person can perform which
are not present in common datasets. For instance, human
motions performed during outdoor and/or sports activities,
e.g. as shown in Fig. 1, are hard or even impossible to capture with a commercial motion capture systems. Therefore, the acquisition of training data is a major practical
challenge. To this end, we propose a novel self-supervised
training procedure that does not require any 2D or 3D an-

Figure 1. CanonPose learns a monocular 3D human pose estimator
from multi-view self-supervision. By estimating 3D poses from
different views in a canonical form together with the respective
camera rotations we exploit multi-view consistency in the training
data. Even for challenging outdoor datasets with moving cameras
we achieve convincing 3D pose estimates from single images after
training.

notations in the multi-view training dataset and works with
uncalibrated cameras. To acquire 2D joint predictions from
images we use a 2D human joint estimator [7] that is pretrained on a different dataset with only 2D joint annotations.
The only requirements for our method are at least two temporally synchronised cameras that observe the person of interest from different angles. No further knowledge about the
scene, camera calibration and intrinsics is required. Several related works consider a sparse set of 3D annotations
[36, 34, 29], unpaired 3D data [47, 48, 16], or known camera positions [36, 34] to solve this problem. However, such
data rarely exists for outdoor settings with moving cameras.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only three competing methods [2, 14, 11] that apply to our setting. They either
require additional knowledge about the scene or observed
person, such as scene geometry [2] and bone lengths constraints [11], or sophisticated traditional computer vision algorithms that produce a pseudo ground truth pose [14].
We propose a self-supervised training method which
mixes outputs of multiple weight-sharing neural networks.
Fig. 2 shows our training pipeline when using two cameras.
Each individual network takes a single image as input and
outputs a 3D pose in a canonical rotation, which gives our

13294

