Deep Implicit Templates for 3D Shape Representation
Zerong Zheng

Tao Yu

Qionghai Dai

Yebin Liu

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Deep implicit functions (DIFs), as a kind of 3D shape
representation, are becoming more and more popular in the
3D vision community due to their compactness and strong
representation power. However, unlike polygon mesh-based
templates, it remains a challenge to reason dense correspondences or other semantic relationships across shapes
represented by DIFs, which limits its applications in texture
transfer, shape analysis and so on. To overcome this limitation and also make DIFs more interpretable, we propose
Deep Implicit Templates, a new 3D shape representation
that supports explicit correspondence reasoning in deep implicit representations. Our key idea is to formulate DIFs
as conditional deformations of a template implicit function.
To this end, we propose Spatial Warping LSTM, which decomposes the conditional spatial transformation into multiple point-wise transformations and guarantees generalization capability. Moreover, the training loss is carefully
designed in order to achieve high reconstruction accuracy
while learning a plausible template with accurate correspondences in an unsupervised manner. Experiments show
that our method can not only learn a common implicit template for a collection of shapes, but also establish dense
correspondences across all the shapes simultaneously without any supervision.

1. Introduction
Representing 3D objects effectively and efficiently in
neural networks is fundamental for many tasks in computer
vision, including 3D model reconstruction, matching, manipulation and understanding. In the pioneering studies, researchers have adopted various traditional geometry representations, including voxel grids [53, 55, 52, 54, 23, 46],
point clouds [62, 1, 58, 33] and meshes [63, 2, 50, 51, 22,
14, 5]. In the past several years, deep implicit functions
(DIFs) have been proposed as an alternative [40, 38, 11, 18,
20, 56, 26, 9, 24, 47, 15]. Compared to traditional representations, DIFs show expressive and flexible capacity for representing complex shapes and fine geometric details, even
in challenging tasks like human digitization [43].

Unfortunately, the implicit nature of DIFs is also its
Achilles’ Heels: although DIFs are good at approximating
individual shapes, they provide no information about the relationship between two different ones. One can easily establish vertice-to-vertice correspondences between two shapes
when using mesh templates [21, 50, 14], but that is difficult
in DIFs. The lack of semantic relationship in DIFs poses
significant challenges for using DIFs in downstream applications such as shape understanding and editing.
To overcome this limitation, we propose Deep Implicit
Templates, a new way to interpret and implement DIFs. The
key idea is to decompose a conditional deep implicit function into two components: a template implicit function and
a conditional spatial warping function. The template implicit function represents the “mean shape” for a category of
objects, while the spatial warping function deforms the template implicit function to form specific object instances. On
one hand, as both the template and the warping field are defined in an implicit manner, the advantages of deep implicit
representations (compactness and efficiency) are preserved.
On the other hand, with the template implicit function as
an intermediate shape, the warping function automatically
establishes dense correspondences across different object.
More recently, some techniques use a set of primitives
to represent 3D shapes in order to capture structure-level
semantics [19, 18, 22, 14]. The primitives can be either
manually defined [19, 22] or learned from data [18, 14].
We emphasize that our method is essentially different from
them in two ways. First, our method decomposes the implicit representations into a template implicit function and
a continuous warping field. Compared to element-based
methods, our decomposition not only provides a complete,
global template for the training data, enabling many applications such as uv mapping and keypiont labeling, but also
makes the latent shape space more interpretable as we can
inspect how shapes deform. Second, our method directly
builds up accurate correspondences in the whole 3D space,
while element-based methods rely on interpolation or feature matching to compute dense correspondences. Overall,
our method provides more flexibility and scalability to control the template and/or its deformation: one can, for example, replace the template in our framework with a custom
designed one without losing the representation power, or

1429

