PSD: Principled Synthetic-to-Real Dehazing Guided by Physical Priors
Zeyuan Chen1 , Yangchao Wang2 , Yang Yang2 , Dong Liu1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
nnice1216@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yancyycwang@outlook.com, dlyyang@gmail.com, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning-based methods have achieved remarkable
performance for image dehazing. However, previous studies
are mostly focused on training models with synthetic hazy
images, which incurs performance drop when the models
are used for real-world hazy images. We propose a Principled Synthetic-to-real Dehazing (PSD) framework to improve the generalization performance of dehazing. Starting
from a dehazing model backbone that is pre-trained on synthetic data, PSD exploits real hazy images to fine-tune the
model in an unsupervised fashion. For the fine-tuning, we
leverage several well-grounded physical priors and combine them into a prior loss committee. PSD allows for
most of the existing dehazing models as its backbone, and
the combination of multiple physical priors boosts dehazing
significantly. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our PSD framework establishes the new stateof-the-art performance for real-world dehazing, in terms of
visual quality assessed by no-reference quality metrics as
well as subjective evaluation and downstream task performance indicator.

1. Introduction
Due to the existence of haze, outdoor images often suffer from low contrast and limited visibility, which adversely
affects the performance of subsequent high-level computer
vision tasks, such as object detection and recognition. Thus,
more and more attention is drawn to image dehazing, that
aims to recover the clean image from a hazy input.
According to the physical scattering model [24, 27], the
hazing process is usually formulated as
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x))

(1)

* This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62022075 and 61931014. Our code and models are available
at https://github.com/zychen- ustc/PSD- PrincipledSynthetic - to - Real - Dehazing - Guided - by - Physical Priors. (Corresponding author: Dong Liu.)

(a) Hazy image

(b) DAD [34]

(c) MSBDN [6]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Dehazing results on a real hazy image.

where I(x) is the observed hazy image, J(x) is the scene
radiance to be recovered. A and t(x) are the global atmospheric light and the transmission map, respectively.
Estimating the clean image from a single hazy input is an
ill-posed problem. Early methods [1, 8, 9, 11, 37] try to estimate transmission map by physical priors and then restore
image via the scattering model. However, these physical
priors are not always reliable, leading to inaccurate transmission estimates and unsatisﬁed dehazing results.
With the advances in deep learning, many methods based
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [3,4,7,14,22,31,
32] have been proposed to overcome the drawbacks of using physical priors. They are more efﬁcient and outperform
traditional prior-based algorithms. In common cases, large
quantities of paired hazy/clean images are necessary for the
training of CNN-based dehazing models. However, it is almost impossible to obtain these image pairs from the real
world, and most learning-based methods resort to training
on synthetic data. Unfortunately, due to the domain gap
between synthetic and real data, dehazing models trained
on synthetic images usually generalize poorly to real-world
hazy images.
Recently, this issue has been picked up by a handful of

7180

