Accurate Few-shot Object Detection with Support-Query
Mutual Guidance and Hybrid Loss
Lu Zhang1 Shuigeng Zhou1 * Jihong Guan2 Ji Zhang3
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
3
Zhejiang Laboratory, China
1

{l zhang19,sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn, jhguan@tongji.edu.cn, Ji.Zhang@zhejianglab.com

Abstract
Most object detection methods require huge amounts of
annotated data and can detect only the categories that appear in the training set. However, in reality acquiring massive annotated training data is both expensive and timeconsuming. In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage
detector for accurate few-shot object detection. In the first
stage, we employ a support-query mutual guidance mechanism to generate more support-relevant proposals. Concretely, on the one hand, a query-guided support weighting
module is developed for aggregating different supports to
generate the support feature. On the other hand, a supportguided query enhancement module is designed by dynamic
kernels. In the second stage, we score and filter proposals
via multi-level feature comparison between each proposal
and the aggregated support feature based on a distance metric learnt by an effective hybrid loss, which makes the embedding space of distance metric more discriminative. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show that our
method substantially outperforms the existing methods and
lifts the SOTA of FSOD task to a higher level.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision. Most existing object detection
methods [23] require huge amounts of annotated training
data, and it is hard to generalize a well-trained model to detect unseen classes. On the contrary, human beings have
strong capability to recognize and locate an object that they
have never seen before, but only if they have a few examples of such an object. In other words, the visual system of
humans can learn novel concepts and features from a few
* correspondence author

examples quickly and then recognizes objects of the same
kind in other images, even when the objects are under large
variance of view, illumination, and shape, etc.
In real-world scenarios, the number of training samples
could be small, and the cost to label high-quality samples
can be very high. Thus, it is important to study the problem
of few-shot object detection (FSOD) [2, 10]. Specifically,
given a few support images with annotations of some target classes, FSOD aims to recognize and localize objects
of these classes in some query images. Similar to fewshot learning, the class space is divided into base (seen)
classes and novel (unseen) classes. During training, only
base classes are used. The inference is conducted on novel
classes, which are different from the base classes.
FSOD is a challenging problem that has not yet been
extensively studied. Among the existing works, some are
based on one-stage detectors, which usually have relatively
low accuracy [10, 28]. In contrast, two-stage detector can
achieve relatively high accuracy [30, 11, 5, 27]. However,
existing two-stage methods still have some obvious drawbacks: 1) Support information is not fully exploited to guide
bounding boxes generation from the query. 2) In k-shot
scenario, they treat different supports equally and aggregate
their features by simple averaging, which will also seriously
impact detection accuracy. 3) Generally, their detection accuracy is still too low to be applicable in real applications.
To address the problems above, in this paper, we propose a novel method for accurate few-shot object detection.
Our method is a two-stage detector with multi-level architecture. In the first stage, we employ a support-query mutual guidance mechanism to generate more support-relevant
proposals. To this end, on the one hand, considering that the
similarities between different supports and the query image
may be quite different, it is natural to think that the supports contribute differently to detect objects from the query
image. Thus, we design a query-guided support weighting

14424

