Supervised Learning for Dynamical System Learning

Ahmed Hefny ∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ahefny@cs.cmu.edu

Carlton Downey †
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
cmdowney@cs.cmu.edu

Geoffrey J. Gordon ‡
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ggordon@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recently there has been substantial interest in spectral methods for learning dynamical systems. These methods are popular since they often offer a good tradeoff
between computational and statistical efficiency. Unfortunately, they can be difficult to use and extend in practice: e.g., they can make it difficult to incorporate
prior information such as sparsity or structure. To address this problem, we present
a new view of dynamical system learning: we show how to learn dynamical systems by solving a sequence of ordinary supervised learning problems, thereby
allowing users to incorporate prior knowledge via standard techniques such as
L1 regularization. Many existing spectral methods are special cases of this new
framework, using linear regression as the supervised learner. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our framework by showing examples where nonlinear regression
or lasso let us learn better state representations than plain linear regression does;
the correctness of these instances follows directly from our general analysis.

1

Introduction

Likelihood-based approaches to learning dynamical systems, such as EM [1] and MCMC [2], can
be slow and suffer from local optima. This difficulty has resulted in the development of so-called
“spectral algorithms” [3], which rely on factorization of a matrix of observable moments; these
algorithms are often fast, simple, and globally optimal.
Despite these advantages, spectral algorithms fall short in one important aspect compared to EM and
MCMC: the latter two methods are meta-algorithms or frameworks that offer a clear template for
developing new instances incorporating various forms of prior knowledge. For spectral algorithms,
by contrast, there is no clear template to go from a set of probabilistic assumptions to an algorithm.
In fact, researchers often relax model assumptions to make the algorithm design process easier,
potentially discarding valuable information in the process.
To address this problem, we propose a new framework for dynamical system learning, using the
idea of instrumental-variable regression [4, 5] to transform dynamical system learning to a sequence
of ordinary supervised learning problems. This transformation allows us to apply the rich literature
on supervised learning to incorporate many types of prior knowledge. Our new methods subsume a
variety of existing spectral algorithms as special cases.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: first we formulate the new learning framework
(Sec. 2). We then provide theoretical guarantees for the proposed methods (Sec. 4). Finally, we give
∗
This material is based upon work funded and supported by the Department of Defense under Contract No.
FA8721-05-C-0003 with Carnegie Mellon University for the operation of the Software Engineering Institute, a
federally funded research and development center.
†
Supported by a grant from the PNC Center for Financial Services Innovation
‡
Supported by NIH grant R01 MH 064537 and ONR contract N000141512365.

1

