Algorithmic Stability and Uniform Generalization

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia
ibrahim.alabdulmohsin@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
One of the central questions in statistical learning theory is to determine the conditions under which agents can learn from experience. This includes the necessary and sufficient conditions for generalization from a given finite training set
to new observations. In this paper, we prove that algorithmic stability in the inference process is equivalent to uniform generalization across all parametric loss
functions. We provide various interpretations of this result. For instance, a relationship is proved between stability and data processing, which reveals that algorithmic stability can be improved by post-processing the inferred hypothesis or by
augmenting training examples with artificial noise prior to learning. In addition,
we establish a relationship between algorithmic stability and the size of the observation space, which provides a formal justification for dimensionality reduction
methods. Finally, we connect algorithmic stability to the size of the hypothesis
space, which recovers the classical PAC result that the size (complexity) of the
hypothesis space should be controlled in order to improve algorithmic stability
and improve generalization.

1

Introduction

One fundamental goal of any learning algorithm is to strike a right balance between underfitting
and overfitting. In mathematical terms, this is often translated into two separate objectives. First,
we would like the learning algorithm to produce a hypothesis that is reasonably consistent with the
empirical evidence (i.e. to have a small empirical risk). Second, we would like to guarantee that the
empirical risk (training error) is a valid estimate of the true unknown risk (test error). The former
condition protects against underfitting while the latter condition protects against overfitting.
The rationale behind these two objectives can be understood if we define the generalization risk
.
Rgen by the absolute difference between the empirical and true risks: Rgen = Remp − Rtrue .
Then, it is elementary to observe that the true risk Rtrue is bounded from above by the sum
Remp + Rgen . Hence, by minimizing both the empirical risk (underfitting) and the generalization
risk (overfitting), one obtains an inference procedure whose true risk is minimal.
Minimizing the empirical risk alone can be carried out using the empirical risk minimization (ERM)
procedure [1] or some approximations to it. However, the generalization risk is often impossible to
deal with directly. Instead, it is a common practice to bound it analyticaly so that we can establish
conditions under which it is guaranteed to be small. By establishing conditions for generalization,
one hopes to design better learning algorithms that both perform well empirically and generalize
well to novel observations in the future. A prominent example of such an approach is the Support
Vector Machines (SVM) algorithm for binary classification [2].
However, bounding the generalization risk is quite intricate because it can be approached from
various angles. In fact, several methods have been proposed in the past to prove generalization bounds including uniform convergence, algorithmic stability, Rademacher and Gaussian complexities, generic chaining bounds, the PAC-Bayesian framework, and robustness-based analysis
1

