Tractable Learning for Complex Probability Queries

Jessa Bekker, Jesse Davis
KU Leuven, Belgium
{jessa.bekker,jesse.davis}@cs.kuleuven.be
Arthur Choi, Adnan Darwiche, Guy Van den Broeck
University of California, Los Angeles
{aychoi,darwiche,guyvdb}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Tractable learning aims to learn probabilistic models where inference is guaranteed to be efficient. However, the particular class of queries that is tractable depends on the model and underlying representation. Usually this class is MPE
or conditional probabilities Pr(x|y) for joint assignments x, y. We propose a
tractable learner that guarantees efficient inference for a broader class of queries.
It simultaneously learns a Markov network and its tractable circuit representation,
in order to guarantee and measure tractability. Our approach differs from earlier
work by using Sentential Decision Diagrams (SDD) as the tractable language instead of Arithmetic Circuits (AC). SDDs have desirable properties, which more
general representations such as ACs lack, that enable basic primitives for Boolean
circuit compilation. This allows us to support a broader class of complex probability queries, including counting, threshold, and parity, in polytime.

1

Introduction

Tractable learning [1] is a promising new machine learning paradigm that focuses on learning probability distributions that support efficient querying. It is motivated by the observation that while
classical algorithms for learning Bayesian and Markov networks excel at fitting data, they ignore the
cost of reasoning with the learned model. However, many applications, such as health-monitoring
systems, require efficient and (guaranteed) accurate reasoning capabilities. Hence, new learning
techniques are needed to support applications with these requirements.
Initially, tractable learning focused on the first model class recognized to be tractable: low-treewidth
graphical models [2–5]. Recent advances in probabilistic inference exploit other properties of a
model, including local structure [6] and exchangeability [7], which even scale to models that have
high treewidth. In particular, the discovery of local structure led to arithmetic circuits (ACs) [8],
which are a much more powerful representation of tractable probability distributions. In turn, this
led to new tractable learners that targeted ACs to guarantee efficient inference [9, 10]. In this context, ACs with latent variables are sometimes called sum-product networks (SPNs) [11, 12]. Other
tractable learners target exchangeable models [13, 14] or determinantal point processes [15].
There is a trade-off in tractable learning that is poorly understood and often ignored: tractability
is not absolute, and always relative to a class of queries that the user is interested in. Existing approaches define tractability as the ability to efficiently compute most-probable explanations (MPE)
or conditional probabilities Pr(x|y) where x, y are joint assignments to subsets of random variables.
While these queries are indeed efficient on ACs, many other queries of interest are not. For example,
computing partial MAP remains NP-hard on low-treewidth and AC models [16]. Similarly, various
1

