Asynchronous stochastic convex optimization:
the noise is in the noise and SGD don’t care
Sorathan Chaturapruek1
John C. Duchi2
Chris Ré1
1
2
Departments of Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, and 2 Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{sorathan,jduchi,chrismre}@stanford.edu

Abstract
We show that asymptotically, completely asynchronous stochastic gradient procedures achieve optimal (even to constant factors) convergence rates for the solution
of convex optimization problems under nearly the same conditions required for
asymptotic optimality of standard stochastic gradient procedures. Roughly, the
noise inherent to the stochastic approximation scheme dominates any noise from
asynchrony. We also give empirical evidence demonstrating the strong performance of asynchronous, parallel stochastic optimization schemes, demonstrating
that the robustness inherent to stochastic approximation problems allows substantially faster parallel and asynchronous solution methods. In short, we show that
for many stochastic approximation problems, as Freddie Mercury sings in Queen’s
Bohemian Rhapsody, “Nothing really matters.”

1

Introduction

We study a natural asynchronous stochastic gradient method for the solution of minimization problems of the form
Z
minimize f (x) := EP [F (x; W )] =
F (x; ω)dP (ω),
(1)
Ω

where x 7→ F (x; ω) is convex for each ω ∈ Ω, P is a probability distribution on Ω, and the vector
x ∈ Rd . Stochastic gradient techniques for the solution of problem (1) have a long history in
optimization, starting from the early work of Robbins and Monro [19] and continuing on through
Ermoliev [7], Polyak and Juditsky [16], and Nemirovski et al. [14]. The latter two show how certain
long stepsizes and averaging techniques yield more robust and asymptotically optimal optimization
schemes, and we show how their results extend to practical parallel and asynchronous settings.
We consider an extension of previous stochastic gradient methods to a natural family of asynchronous gradient methods [3], where multiple processors can draw samples from the distribution
P and asynchronously perform updates to a centralized (shared) decision vector x. Our iterative
scheme is based on the H OGWILD ! algorithm of Niu et al. [15], which is designed to asynchronously
solve certain stochastic optimization problems in multi-core environments, though our analysis and
iterations are different. In particular, we study the following procedure, where each processor runs
asynchronously and independently of the others, though they maintain a shared integer iteration
counter k; each processor P asynchronously performs the following:
(i) Processor P reads current problem data x
(ii) Processor P draws a random sample W ∼ P , computes g = ∇F (x; W ), and increments the
centralized counter k
(iii) Processor P updates x ← x − αk g sequentially for each coordinate j = 1, 2, . . . , d by incrementing [x]j ← [x]j − αk [g]j , where the scalars αk are a non-increasing stepsize sequence.
1

