Halting in Random Walk Kernels

Karsten M. Borgwardt
D-BSSE, ETH Zürich
Basel, Switzerland
karsten.borgwardt@bsse.ethz.ch

Mahito Sugiyama
ISIR, Osaka University, Japan
JST, PRESTO
mahito@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Random walk kernels measure graph similarity by counting matching walks in
two graphs. In their most popular form of geometric random walk kernels, longer
walks of length k are downweighted by a factor of λk (λ < 1) to ensure convergence of the corresponding geometric series. We know from the field of link
prediction that this downweighting often leads to a phenomenon referred to as
halting: Longer walks are downweighted so much that the similarity score is
completely dominated by the comparison of walks of length 1. This is a naı̈ve
kernel between edges and vertices. We theoretically show that halting may occur
in geometric random walk kernels. We also empirically quantify its impact in simulated datasets and popular graph classification benchmark datasets. Our findings
promise to be instrumental in future graph kernel development and applications of
random walk kernels.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, graph kernels have become a popular approach to graph comparison [4, 5, 7, 9,
12, 13, 14], which is at the heart of many machine learning applications in bioinformatics, imaging,
and social-network analysis. The first and best-studied instance of this family of kernels are random
walk kernels, which count matching walks in two graphs [5, 7] to quantify their similarity. In particular, the geometric random walk kernel [5] is often used in applications as a baseline comparison
method on graph benchmark datasets when developing new graph kernels. These geometric random
walk kernels assign a weight λk to walks of length k, where λ < 1 is set to be small enough to
ensure convergence of the corresponding geometric series.
Related similarity measures have also been employed in link prediction [6, 10] as a similarity score
between vertices [8]. However, there is one caveat regarding these approaches. Walk-based similarity scores with exponentially decaying weights tend to suffer from a problem referred to as halting [1]. They may downweight walks of lengths 2 and more, so much so that the similarity score is
ultimately completely dominated by walks of length 1. In other words, they are almost identical to
a simple comparison of edges and vertices, which ignores any topological information in the graph
beyond single edges. Such a simple similarity measure could be computed more efficiently outside
the random walk framework. Therefore, halting may affect both the expressivity and efficiency of
these similarity scores.
Halting has been conjectured to occur in random walk kernels [1], but its existence in graph kernels
has never been theoretically proven or empirically demonstrated. Our goal in this study is to answer
the open question if and when halting occurs in random walk graph kernels.
We theoretically show that halting may occur in graph kernels and that its extent depends on properties of the graphs being compared (Section 2). We empirically demonstrate in which simulated
datasets and popular graph classification benchmark datasets halting is a concern (Section 3). We
conclude by summarizing when halting occurs in practice and how it can be avoided (Section 4).
1

