Robust PCA with compressed data
Wooseok Ha
University of Chicago
haywse@uchicago.edu

Rina Foygel Barber
University of Chicago
rina@uchicago.edu

Abstract
The robust principal component analysis (RPCA) problem seeks to separate lowrank trends from sparse outliers within a data matrix, that is, to approximate a n⇥d
matrix D as the sum of a low-rank matrix L and a sparse matrix S. We examine
the robust principal component analysis (RPCA) problem under data compression,
where the data Y is approximately given by (L+S)·C, that is, a low-rank + sparse
data matrix that has been compressed to size n ⇥ m (with m substantially smaller
than the original dimension d) via multiplication with a compression matrix C.
We give a convex program for recovering the sparse component S along with the
compressed low-rank component L · C, along with upper bounds on the error of
this reconstruction that scales naturally with the compression dimension m and
coincides with existing results for the uncompressed setting m = d. Our results
can also handle error introduced through additive noise or through missing data.
The scaling of dimension, compression, and signal complexity in our theoretical
results is verified empirically through simulations, and we also apply our method
to a data set measuring chlorine concentration across a network of sensors to test
its performance in practice.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a tool for providing a low-rank approximation to a data
matrix D 2 Rn⇥d , with the aim of reducing dimension or capturing the main directions of variation
in the data. More recently, there has been increased focus on more general forms of PCA, that is
more robust to realistic flaws in the data such as heavy-tailed outliers. The robust PCA (RPCA)
problem formulates a decomposition of the data,
D ⇡L+S ,

into a low-rank component L (capturing trends across the data matrix) and a sparse component S
(capturing outlier measurements that may obscure the low-rank trends), which we seek to separate
based only on observing the data matrix D [3, 10]. Depending on the application, we may be
primarily interested in one or the other component:
• In some settings, the sparse component S may represent unwanted outliers, e.g. corrupted
measurements—we may wish to clean the data by removing the outliers and recovering the
low-rank component L.
• In other settings, the sparse component S may contain the information of interest—for
instance, in image or video data, S may capture the foreground objects which are of interest,
while L may capture background components which we wish to subtract.
Existing methods to separate the sparse and low-rank components include convex [3, 10] and nonconvex [9] methods, and can handle extensions or additional challenges such as missing data [3],
column-sparse rather than elementwise-sparse structure [11], streaming data [6, 7], and different
types of structures superimposed with a low-rank component [1].
1

