Generative Image Modeling Using Spatial LSTMs

Matthias Bethge
University of Tübingen
72076 Tübingen, Germany
matthias@bethgelab.org

Lucas Theis
University of Tübingen
72076 Tübingen, Germany
lucas@bethgelab.org

Abstract
Modeling the distribution of natural images is challenging, partly because of
strong statistical dependencies which can extend over hundreds of pixels. Recurrent neural networks have been successful in capturing long-range dependencies in a number of problems but only recently have found their way into generative image models. We here introduce a recurrent image model based on multidimensional long short-term memory units which are particularly suited for image
modeling due to their spatial structure. Our model scales to images of arbitrary
size and its likelihood is computationally tractable. We find that it outperforms the
state of the art in quantitative comparisons on several image datasets and produces
promising results when used for texture synthesis and inpainting.

1

Introduction

The last few years have seen tremendous progress in learning useful image representations [6].
While early successes were often achieved through the use of generative models [e.g., 13, 23, 30],
recent breakthroughs were mainly driven by improvements in supervised techniques [e.g., 20, 34].
Yet unsupervised learning has the potential to tap into the much larger source of unlabeled data,
which may be important for training bigger systems capable of a more general scene understanding. For example, multimodal data is abundant but often unlabeled, yet can still greatly benefit
unsupervised approaches [36].
Generative models provide a principled approach to unsupervised learning. A perfect model of
natural images would be able to optimally predict parts of an image given other parts of an image and
thereby clearly demonstrate a form of scene understanding. When extended by labels, the Bayesian
framework can be used to perform semi-supervised learning in the generative model [19, 28] while it
is less clear how to combine other unsupervised approaches with discriminative learning. Generative
image models are also useful in more traditional applications such as image reconstruction [33, 35,
49] or compression [47].
Recently there has been a renewed strong interest in the development of generative image models
[e.g., 4, 8, 10, 11, 18, 24, 31, 35, 45, 47]. Most of this work has tried to bring to bear the flexibility of
deep neural networks on the problem of modeling the distribution of natural images. One challenge
in this endeavor is to find the right balance between tractability and flexibility. The present article
contributes to this line of research by introducing a fully tractable yet highly flexible image model.
Our model combines multi-dimensional recurrent neural networks [9] with mixtures of experts.
More specifically, the backbone of our model is formed by a spatial variant of long short-term
memory (LSTM) [14]. One-dimensional LSTMs have been particularly successful in modeling text
and speech [e.g., 38, 39], but have also been used to model the progression of frames in video [36]
and very recently to model single images [11]. In contrast to earlier work on modeling images,
here we use multi-dimensional LSTMs [9] which naturally lend themselves to the task of generative
image modeling due to their spatial structure and ability to capture long-range correlations.
1

