The Poisson Gamma Belief Network
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA

Yulai Cong
National Laboratory of RSP
Xidian University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

Bo Chen
National Laboratory of RSP
Xidian University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

Abstract
To infer a multilayer representation of high-dimensional count vectors, we propose the Poisson gamma belief network (PGBN) that factorizes each of its layers
into the product of a connection weight matrix and the nonnegative real hidden
units of the next layer. The PGBN’s hidden layers are jointly trained with an
upward-downward Gibbs sampler, each iteration of which upward samples Dirichlet distributed connection weight vectors starting from the first layer (bottom data
layer), and then downward samples gamma distributed hidden units starting from
the top hidden layer. The gamma-negative binomial process combined with a
layer-wise training strategy allows the PGBN to infer the width of each layer given
a fixed budget on the width of the first layer. The PGBN with a single hidden layer
reduces to Poisson factor analysis. Example results on text analysis illustrate interesting relationships between the width of the first layer and the inferred network
structure, and demonstrate that the PGBN, whose hidden units are imposed with
correlated gamma priors, can add more layers to increase its performance gains
over Poisson factor analysis, given the same limit on the width of the first layer.

1

Introduction

There has been significant recent interest in deep learning. Despite its tremendous success in supervised learning, inferring a multilayer data representation in an unsupervised manner remains a
challenging problem [1, 2, 3]. The sigmoid belief network (SBN), which connects the binary units
of adjacent layers via the sigmoid functions, infers a deep representation of multivariate binary vectors [4, 5]. The deep belief network (DBN) [6] is a SBN whose top hidden layer is replaced by the
restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) [7] that is undirected. The deep Boltzmann machine (DBM)
is an undirected deep network that connects the binary units of adjacent layers using the RBMs [8].
All these deep networks are designed to model binary observations. Although one may modify the
bottom layer to model Gaussian and multinomial observations, the hidden units of these networks
are still typically restricted to be binary [8, 9, 10]. One may further consider the exponential family
harmoniums [11, 12] to construct more general networks with non-binary hidden units, but often at
the expense of noticeably increased complexity in training and data fitting.
Moving beyond conventional deep networks using binary hidden units, we construct a deep directed
network with gamma distributed nonnegative real hidden units to unsupervisedly infer a multilayer
representation of multivariate count vectors, with a simple but powerful mechanism to capture the
correlations among the visible/hidden features across all layers and handle highly overdispersed
counts. The proposed model is called the Poisson gamma belief network (PGBN), which factorizes
the observed count vectors under the Poisson likelihood into the product of a factor loading matrix
and the gamma distributed hidden units (factor scores) of layer one; and further factorizes the shape
parameters of the gamma hidden units of each layer into the product of a connection weight matrix
and the gamma hidden units of the next layer. Distinct from previous deep networks that often utilize
binary units for tractable inference and require tuning both the width (number of hidden units) of
each layer and the network depth (number of layers), the PGBN employs nonnegative real hidden
1

