Stochastic Online Greedy Learning with
Semi-bandit Feedbacks
Tian Lin
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
lintian06@gmail.com

Jian Li
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
lapordge@gmail.com

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
The greedy algorithm is extensively studied in the field of combinatorial optimization for decades. In this paper, we address the online learning problem when the
input to the greedy algorithm is stochastic with unknown parameters that have
to be learned over time. We first propose the greedy regret and -quasi greedy
regret as learning metrics comparing with the performance of offline greedy algorithm. We then propose two online greedy learning algorithms with semi-bandit
feedbacks, which use multi-armed bandit and pure exploration bandit policies at
each level of greedy learning, one for each of the regret metrics respectively. Both
algorithms achieve O(log T ) problem-dependent regret bound (T being the time
horizon) for a general class of combinatorial structures and reward functions that
allow greedy solutions. We further show that the bound is tight in T and other
problem instance parameters.

1

Introduction

The greedy algorithm is simple and easy-to-implement, and can be applied to solve a wide range of
complex optimization problems, either with exact solutions (e.g. minimum spanning tree [19, 25])
or approximate solutions (e.g. maximum coverage [11] or influence maximization [17]). Moreover,
for many practical problems, the greedy algorithm often serves as the first heuristic of choice and
performs well in practice even when it does not provide a theoretical guarantee.
The classical greedy algorithm assumes that a certain reward function is given, and it constructs the
solution iteratively. In each phase, it searches for a local optimal element to maximize the marginal
gain of reward, and add it to the solution. We refer to this case as the offline greedy algorithm with
a given reward function, and the corresponding problem the offline problems. The phase-by-phase
process of the greedy algorithm naturally forms a decision sequence to illustrate the decision flow in
finding the solution, which is named as the greedy sequence. We characterize the decision class as an
accessible set system, a general combinatorial structure encompassing many interesting problems.
In many real applications, however, the reward function is stochastic and is not known in advance,
and the reward is only instantiated based on the unknown distribution after the greedy sequence is
selected. For example, in the influence maximization problem [17], social influence are propagated
in a social network from the selected seed nodes following a stochastic model with unknown parameters, and one wants to find the optimal seed set of size k that generates the largest influence
spread, which is the expected number of nodes influenced in a cascade. In this case, the reward of
seed selection is only instantiated after the seed selection, and is only one of the random outcomes.
Therefore, when the stochastic reward function is unknown, we aim at maximizing the expected
reward overtime while gradually learning the key parameters of the expected reward functions. This
falls in the domain of online learning, and we refer the online algorithm as the strategy of the player,
who makes sequential decisions, interacts with the environment, obtains feedbacks, and accumulates
1

