No-Regret Learning in Bayesian Games

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
New York, NY
vasy@microsoft.com

Jason Hartline
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL
hartline@northwestern.edu

Éva Tardos
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
eva@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Recent price-of-anarchy analyses of games of complete information suggest that
coarse correlated equilibria, which characterize outcomes resulting from no-regret
learning dynamics, have near-optimal welfare. This work provides two main technical results that lift this conclusion to games of incomplete information, a.k.a.,
Bayesian games. First, near-optimal welfare in Bayesian games follows directly
from the smoothness-based proof of near-optimal welfare in the same game when
the private information is public. Second, no-regret learning dynamics converge
to Bayesian coarse correlated equilibrium in these incomplete information games.
These results are enabled by interpretation of a Bayesian game as a stochastic
game of complete information.

1

Introduction

A recent confluence of results from game theory and learning theory gives a simple explanation for
why good outcomes in large families of strategically-complex games can be expected. The advance
comes from (a) a relaxation the classical notion of equilibrium in games to one that corresponds to
the outcome attained when players’ behavior ensures asymptotic no-regret, e.g., via standard online
learning algorithms such as weighted majority, and (b) an extension theorem that shows that the
standard approach for bounding the quality of classical equilibria automatically implies the same
bounds on the quality of no-regret equilibria. This paper generalizes these results from static games
to Bayesian games, for example, auctions.
Our motivation for considering learning outcomes in Bayesian games is the following. Many important games model repeated interactions between an uncertain set of participants. Sponsored search,
and more generally, online ad-auction market places, are important examples of such games. Platforms are running millions of auctions, with each individual auction slightly different and of only
very small value, but such market places have high enough volume to be the financial basis of large
industries. This online auction environment is best modeled by a repeated Bayesian game: the auction game is repeated over time, with the set of participants slightly different each time, depending
on many factors from budgets of the players to subtle differences in the opportunities.
A canonical example to which our methods apply is a single-item first-price auction with players’
values for the item drawn from a product distribution. In such an auction, players simultaneously
submit sealed bids and the player with the highest bid wins and pays her bid. The utility of the
winner is her value minus her bid; the utilities of the losers are zero. When the values are drawn from
non-identical continuous distributions the Bayes-Nash equilibrium is given by a differential equation
1

