The Self-Normalized Estimator for Counterfactual
Learning

Thorsten Joachims
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
tj@cs.cornell.edu

Adith Swaminathan
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
adith@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
This paper identifies a severe problem of the counterfactual risk estimator typically used in batch learning from logged bandit feedback (BLBF), and proposes
the use of an alternative estimator that avoids this problem. In the BLBF setting,
the learner does not receive full-information feedback like in supervised learning, but observes feedback only for the actions taken by a historical policy. This
makes BLBF algorithms particularly attractive for training online systems (e.g., ad
placement, web search, recommendation) using their historical logs. The Counterfactual Risk Minimization (CRM) principle [1] offers a general recipe for designing BLBF algorithms. It requires a counterfactual risk estimator, and virtually
all existing works on BLBF have focused on a particular unbiased estimator. We
show that this conventional estimator suffers from a propensity overfitting problem
when used for learning over complex hypothesis spaces. We propose to replace
the risk estimator with a self-normalized estimator, showing that it neatly avoids
this problem. This naturally gives rise to a new learning algorithm – Normalized
Policy Optimizer for Exponential Models (Norm-POEM) – for structured output
prediction using linear rules. We evaluate the empirical effectiveness of NormPOEM on several multi-label classification problems, finding that it consistently
outperforms the conventional estimator.

1

Introduction

Most interactive systems (e.g. search engines, recommender systems, ad platforms) record large
quantities of log data which contain valuable information about the system’s performance and user
experience. For example, the logs of an ad-placement system record which ad was presented in a
given context and whether the user clicked on it. While these logs contain information that should
inform the design of future systems, the log entries do not provide supervised training data in the
conventional sense. This prevents us from directly employing supervised learning algorithms to
improve these systems. In particular, each entry only provides bandit feedback since the loss/reward
is only observed for the particular action chosen by the system (e.g. the presented ad) but not for
all the other actions the system could have taken. Moreover, the log entries are biased since actions
that are systematically favored by the system will by over-represented in the logs.
Learning from historical logs data can be formalized as batch learning from logged bandit feedback
(BLBF) [2, 1]. Unlike the well-studied problem of online learning from bandit feedback [3], this
setting does not require the learner to have interactive control over the system. Learning in such
a setting is closely related to the problem of off-policy evaluation in reinforcement learning [4] –
we would like to know how well a new system (policy) would perform if it had been used in the
past. This motivates the use of counterfactual estimators [5]. Following an approach analogous
to Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), it was shown that such estimators can be used to design
learning algorithms for batch learning from logged bandit feedback [6, 5, 1].
1

