Learning Continuous Control Policies by
Stochastic Value Gradients
Nicolas Heess⇤ , Greg Wayne⇤ , David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez
Google DeepMind
{heess, gregwayne, davidsilver, countzero, tassa, etom}@google.com
⇤

These authors contributed equally.

Abstract
We present a unified framework for learning continuous control policies using
backpropagation. It supports stochastic control by treating stochasticity in the
Bellman equation as a deterministic function of exogenous noise. The product
is a spectrum of general policy gradient algorithms that range from model-free
methods with value functions to model-based methods without value functions.
We use learned models but only require observations from the environment instead of observations from model-predicted trajectories, minimizing the impact
of compounded model errors. We apply these algorithms first to a toy stochastic
control problem and then to several physics-based control problems in simulation.
One of these variants, SVG(1), shows the effectiveness of learning models, value
functions, and policies simultaneously in continuous domains.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient algorithms maximize the expectation of cumulative reward by following the gradient
of this expectation with respect to the policy parameters. Most existing algorithms estimate this gradient in a model-free manner by sampling returns from the real environment and rely on a likelihood
ratio estimator [32, 26]. Such estimates tend to have high variance and require large numbers of
samples or, conversely, low-dimensional policy parameterizations.
A second approach to estimate a policy gradient relies on backpropagation instead of likelihood ratio
methods. If a differentiable environment model is available, one can link together the policy, model,
and reward function to compute an analytic policy gradient by backpropagation of reward along a
trajectory [18, 11, 6, 9]. Instead of using entire trajectories, one can estimate future rewards using a
learned value function (a critic) and compute policy gradients from subsequences of trajectories. It
is also possible to backpropagate analytic action derivatives from a Q-function to compute the policy
gradient without a model [31, 21, 23]. Following Fairbank [8], we refer to methods that compute
the policy gradient through backpropagation as value gradient methods.
In this paper, we address two limitations of prior value gradient algorithms. The first is that, in
contrast to likelihood ratio methods, value gradient algorithms are only suitable for training deterministic policies. Stochastic policies have several advantages: for example, they can be beneficial for
partially observed problems [24]; they permit on-policy exploration; and because stochastic policies
can assign probability mass to off-policy trajectories, we can train a stochastic policy on samples
from an experience database in a principled manner. When an environment model is used, value
gradient algorithms have also been critically limited to operation in deterministic environments. By
exploiting a mathematical tool known as “re-parameterization” that has found recent use for generative models [20, 12], we extend the scope of value gradient algorithms to include the optimization
of stochastic policies in stochastic environments. We thus describe our framework as Stochastic
Value Gradient (SVG) methods. Secondly, we show that an environment dynamics model, value
function, and policy can be learned jointly with neural networks based only on environment interaction. Learned dynamics models are often inaccurate, which we mitigate by computing value
gradients along real system trajectories instead of planned ones, a feature shared by model-free
1

