Local Expectation Gradients for Black Box
Variational Inference
Michalis K. Titsias
Athens University of Economics and Business
mtitsias@aueb.gr

Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla
Vicarious
miguel@vicarious.com

Abstract
We introduce local expectation gradients which is a general purpose stochastic
variational inference algorithm for constructing stochastic gradients by sampling
from the variational distribution. This algorithm divides the problem of estimating
the stochastic gradients over multiple variational parameters into smaller sub-tasks
so that each sub-task explores intelligently the most relevant part of the variational
distribution. This is achieved by performing an exact expectation over the single
random variable that most correlates with the variational parameter of interest
resulting in a Rao-Blackwellized estimate that has low variance. Our method
works efficiently for both continuous and discrete random variables. Furthermore,
the proposed algorithm has interesting similarities with Gibbs sampling but at the
same time, unlike Gibbs sampling, can be trivially parallelized.

1

Introduction

Stochastic variational inference has emerged as a promising and flexible framework for performing large scale approximate inference in complex probabilistic models. It significantly extends the
traditional variational inference framework [7, 1] by incorporating stochastic approximation [16]
into the optimization of the variational lower bound. Currently, there exist two major research directions in stochastic variational inference. The first one (data stochasticity) attempts to deal with
massive datasets by constructing stochastic gradients by using mini-batches of training examples
[5, 6]. The second direction (expectation stochasticity) aims at dealing with the intractable expectations under the variational distribution that are encountered in non-conjugate probabilistic models
[12, 14, 10, 18, 8, 15, 20]. Unifying these two ideas, it is possible to use stochastic gradients to address both massive datasets and intractable expectations. This results in a doubly stochastic estimation approach, where the mini-batch source of stochasticity can be combined with the stochasticity
associated with sampling from the variational distribution.
In this paper, we are interested to further investigate the expectation stochasticity that in practice is
dealt with by drawing samples from the variational distribution. A challenging issue here is concerned with the variance reduction of the stochastic gradients. Specifically, while the method based
on the log derivative trick is currently the most general one, it has been observed to severely suffer
from high variance problems [12, 14, 10] and thus it is only applicable together with sophisticated
variance reduction techniques based on control variates. However, the construction of efficient control variates can be strongly dependent on the form of the probabilistic model. Therefore, it would be
highly desirable to introduce more black box procedures, where simple stochastic gradients can work
well for any model, thus allowing the end-user not to worry about having to design model-dependent
variance reduction techniques. Notice, that for continuous random variables and differentiable functions the reparametrization approach [8, 15, 20] offers a simple black box procedure [20, 9] which
does not require further model-dependent variance reduction. However, reparametrization is neither
applicable for discrete spaces nor for non-differentiable models and this greatly limits its scope of
applicability.
1

