Cross-Domain Matching for Bag-of-Words Data
via Kernel Embeddings of Latent Distributions
Yuya Yoshikawa∗
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Nara, 630-0192, Japan
yoshikawa.yuya.yl9@is.naist.jp

Tomoharu Iwata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, 619-0237, Japan
iwata.tomoharu@lab.ntt.co.jp

Hiroshi Sawada
NTT Service Evolution Laboratories
Kanagawa, 239-0847, Japan
sawada.hiroshi@lab.ntt.co.jp

Takeshi Yamada
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, 619-0237, Japan
yamada.tak@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
We propose a kernel-based method for finding matching between instances across
different domains, such as multilingual documents and images with annotations.
Each instance is assumed to be represented as a multiset of features, e.g., a bag-ofwords representation for documents. The major difficulty in finding cross-domain
relationships is that the similarity between instances in different domains cannot
be directly measured. To overcome this difficulty, the proposed method embeds
all the features of different domains in a shared latent space, and regards each
instance as a distribution of its own features in the shared latent space. To represent the distributions efficiently and nonparametrically, we employ the framework
of the kernel embeddings of distributions. The embedding is estimated so as to
minimize the difference between distributions of paired instances while keeping
unpaired instances apart. In our experiments, we show that the proposed method
can achieve high performance on finding correspondence between multi-lingual
Wikipedia articles, between documents and tags, and between images and tags.

1

Introduction

The discovery of matched instances in different domains is an important task, which appears in natural language processing, information retrieval and data mining tasks such as finding the alignment
of cross-lingual sentences [1], attaching tags to images [2] or text documents [3], and matching user
identifications in different databases [4].
When given an instance in a source domain, our goal is to find the instance in a target domain that
is the most closely related to the given instance. In this paper, we focus on a supervised setting,
where correspondence information between some instances in different domains is given. To find
matching in a single domain, e.g., find documents relevant to an input document, a similarity (or
distance) measure between instances can be used. On the other hand, when trying to find matching
between instances in different domains, we cannot directly measure the distances since they consist of different types of features. For example, when matching documents in different languages,
since the documents have different vocabularies we cannot directly measure the similarities between
documents across different languages without dictionaries.
∗
The author moved to Software Technology and Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory (STAIR Lab)
at Chiba Institute of Technology, Japan.

1

