V ISALOGY: Answering Visual Analogy Questions

C. Lawrence Zitnick
Microsoft Research
larryz@microsoft.com

Fereshteh Sadeghi
University of Washington
fsadeghi@cs.washington.edu

Ali Farhadi
University of Washington, The Allen Institute for AI
ali@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of answering visual analogy questions. These
questions take the form of image A is to image B as image C is to what. Answering these questions entails discovering the mapping from image A to image B and
then extending the mapping to image C and searching for the image D such that
the relation from A to B holds for C to D. We pose this problem as learning an embedding that encourages pairs of analogous images with similar transformations to
be close together using convolutional neural networks with a quadruple Siamese
architecture. We introduce a dataset of visual analogy questions in natural images,
and show first results of its kind on solving analogy questions on natural images.

1

Introduction

Analogy is the task of mapping information from a source to a target. Analogical thinking is a
crucial component in problem solving and has been regarded as a core component of cognition [1].
Analogies have been extensively explored in cognitive sciences and explained by several theories
and models: shared structure [1], shared abstraction [2], identity of relation, hidden deduction [3],
etc. The common two components among most theories are the discovery of a form of relation or
mapping in the source and extension of the relation to the target. Such a process is very similar to
the tasks in analogy questions in standardized tests such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT): A is
to B as C is to what?
In this paper, we introduce V ISALOGY to address the problem of solving visual analogy questions.
Three images Ia , Ib , and Ic are provided as input and a fourth image Id must be selected such that
Ia is to Ib as Ic is to Id . This involves discovering an extendable mapping from Ia to Ib and then
applying it to Ic to find Id . Estimating such a mapping for natural images using current feature
spaces would require careful alignment, complex reasoning, and potentially expensive training data.
Instead, we learn an embedding space where reasoning about analogies can be performed by simple
vector transformations. This is in fact aligned with the traditional logical understanding of analogy
as an arrow or homomorphism from source to the target.
Our goal is to learn a representation that given a set of training analogies can generalize to unseen
analogies across various categories and attributes. Figure 1 shows an example visual analogy question. Answering this question entails discovering the mapping from the brown bear to the white
bear (in this case a color change), applying the same mapping to the brown dog, and then searching
among a set of images (the middle row in Figure 1) to find an example that respects the discovered
mapping from the brown dog best. Such a mapping should ideally prefer white dogs. The bottom
row shows a ranking imposed by V ISALOGY.
We propose learning an embedding that encourages pairs of analogous images with similar mappings
to be close together. Specifically, we learn a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with Siamese
quadruple architecture (Figure 2) to obtain an embedding space where analogical reasoning can be
1

