Empirical Localization of Homogeneous Divergences
on Discrete Sample Spaces

Takashi Takenouchi
Department of Complex and Intelligent Systems
Future University Hakodate
116-2 Kamedanakano, Hakodate, Hokkaido, 040-8655, Japan
ttakashi@fun.ac.jp
Takafumi Kanamori
Department of Computer Science and Mathematical Informatics
Nagoya University
Furocho, Chikusaku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan
kanamori@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel parameter estimator for probabilistic models on
discrete space. The proposed estimator is derived from minimization of homogeneous divergence and can be constructed without calculation of the normalization
constant, which is frequently infeasible for models in the discrete space. We investigate statistical properties of the proposed estimator such as consistency and
asymptotic normality, and reveal a relationship with the information geometry.
Some experiments show that the proposed estimator attains comparable performance to the maximum likelihood estimator with drastically lower computational
cost.

1

Introduction

Parameter estimation of probabilistic models on discrete space is a popular and important issue in
the fields of machine learning and pattern recognition. For example, the Boltzmann machine (with
hidden variables) [1] [2] [3] is a very popular probabilistic model to represent binary variables, and
attracts increasing attention in the context of Deep learning [4]. A training of the Boltzmann machine, i.e., estimation of parameters is usually done by the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
The MLE for the Boltzmann machine cannot be explicitly solved and the gradient-based optimization is frequently used. A difficulty of the gradient-based optimization is that the calculation of the
gradient requires calculation of a normalization constant or a partition function in each step of the optimization and its computational cost is sometimes exponential order. The problem of computational
cost is common to the other probabilistic models on discrete spaces and various kinds of approximation methods have been proposed to solve the difficulty. One approach tries to approximate the
probabilistic model by a tractable model by the mean-field approximation, which considers a model
assuming independence of variables [5]. Another approach such as the contrastive divergence [6]
avoids the exponential time calculation by the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling.
In the literature of parameters estimation of probabilistic model for continuous variables, [7] employs a score function which is a gradient of log-density with respect to the data vector rather than
parameters. This approach makes it possible to estimate parameters without calculating the normalization term by focusing on the shape of the density function. [8] extended the method to discrete
variables, which defines information of “neighbor” by contrasting probability with that of a flipped
1

