Bidirectional Recurrent Convolutional Networks
for Multi-Frame Super-Resolution

Yan Huang1
Wei Wang1
Liang Wang1,2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

{yhuang, wangwei, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Super resolving a low-resolution video is usually handled by either single-image
super-resolution (SR) or multi-frame SR. Single-Image SR deals with each video
frame independently, and ignores intrinsic temporal dependency of video frames
which actually plays a very important role in video super-resolution. Multi-Frame
SR generally extracts motion information, e.g., optical flow, to model the temporal
dependency, which often shows high computational cost. Considering that recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can model long-term contextual information of temporal sequences well, we propose a bidirectional recurrent convolutional network
for efficient multi-frame SR. Different from vanilla RNNs, 1) the commonly-used
recurrent full connections are replaced with weight-sharing convolutional connections and 2) conditional convolutional connections from previous input layers
to the current hidden layer are added for enhancing visual-temporal dependency
modelling. With the powerful temporal dependency modelling, our model can
super resolve videos with complex motions and achieve state-of-the-art performance. Due to the cheap convolution operations, our model has a low computational complexity and runs orders of magnitude faster than other multi-frame
methods.

1

Introduction

Since large numbers of high-definition displays have sprung up, generating high-resolution videos
from previous low-resolution contents, namely video super-resolution (SR), is under great demand.
Recently, various methods have been proposed to handle this problem, which can be classified into
two categories: 1) single-image SR [10, 5, 9, 8, 12, 25, 23] super resolves each of the video frames
independently, and 2) multi-frame SR [13, 17, 3, 2, 14, 13] models and exploits temporal dependency
among video frames, which is usually considered as an essential component of video SR.
Existing multi-frame SR methods generally model the temporal dependency by extracting subpixel
motions of video frames, e.g., estimating optical flow based on sparse prior integration or variation
regularity [2, 14, 13]. But such accurate motion estimation can only be effective for video sequences
which contain small motions. In addition, the high computational cost of these methods limits the
real-world applications. Several solutions have been explored to overcome these issues by avoiding
the explicit motion estimation [21, 16]. Unfortunately, they still have to perform implicit motion
estimation to reduce temporal aliasing and achieve resolution enhancement when large motions are
encountered.
Given the fact that recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can well model long-term contextual information for video sequence, we propose a bidirectional recurrent convolutional network (BRCN)
1

