Efficient and Parsimonious Agnostic Active Learning

Tzu-Kuo Huang
Microsoft Research, NYC

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research, NYC

Daniel Hsu
Columbia University

tkhuang@microsoft.com

alekha@microsoft.com

djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

John Langford
Microsoft Research, NYC

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research, NYC

jcl@microsoft.com

schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
We develop a new active learning algorithm for the streaming setting satisfying
three important properties: 1) It provably works for any classifier representation
and classification problem including those with severe noise. 2) It is efficiently
implementable with an ERM oracle. 3) It is more aggressive than all previous
approaches satisfying 1 and 2. To do this, we create an algorithm based on a
newly defined optimization problem and analyze it. We also conduct the first experimental analysis of all efficient agnostic active learning algorithms, evaluating
their strengths and weaknesses in different settings.

1

Introduction

Given a label budget, what is the best way to learn a classifier?
Active learning approaches to this question are known to yield exponential improvements over supervised learning under strong assumptions [7]. Under much weaker assumptions, streaming-based
agnostic active learning [2, 4, 5, 9, 18] is particularly appealing since it is known to work for any
classifier representation and any label distribution with an i.i.d. data source.1 Here, a learning algorithm decides for each unlabeled example in sequence whether or not to request a label, never
revisiting this decision. Restated then: What is the best possible active learning algorithm which
works for any classifier representation, any label distribution, and is computationally tractable?
Computational tractability is a critical concern, because most known algorithms for this setting [e.g.,
2, 16, 18] require explicit enumeration of classifiers, implying exponentially-worse computational
complexity compared to typical supervised learning algorithms. Active learning algorithms based
on empirical risk minimization (ERM) oracles [4, 5, 13] can overcome this intractability by using
passive classification algorithms as the oracle to achieve a computationally acceptable solution.
Achieving generality, robustness, and acceptable computation has a cost. For the above methods [4,
5, 13], a label is requested on nearly every unlabeled example where two empirically good classifiers
disagree. This results in a poor label complexity, well short of information-theoretic limits [6] even
for general robust solutions [18]. Until now.
In Section 3, we design a new algorithm called ACTIVE C OVER (AC) for constructing query probability functions that minimize the probability of querying inside the disagreement region—the set
of points where good classifiers disagree—and never query otherwise. This requires a new algorithm that maintains a parsimonious cover of the set of empirically good classifiers. The cover is
a result of solving an optimization problem (in Section 4) specifying the properties of a desirable
1
See the monograph of Hanneke [11] for an overview of the existing literature, including alternative settings
where additional assumptions are placed on the data source (e.g., separability) [8, 3, 1].

1

