Learning Structured Densities via Infinite
Dimensional Exponential Families

Mladen Kolar
University of Chicago
mkolar@chicagobooth.edu

Siqi Sun
TTI Chicago
siqi.sun@ttic.edu

Jinbo Xu
TTI Chicago
jinbo.xu@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning the structure of a probabilistic graphical models is a well studied problem in the machine learning community due to its importance in many applications. Current approaches are mainly focused on learning the structure under restrictive parametric assumptions, which limits the applicability of these methods.
In this paper, we study the problem of estimating the structure of a probabilistic
graphical model without assuming a particular parametric model. We consider
probabilities that are members of an infinite dimensional exponential family [4],
which is parametrized by a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) H and its
kernel k. One difficulty in learning nonparametric densities is the evaluation of
the normalizing constant. In order to avoid this issue, our procedure minimizes
the penalized score matching objective [10, 11]. We show how to efficiently minimize the proposed objective using existing group lasso solvers. Furthermore, we
prove that our procedure recovers the graph structure with high-probability under
mild conditions. Simulation studies illustrate ability of our procedure to recover
the true graph structure without the knowledge of the data generating process.

1

Introduction

Undirected graphical models, or Markov random fields [13], have been extensively studied and applied in fields ranging from computational biology [15, 28], to natural language processing [16, 20]
and computer vision [9, 17]. In an undirected graphical model, conditional independence assumptions underlying a probability distribution are encoded in the graph structure. Furthermore, the joint
probability density function can be factorized according to the cliques of the graph [14]. One of the
fundamental problems in the literature is learning the structure of a graphical model given an i.i.d.
sample from an unknown distribution. A lot of work has been done under specific parametric assumptions on the unknown distribution. For example, in Gaussian Graphical Models the structure of
the graph is encoded by the sparsity pattern of the precision matrix [6, 30]. Similarly, in the context
of exponential family graphical models, where the node conditional distribution given all the other
nodes is a member of an exponential family, the structure is described by the non-zero coefficients
[29]. Most existing approaches to learn the structure of a high-dimensional undirected graphical
model are based on minimizing a penalized loss objective, where the loss is usually a log-likelihood
or a composite likelihood and the penalty induces sparsity on the resulting parameter vector [see,
for example, 6, 12, 18, 22, 24, 29, 30]. In addition to sparsity inducing penalties, methods that
use other structural constraints have been proposed. For example, since many real-world networks
are scale-free [1], several algorithms are designed specifically to learn structure of such networks
1

