BinaryConnect: Training Deep Neural Networks with
binary weights during propagations

Matthieu Courbariaux
École Polytechnique de Montréal
matthieu.courbariaux@polymtl.ca

Yoshua Bengio
Université de Montréal, CIFAR Senior Fellow
yoshua.bengio@gmail.com

Jean-Pierre David
École Polytechnique de Montréal
jean-pierre.david@polymtl.ca

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have achieved state-of-the-art results in a wide
range of tasks, with the best results obtained with large training sets and large
models. In the past, GPUs enabled these breakthroughs because of their greater
computational speed. In the future, faster computation at both training and test
time is likely to be crucial for further progress and for consumer applications on
low-power devices. As a result, there is much interest in research and development of dedicated hardware for Deep Learning (DL). Binary weights, i.e., weights
which are constrained to only two possible values (e.g. -1 or 1), would bring great
benefits to specialized DL hardware by replacing many multiply-accumulate operations by simple accumulations, as multipliers are the most space and powerhungry components of the digital implementation of neural networks. We introduce BinaryConnect, a method which consists in training a DNN with binary
weights during the forward and backward propagations, while retaining precision
of the stored weights in which gradients are accumulated. Like other dropout
schemes, we show that BinaryConnect acts as regularizer and we obtain near
state-of-the-art results with BinaryConnect on the permutation-invariant MNIST,
CIFAR-10 and SVHN.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have substantially pushed the state-of-the-art in a wide range of tasks,
especially in speech recognition [1, 2] and computer vision, notably object recognition from images [3, 4]. More recently, deep learning is making important strides in natural language processing,
especially statistical machine translation [5, 6, 7]. Interestingly, one of the key factors that enabled
this major progress has been the advent of Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), with speed-ups on the
order of 10 to 30-fold, starting with [8], and similar improvements with distributed training [9, 10].
Indeed, the ability to train larger models on more data has enabled the kind of breakthroughs observed in the last few years. Today, researchers and developers designing new deep learning algorithms and applications often find themselves limited by computational capability. This along, with
the drive to put deep learning systems on low-power devices (unlike GPUs) is greatly increasing the
interest in research and development of specialized hardware for deep networks [11, 12, 13].
Most of the computation performed during training and application of deep networks regards the
multiplication of a real-valued weight by a real-valued activation (in the recognition or forward
propagation phase of the back-propagation algorithm) or gradient (in the backward propagation
phase of the back-propagation algorithm). This paper proposes an approach called BinaryConnect
1

