Optimization Monte Carlo: Efficient and
Embarrassingly Parallel Likelihood-Free Inference

Max Welling∗
Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam
welling.max@gmail.com

Edward Meeds
Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam
tmeeds@gmail.com

Abstract
We describe an embarrassingly parallel, anytime Monte Carlo method for
likelihood-free models. The algorithm starts with the view that the stochasticity of the pseudo-samples generated by the simulator can be controlled externally
by a vector of random numbers u, in such a way that the outcome, knowing u,
is deterministic. For each instantiation of u we run an optimization procedure to
minimize the distance between summary statistics of the simulator and the data.
After reweighing these samples using the prior and the Jacobian (accounting for
the change of volume in transforming from the space of summary statistics to the
space of parameters) we show that this weighted ensemble represents a Monte
Carlo estimate of the posterior distribution. The procedure can be run embarrassingly parallel (each node handling one sample) and anytime (by allocating
resources to the worst performing sample). The procedure is validated on six experiments.

1

Introduction

Computationally demanding simulators are used across the full spectrum of scientific and industrial
applications, whether one studies embryonic morphogenesis in biology, tumor growth in cancer
research, colliding galaxies in astronomy, weather forecasting in meteorology, climate changes in
the environmental science, earthquakes in seismology, market movement in economics, turbulence
in physics, brain functioning in neuroscience, or fabrication processes in industry. Approximate
Bayesian computation (ABC) forms a large class algorithms that aims to sample from the posterior
distribution over parameters for these likelihood-free (a.k.a. simulator based) models. Likelihoodfree inference, however, is notoriously inefficient in terms of the number of simulation calls per
independent sample. Further, like regular Bayesian inference algorithms, care must be taken so that
posterior sampling targets the correct distribution.
The simplest ABC algorithm, ABC rejection sampling, can be fully parallelized by running independent processes with no communication or synchronization requirements. I.e. it is an embarrassingly
parallel algorithm. Unfortunately, as the most inefficient ABC algorithm, the benefits of this title are limited. There has been considerable progress in distributed MCMC algorithms aimed at
large-scale data problems [2, 1]. Recently, a sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) algorithm called “the
particle cascade” was introduced that emits streams of samples asynchronously with minimal memory management and communication [17]. In this paper we present an alternative embarrassingly
parallel sampling approach: each processor works independently, at full capacity, and will indefinitely emit independent samples. The main trick is to pull random number generation outside of the
simulator and treat the simulator as a deterministic piece of code. We then minimize the difference
∗
Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences University of California, Irvine, and Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research.

1

