Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines via the
Thouless-Anderson-Palmer Free Energy

Marylou Gabrié
Eric W. Tramel
Florent Krzakala
Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, UMR 8550 CNRS
École Normale Supérieure & Université Pierre et Marie Curie
75005 Paris, France
{marylou.gabrie, eric.tramel}@lps.ens.fr, florent.krzakala@ens.fr

Abstract
Restricted Boltzmann machines are undirected neural networks which have been
shown to be effective in many applications, including serving as initializations
for training deep multi-layer neural networks. One of the main reasons for their
success is the existence of efficient and practical stochastic algorithms, such as
contrastive divergence, for unsupervised training. We propose an alternative deterministic iterative procedure based on an improved mean field method from statistical physics known as the Thouless-Anderson-Palmer approach. We demonstrate
that our algorithm provides performance equal to, and sometimes superior to, persistent contrastive divergence, while also providing a clear and easy to evaluate
objective function. We believe that this strategy can be easily generalized to other
models as well as to more accurate higher-order approximations, paving the way
for systematic improvements in training Boltzmann machines with hidden units.

1

Introduction

A restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) [1, 2] is a type of undirected neural network with surprisingly many applications. This model has been used in problems as diverse as dimensionality
reduction [3], classification [4], collaborative filtering [5], feature learning [6], and topic modeling
[7]. Also, quite remarkably, it has been shown that generative RBMs can be stacked into multi-layer
neural networks, forming an initialization for deep network architectures [8, 9]. Such deep architectures are believed to be crucial for learning high-order representations and concepts. Although the
amount of training data available in practice has made pretraining of deep nets dispensable for supervised tasks, RBMs remain at the core of unsupervised learning, a key area for future developments
in machine intelligence [10].
While the training procedure for RBMs can be written as a log-likelihood maximization, an exact implementation of this approach is computationally intractable for all but the smallest models.
However, fast stochastic Monte Carlo methods, specifically contrastive divergence (CD) [2] and persistent CD (PCD) [11, 12], have made large-scale RBM training both practical and efficient. These
methods have popularized RBMs even though it is not entirely clear why such approximate methods
should work as well as they do.
In this paper, we propose an alternative deterministic strategy for training RBMs, and neural networks with hidden units in general, based on the so-called mean-field, and extended mean-field,
methods of statistical mechanics. This strategy has been used to train neural networks in a number of earlier works [13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. In fact, for entirely visible networks, the use of adaptive
cluster expansion mean-field methods has lead to spectacular results in learning Boltzmann machine
representations [18, 19].
1

