Collaboratively Learning Preferences from Ordinal
Data
Sewoong Oh , Kiran K. Thekumparampil
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{swoh,thekump2}@illinois.edu

Jiaming Xu
The Wharton School, UPenn
jiamingx@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
In personalized recommendation systems, it is important to predict preferences of
a user on items that have not been seen by that user yet. Similarly, in revenue
management, it is important to predict outcomes of comparisons among those
items that have never been compared so far. The MultiNomial Logit model, a
popular discrete choice model, captures the structure of the hidden preferences
with a low-rank matrix. In order to predict the preferences, we want to learn the
underlying model from noisy observations of the low-rank matrix, collected as
revealed preferences in various forms of ordinal data. A natural approach to learn
such a model is to solve a convex relaxation of nuclear norm minimization. We
present the convex relaxation approach in two contexts of interest: collaborative
ranking and bundled choice modeling. In both cases, we show that the convex
relaxation is minimax optimal. We prove an upper bound on the resulting error
with finite samples, and provide a matching information-theoretic lower bound.

1

Introduction

In recommendation systems and revenue management, it is important to predict preferences on items
that have not been seen by a user or predict outcomes of comparisons among those that have never
been compared. Predicting such hidden preferences would be hopeless without further assumptions on the structure of the preference. Motivated by the success of matrix factorization models on
collaborative filtering applications, we model hidden preferences with low-rank matrices to collaboratively learn preference matrices from ordinal data. This paper considers the following scenarios:
• Collaborative ranking. Consider an online market that collects each user’s preference as
a ranking over a subset of items that are ‘seen’ by the user. Such data can be obtained by
directly asking to compare some items, or by indirectly tracking online activities on which
items are viewed, how much time is spent on the page, or how the user rated the items.
In order to make personalized recommendations, we want a model which (a) captures how
users who prefer similar items are also likely to have similar preferences on unseen items,
(b) predicts which items a user might prefer, by learning from such ordinal data.
• Bundled choice modeling. Discrete choice models describe how a user makes decisions on
what to purchase. Typical choice models assume the willingness to buy an item is independent of what else the user bought. In many cases, however, we make ‘bundled’ purchases:
we buy particular ingredients together for one recipe or we buy two connecting flights. One
choice (the first flight) has a significant impact on the other (the connecting flight). In order
to optimize the assortment (which flight schedules to offer) for maximum expected revenue, it is crucial to accurately predict the willingness of the consumers to purchase, based
on past history. We consider a case where there are two types of products (e.g. jeans and
shirts), and want (a) a model that captures such interacting preferences for pairs of items,
one from each category; and (b) to predict the consumer’s choice probabilities on pairs of
items, by learning such models from past purchase history.
1

