Deep Temporal Sigmoid Belief Networks
for Sequence Modeling

Zhe Gan, Chunyuan Li, Ricardo Henao, David Carlson and Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
{zhe.gan, chunyuan.li, r.henao, david.carlson, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
Deep dynamic generative models are developed to learn sequential dependencies
in time-series data. The multi-layered model is designed by constructing a hierarchy of temporal sigmoid belief networks (TSBNs), defined as a sequential stack
of sigmoid belief networks (SBNs). Each SBN has a contextual hidden state,
inherited from the previous SBNs in the sequence, and is used to regulate its hidden bias. Scalable learning and inference algorithms are derived by introducing
a recognition model that yields fast sampling from the variational posterior. This
recognition model is trained jointly with the generative model, by maximizing its
variational lower bound on the log-likelihood. Experimental results on bouncing
balls, polyphonic music, motion capture, and text streams show that the proposed
approach achieves state-of-the-art predictive performance, and has the capacity to
synthesize various sequences.

1

Introduction

Considerable research has been devoted to developing probabilistic models for high-dimensional
time-series data, such as video and music sequences, motion capture data, and text streams. Among
them, Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [1] and Linear Dynamical Systems (LDS) [2] have been
widely studied, but they may be limited in the type of dynamical structures they can model. An
HMM is a mixture model, which relies on a single multinomial variable to represent the history of a
time-series. To represent N bits of information about the history, an HMM could require 2N distinct
states. On the other hand, real-world sequential data often contain complex non-linear temporal
dependencies, while a LDS can only model simple linear dynamics.
Another class of time-series models, which are potentially better suited to model complex probability distributions over high-dimensional sequences, relies on the use of Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) [3, 4, 5, 6], and variants of a well-known undirected graphical model called the Restricted
Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. One such variant is the Temporal Restricted Boltzmann Machine (TRBM) [8], which consists of a sequence of RBMs, where the state of one or more
previous RBMs determine the biases of the RBM in the current time step. Learning and inference in
the TRBM is non-trivial. The approximate procedure used in [8] is heuristic and not derived from a
principled statistical formalism.
Recently, deep directed generative models [12, 13, 14, 15] are becoming popular. A directed graphical model that is closely related to the RBM is the Sigmoid Belief Network (SBN) [16]. In the work
presented here, we introduce the Temporal Sigmoid Belief Network (TSBN), which can be viewed
as a temporal stack of SBNs, where each SBN has a contextual hidden state that is inherited from
the previous SBNs and is used to adjust its hidden-units bias. Based on this, we further develop
a deep dynamic generative model by constructing a hierarchy of TSBNs. This can be considered
1

