Synaptic Sampling: A Bayesian Approach to
Neural Network Plasticity and Rewiring

David Kappel1

Stefan Habenschuss1
Robert Legenstein
Wolfgang Maass
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Graz University of Technology
A-8010 Graz, Austria
[kappel, habenschuss, legi, maass]@igi.tugraz.at

Abstract
We reexamine in this article the conceptual and mathematical framework for understanding the organization of plasticity in spiking neural networks. We propose
that inherent stochasticity enables synaptic plasticity to carry out probabilistic inference by sampling from a posterior distribution of synaptic parameters. This
view provides a viable alternative to existing models that propose convergence of
synaptic weights to maximum likelihood parameters. It explains how priors on
weight distributions and connection probabilities can be merged optimally with
learned experience. In simulations we show that our model for synaptic plasticity
allows spiking neural networks to compensate continuously for unforeseen disturbances. Furthermore it provides a normative mathematical framework to better
understand the permanent variability and rewiring observed in brain networks.

1

Introduction

In the 19th century, Helmholtz proposed that perception could be understood as unconscious inference [1]. This insight has recently (re)gained considerable attention in models of Bayesian inference
in neural networks [2]. The hallmark of this theory is the assumption that the activity z of neuronal
networks can be viewed as an internal model for hidden variables in the outside world that give rise
to sensory experiences x. This hidden state z is usually assumed to be represented by the activity of
neurons in the network. A network N of stochastically firing neurons is modeled in this framework
by a probability distribution pN (x, z|θ) that describes the probabilistic relationships between a set
of N inputs x = (x1 , . . . , xN ) and corresponding network responses z = (z 1 , . . . , z N ), where θ
denotes the vector of network parameters that shape
P this distribution, e.g., via synaptic weights and
network connectivity. The likelihood pN (x|θ) = z pN (x, z|θ) of the actually occurring inputs x
under the resulting internal model can then be viewed as a measure for the agreement between this
internal model (which carries out “predictive coding” [3]) and its environment (which generates x).
The goal of network learning is usually described in this probabilistic generative framework as finding parameter values θ ∗ that maximize this agreement, or equivalently the likelihood of the inputs x
(maximum likelihood learning): θ ∗ = arg maxθ pN (x|θ). Locally optimal estimates of θ ∗ can be
determined by gradient ascent on the data likelihood pN (x|θ), which led to many previous models
of network plasticity [4, 5, 6]. While these models learn point estimates of locally optimal parameters θ ∗ , theoretical considerations for artificial neural networks suggest that it is advantageous to
learn full posterior distributions p∗ (θ) over parameters. This full Bayesian treatment of learning
allows to integrate structural parameter priors in a Bayes-optimal way and promises better generalization of the acquired knowledge to new inputs [7, 8]. The problem how such posterior distributions
could be learned by brain networks has been highlighted in [2] as an important future challenge in
computational neuroscience.
1

these authors contributed equally

1

