Spatial Transformer Networks

Max Jaderberg

Karen Simonyan

Andrew Zisserman

Koray Kavukcuoglu

Google DeepMind, London, UK
{jaderberg,simonyan,zisserman,korayk}@google.com

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks define an exceptionally powerful class of models,
but are still limited by the lack of ability to be spatially invariant to the input data
in a computationally and parameter efficient manner. In this work we introduce a
new learnable module, the Spatial Transformer, which explicitly allows the spatial manipulation of data within the network. This differentiable module can be
inserted into existing convolutional architectures, giving neural networks the ability to actively spatially transform feature maps, conditional on the feature map
itself, without any extra training supervision or modification to the optimisation
process. We show that the use of spatial transformers results in models which
learn invariance to translation, scale, rotation and more generic warping, resulting in state-of-the-art performance on several benchmarks, and for a number of
classes of transformations.

1

Introduction

Over recent years, the landscape of computer vision has been drastically altered and pushed forward
through the adoption of a fast, scalable, end-to-end learning framework, the Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [18]. Though not a recent invention, we now see a cornucopia of CNN-based
models achieving state-of-the-art results in classification, localisation, semantic segmentation, and
action recognition tasks, amongst others.
A desirable property of a system which is able to reason about images is to disentangle object
pose and part deformation from texture and shape. The introduction of local max-pooling layers in
CNNs has helped to satisfy this property by allowing a network to be somewhat spatially invariant
to the position of features. However, due to the typically small spatial support for max-pooling
(e.g. 2 × 2 pixels) this spatial invariance is only realised over a deep hierarchy of max-pooling and
convolutions, and the intermediate feature maps (convolutional layer activations) in a CNN are not
actually invariant to large transformations of the input data [5, 19]. This limitation of CNNs is due
to having only a limited, pre-defined pooling mechanism for dealing with variations in the spatial
arrangement of data.
In this work we introduce the Spatial Transformer module, that can be included into a standard
neural network architecture to provide spatial transformation capabilities. The action of the spatial
transformer is conditioned on individual data samples, with the appropriate behaviour learnt during
training for the task in question (without extra supervision). Unlike pooling layers, where the receptive fields are fixed and local, the spatial transformer module is a dynamic mechanism that can
actively spatially transform an image (or a feature map) by producing an appropriate transformation
for each input sample. The transformation is then performed on the entire feature map (non-locally)
and can include scaling, cropping, rotations, as well as non-rigid deformations. This allows networks
which include spatial transformers to not only select regions of an image that are most relevant (attention), but also to transform those regions to a canonical, expected pose to simplify inference in
the subsequent layers. Notably, spatial transformers can be trained with standard back-propagation,
allowing for end-to-end training of the models they are injected in.
1

