A Recurrent Latent Variable Model
for Sequential Data

Junyoung Chung, Kyle Kastner, Laurent Dinh, Kratarth Goel,
Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio∗
Department of Computer Science and Operations Research
Université de Montréal
∗
CIFAR Senior Fellow
{firstname.lastname}@umontreal.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the inclusion of latent random variables into the hidden state of a recurrent neural network (RNN) by combining the elements of the
variational autoencoder. We argue that through the use of high-level latent random variables, the variational RNN (VRNN)1 can model the kind of variability
observed in highly structured sequential data such as natural speech. We empirically evaluate the proposed model against other related sequential models on four
speech datasets and one handwriting dataset. Our results show the important roles
that latent random variables can play in the RNN dynamics.

1

Introduction

Learning generative models of sequences is a long-standing machine learning challenge and historically the domain of dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) such as hidden Markov models (HMMs)
and Kalman filters. The dominance of DBN-based approaches has been recently overturned by a
resurgence of interest in recurrent neural network (RNN) based approaches. An RNN is a special
type of neural network that is able to handle both variable-length input and output. By training an
RNN to predict the next output in a sequence, given all previous outputs, it can be used to model
joint probability distribution over sequences.
Both RNNs and DBNs consist of two parts: (1) a transition function that determines the evolution
of the internal hidden state, and (2) a mapping from the state to the output. There are, however, a
few important differences between RNNs and DBNs.
DBNs have typically been limited either to relatively simple state transition structures (e.g., linear
models in the case of the Kalman filter) or to relatively simple internal state structure (e.g., the HMM
state space consists of a single set of mutually exclusive states). RNNs, on the other hand, typically
possess both a richly distributed internal state representation and flexible non-linear transition functions. These differences give RNNs extra expressive power in comparison to DBNs. This expressive
power and the ability to train via error backpropagation are the key reasons why RNNs have gained
popularity as generative models for highly structured sequential data.
In this paper, we focus on another important difference between DBNs and RNNs. While the hidden
state in DBNs is expressed in terms of random variables, the internal transition structure of the
standard RNN is entirely deterministic. The only source of randomness or variability in the RNN
is found in the conditional output probability model. We suggest that this can be an inappropriate
way to model the kind of variability observed in highly structured data, such as natural speech,
which is characterized by strong and complex dependencies among the output variables at different
1

Code is available at http://www.github.com/jych/nips2015_vrnn

1

