Probabilistic Variational Bounds
for Graphical Models

Qiang Liu
Computer Science
Dartmouth College
qliu@cs.dartmouth.edu

John Fisher III
CSAIL
MIT
fisher@csail.mit.edu

Alexander Ihler
Computer Science
Univ. of California, Irvine
ihler@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
Variational algorithms such as tree-reweighted belief propagation can provide deterministic bounds on the partition function, but are often loose and difficult to use
in an “any-time” fashion, expending more computation for tighter bounds. On the
other hand, Monte Carlo estimators such as importance sampling have excellent
any-time behavior, but depend critically on the proposal distribution. We propose
a simple Monte Carlo based inference method that augments convex variational
bounds by adding importance sampling (IS). We argue that convex variational
methods naturally provide good IS proposals that “cover” the target probability,
and reinterpret the variational optimization as designing a proposal to minimize an
upper bound on the variance of our IS estimator. This both provides an accurate
estimator and enables construction of any-time probabilistic bounds that improve
quickly and directly on state-of-the-art variational bounds, and provide certificates
of accuracy given enough samples relative to the error in the initial bound.

1

Introduction

Graphical models such as Bayesian networks, Markov random fields and deep generative models
provide a powerful framework for reasoning about complex dependency structures over many variables [see e.g., 14, 13]. A fundamental task is to calculate the partition function, or normalization
constant. This task is #P-complete in the worst case, but in many practical cases it is possible to
find good deterministic or Monte Carlo approximations. The most useful approximations should
give not only accurate estimates, but some form of confidence interval, so that for easy problems
one has a certificate of accuracy, while harder problems are identified as such. Broadly speaking,
approximations fall into two classes: variational optimization, and Monte Carlo sampling.
Variational inference [29] provides a spectrum of deterministic estimates and upper and lower
bounds on the partition function; these include loopy belief propagation (BP), which is often quite
accurate; its convex variants, such as tree reweighted BP (TRW-BP), which give upper bounds on the
partition function; and mean field type methods that give lower bounds. Unfortunately, these methods often lack useful accuracy assessments; although in principle a pair of upper and lower bounds
(such as TRW-BP and mean field) taken together give an interval containing the true solution, the
gap is often too large to be practically useful. Also, improving these bounds typically means using
larger regions, which quickly runs into memory constraints.
Monte Carlo methods, often based on some form of importance sampling (IS), can also be used
to estimate the partition function [e.g., 15]. In principle, IS provides unbiased estimates, with the
potential for a probabilistic bound: a bound which holds with some user-selected probability 1 − δ.
Sampling estimates can also easily trade time for increased accuracy, without using more memory.
Unfortunately, choosing the proposal distribution in IS is often both crucial and difficult; if poorly
chosen, not only is the estimator high-variance, but the samples’ empirical variance estimate is also
misleading, resulting in both poor accuracy and poor confidence estimates; see e.g., [35, 1].
1

