Time-Sensitive Recommendation From
Recurrent User Activities

Nan Du , Yichen Wang , Niao He∗ , Le Song

College of Computing, Georgia Tech
∗
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial & System Engineering, Georgia Tech
dunan@gatech.edu, yichen.wang@gatech.edu, nhe6@gatech.edu
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
By making personalized suggestions, a recommender system is playing a crucial
role in improving the engagement of users in modern web-services. However,
most recommendation algorithms do not explicitly take into account the temporal behavior and the recurrent activities of users. Two central but less explored
questions are how to recommend the most desirable item at the right moment, and
how to predict the next returning time of a user to a service. To address these
questions, we propose a novel framework which connects self-exciting point processes and low-rank models to capture the recurrent temporal patterns in a large
collection of user-item consumption pairs. We show that the parameters of the
model can be estimated via a convex optimization, and furthermore, we develop
an efficient algorithm that maintains O(1/) convergence rate, scales up to problems with millions of user-item pairs and hundreds of millions of temporal events.
Compared to other state-of-the-arts in both synthetic and real datasets, our model
achieves superb predictive performance in the two time-sensitive recommendation tasks. Finally, we point out that our formulation can incorporate other extra
context information of users, such as profile, textual and spatial features.

1

Introduction

Delivering personalized user experiences is believed to play a crucial role in the long-term engagement of users to modern web-services [26]. For example, making recommendations on proper items
at the right moment can make personal assistant services on mainstream mobile platforms more competitive and usable, since people tend to have different activities depending on the temporal/spatial
contexts such as morning vs. evening, weekdays vs. weekend (see for example Figure 1(a)). Unfortunately, most existing recommendation techniques are mainly optimized at predicting users’ onetime preference (often denoted by integer ratings) on items, while users’ continuously time-varying
preferences remain largely under explored.
Besides, traditional user feedback signals (e.g. user-item ratings, click-through-rates, etc.) have been
increasingly argued to be ineffective to represent real engagement of users due to the sparseness and
nosiness of the data [26]. The temporal patterns at which users return to the services (items) thus becomes a more relevant metric to evaluate their satisfactions [12]. Furthermore, successful predictions
of the returning time not only allows a service to keep track of the evolving user preferences, but also
helps a service provider to improve their marketing strategies. For most web companies, if we can
predict when users will come back next, we could make ads bidding more economic, allowing marketers to bid on time slots. After all, marketers need not blindly bid all time slots indiscriminately.
In the context of modern electronic health record data, patients may have several diseases that have
complicated dependencies on each other shown at the bottom of Figure 1(a). The occurrence of one
disease could trigger the progression of another. Predicting the returning time on certain disease
can effectively help doctors to take proactive steps to reduce the potential risks. However, since
most models in literature are particularly optimized for predicting ratings [16, 23, 15, 3, 25, 13, 21],
1

