Precision-Recall-Gain Curves:
PR Analysis Done Right

Meelis Kull
Intelligent Systems Laboratory
University of Bristol, United Kingdom
Meelis.Kull@bristol.ac.uk

Peter A. Flach
Intelligent Systems Laboratory
University of Bristol, United Kingdom
Peter.Flach@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Precision-Recall analysis abounds in applications of binary classification where
true negatives do not add value and hence should not affect assessment of the
classifier’s performance. Perhaps inspired by the many advantages of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the area under such curves for accuracybased performance assessment, many researchers have taken to report PrecisionRecall (PR) curves and associated areas as performance metric. We demonstrate
in this paper that this practice is fraught with difficulties, mainly because of incoherent scale assumptions – e.g., the area under a PR curve takes the arithmetic
mean of precision values whereas the Fβ score applies the harmonic mean. We
show how to fix this by plotting PR curves in a different coordinate system, and
demonstrate that the new Precision-Recall-Gain curves inherit all key advantages
of ROC curves. In particular, the area under Precision-Recall-Gain curves conveys an expected F1 score on a harmonic scale, and the convex hull of a PrecisionRecall-Gain curve allows us to calibrate the classifier’s scores so as to determine,
for each operating point on the convex hull, the interval of β values for which the
point optimises Fβ . We demonstrate experimentally that the area under traditional
PR curves can easily favour models with lower expected F1 score than others, and
so the use of Precision-Recall-Gain curves will result in better model selection.

1

Introduction and Motivation

In machine learning and related areas we often need to optimise multiple performance measures,
such as per-class classification accuracies, precision and recall in information retrieval, etc. We then
have the option to fix a particular way to trade off these performance measures: e.g., we can use
overall classification accuracy which gives equal weight to correctly classified instances regardless
of their class; or we can use the F1 score which takes the harmonic mean of precision and recall.
However, multi-objective optimisation suggests that to delay fixing a trade-off for as long as possible
has practical benefits, such as the ability to adapt a model or set of models to changing operating
contexts. The latter is essentially what receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves do for binary classification. In an ROC plot we plot true positive rate (the proportion of correctly classified
positives, also denoted tpr) on the y-axis against false positive rate (the proportion of incorrectly
classified negatives, also denoted fpr) on the x-axis. A categorical classifier evaluated on a test set
gives rise to a single ROC point, while a classifier which outputs scores (henceforth called a model)
can generate a set of points (commonly referred to as the ROC curve) by varying the decision threshold (Figure 1 (left)).
ROC curves are widely used in machine learning and their main properties are well understood [3].
These properties can be summarised as follows.
1

