Online Rank Elicitation for Plackett-Luce:
A Dueling Bandits Approach
Balázs Szörényi
Technion, Haifa, Israel /
MTA-SZTE Research Group on
Artificial Intelligence, Hungary
szorenyibalazs@gmail.com

Róbert Busa-Fekete, Adil Paul, Eyke Hüllermeier
Department of Computer Science
University of Paderborn
Paderborn, Germany
{busarobi,adil.paul,eyke}@upb.de

Abstract
We study the problem of online rank elicitation, assuming that rankings of a set
of alternatives obey the Plackett-Luce distribution. Following the setting of the
dueling bandits problem, the learner is allowed to query pairwise comparisons
between alternatives, i.e., to sample pairwise marginals of the distribution in an
online fashion. Using this information, the learner seeks to reliably predict the
most probable ranking (or top-alternative). Our approach is based on constructing
a surrogate probability distribution over rankings based on a sorting procedure, for
which the pairwise marginals provably coincide with the marginals of the PlackettLuce distribution. In addition to a formal performance and complexity analysis,
we present first experimental studies.

1

Introduction

Several variants of learning-to-rank problems have recently been studied in an online setting, with
preferences over alternatives given in the form of stochastic pairwise comparisons [6]. Typically, the
learner is allowed to select (presumably most informative) alternatives in an active way—making a
connection to multi-armed bandits, where single alternatives are chosen instead of pairs, this is also
referred to as the dueling bandits problem [28].
Methods for online ranking can mainly be distinguished with regard to the assumptions they make
about the probabilities pi,j that, in a direct comparison between two alternatives i and j, the former
is preferred over the latter. If these probabilities are not constrained at all, a complexity that grows
quadratically in the number M of alternatives is essentially unavoidable [27, 8, 9]. Yet, by exploiting
(stochastic) transitivity properties, which are quite natural in a ranking context, it is possible to
devise algorithms with better performance guaranties, typically of the order M log M [29, 28, 7].
The idea of exploiting transitivity in preference-based online learning establishes a natural connection to sorting algorithms. Naively, for example, one could simply apply an efficient sorting
algorithm such as MergeSort as an active sampling scheme, thereby producing a random order of
the alternatives. What can we say about the optimality of such an order? The problem is that the
probability distribution (on rankings) induced by the sorting algorithm may not be well attuned with
the original preference relation (i.e., the probabilities pi,j ).
In this paper, we will therefore combine a sorting algorithm, namely QuickSort [15], and a stochastic preference model that harmonize well with each other—in a technical sense to be detailed later
on. This harmony was first presented in [1], and our main contribution is to show how it can be
exploited for online rank elicitation. More specifically, we assume that pairwise comparisons obey
the marginals of a Plackett-Luce model [24, 19], a widely used parametric distribution over rankings
(cf. Section 5). Despite the quadratic worst case complexity of QuickSort, we succeed in developing
its budgeted version (presented in Section 6) with a complexity of O(M log M ). While only returning partial orderings, this version allows us to devise PAC-style algorithms that find, respectively, a
close-to-optimal item (Section 7) and a close-to-optimal ranking of all items (Section 8), both with
high probability.
1

