Nonparametric von Mises Estimators for Entropies,
Divergences and Mutual Informations

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research, NY
akshaykr@cs.cmu.edu

Kirthevasan Kandasamy
Carnegie Mellon University
kandasamy@cs.cmu.edu

Barnabás Póczos, Larry Wasserman
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu, larry@stat.cmu.edu

James M. Robins
Harvard University
robins@hsph.harvard.edu

Abstract
We propose and analyse estimators for statistical functionals of one or more distributions under nonparametric assumptions. Our estimators are derived from the
von Mises expansion and are based on the theory of influence functions, which appear in the semiparametric statistics literature. We show that estimators based either on data-splitting or a leave-one-out technique enjoy fast rates of convergence
and other favorable theoretical properties. We apply this framework to derive estimators for several popular information theoretic quantities, and via empirical
evaluation, show the advantage of this approach over existing estimators.

1

Introduction

Entropies, divergences, and mutual informations are classical information-theoretic quantities that
play fundamental roles in statistics, machine learning, and across the mathematical sciences. In
addition to their use as analytical tools, they arise in a variety of applications including hypothesis
testing, parameter estimation, feature selection, and optimal experimental design. In many of these
applications, it is important to estimate these functionals from data so that they can be used in downstream algorithmic or scientific tasks. In this paper, we develop a recipe for estimating statistical
functionals of one or more nonparametric distributions based on the notion of influence functions.
Entropy estimators are used in applications ranging from independent components analysis [15],
intrinsic dimension estimation [4] and several signal processing applications [9]. Divergence estimators are useful in statistical tasks such as two-sample testing. Recently they have also gained
popularity as they are used to measure (dis)-similarity between objects that are modeled as distributions, in what is known as the “machine learning on distributions” framework [5, 28]. Mutual information estimators have been used in in learning tree-structured Markov random fields [19], feature
selection [25], clustering [18] and neuron classification [31]. In the parametric setting, conditional
divergence and conditional mutual information estimators are used for conditional two sample testing or as building blocks for structure learning in graphical models. Nonparametric estimators for
these quantities could potentially allow us to generalise several of these algorithms to the nonparametric domain. Our approach gives sample-efficient estimators for all these quantities (and many
others), which often outperfom the existing estimators both theoretically and empirically.
Our approach to estimating these functionals is based on post-hoc correction of a preliminary estimator using the Von Mises Expansion [7, 36]. This idea has been used before in the semiparametric
statistics literature [3, 30]. However, most studies are restricted to functionals of one distribution
and have focused on a “data-split” approach which splits the samples for density estimation and
functional estimation. While the data-split (DS) estimator is known to achieve the parametric con1

