Principal Geodesic Analysis for Probability Measures
under the Optimal Transport Metric

Vivien Seguy
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
vivien.seguy@iip.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Marco Cuturi
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
mcuturi@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Given a family of probability measures in P (X ), the space of probability measures on a Hilbert space X , our goal in this paper is to highlight one ore more
curves in P (X ) that summarize efficiently that family. We propose to study this
problem under the optimal transport (Wasserstein) geometry, using curves that
are restricted to be geodesic segments under that metric. We show that concepts
that play a key role in Euclidean PCA, such as data centering or orthogonality of
principal directions, find a natural equivalent in the optimal transport geometry,
using Wasserstein means and differential geometry. The implementation of these
ideas is, however, computationally challenging. To achieve scalable algorithms
that can handle thousands of measures, we propose to use a relaxed definition
for geodesics and regularized optimal transport distances. The interest of our approach is demonstrated on images seen either as shapes or color histograms.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport distances (Villani, 2008), a.k.a Wasserstein or earth mover’s distances, define
a powerful geometry to compare probability measures supported on a metric space X . The
Wasserstein space P (X )—the space of probability measures on X endowed with the Wasserstein
distance—is a metric space which has received ample interest from a theoretical perspective. Given
the prominent role played by probability measures and feature histograms in machine learning, the
properties of P (X ) can also have practical implications in data science. This was shown by Agueh
and Carlier (2011) who described first Wasserstein means of probability measures. Wasserstein
means have been recently used in Bayesian inference (Srivastava et al., 2015), clustering (Cuturi
and Doucet, 2014), graphics (Solomon et al., 2015) or brain imaging (Gramfort et al., 2015). When
X is not just metric but also a Hilbert space, P (X ) is an infinite-dimensional Riemannian manifold
(Ambrosio et al. 2006, Chap. 8; Villani 2008, Part II). Three recent contributions by Boissard et al.
(2015, §5.2), Bigot et al. (2015) and Wang et al. (2013) exploit directly or indirectly this structure to
extend Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to P (X ). These important seminal papers are, however, limited in their applicability and/or the type of curves they output. Our goal in this paper is to
propose more general and scalable algorithms to carry out Wasserstein principal geodesic analysis
on probability measures, and not simply dimensionality reduction as explained below.
Principal Geodesics in P (X ) vs. Dimensionality Reduction on P (X ) We provide in Fig. 1 a
simple example that illustrates the motivation of this paper, and which also shows how our approach
differentiates itself from existing dimensionality reduction algorithms (linear and non-linear) that
draw inspiration from PCA. As shown in Fig. 1, linear PCA cannot produce components that remain in P (X ). Even more advanced tools, such as those proposed by Hastie and Stuetzle (1989),
fall slightly short of that goal. On the other hand, Wasserstein geodesic analysis yields geodesic
components in P (X ) that are easy to interpret and which can also be used to reduce dimensionality.
1

