Matrix Completion Under Monotonic Single Index
Models
Ravi Ganti
Wisconsin Institutes for Discovery
UW-Madison
gantimahapat@wisc.edu

Laura Balzano
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of Michigan Ann Arbor
girasole@umich.edu

Rebecca Willett
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
UW-Madison
rmwillett@wisc.edu

Abstract
Most recent results in matrix completion assume that the matrix under consideration is low-rank or that the columns are in a union of low-rank subspaces. In
real-world settings, however, the linear structure underlying these models is distorted by a (typically unknown) nonlinear transformation. This paper addresses
the challenge of matrix completion in the face of such nonlinearities. Given a
few observations of a matrix that are obtained by applying a Lipschitz, monotonic
function to a low rank matrix, our task is to estimate the remaining unobserved entries. We propose a novel matrix completion method that alternates between lowrank matrix estimation and monotonic function estimation to estimate the missing
matrix elements. Mean squared error bounds provide insight into how well the
matrix can be estimated based on the size, rank of the matrix and properties of the
nonlinear transformation. Empirical results on synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate the competitiveness of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

In matrix completion, one has access to a matrix with only a few observed entries, and the task is
to estimate the entire matrix using the observed entries. This problem has a plethora of applications
such as collaborative filtering, recommender systems [1] and sensor networks [2]. Matrix completion has been well studied in machine learning, and we now know how to recover certain matrices
given a few observed entries of the matrix [3, 4] when it is assumed to be low rank. Typical work
in matrix completion assumes that the matrix to be recovered is incoherent, low rank, and entries
are sampled uniformly at random [5, 6, 4, 3, 7, 8]. While recent work has focused on relaxing the
incoherence and sampling conditions under which matrix completion succeeds, there has been little
work for matrix completion when the underlying matrix is of high rank. More specifically, we shall
assume that the matrix that we need to complete is obtained by applying some unknown, non-linear
function to each element of an unknown low-rank matrix. Because of the application of a non-linear
transformation, the resulting ratings matrix tends to have a large rank. To understand the effect of
the application of non-linear transformation on a low-rank
matrix, we shall consider the following
Pm
simple experiment: Given an n × m matrix X, let X = i=1 σi ui vi> be its SVD. The rank of the
matrix X is the number of non-zero singular values. Given an  ∈ (0, 1), define the effective rank
of X as follows:
s Pm
(
)
2
j=k+1 σj
Pm 2 ≤  .
r (X) = min k ∈ N :
(1)
j=1 σj
1

