A Framework for Individualizing Predictions of Disease
Trajectories by Exploiting Multi-Resolution Structure

Suchi Saria
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
ssaria@cs.jhu.edu

Peter Schulam
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
pschulam@jhu.edu

Abstract
For many complex diseases, there is a wide variety of ways in which an individual can manifest the disease. The challenge of personalized medicine is to
develop tools that can accurately predict the trajectory of an individual’s disease,
which can in turn enable clinicians to optimize treatments. We represent an individual’s disease trajectory as a continuous-valued continuous-time function describing the severity of the disease over time. We propose a hierarchical latent
variable model that individualizes predictions of disease trajectories. This model
shares statistical strength across observations at different resolutions–the population, subpopulation and the individual level. We describe an algorithm for learning
population and subpopulation parameters offline, and an online procedure for dynamically learning individual-specific parameters. Finally, we validate our model
on the task of predicting the course of interstitial lung disease, a leading cause
of death among patients with the autoimmune disease scleroderma. We compare
our approach against state-of-the-art and demonstrate significant improvements in
predictive accuracy.

1

Introduction

In complex, chronic diseases such as autism, lupus, and Parkinson’s, the way the disease manifests
may vary greatly across individuals [1]. For example, in scleroderma, the disease we use as a running
example in this work, individuals may be affected across six organ systems—the lungs, heart, skin,
gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and vasculature—to varying extents [2]. For any single organ system,
some individuals may show rapid decline throughout the course of their disease, while others may
show early decline but stabilize later on. Often in such diseases, the most effective drugs have
strong side-effects. With tools that can accurately predict an individual’s disease activity trajectory,
clinicians can more aggressively treat those at greatest risk early, rather than waiting until the disease
progresses to a high level of severity. To monitor the disease, physicians use clinical markers to
quantify severity. In scleroderma, for example, PFVC is a clinical marker used to measure lung
severity. The task of individualized prediction of disease activity trajectories is that of using an
individual’s clinical history to predict the future course of a clinical marker; in other words, the goal
is to predict a function representing a trajectory that is updated dynamically using an individual’s
previous markers and individual characteristics.
Predicting disease activity trajectories presents a number of challenges. First, there are multiple latent factors that cause heterogeneity across individuals. One such factor is the underlying biological
mechanism driving the disease. For example, two different genetic mutations may trigger distinct
disease trajectories (e.g. as in Figures 1a and 1b). If we could divide individuals into groups according to their mechanisms—or disease subtypes (see e.g. [3, 4, 5, 6])—it would be straightforward
to fit separate models to each subpopulation. In most complex diseases, however, the mechanisms
are poorly understood and clear definitions of subtypes do not exist. If subtype alone determined
trajectory, then we could cluster individuals. However, other unobserved individual-specific factors
1

