Decomposition Bounds for Marginal MAP

∗

Wei Ping∗
Qiang Liu†
Alexander Ihler∗
†
Computer Science, UC Irvine
Computer Science, Dartmouth College
{wping,ihler}@ics.uci.edu qliu@cs.dartmouth.edu

Abstract
Marginal MAP inference involves making MAP predictions in systems defined
with latent variables or missing information. It is significantly more difficult than
pure marginalization and MAP tasks, for which a large class of efficient and convergent variational algorithms, such as dual decomposition, exist. In this work, we
generalize dual decomposition to a generic power sum inference task, which includes marginal MAP, along with pure marginalization and MAP, as special cases.
Our method is based on a block coordinate descent algorithm on a new convex
decomposition bound, that is guaranteed to converge monotonically, and can be
parallelized efficiently. We demonstrate our approach on marginal MAP queries
defined on real-world problems from the UAI approximate inference challenge,
showing that our framework is faster and more reliable than previous methods.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models such as Bayesian networks and Markov random fields provide a useful framework and powerful tools for machine learning. Given a graphical model, inference refers to
answering probabilistic queries about the model. There are three common types of inference tasks.
The first are max-inference or maximum a posteriori (MAP) tasks, which aim to find the most probable state of the joint probability; exact and approximate MAP inference is widely used in structured
prediction [26]. Sum-inference tasks include calculating marginal probabilities and the normalization constant of the distribution, and play a central role in many learning tasks (e.g., maximum
likelihood). Finally, marginal MAP tasks are “mixed” inference problems, which generalize the first
two types by marginalizing a subset of variables (e.g., hidden variables) before optimizing over the
remainder.1 These tasks arise in latent variable models [e.g., 29, 25] and many decision-making
problems [e.g., 13]. All three inference types are generally intractable; as a result, approximate
inference, particularly convex relaxations or upper bounding methods, are of great interest.
Decomposition methods provide a useful and computationally efficient class of bounds on inference
problems. For example, dual decomposition methods for MAP [e.g., 31] give a class of easy-toevaluate upper bounds which can be directly optimized using coordinate descent [36, 6], subgradient
updates [14], or other methods [e.g., 22]. It is easy to ensure both convergence, and that the objective is monotonically decreasing (so that more computation always provides a better bound). The
resulting bounds can be used either as stand-alone approximation methods [6, 14], or as a component of search [11]. In summation problems, a notable decomposition bound is tree-reweighted BP
(TRW), which bounds the partition function with a combination of trees [e.g., 34, 21, 12, 3]. These
bounds are useful in joint inference and learning (or “inferning”) frameworks, allowing learning
with approximate inference to be framed as a joint optimization over the model parameters and decomposition bound, often leading to more efficient learning [e.g., 23]. However, far fewer methods
have been developed for marginal MAP problems.
1

In some literature [e.g., 28], marginal MAP is simply called MAP, and the joint MAP task is called MPE.

1

