Semi-supervised Convolutional Neural Networks for
Text Categorization via Region Embedding

Rie Johnson
RJ Research Consulting
Tarrytown, NY, USA
riejohnson@gmail.com

Tong Zhang∗
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA
tzhang@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a new semi-supervised framework with convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) for text categorization. Unlike the previous approaches that rely
on word embeddings, our method learns embeddings of small text regions from
unlabeled data for integration into a supervised CNN. The proposed scheme for
embedding learning is based on the idea of two-view semi-supervised learning,
which is intended to be useful for the task of interest even though the training
is done on unlabeled data. Our models achieve better results than previous approaches on sentiment classification and topic classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15] are neural networks that can make use of the internal
structure of data such as the 2D structure of image data through convolution layers, where each
computation unit responds to a small region of input data (e.g., a small square of a large image). On
text, CNN has been gaining attention, used in systems for tagging, entity search, sentence modeling,
and so on [4, 5, 26, 7, 21, 12, 25, 22, 24, 13], to make use of the 1D structure (word order) of text
data. Since CNN was originally developed for image data, which is fixed-sized, low-dimensional and
dense, without modification it cannot be applied to text documents, which are variable-sized, highdimensional and sparse if represented by sequences of one-hot vectors. In many of the CNN studies
on text, therefore, words in sentences are first converted to low-dimensional word vectors. The word
vectors are often obtained by some other method from an additional large corpus, which is typically
done in a fashion similar to language modeling though there are many variations [3, 4, 20, 23, 6, 19].
Use of word vectors obtained this way is a form of semi-supervised learning and leaves us with
the following questions. Q1. How effective is CNN on text in a purely supervised setting without
the aid of unlabeled data? Q2. Can we use unlabeled data with CNN more effectively than using
general word vector learning methods? Our recent study [11] addressed Q1 on text categorization
and showed that CNN without a word vector layer is not only feasible but also beneficial when
not aided by unlabeled data. Here we address Q2 also on text categorization: building on [11], we
propose a new semi-supervised framework that learns embeddings of small text regions (instead of
words) from unlabeled data, for use in a supervised CNN.
The essence of CNN, as described later, is to convert small regions of data (e.g., “love it” in a document) to feature vectors for use in the upper layers; in other words, through training, a convolution
layer learns an embedding of small regions of data. Here we use the term ‘embedding’ loosely to
mean a structure-preserving function, in particular, a function that generates low-dimensional features that preserve the predictive structure. [11] applies CNN directly to high-dimensional one-hot
vectors, which leads to directly learning an embedding of small text regions (e.g., regions of size 3
∗
Tong Zhang would like to acknowledge NSF IIS-1250985, NSF IIS-1407939, and NIH R01AI116744 for
supporting his research.

1

