Measuring Sample Quality with Stein’s Method
Jackson Gorham
Department of Statistics
Stanford University

Lester Mackey
Department of Statistics
Stanford University

Abstract
To improve the efficiency of Monte Carlo estimation, practitioners are turning to
biased Markov chain Monte Carlo procedures that trade off asymptotic exactness
for computational speed. The reasoning is sound: a reduction in variance due to
more rapid sampling can outweigh the bias introduced. However, the inexactness
creates new challenges for sampler and parameter selection, since standard measures of sample quality like effective sample size do not account for asymptotic
bias. To address these challenges, we introduce a new computable quality measure
based on Stein’s method that bounds the discrepancy between sample and target
expectations over a large class of test functions. We use our tool to compare exact,
biased, and deterministic sample sequences and illustrate applications to hyperparameter selection, convergence rate assessment, and quantifying bias-variance
tradeoffs in posterior inference.

1

Introduction

When faced with a complex target distribution, one often turns to RMarkov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) [1] to approximate intractable expectations EP [h(Z)] = X p(x)h(x)dx with asympPn
totically exact sample estimates EQ [h(X)] = i=1 q(xi )h(xi ). These complex targets commonly
arise as posterior distributions in Bayesian inference and as candidate distributions in maximum
likelihood estimation [2]. In recent years, researchers [e.g., 3, 4, 5] have introduced asymptotic bias
into MCMC procedures to trade off asymptotic correctness for improved sampling speed. The rationale is that more rapid sampling can reduce the variance of a Monte Carlo estimate and hence
outweigh the bias introduced. However, the added flexibility introduces new challenges for sampler
and parameter selection, since standard sample quality measures, like effective sample size, asymptotic variance, trace and mean plots, and pooled and within-chain variance diagnostics, presume
eventual convergence to the target [1] and hence do not account for asymptotic bias.
To address this shortcoming, we develop a new measure of sample quality suitable for comparing
asymptotically exact, asymptotically biased, and even deterministic sample sequences. The quality
measure is based on Stein’s method and is attainable by solving a linear program. After outlining
our design criteria in Section 2, we relate the convergence of the quality measure to that of standard
probability metrics in Section 3, develop a streamlined implementation based on geometric spanners
in Section 4, and illustrate applications to hyperparameter selection, convergence rate assessment,
and the quantification of bias-variance tradeoffs in posterior inference in Section 5. We discuss
related work in Section 6 and defer all proofs to the appendix.
Notation We denote the `2 , `1 , and `1 norms on Rd by k·k2 , k·k1 , and k·k1 respectively. We will
⇤
often refer to a generic norm k·k on Rd with associated dual norms kwk , supv2Rd :kvk=1 hw, vi
⇤
⇤
⇤
for vectors w 2 Rd , kM k , supv2Rd :kvk=1 kM vk for matrices M 2 Rd⇥d , and kT k ,
⇤
supv2Rd :kvk=1 kT [v]k for tensors T 2 Rd⇥d⇥d . We denote the j-th standard basis vector by ej , the
@
partial derivative @xk by rk , and the gradient of any Rd -valued function g by rg with components
(rg(x))jk , rk gj (x).
1

