Large-Scale Bayesian Multi-Label Learning via
Topic-Based Label Embeddings

Piyush Rai†∗ , Changwei Hu∗ , Ricardo Henao∗ , Lawrence Carin∗
†
∗
CSE Dept, IIT Kanpur
ECE Dept, Duke University
piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in, {ch237,r.henao,lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
We present a scalable Bayesian multi-label learning model based on learning lowdimensional label embeddings. Our model assumes that each label vector is generated as a weighted combination of a set of topics (each topic being a distribution
over labels), where the combination weights (i.e., the embeddings) for each label
vector are conditioned on the observed feature vector. This construction, coupled
with a Bernoulli-Poisson link function for each label of the binary label vector,
leads to a model with a computational cost that scales in the number of positive labels in the label matrix. This makes the model particularly appealing for
real-world multi-label learning problems where the label matrix is usually very
massive but highly sparse. Using a data-augmentation strategy leads to full local
conjugacy in our model, facilitating simple and very efficient Gibbs sampling, as
well as an Expectation Maximization algorithm for inference. Also, predicting
the label vector at test time does not require doing an inference for the label embeddings and can be done in closed form. We report results on several benchmark
data sets, comparing our model with various state-of-the art methods.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning refers to the problem setting in which the goal is to assign to an object (e.g., a
video, image, or webpage) a subset of labels (e.g., tags) from a (possibly very large) set of labels.
The label assignments of each example can be represented using a binary label vector, indicating the
presence/absence of each label. Despite a significant amount of prior work, multi-label learning [7,
6] continues to be an active area of research, with a recent surge of interest [1, 25, 18, 13, 10] in
designing scalable multi-label learning methods to address the challenges posed by problems such as
image/webpage annotation [18], computational advertising [1, 18], medical coding [24], etc., where
not only the number of examples and data dimensionality are large but the number of labels can also
be massive (several thousands to even millions).
Often, in multi-label learning problems, many of the labels tend to be correlated with each other.
To leverage the label correlations and also handle the possibly massive number of labels, a common
approach is to reduce the dimensionality of the label space, e.g., by projecting the label vectors to
a subspace [10, 25, 21], learning a prediction model in that space, and then projecting back to the
original space. However, as the label space dimensionality increases and/or the sparsity in the label
matrix becomes more pronounced (i.e., very few ones), and/or if the label matrix is only partially
observed, such methods tend to suffer [25] and can also become computationally prohibitive.
To address these issues, we present a scalable, fully Bayesian framework for multi-label learning.
Our framework is similar in spirit to the label embedding methods based on reducing the label space
dimensionality [10, 21, 25]. However, our framework offers the following key advantages: (1)
computational cost of training our model scales in the number of ones in the label matrix, which
makes our framework easily scale in cases where the label matrix is massive but sparse; (2) our
likelihood model for the binary labels, based on a Bernoulli-Poisson link, more realistically models
the extreme sparsity of the label matrix as compared to the commonly employed logistic/probit link;
and (3) our model is more interpretable - embeddings naturally correspond to topics where each
topic is a distribution over labels. Moreover, at test time, unlike other Bayesian methods [10], we do
not need to infer the label embeddings of the test example, thereby leading to faster predictions.
1

