Adaptive Stochastic Optimization: From Sets to Paths
Zhan Wei Lim
David Hsu
Wee Sun Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{limzhanw,dyhsu,leews}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Adaptive stochastic optimization (ASO) optimizes an objective function adaptively under uncertainty. It plays a crucial role in planning and learning under
uncertainty, but is, unfortunately, computationally intractable in general. This paper introduces two conditions on the objective function, the marginal likelihood
rate bound and the marginal likelihood bound, which, together with pointwise
submodularity, enable efficient approximate solution of ASO. Several interesting
classes of functions satisfy these conditions naturally, e.g., the version space reduction function for hypothesis learning. We describe Recursive Adaptive Coverage, a new ASO algorithm that exploits these conditions, and apply the algorithm
to two robot planning tasks under uncertainty. In contrast to the earlier submodular optimization approach, our algorithm applies to ASO over both sets and paths.

1

Introduction

A hallmark of an intelligent agent is to learn new information as the world unfolds and to improvise
by fusing the new information with prior knowledge. Consider an autonomous unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) searching for a victim lost in a jungle. The UAV acquires new information on the
victim’s location by scanning the environment with noisy onboard sensors. How can the UAV plan
and adapt its search strategy in order to find the victim as fast as possible? This is an example of
stochastic optimization, in which an agent chooses a sequence of actions under uncertainty in order
to optimize an objective function. In adaptive stochastic optimization (ASO), the agent’s action
choices are conditioned on the outcomes of earlier choices. ASO plays a crucial role in planning
and learning under uncertainty, but it is, unfortunately, computationally intractable in general [5].
Adaptive submodular optimization provides a powerful tool for approximate solution of ASO and
has several important applications, such as sensor placement, active learning, etc. [5]. However, it
has been so far restricted to optimization over a set domain: the agent chooses a subset out of a
finite set of items. This is inadequate for the UAV search, as the agent’s consecutive choices are
constrained to form a path. Our work applies to ASO over both sets and paths.
Our work aims to identify subclasses of ASO and provide conditions that enable efficient nearoptimal solution. We introduce two conditions on the objective function, the marginal likelihood
rate bound (MLRB) and the marginal likelihood bound (MLB). They enable efficient approximation
of ASO with pointwise submodular objective functions, functions that satisfy a “diminishing return”
property. MLRB is different from adaptive submodularity; we prove that adaptive submodularity
does not imply MLRB and vice versa. While there exist functions that do not satisfy either the
adaptive submodular or the MLRB condition, all pointwise submodular functions satisfy the MLB
condition, albeit with different constants.
We propose Recursive Adaptive Coverage (RAC), a polynomial-time approximation algorithm that
guarantees near-optimal solution of ASO over either a set or a path domain, if the objective function
satisfies the MLRB or the MLB condition and is pointwise monotone submodular. Since MLRB
differs from adaptive submodularity, the new algorithm expands the set of problems that admit efficient approximate solutions, even for ASO over a set domain. We have evaluated RAC in simulation
on two robot planning tasks under uncertainty and show that RAC performs well against several
commonly used heuristic algorithms, including greedy algorithms that optimize information gain.
1

