Neural Adaptive Sequential Monte Carlo

Shixiang Gu†‡
Zoubin Ghahramani†
Richard E. Turner†
University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering, Cambridge UK
‡
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
sg717@cam.ac.uk, zoubin@eng.cam.ac.uk, ret26@cam.ac.uk
†

Abstract
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC), or particle filtering, is a popular class of methods for sampling from an intractable target distribution using a sequence of simpler intermediate distributions. Like other importance sampling-based methods,
performance is critically dependent on the proposal distribution: a bad proposal
can lead to arbitrarily inaccurate estimates of the target distribution. This paper
presents a new method for automatically adapting the proposal using an approximation of the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the true posterior and the
proposal distribution. The method is very flexible, applicable to any parameterized proposal distribution and it supports online and batch variants. We use the
new framework to adapt powerful proposal distributions with rich parameterizations based upon neural networks leading to Neural Adaptive Sequential Monte
Carlo (NASMC). Experiments indicate that NASMC significantly improves inference in a non-linear state space model outperforming adaptive proposal methods
including the Extended Kalman and Unscented Particle Filters. Experiments also
indicate that improved inference translates into improved parameter learning when
NASMC is used as a subroutine of Particle Marginal Metropolis Hastings. Finally
we show that NASMC is able to train a latent variable recurrent neural network
(LV-RNN) achieving results that compete with the state-of-the-art for polymorphic music modelling. NASMC can be seen as bridging the gap between adaptive
SMC methods and the recent work in scalable, black-box variational inference.

1

Introduction

Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) is a class of algorithms that draw samples from a target distribution
of interest by sampling from a series of simpler intermediate distributions. More specifically, the sequence constructs a proposal for importance sampling (IS) [1, 2]. SMC is particularly well-suited for
performing inference in non-linear dynamical models with hidden variables, since filtering naturally
decomposes into a sequence, and in many such cases it is the state-of-the-art inference method [2, 3].
Generally speaking, inference methods can be used as modules in parameter learning systems. SMC
has been used in such a way for both approximate maximum-likelihood parameter learning [4] and
in Bayesian approaches such as the recently developed Particle MCMC methods [3].
Critically, in common with any importance sampling method, the performance of SMC is strongly
dependent on the choice of the proposal distribution. If the proposal is not well-matched to the target distribution, then the method can produce samples that have low effective sample size and this
leads to Monte Carlo estimates that have pathologically high variance [1]. The SMC community
has developed approaches to mitigate these limitations such as resampling to improve particle diversity when the effective sample size is low [1] and applying MCMC transition kernels to improve
particle diversity [5, 2, 3]. A complementary line of research leverages distributional approximate
inference methods, such as the extended Kalman Filter and Unscented Kalman Filter, to construct
better proposals, leading to the Extended Kalman Particle Filter (EKPF) and Unscented Particle Fil1

