Subspace Clustering with Irrelevant Features via
Robust Dantzig Selector

Chao Qu
Department of Mechanical Engineering
National University of Singapore

Huan Xu
Department of Mechanical Engineering
National University of Singapore

A0117143@u.nus.edu

mpexuh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper considers the subspace clustering problem where the data contains
irrelevant or corrupted features. We propose a method termed “robust Dantzig selector” which can successfully identify the clustering structure even with the presence of irrelevant features. The idea is simple yet powerful: we replace the inner
product by its robust counterpart, which is insensitive to the irrelevant features
given an upper bound of the number of irrelevant features. We establish theoretical guarantees for the algorithm to identify the correct subspace, and demonstrate
the effectiveness of the algorithm via numerical simulations. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first method developed to tackle subspace clustering with
irrelevant features.

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed fast growing attention in research of high-dimensional data: images,
videos, DNA microarray data and data from many other applications all have the property that the
dimensionality can be comparable or even much larger than the number of samples. While this
setup appears ill-posed in the first sight, the inference and recovery is possible by exploiting the fact
that high-dimensional data often possess low dimensional structures [3, 14, 19]. On the other hand,
in this era of big data, huge amounts of data are collected everywhere, and such data is generally
heterogeneous. Clean data and irrelevant or even corrupted information are often mixed together,
which motivates us to consider the high-dimensional, big but dirty data problem. In particular, we
study the subspace clustering problem in this setting.
Subspace clustering is an important subject in analyzing high-dimensional data, inspired by many
real applications[15]. Given data points lying in the union of multiple linear spaces, subspace clustering aims to identify all these linear spaces, and cluster the sample points according to the linear
spaces they belong to. Here, different subspaces may correspond to motion of different objects in
video sequence [11, 17, 20], different rotations, translations and thickness in handwritten digit or
the latent communities for the social graph [15, 5].
A variety of algorithms of subspace clustering have been proposed in the last several years including algebraic algorithms [16], iterative methods [9, 1], statistical methods [11, 10], and spectral
clustering-based methods [6, 7]. Among them, sparse subspace clustering (SSC) not only achieves
state-of-art empirical performance, but also possesses elegant theoretical guarantees. In [12], the
authors provide a geometric analysis of SSC which explains rigorously why SSC is successful even
when the subspaces are overlapping [12]. [18] and [13] extend SSC to the noisy case, where data are
contaminated by additive Gaussian noise. Different from these work, we focus on the case where
some irrelevant features are involved.
1

