Distributionally Robust Logistic Regression

Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh
Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani
Daniel Kuhn
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
{soroosh.shafiee,peyman.mohajerin,daniel.kuhn} @epfl.ch

Abstract
This paper proposes a distributionally robust approach to logistic regression. We
use the Wasserstein distance to construct a ball in the space of probability distributions centered at the uniform distribution on the training samples. If the radius of
this ball is chosen judiciously, we can guarantee that it contains the unknown datagenerating distribution with high confidence. We then formulate a distributionally robust logistic regression model that minimizes a worst-case expected logloss
function, where the worst case is taken over all distributions in the Wasserstein
ball. We prove that this optimization problem admits a tractable reformulation
and encapsulates the classical as well as the popular regularized logistic regression
problems as special cases. We further propose a distributionally robust approach
based on Wasserstein balls to compute upper and lower confidence bounds on the
misclassification probability of the resulting classifier. These bounds are given by
the optimal values of two highly tractable linear programs. We validate our theoretical out-of-sample guarantees through simulated and empirical experiments.

1

Introduction

Logistic regression is one of the most frequently used classification methods [1]. Its objective is to
establish a probabilistic relationship between a continuous feature vector and a binary explanatory
variable. However, in spite of its overwhelming success in machine learning, data analytics and
medicine etc., logistic regression models can display a poor out-of-sample performance if training
data is sparse. In this case modelers often resort to ad hoc regularization techniques in order to
combat overfitting effects. This paper aims to develop new regularization techniques for logistic
regression—and to provide intuitive probabilistic interpretations for existing ones—by using tools
from modern distributionally robust optimization.
Logistic Regression: Let x ∈ Rn denote a feature vector and y ∈ {−1, +1} the associated binary
label to be predicted. In logistic regression, the conditional distribution of y given x is modeled as
−1

Prob(y|x) = [1 + exp(−yhβ, xi)]

,

(1)

where the weight vector β ∈ Rn constitutes an unknown regression parameter. Suppose that N
training samples {(x̂i , ŷi )}N
i=1 have been observed. Then, the maximum likelihood estimator of
classical logistic regression is found by solving the geometric program
N

min
β

1 X
lβ (x̂i , ŷi ) ,
N i=1

(2)

whose objective function is given by the sample average of the logloss function lβ (x, y) = log(1 +
exp (−yhβ, xi)). It has been observed, however, that the resulting maximum likelihood estimator
may display a poor out-of-sample performance. Indeed, it is well documented that minimizing the
average logloss function leads to overfitting and weak classification performance [2, 3]. In order
1

