Covariance-Controlled Adaptive Langevin
Thermostat for Large-Scale Bayesian Sampling

Xiaocheng Shang∗
University of Edinburgh
x.shang@ed.ac.uk

Zhanxing Zhu∗
University of Edinburgh
zhanxing.zhu@ed.ac.uk

Benedict Leimkuhler
University of Edinburgh
b.leimkuhler@ed.ac.uk

Amos J. Storkey
University of Edinburgh
a.storkey@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Monte Carlo sampling for Bayesian posterior inference is a common approach
used in machine learning. The Markov Chain Monte Carlo procedures that are
used are often discrete-time analogues of associated stochastic differential equations (SDEs). These SDEs are guaranteed to leave invariant the required posterior
distribution. An area of current research addresses the computational benefits of
stochastic gradient methods in this setting. Existing techniques rely on estimating
the variance or covariance of the subsampling error, and typically assume constant
variance. In this article, we propose a covariance-controlled adaptive Langevin
thermostat that can effectively dissipate parameter-dependent noise while maintaining a desired target distribution. The proposed method achieves a substantial
speedup over popular alternative schemes for large-scale machine learning applications.

1

Introduction

In machine learning applications, direct sampling with the entire large-scale dataset is computationally infeasible. For instance, standard Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods [16], as well
as typical Hybrid Monte Carlo (HMC) methods [3, 6, 9], require the calculation of the acceptance
probability and the creation of informed proposals based on the whole dataset.
In order to improve computational efficiency, a number of stochastic gradient methods [4, 5, 20, 21]
have been proposed in the setting of Bayesian sampling based on random (and much smaller) subsets
to approximate the likelihood of the whole dataset, thus substantially reducing the computational
cost in practice. Welling and Teh proposed the so-called Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics
(SGLD) [21], combining the ideas of stochastic optimization [18] and traditional Brownian dynamics, with a sequence of stepsizes decreasing to zero. A fixed stepsize is often adopted in practice
which is the choice in this article as in Vollmer et al. [20], where a modified SGLD (mSGLD) was
also introduced that was designed to reduce sampling bias.
SGLD generates samples from first order Brownian dynamics, and thus, with a fixed timestep, one
can show that it is unable to dissipate excess noise in gradient approximations while maintaining
the desired invariant distribution [4]. A Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC)
method was proposed by Chen et al. [4], which relies on second order Langevin dynamics and incorporates a parameter-dependent diffusion matrix that is intended to effectively offset the stochastic
perturbation of the gradient. However, it is difficult to accommodate the additional diffusion term
∗

The first and second authors contributed equally, and the listed author order was decided by lot.

1

