Optimal Rates for Random Fourier Features

Bharath K. Sriperumbudur∗
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
bks18@psu.edu

Zoltán Szabó∗
Gatsby Unit, CSML, UCL
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, 25 Howland Street
London - W1T 4JG, UK
zoltan.szabo@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Kernel methods represent one of the most powerful tools in machine learning to tackle
problems expressed in terms of function values and derivatives due to their capability to
represent and model complex relations. While these methods show good versatility, they
are computationally intensive and have poor scalability to large data as they require operations on Gram matrices. In order to mitigate this serious computational limitation, recently
randomized constructions have been proposed in the literature, which allow the application of fast linear algorithms. Random Fourier features (RFF) are among the most popular
and widely applied constructions: they provide an easily computable, low-dimensional
feature representation for shift-invariant kernels. Despite the popularity of RFFs, very little is understood theoretically about their approximation quality. In this paper, we provide
a detailed finite-sample theoretical analysis about the approximation quality of RFFs by (i)
establishing optimal (in terms of the RFF dimension, and growing set size) performance
guarantees in uniform norm, and (ii) presenting guarantees in Lr (1 ≤ r < ∞) norms.
We also propose an RFF approximation to derivatives of a kernel with a theoretical study
on its approximation quality.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods [17] have enjoyed tremendous success in solving several fundamental problems of
machine learning ranging from classification, regression, feature extraction, dependency estimation,
causal discovery, Bayesian inference and hypothesis testing. Such a success owes to their capability
to represent and model complex relations by mapping points into high (possibly infinite) dimensional
feature spaces. At the heart of all these techniques is the kernel trick, which allows to implicitly
compute inner products between these high dimensional feature maps, λ via a kernel function k:
k(x, y) = hλ(x), λ(y)i. However, this flexibility and richness of kernels has a price: by resorting
to implicit computations these methods operate on the Gram matrix of the data, which raises serious
computational challenges while dealing with large-scale data. In order to resolve this bottleneck,
numerous solutions have been proposed, such as low-rank matrix approximations [25, 6, 1], explicit
feature maps designed for additive kernels [23, 11], hashing [19, 9], and random Fourier features
(RFF) [13] constructed for shift-invariant kernels, the focus of the current paper.
RFFs implement an extremely simple, yet efficient idea: instead of relying on the implicit feature
map λ associated with the kernel, by appealing to Bochner’s theorem [24]—any bounded, continuous, shift-invariant kernel is the Fourier transform of a probability measure—-[13] proposed an
explicit low-dimensional random Fourier feature map φ obtained by empirically approximating the
Fourier integral so that k(x, y) ≈ hφ(x), φ(y)i. The advantage of this explicit low-dimensional
feature representation is that the kernel machine can be efficiently solved in the primal form through
fast linear solvers, thereby enabling to handle large-scale data. Through numerical experiments, it
has also been demonstrated that kernel algorithms constructed using the approximate kernel do not
∗

Contributed equally.

1

