Discriminative Robust Transformation Learning

Jiaji Huang

Qiang Qiu

Guillermo Sapiro

Robert Calderbank

Department of Electrical Engineering, Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
{jiaji.huang,qiang.qiu,guillermo.sapiro,robert.calderbank}@duke.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a framework for learning features that are robust to data variation, which is particularly important when only a limited number of training
samples are available. The framework makes it possible to tradeoff the discriminative value of learned features against the generalization error of the learning
algorithm. Robustness is achieved by encouraging the transform that maps data
to features to be a local isometry. This geometric property is shown to improve
(K, )-robustness, thereby providing theoretical justification for reductions in generalization error observed in experiments. The proposed optimization framework
is used to train standard learning algorithms such as deep neural networks. Experimental results obtained on benchmark datasets, such as labeled faces in the wild,
demonstrate the value of being able to balance discrimination and robustness.

1

Introduction

Learning features that are able to discriminate is a classical problem in data analysis. The basic idea
is to reduce the variance within a class while increasing it between classes. One way to implement
this is by regularizing a certain measure of the variance, while assuming some prior knowledge
about the data. For example, Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) [4] measures sample covariance
and implicitly assumes that each class is Gaussian distributed. The Low Rank Transform (LRT) [10],
instead uses nuclear norm to measure the variance and assumes that each class is near a low-rank
subspace. A different approach is to regularize the pairwise distances between data points. Examples
include the seminal work on metric learning [17] and its extensions [5, 6, 16].
While great attention has been paid to designing objectives to encourage discrimination, less effort
has been made in understanding and encouraging robustness to data variation, which is especially
important when a limited number of training samples are available. One exception is [19], which
promotes robustness by regularizing the traditional metric learning objective using prior knowledge
from an auxiliary unlabeled dataset.
In this paper we develop a general framework for balancing discrimination and robustness. Robustness is achieved by encouraging the learned data-to-features transform to be locally an isometry
within each class. We theoretically justify this approach using (K, )-robustness [1, 18] and give an
example of the proposed formulation, incorporating it in deep neural networks. Experiments validate the capability to trade-off discrimination against robustness. Our main contributions are the
following: 1) prove that locally near isometry leads to robustness; 2) propose a practical framework
that allows to robustify a wide class of learned transforms, both linear and nonlinear; 3) provide
an explicit realization of the proposed framework, achieving competitive results on difficult face
verification tasks.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 motivates the proposed study and proposes a general
formulation for learning a Discriminative Robust Transform (DRT). Section 3 provides a theoretical
justification for the framework by making an explicit connection to robustness. Section 4 gives a
1

