Bounding the Cost of Search-Based Lifted Inference

Vibhav Gogate
University of Texas At Dallas
800 W Campbell Rd, Richardson, TX 75080
vibhav.gogate@utdallas.edu

David Smith
University of Texas At Dallas
800 W Campbell Rd, Richardson, TX 75080
dbs014200@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Recently, there has been growing interest in systematic search-based and importance sampling-based lifted inference algorithms for statistical relational models
(SRMs). These lifted algorithms achieve significant complexity reductions over
their propositional counterparts by using lifting rules that leverage symmetries in
the relational representation. One drawback of these algorithms is that they use
an inference-blind representation of the search space, which makes it difficult to
efficiently pre-compute tight upper bounds on the exact cost of inference without running the algorithm to completion. In this paper, we present a principled
approach to address this problem. We introduce a lifted analogue of the propositional And/Or search space framework, which we call a lifted And/Or schematic.
Given a schematic-based representation of an SRM, we show how to efficiently
compute a tight upper bound on the time and space cost of exact inference from
a current assignment and the remaining schematic. We show how our bounding
method can be used within a lifted importance sampling algorithm, in order to
perform effective Rao-Blackwellisation, and demonstrate experimentally that the
Rao-Blackwellised version of the algorithm yields more accurate estimates on
several real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

A myriad of probabilistic logic languages have been proposed in recent years [5, 12, 17]. These
languages can express elaborate models with a compact specification. Unfortunately, performing
efficient inference in these models remains a challenge. Researchers have attacked this problem
by “lifting” propositional inference techniques; lifted algorithms identify indistinguishable random
variables and treat them as a single block at inference time, which can yield significant reductions
in complexity. Since the original proposal by Poole [15], a variety of lifted inference algorithms
have emerged. One promising approach is the class of search-based algorithms [8, 9, 16, 19, 20, 21],
which lift propositional weighted model counting [4, 18] to the first-order level by transforming the
propositional search space into a smaller lifted search space.
In general, exact lifted inference remains intractable. As a result, there has been a growing interest
in developing approximate algorithms that take advantage of symmetries. In this paper, we focus
on a class of such algorithms, called lifted sampling methods [9, 10, 13, 14, 22] and in particular on
the lifted importance sampling (LIS) algorithm [10]. LIS can be understood as a sampling analogue
of an exact lifted search algorithm called probabilistic theorem proving (PTP). PTP accepts a SRM
as input (as a Markov Logic Network (MLN) [17]), decides upon a lifted inference rule to apply
(conditioning, decomposition, partial grounding, etc.), constructs a set of reduced MLNs, recursively
calls itself on each reduced MLN in this set, and combines the returned values in an appropriate
manner. A drawback of PTP is that the MLN representation of the search space is inference unaware;
at any step in PTP, the cost of inference over the remaining model is unknown. This is problematic
because unlike (propositional) importance sampling algorithms for graphical models, which can
be Rao-Blackwellised [3] in a principled manner by sampling variables until the treewidth of the
remaining model is bounded by a small constant (called w-cutset sampling [1]), it is currently not
possible to Rao-Blackwellise LIS in a principled manner. To address these limitations, we make the
following contributions:
1

