M -Statistic for Kernel Change-Point Detection
Shuang Li, Yao Xie
H. Milton Stewart School of
Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgian Institute of Technology
sli370@gatech.edu
yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu

Hanjun Dai, Le Song
Computational Science and Engineering
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
hanjundai@gatech.edu
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Detecting the emergence of an abrupt change-point is a classic problem in statistics and machine learning. Kernel-based nonparametric statistics have been proposed for this task which make fewer assumptions on the distributions than traditional parametric approach. However, none of the existing kernel statistics has
provided a computationally efficient way to characterize the extremal behavior of
the statistic. Such characterization is crucial for setting the detection threshold, to
control the significance level in the offline case as well as the average run length
in the online case. In this paper we propose two related computationally efficient
M -statistics for kernel-based change-point detection when the amount of background data is large. A novel theoretical result of the paper is the characterization
of the tail probability of these statistics using a new technique based on change-ofmeasure. Such characterization provides us accurate detection thresholds for both
offline and online cases in computationally efficient manner, without the need to
resort to the more expensive simulations such as bootstrapping. We show that our
methods perform well in both synthetic and real world data.

1 Introduction
Detecting the emergence of abrupt change-points is a classic problem in statistics and machine
learning. Given a sequence of samples, x1 , x2 , . . . , xt , from a domain X , we are interested in
detecting a possible change-point ⌧ , such that before ⌧ , the samples xi ⇠ P i.i.d. for i  ⌧ , where
P is the so-called background distribution, and after the change-point, the samples xi ⇠ Q i.i.d. for
i ⌧ +1, where Q is a post-change distribution. Here the time horizon t can be either a fixed number
t = T0 (called an offline or fixed-sample problem), or t is not fixed and we keep getting new samples
(called a sequential or online problem). Our goal is to detect the existence of the change-point in
the offline setting, or detect the emergence of a change-point as soon as possible after it occurs in
the online setting. We will restrict our attention to detecting one change-point, which arises often in
monitoring problems. One such example is the seismic event detection [9], where we would like to
detect the onset of the event precisely in retrospect to better understand earthquakes or as quickly as
possible from the streaming data. Ideally, the detection algorithm can also be robust to distributional
assumptions as we wish to detect all kinds of seismic events that are different from the background.
Typically we have a large amount of background data (since seismic events are rare), and we want
the algorithm to exploit these data while being computationally efficient.
Classical approaches for change-point detection are usually parametric, meaning that they rely on
strong assumptions on the distribution. Nonparametric and kernel approaches are distribution free
and more robust as they provide consistent results over larger classes of data distributions (they
can possibly be less powerful in settings where a clear distributional assumption can be made).
In particular, many kernel based statistics have been proposed in the machine learning literature [5, 2, 18, 6, 7, 1] which typically work better in real data with few assumptions. However,
none of these existing kernel statistics has provided a computationally efficient way to characterize
1

