Skip-Thought Vectors

Ryan Kiros 1 , Yukun Zhu 1 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1,2 , Richard S. Zemel 1,2
Antonio Torralba 3 , Raquel Urtasun 1 , Sanja Fidler 1
University of Toronto 1
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research 2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3

Abstract
We describe an approach for unsupervised learning of a generic, distributed sentence encoder. Using the continuity of text from books, we train an encoderdecoder model that tries to reconstruct the surrounding sentences of an encoded
passage. Sentences that share semantic and syntactic properties are thus mapped
to similar vector representations. We next introduce a simple vocabulary expansion method to encode words that were not seen as part of training, allowing us
to expand our vocabulary to a million words. After training our model, we extract and evaluate our vectors with linear models on 8 tasks: semantic relatedness,
paraphrase detection, image-sentence ranking, question-type classification and 4
benchmark sentiment and subjectivity datasets. The end result is an off-the-shelf
encoder that can produce highly generic sentence representations that are robust
and perform well in practice.

1

Introduction

Developing learning algorithms for distributed compositional semantics of words has been a longstanding open problem at the intersection of language understanding and machine learning. In recent
years, several approaches have been developed for learning composition operators that map word
vectors to sentence vectors including recursive networks [1], recurrent networks [2], convolutional
networks [3, 4] and recursive-convolutional methods [5, 6] among others. All of these methods
produce sentence representations that are passed to a supervised task and depend on a class label in
order to backpropagate through the composition weights. Consequently, these methods learn highquality sentence representations but are tuned only for their respective task. The paragraph vector
of [7] is an alternative to the above models in that it can learn unsupervised sentence representations
by introducing a distributed sentence indicator as part of a neural language model. The downside is
at test time, inference needs to be performed to compute a new vector.
In this paper we abstract away from the composition methods themselves and consider an alternative loss function that can be applied with any composition operator. We consider the following
question: is there a task and a corresponding loss that will allow us to learn highly generic sentence
representations? We give evidence for this by proposing a model for learning high-quality sentence
vectors without a particular supervised task in mind. Using word vector learning as inspiration, we
propose an objective function that abstracts the skip-gram model of [8] to the sentence level. That
is, instead of using a word to predict its surrounding context, we instead encode a sentence to predict
the sentences around it. Thus, any composition operator can be substituted as a sentence encoder
and only the objective function becomes modified. Figure 1 illustrates the model. We call our model
skip-thoughts and vectors induced by our model are called skip-thought vectors.
Our model depends on having a training corpus of contiguous text. We chose to use a large collection
of novels, namely the BookCorpus dataset [9] for training our models. These are free books written
by yet unpublished authors. The dataset has books in 16 different genres, e.g., Romance (2,865
books), Fantasy (1,479), Science fiction (786), Teen (430), etc. Table 1 highlights the summary
statistics of the book corpus. Along with narratives, books contain dialogue, emotion and a wide
range of interaction between characters. Furthermore, with a large enough collection the training
set is not biased towards any particular domain or application. Table 2 shows nearest neighbours
1

