Differentially Private Subspace Clustering

Yining Wang, Yu-Xiang Wang and Aarti Singh
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon Universty, Pittsburgh, USA
{yiningwa,yuxiangw,aarti}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Subspace clustering is an unsupervised learning problem that aims at grouping
data points into multiple “clusters” so that data points in a single cluster lie approximately on a low-dimensional linear subspace. It is originally motivated by
3D motion segmentation in computer vision, but has recently been generically
applied to a wide range of statistical machine learning problems, which often involves sensitive datasets about human subjects. This raises a dire concern for
data privacy. In this work, we build on the framework of differential privacy
and present two provably private subspace clustering algorithms. We demonstrate
via both theory and experiments that one of the presented methods enjoys formal
privacy and utility guarantees; the other one asymptotically preserves differential
privacy while having good performance in practice. Along the course of the proof,
we also obtain two new provable guarantees for the agnostic subspace clustering
and the graph connectivity problem which might be of independent interests.

1

Introduction

Subspace clustering was originally proposed to solve very specific computer vision problems having
a union-of-subspace structure in the data, e.g., motion segmentation under an affine camera model
[11] or face clustering under Lambertian illumination models [15]. As it gains increasing attention
in the statistics and machine learning community, people start to use it as an agnostic learning tool in
social network [5], movie recommendation [33] and biological datasets [19]. The growing applicability of subspace clustering in these new domains inevitably raises the concern of data privacy, as
many such applications involve dealing with sensitive information. For example, [19] applies subspace clustering to identify diseases from personalized medical data and [33] in fact uses subspace
clustering as a effective tool to conduct linkage attacks on individuals in movie rating datasets. Nevertheless, privacy issues in subspace clustering have been less explored in the past literature, with
the only exception of a brief analysis and discussion in [29]. However, the algorithms and analysis
presented in [29] have several notable deficiencies. For example, data points are assumed to be incoherent and it only protects the differential privacy of any feature of a user rather than the entire user
profile in the database. The latter means it is possible for an attacker to infer with high confidence
whether a particular user is in the database, given sufficient side information.
It is perhaps reasonable why there is little work focusing on private subspace clustering, which
is by all means a challenging task. For example, a negative result in [29] shows that if utility is
measured in terms of exact clustering, then no private subspace clustering algorithm exists when
neighboring databases are allowed to differ on an entire user profile. In addition, state-of-the-art
subspace clustering methods like Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC, [11]) lack a complete analysis of
its clustering output, thanks to the notorious “graph connectivity” problem [21]. Finally, clustering
could have high global sensitivity even if only cluster centers are released, as depicted in Figure 1.
As a result, general private data releasing schemes like output perturbation [7, 8, 2] do not apply.
In this work, we present a systematic and principled treatment of differentially private subspace
clustering. To circumvent the negative result in [29], we use the perturbation of recovered low1

