Randomized Block Krylov Methods for Stronger and
Faster Approximate Singular Value Decomposition

Christopher Musco
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, EECS
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
cpmusco@mit.edu

Cameron Musco
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, EECS
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
cnmusco@mit.edu

Abstract
Since being analyzed by Rokhlin, Szlam, and Tygert [1] and popularized by
Halko, Martinsson, and Tropp [2], randomized Simultaneous Power Iteration has
become the method of choice for approximate singular value decomposition. It is
more accurate than simpler sketching algorithms, yet still converges quickly for
any matrix, independently of singular value gaps. After Õ(1/) iterations, it gives
a low-rank approximation within (1 + ) of optimal for spectral norm error.
We give the first provable runtime improvement on Simultaneous Iteration: a randomized block Krylov method, closely related to the classic Block Lanczos algo√
rithm, gives the same guarantees in just Õ(1/ ) iterations and performs substantially better experimentally. Our analysis is the first of a Krylov subspace method
that does not depend on singular value gaps, which are unreliable in practice.
Furthermore, while it is a simple accuracy benchmark, even (1 + ) error for
spectral norm low-rank approximation does not imply that an algorithm returns
high quality principal components, a major issue for data applications. We address
this problem for the first time by showing that both Block Krylov Iteration and
Simultaneous Iteration give nearly optimal PCA for any matrix. This result further
justifies their strength over non-iterative sketching methods.

1

Introduction

Any matrix A ∈ Rn×d with rank r can be written using a singular value decomposition (SVD) as
A = UΣVT . U ∈ Rn×r and V ∈ Rd×r have orthonormal columns (A’s left and right singular
vectors) and Σ ∈ Rr×r is a positive diagonal matrix containing A’s singular values: σ1 ≥ . . . ≥ σr .
A rank k partial SVD algorithm returns just the top k left or right singular vectors of A. These are
the first k columns of U or V, denoted Uk and Vk respectively.
Among countless applications, the SVD is used for optimal low-rank approximation and principal
component analysis (PCA). Specifically, for k < r, a partial SVD can be used to construct a rank k
approximation Ak such that both kA − Ak kF and kA − Ak k2 are as small as possible. We simply
set Ak = Uk UTk A. That is, Ak is A projected onto the space spanned by its top k singular vectors.
For principal component analysis, A’s top singular vector u1 provides a top principal component,
which describes the direction of greatest variance within A. The ith singular vector ui provides the
ith principal component, which is the direction of greatest variance orthogonal to all higher principal
components. Formally, denoting A’s ith singular value as σi ,
uTi AAT ui = σi2 =

max

x:kxk2 =1, x⊥uj ∀j<i

xT AAT x.

Traditional SVD algorithms are expensive, typically running in O(nd2 ) time, so there has been substantial research on randomized techniques that seek nearly optimal low-rank approximation and
1

