On the Optimality of Classifier Chain for
Multi-label Classification
Weiwei Liu
Ivor W. Tsang∗
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems
University of Technology, Sydney
liuweiwei863@gmail.com, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
To capture the interdependencies between labels in multi-label classification problems, classifier chain (CC) tries to take the multiple labels of each instance into
account under a deterministic high-order Markov Chain model. Since its performance is sensitive to the choice of label order, the key issue is how to determine
the optimal label order for CC. In this work, we first generalize the CC model over
a random label order. Then, we present a theoretical analysis of the generalization error for the proposed generalized model. Based on our results, we propose
a dynamic programming based classifier chain (CC-DP) algorithm to search the
globally optimal label order for CC and a greedy classifier chain (CC-Greedy)
algorithm to find a locally optimal CC. Comprehensive experiments on a number of real-world multi-label data sets from various domains demonstrate that our
proposed CC-DP algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art approaches and the CCGreedy algorithm achieves comparable prediction performance with CC-DP.

1

Introduction

Multi-label classification, where each instance can belong to multiple labels simultaneously, has
significantly attracted the attention of researchers as a result of its various applications, ranging from
document classification and gene function prediction, to automatic image annotation. For example,
a document can be associated with a range of topics, such as Sports, Finance and Education [1]; a
gene belongs to the functions of protein synthesis, metabolism and transcription [2]; an image may
have both beach and tree tags [3].
One popular strategy for multi-label classification is to reduce the original problem into many binary classification problems. Many works have followed this strategy. For example, binary relevance
(BR) [4] is a simple approach for multi-label learning which independently trains a binary classifier
for each label. Recently, Dembczynski et al. [5] have shown that methods of multi-label learning which explicitly capture label dependency will usually achieve better prediction performance.
Therefore, modeling the label dependency is one of the major challenges in multi-label classification problems. Many multi-label learning models [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] have been developed to
capture label dependency. Amongst them, the classifier chain (CC) model is one of the most popular
methods due to its simplicity and promising experimental results [6].
CC works as follows: One classifier is trained for each label. For the (i + 1)th label, each instance
is augmented with the 1st, 2nd, · · · , ith label as the input to train the (i + 1)th classifier. Given a
new instance to be classified, CC firstly predicts the value of the first label, then takes this instance
together with the predicted value as the input to predict the value of the next label. CC proceeds
in this way until the last label is predicted. However, here is the question: Does the label order
affect the performance of CC? Apparently yes, because different classifier chains involve different
∗

Corresponding author

1

