Weighted Theta Functions and Embeddings with
Applications to Max-Cut, Clustering and
Summarization
Fredrik D. Johansson
Computer Science & Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Göteborg, SE-412 96, Sweden
frejohk@chalmers.se

Ankani Chattoraj∗
Brain & Cognitive Sciences
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627-0268, USA
achattor@ur.rochester.edu

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India
chiru@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Devdatt Dubhashi
Computer Science & Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Göteborg, SE-412 96, Sweden
dubhashi@chalmers.se

Abstract
We introduce a unifying generalization of the Lovász theta function, and the associated geometric embedding, for graphs with weights on both nodes and edges.
We show how it can be computed exactly by semidefinite programming, and how
to approximate it using SVM computations. We show how the theta function can
be interpreted as a measure of diversity in graphs and use this idea, and the graph
embedding in algorithms for Max-Cut, correlation clustering and document summarization, all of which are well represented as problems on weighted graphs.

1

Introduction

Embedding structured data, such as graphs, in geometric spaces, is a central problem in machine
learning. In many applications, graphs are attributed with weights on the nodes and edges – information that needs to be well represented by the embedding. Lovász introduced a graph embedding
together with the famous theta function in the seminal paper [19], giving his celebrated solution to
the problem of computing the Shannon capacity of the pentagon. Indeed, Lovász’s embedding is a
very elegant and powerful representation of unweighted graphs, that has come to play a central role
in information theory, graph theory and combinatorial optimization [10, 8]. However, despite there
being at least eight different formulations of ϑ(G) for unweighted graphs, see for example [20], there
does not appear to be a version that applies to graphs with weights on the edges. This is surprising,
as it has a natural interpretation in the information theoretic problem of the original definition [19].
A version of the Lovász number for edge-weighted graphs, and a corresponding geometrical representation, could open the way to new approaches to learning problems on data represented as
similarity matrices. Here we propose such a generalization for graphs with weights on both nodes
and edges, by combining a few key observations. Recently, Jethava et al. [14] discovered an interesting connection between the original theta function and a central problem in machine learning,
namely the one class Support Vector Machine (SVM) formulation [14]. This kernel based method
gives yet another equivalent characterization of the Lovász number. Crucially, it is easily modified
to yield an equivalent characterization of the closely related Delsarte version of the Lovász number
∗

This work was performed when the author was affiliated with CSE at Chalmers University of Technology.

1

