Fast Randomized Kernel Ridge Regression with
Statistical Guarantees∗
Ahmed El Alaoui †
Michael W. Mahoney ‡
† Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
‡ Statistics and International Computer Science Institute
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720.
{elalaoui@eecs,mmahoney@stat}.berkeley.edu

Abstract
One approach to improving the running time of kernel-based methods is to build
a small sketch of the kernel matrix and use it in lieu of the full matrix in the
machine learning task of interest. Here, we describe a version of this approach
that comes with running time guarantees as well as improved guarantees on its
statistical performance. By extending the notion of statistical leverage scores to
the setting of kernel ridge regression, we are able to identify a sampling distribution that reduces the size of the sketch (i.e., the required number of columns to
be sampled) to the effective dimensionality of the problem. This latter quantity is
often much smaller than previous bounds that depend on the maximal degrees of
freedom. We give an empirical evidence supporting this fact. Our second contribution is to present a fast algorithm to quickly compute coarse approximations to
these scores in time linear in the number of samples. More precisely, the running
time of the algorithm is O(np2 ) with p only depending on the trace of the kernel
matrix and the regularization parameter. This is obtained via a variant of squared
length sampling that we adapt to the kernel setting. Lastly, we discuss how this
new notion of the leverage of a data point captures a fine notion of the difficulty
of the learning problem.

1

Introduction

We consider the low-rank approximation of symmetric positive semi-definite (SPSD) matrices that
arise in machine learning and data analysis, with an emphasis on obtaining good statistical guarantees. This is of interest primarily in connection with kernel-based machine learning methods. Recent
work in this area has focused on one or the other of two very different perspectives: an algorithmic perspective, where the focus is on running time issues and worst-case quality-of-approximation
guarantees, given a fixed input matrix; and a statistical perspective, where the goal is to obtain good
inferential properties, under some hypothesized model, by using the low-rank approximation in
place of the full kernel matrix. The recent results of Gittens and Mahoney [2] provide the strongest
example of the former, and the recent results of Bach [3] are an excellent example of the latter.
In this paper, we combine ideas from these two lines of work in order to obtain a fast randomized
kernel method with statistical guarantees that are improved relative to the state-of-the-art.
To understand our approach, recall that several papers have established the crucial importance—
from the algorithmic perspective—of the statistical leverage scores, as they capture structural nonuniformities of the input matrix and they can be used to obtain very sharp worst-case approximation
guarantees. See, e.g., work on CUR matrix decompositions [5, 6], work on the the fast approximation of the statistical leverage scores [7], and the recent review [8] for more details. Here, we
∗

A technical report version of this conference paper is available at [1].

1

