Natural Neural Networks
Guillaume Desjardins, Karen Simonyan, Razvan Pascanu, Koray Kavukcuoglu
{gdesjardins,simonyan,razp,korayk}@google.com
Google DeepMind, London

Abstract
We introduce Natural Neural Networks, a novel family of algorithms that speed up
convergence by adapting their internal representation during training to improve
conditioning of the Fisher matrix. In particular, we show a specific example that
employs a simple and efficient reparametrization of the neural network weights by
implicitly whitening the representation obtained at each layer, while preserving
the feed-forward computation of the network. Such networks can be trained efficiently via the proposed Projected Natural Gradient Descent algorithm (PRONG),
which amortizes the cost of these reparametrizations over many parameter updates and is closely related to the Mirror Descent online learning algorithm. We
highlight the benefits of our method on both unsupervised and supervised learning tasks, and showcase its scalability by training on the large-scale ImageNet
Challenge dataset.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have proven extremely successful across a broad range of applications. While their
deep and complex structure affords them a rich modeling capacity, it also creates complex dependencies between the parameters which can make learning difficult via first order stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). As long as SGD remains the workhorse of deep learning, our ability to extract highlevel representations from data may be hindered by difficult optimization, as evidenced by the boost
in performance offered by batch normalization (BN) [7] on the Inception architecture [25].
Though its adoption remains limited, the natural gradient [1] appears ideally suited to these difficult
optimization issues. By following the direction of steepest descent on the probabilistic manifold,
the natural gradient can make constant progress over the course of optimization, as measured by the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between consecutive iterates. Utilizing the proper distance measure ensures that the natural gradient is invariant to the parametrization of the model. Unfortunately,
its application has been limited due to its high computational cost. Natural gradient descent (NGD)
typically requires an estimate of the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) which is square in the number
of parameters, and worse, it requires computing its inverse. Truncated Newton methods can avoid
explicitly forming the FIM in memory [12, 15], but they require an expensive iterative procedure to
compute the inverse. Such computations can be wasteful as they do not take into account the highly
structured nature of deep models.
Inspired by recent work on model reparametrizations [17, 13], our approach starts with a simple question: can we devise a neural network architecture whose Fisher is constrained to be
identity? This is an important question, as SGD and NGD would be equivalent in the resulting
model. The main contribution of this paper is in providing a simple, theoretically justified network
reparametrization which approximates via first-order gradient descent, a block-diagonal natural gradient update over layers. Our method is computationally efficient due to the local nature of the
reparametrization, based on whitening, and the amortized nature of the algorithm. Our second contribution is in unifying many heuristics commonly used for training neural networks, under the roof
of the natural gradient, while highlighting an important connection between model reparametrizations and Mirror Descent [3]. Finally, we showcase the efficiency and the scalability of our method
1

