Differentially Private Learning
of Structured Discrete Distributions
Ilias Diakonikolas∗
University of Edinburgh

Moritz Hardt
Google Research

Ludwig Schmidt
MIT

Abstract
We investigate the problem of learning an unknown probability distribution over
a discrete population from random samples. Our goal is to design efficient algorithms that simultaneously achieve low error in total variation norm while guaranteeing Differential Privacy to the individuals of the population.
We describe a general approach that yields near sample-optimal and computationally efficient differentially private estimators for a wide range of well-studied and
natural distribution families. Our theoretical results show that for a wide variety
of structured distributions there exist private estimation algorithms that are nearly
as efficient—both in terms of sample size and running time—as their non-private
counterparts. We complement our theoretical guarantees with an experimental
evaluation. Our experiments illustrate the speed and accuracy of our private estimators on both synthetic mixture models and a large public data set.

1

Introduction

The majority of available data in modern machine learning applications come in a raw and unlabeled
form. An important class of unlabeled data is naturally modeled as samples from a probability
distribution over a very large discrete domain. Such data occurs in almost every setting imaginable—
financial transactions, seismic measurements, neurobiological data, sensor networks, and network
traffic records, to name a few. A classical problem in this context is that of density estimation or
distribution learning: Given a number of iid samples from an unknown target distribution, we want
to compute an accurate approximation of the distribution. Statistical and computational efficiency
are the primary performance criteria for a distribution learning algorithm. More specifically, we
would like to design an algorithm whose sample size requirements are information-theoretically
optimal, and whose running time is nearly linear in its sample size.
Beyond computational and statistical efficiency, however, data analysts typically have a variety
of additional criteria they must balance. In particular, data providers often need to maintain the
anonymity and privacy of those individuals whose information was collected. How can we reveal
useful statistics about a population, while still preserving the privacy of individuals? In this paper,
we study the problem of density estimation in the presence of privacy constraints, focusing on the
notion of differential privacy [1].
Our contributions. Our main findings suggest that the marginal cost of ensuring differential privacy in the context of distribution learning is only moderate. In particular, for a broad class of
shape-constrained density estimation problems, we give private estimation algorithms that are nearly
as efficient—both in terms of sample size and running time—as a nearly optimal non-private baseline. As our learning algorithm approximates the underlying distribution up to small error in total
variation norm, all crucial properties of the underlying distribution are preserved. In particular, the
analyst is free to compose our learning algorithm with an arbitrary non-private analysis.
∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

1

