Accelerated Mirror Descent
in Continuous and Discrete Time
Walid Krichene
UC Berkeley

Alexandre M. Bayen
UC Berkeley

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley and QUT

walid@eecs.berkeley.edu

bayen@berkeley.edu

bartlett@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study accelerated mirror descent dynamics in continuous and discrete time.
Combining the original continuous-time motivation of mirror descent with a recent ODE interpretation of Nesterov’s accelerated method, we propose a family of
continuous-time descent dynamics for convex functions with Lipschitz gradients,
such that the solution trajectories converge to the optimum at a O(1/t2 ) rate. We
then show that a large family of first-order accelerated methods can be obtained as
a discretization of the ODE, and these methods converge at a O(1/k 2 ) rate. This
connection between accelerated mirror descent and the ODE provides an intuitive
approach to the design and analysis of accelerated first-order algorithms.

1

Introduction

We consider a convex optimization problem, minimizex∈X f (x), where X ⊆ Rn is convex and
closed, f is a C 1 convex function, and ∇f is assumed to be Lf -Lipschitz. Let f ? be the minimum
of f on X . Many convex optimization methods can be interpreted as the discretization of an ordinary
differential equation, the solutions of which are guaranteed to converge to the set of minimizers. Perhaps the simplest such method is gradient descent, given by the iteration x(k+1) = x(k) −s∇f (x(k) )
for some step size s, which can be interpreted as the discretization of the ODE Ẋ(t) = −∇f (X(t)),
with discretization step s. The well-established theory of ordinary differential equations can provide
guidance in the design and analysis of optimization algorithms, and has been used for unconstrained
optimization [8, 7, 13], constrained optimization [27] and stochastic optimization [25]. In particular,
proving convergence of the solution trajectories of an ODE can often be achieved using simple and
elegant Lyapunov arguments. The ODE can then be carefully discretized to obtain an optimization algorithm for which the convergence rate can be analyzed by using an analogous Lyapunov
argument in discrete time.
In this article, we focus on two families of first-order methods: Nesterov’s accelerated method [22],
and Nemirovski’s mirror descent method [19]. First-order methods have become increasingly important for large-scale optimization problems that arise in machine learning applications. Nesterov’s
accelerated method [22] has been applied to many problems and extended in a number of ways, see
for example [23, 20, 21, 4]. The mirror descent method also provides an important generalization of the gradient descent method to non-Euclidean geometries, as discussed in [19, 3], and has
many applications in convex optimization [6, 5, 12, 15], as well as online learning [9, 11]. An intuitive understanding of these methods is of particular importance for the design and analysis of
new algorithms. Although Nesterov’s method has been notoriously hard to explain intuitively [14],
progress has been made recently: in [28], Su et al. give an ODE interpretation of Nesterov’s method.
However, this interpretation is restricted to the original method [22], and does not apply to its extensions to non-Euclidean geometries. In [1], Allen-Zhu and Orecchia give another interpretation
of Nesterov’s method, as performing, at each iteration, a convex combination of a mirror step and a
gradient step. Although it covers a broader family of algorithms (including non-Euclidean geometries), this interpretation still requires an involved analysis, and lacks the simplicity and elegance of
1

