Regularized EM Algorithms: A Unified Framework
and Statistical Guarantees
Constantine Caramanis
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Xinyang Yi
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
yixy@utexas.edu

Abstract
Latent models are a fundamental modeling tool in machine learning applications,
but they present significant computational and analytical challenges. The popular
EM algorithm and its variants, is a much used algorithmic tool; yet our rigorous
understanding of its performance is highly incomplete. Recently, work in [1] has
demonstrated that for an important class of problems, EM exhibits linear local
convergence. In the high-dimensional setting, however, the M -step may not be
well defined. We address precisely this setting through a unified treatment using
regularization. While regularization for high-dimensional problems is by now
well understood, the iterative EM algorithm requires a careful balancing of making
progress towards the solution while identifying the right structure (e.g., sparsity or
low-rank). In particular, regularizing the M -step using the state-of-the-art highdimensional prescriptions (e.g., à la [19]) is not guaranteed to provide this balance.
Our algorithm and analysis are linked in a way that reveals the balance between
optimization and statistical errors. We specialize our general framework to sparse
gaussian mixture models, high-dimensional mixed regression, and regression with
missing variables, obtaining statistical guarantees for each of these examples.

1

Introduction

We give general conditions for the convergence of the EM method for high-dimensional estimation.
We specialize these conditions to several problems of interest, including high-dimensional sparse
and low-rank mixed regression, sparse gaussian mixture models, and regression with missing covariates. As we explain below, the key problem in the high-dimensional setting is the M -step. A natural
idea is to modify this step via appropriate regularization, yet choosing the appropriate sequence of
regularizers is a critical problem. As we know from the theory of regularized M-estimators (e.g.,
[19]) the regularizer should be chosen proportional to the target estimation error. For EM, however,
the target estimation error changes at each step.
The main contribution of our work is technical: we show how to perform this iterative regularization.
We show that the regularization sequence must be chosen so that it converges to a quantity controlled
by the ultimate estimation error. In existing work, the estimation error is given by the relationship
between the population and empirical M -step operators, but this too is not well defined in the highdimensional setting. Thus a key step, related both to our algorithm and its convergence analysis, is
obtaining a different characterization of statistical error for the high-dimensional setting.
Background and Related Work
EM (e.g., [8, 12]) is a general algorithmic approach for handling latent variable models (including
mixtures), popular largely because it is typically computationally highly scalable, and easy to implement. On the flip side, despite a fairly long history of studying EM in theory (e.g., [12, 17, 21]),
1

