Subset Selection by Pareto Optimization

Chao Qian
Yang Yu
Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 210023, China
{qianc,yuy,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Selecting the optimal subset from a large set of variables is a fundamental problem
in various learning tasks such as feature selection, sparse regression, dictionary
learning, etc. In this paper, we propose the POSS approach which employs evolutionary Pareto optimization to find a small-sized subset with good performance.
We prove that for sparse regression, POSS is able to achieve the best-so-far theoretically guaranteed approximation performance efficiently. Particularly, for the
Exponential Decay subclass, POSS is proven to achieve an optimal solution. Empirical study verifies the theoretical results, and exhibits the superior performance
of POSS to greedy and convex relaxation methods.

1

Introduction

Subset selection is to select a subset of size k from a total set of n variables for optimizing some
criterion. This problem arises in many applications, e.g., feature selection, sparse learning and
compressed sensing. The subset selection problem is, however, generally NP-hard [13, 4]. Previous
employed techniques can be mainly categorized into two branches, greedy algorithms and convex
relaxation methods. Greedy algorithms iteratively select or abandon one variable that makes the
criterion currently optimized [9, 19], which are however limited due to its greedy behavior. Convex
relaxation methods usually replace the set size constraint (i.e., the `0 -norm) with convex constraints,
e.g., the `1 -norm constraint [18] and the elastic net penalty [29]; then find the optimal solutions to
the relaxed problem, which however could be distant to the true optimum.
Pareto optimization solves a problem by reformulating it as a bi-objective optimization problem
and employing a bi-objective evolutionary algorithm, which has significantly developed recently in
theoretical foundation [22, 15] and applications [16]. This paper proposes the POSS (Pareto Optimization for Subset Selection) method, which treats subset selection as a bi-objective optimization
problem that optimizes some given criterion and the subset size simultaneously. To investigate the
performance of POSS, we study a representative example of subset selection, the sparse regression.
The subset selection problem in sparse regression is to best estimate a predictor variable by linear
regression [12], where the quality of estimation is usually measured by the mean squared error, or
equivalently, the squared multiple correlation R2 [6, 11]. Gilbert et al. [9] studied the two-phased
approach with orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP), and proved the multiplicative approximation
guarantee 1 + Θ(µk 2 ) for the mean squared error, when the coherence µ (i.e., the maximum correlation between any pair of observation variables) is O(1/k). This approximation bound was later
improved by [20, 19]. Under the same small coherence condition, Das and Kempe [2] analyzed the
forward regression (FR) algorithm [12] and obtained an approximation guarantee 1 − Θ(µk) for R2 .
These results however will break down when µ ∈ w(1/k). By introducing the submodularity ratio
γ, Das and Kempe [3] proved the approximation guarantee 1 − e−γ on R2 by the FR algorithm;
this guarantee is considered to be the strongest since it can be applied with any coherence. Note
that sparse regression is similar to the problem of sparse recovery [7, 25, 21, 17], but they are for
1

