Grammar as a Foreign Language

Oriol Vinyals∗
Google
vinyals@google.com
Terry Koo
Google
terrykoo@google.com

Lukasz Kaiser∗
Google
lukaszkaiser@google.com
Slav Petrov
Google
slav@google.com

Ilya Sutskever
Google
ilyasu@google.com

Geoffrey Hinton
Google
geoffhinton@google.com

Abstract
Syntactic constituency parsing is a fundamental problem in natural language processing and has been the subject of intensive research and engineering for decades.
As a result, the most accurate parsers are domain specific, complex, and inefficient. In this paper we show that the domain agnostic attention-enhanced
sequence-to-sequence model achieves state-of-the-art results on the most widely
used syntactic constituency parsing dataset, when trained on a large synthetic corpus that was annotated using existing parsers. It also matches the performance
of standard parsers when trained only on a small human-annotated dataset, which
shows that this model is highly data-efficient, in contrast to sequence-to-sequence
models without the attention mechanism. Our parser is also fast, processing over
a hundred sentences per second with an unoptimized CPU implementation.

1

Introduction

Syntactic constituency parsing is a fundamental problem in linguistics and natural language processing that has a wide range of applications. This problem has been the subject of intense research
for decades, and as a result, there exist highly accurate domain-specific parsers. The computational
requirements of traditional parsers are cubic in sentence length, and while linear-time shift-reduce
constituency parsers improved in accuracy in recent years, they never matched state-of-the-art. Furthermore, standard parsers have been designed with parsing in mind; the concept of a parse tree is
deeply ingrained into these systems, which makes these methods inapplicable to other problems.
Recently, Sutskever et al. [1] introduced a neural network model for solving the general sequenceto-sequence problem, and Bahdanau et al. [2] proposed a related model with an attention mechanism
that makes it capable of handling long sequences well. Both models achieve state-of-the-art results
on large scale machine translation tasks (e.g., [3, 4]). Syntactic constituency parsing can be formulated as a sequence-to-sequence problem if we linearize the parse tree (cf. Figure 2), so we can
apply these models to parsing as well.
Our early experiments focused on the sequence-to-sequence model of Sutskever et al. [1]. We found
this model to work poorly when we trained it on standard human-annotated parsing datasets (1M
tokens), so we constructed an artificial dataset by labelling a large corpus with the BerkeleyParser.
∗

Equal contribution

1

