Sparse Linear Programming via
Primal and Dual Augmented Coordinate Descent

Ian E.H. Yen ∗

Kai Zhong ∗ Cho-Jui Hsieh † Pradeep Ravikumar ∗ Inderjit S. Dhillon ∗
†
University of Texas at Austin
University of California at Davis
∗
{ianyen,pradeepr,inderjit}@cs.utexas.edu zhongkai@ices.utexas.edu
†
chohsieh@ucdavis.edu
∗

Abstract
Over the past decades, Linear Programming (LP) has been widely used in different
areas and considered as one of the mature technologies in numerical optimization.
However, the complexity offered by state-of-the-art algorithms (i.e. interior-point
method and primal, dual simplex methods) is still unsatisfactory for problems in
machine learning with huge number of variables and constraints. In this paper,
we investigate a general LP algorithm based on the combination of Augmented
Lagrangian and Coordinate Descent (AL-CD), giving an iteration complexity of
O((log(1/))2 ) with O(nnz(A)) cost per iteration, where nnz(A) is the number
of non-zeros in the m × n constraint matrix A, and in practice, one can further reduce cost per iteration to the order of non-zeros in columns (rows) corresponding
to the active primal (dual) variables through an active-set strategy. The algorithm
thus yields a tractable alternative to standard LP methods for large-scale problems
of sparse solutions and nnz(A)  mn. We conduct experiments on large-scale
LP instances from `1 -regularized multi-class SVM, Sparse Inverse Covariance Estimation, and Nonnegative Matrix Factorization, where the proposed approach
finds solutions of 10−3 precision orders of magnitude faster than state-of-the-art
implementations of interior-point and simplex methods. 1

1

Introduction

Linear Programming (LP) has been studied since the early 19th century and has become one of
the representative tools of numerical optimization with wide applications in machine learning such
as `1 -regularized SVM [1], MAP inference [2], nonnegative matrix factorization [3], exemplarbased clustering [4, 5], sparse inverse covariance estimation [6], and Markov Decision Process [7].
However, as the demand for scalability keeps increasing, the scalability of existing LP solvers has
become unsatisfactory. In particular, most algorithms in machine learning targeting large-scale data
have a complexity linear to the data size [8, 9, 10], while the complexity of state-of-the-art LP
solvers (i.e. Interior-Point method and Primal, Dual Simplex methods) is still at least quadratic in
the number of variables or constraints [11].
The quadratic complexity comes from the need to solve each linear system exactly in both simplex
and interior point method. In particular, the simplex method, when traversing from one corner point
to another, requires solution to a linear system that has dimension linear to the number of variables
or constraints, while in an Interior-Point method, finding the Newton direction requires solving a
linear system of similar size. While there are sparse variants of LU and Cholesky decomposition that
can utilize the sparsity pattern of matrix in a linear system, the worst-case complexity for solving
such system is at least quadratic to the dimension except for very special cases such as a tri-diagonal
or band-structured matrix.
1

Our solver has been released here: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/˜ianyen/LPsparse/

1

