Action-Conditional Video Prediction
using Deep Networks in Atari Games

Junhyuk Oh

Xiaoxiao Guo Honglak Lee Richard Lewis
Satinder Singh
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
{junhyuk,guoxiao,honglak,rickl,baveja}@umich.edu

Abstract
Motivated by vision-based reinforcement learning (RL) problems, in particular
Atari games from the recent benchmark Aracade Learning Environment (ALE),
we consider spatio-temporal prediction problems where future image-frames depend on control variables or actions as well as previous frames. While not composed of natural scenes, frames in Atari games are high-dimensional in size, can
involve tens of objects with one or more objects being controlled by the actions
directly and many other objects being influenced indirectly, can involve entry and
departure of objects, and can involve deep partial observability. We propose and
evaluate two deep neural network architectures that consist of encoding, actionconditional transformation, and decoding layers based on convolutional neural
networks and recurrent neural networks. Experimental results show that the proposed architectures are able to generate visually-realistic frames that are also useful for control over approximately 100-step action-conditional futures in some
games. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to make and evaluate
long-term predictions on high-dimensional video conditioned by control inputs.

1

Introduction

Over the years, deep learning approaches (see [5, 26] for survey) have shown great success in many
visual perception problems (e.g., [16, 7, 32, 9]). However, modeling videos (building a generative
model) is still a very challenging problem because it often involves high-dimensional natural-scene
data with complex temporal dynamics. Thus, recent studies have mostly focused on modeling simple
video data, such as bouncing balls or small patches, where the next frame is highly-predictable given
the previous frames [29, 20, 19]. In many applications, however, future frames depend not only on
previous frames but also on control or action variables. For example, the first-person-view in a vehicle is affected by wheel-steering and acceleration. The camera observation of a robot is similarly
dependent on its movement and changes of its camera angle. More generally, in vision-based reinforcement learning (RL) problems, learning to predict future images conditioned on actions amounts
to learning a model of the dynamics of the agent-environment interaction, an essential component
of model-based approaches to RL. In this paper, we focus on Atari games from the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [1] as a source of challenging action-conditional video modeling problems.
While not composed of natural scenes, frames in Atari games are high-dimensional, can involve tens
of objects with one or more objects being controlled by the actions directly and many other objects
being influenced indirectly, can involve entry and departure of objects, and can involve deep partial
observability. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to make and evaluate long-term
predictions on high-dimensional images conditioned by control inputs.
This paper proposes, evaluates, and contrasts two spatio-temporal prediction architectures based on
deep networks that incorporate action variables (See Figure 1). Our experimental results show that
our architectures are able to generate realistic frames over 100-step action-conditional future frames
without diverging in some Atari games. We show that the representations learned by our architectures 1) approximately capture natural similarity among actions, and 2) discover which objects are
directly controlled by the agent’s actions and which are only indirectly influenced or not controlled.
We evaluated the usefulness of our architectures for control in two ways: 1) by replacing emulator
frames with predicted frames in a previously-learned model-free controller (DQN; DeepMind’s state
1

