LASSO with Non-linear Measurements is Equivalent
to One With Linear Measurements
Ehsan Abbasi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech
eabbasi@caltech.edu

Christos Thrampoulidis,
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech
cthrampo@caltech.edu

Babak Hassibi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech
hassibi@caltech.edu ∗

Abstract
Consider estimating an unknown, but structured (e.g. sparse, low-rank, etc.), signal x0 ∈ Rn from a vector y ∈ Rm of measurements of the form yi = gi (ai T x0 ),
where the ai ’s are the rows of a known measurement matrix A, and, g(·) is a
(potentially unknown) nonlinear and random link-function. Such measurement
functions could arise in applications where the measurement device has nonlinearities and uncertainties. It could also arise by design, e.g., gi (x) = sign(x + zi ),
corresponds to noisy 1-bit quantized measurements. Motivated by the classical
work of Brillinger, and more recent work of Plan and Vershynin, we estimate x0
via solving the Generalized-LASSO, i.e., x̂ := arg minx ky − Ax0 k2 + λf (x)
for some regularization parameter λ > 0 and some (typically non-smooth) convex
regularizer f (·) that promotes the structure of x0 , e.g. `1 -norm, nuclear-norm,
etc. While this approach seems to naively ignore the nonlinear function g(·), both
Brillinger (in the non-constrained case) and Plan and Vershynin have shown that,
when the entries of A are iid standard normal, this is a good estimator of x0 up to
a constant of proportionality µ, which only depends on g(·). In this work, we considerably strengthen these results by obtaining explicit expressions forkx̂−µx0 k2 ,
for the regularized Generalized-LASSO, that are asymptotically precise when m
and n grow large. A main result is that the estimation performance of the Generalized LASSO with non-linear measurements is asymptotically the same as one
whose measurements are linear yi = µai T x0 + σzi , with µ = Eγg(γ) and
σ 2 = E(g(γ) − µγ)2 , and, γ standard normal. To the best of our knowledge,
the derived expressions on the estimation performance are the first-known precise
results in this context. One interesting consequence of our result is that the optimal quantizer of the measurements that minimizes the estimation error of the
Generalized LASSO is the celebrated Lloyd-Max quantizer.

1

Introduction

Non-linear Measurements. Consider the problem of estimating an unknown signal vector x0 ∈ Rn
from a vector y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , ym )T of m measurements taking the following form:
yi = gi (aTi x0 ), i = 1, 2, . . . , m.
(1)
Here, each ai represents a (known) measurement vector. The gi ’s are independent copies of a
(generically random) link function g. For instance, gi (x) = x + zi , with say zi being normally
∗

This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants CNS-0932428, CCF-1018927, CCF-1423663 and
CCF-1409204, by a grant from Qualcomm Inc., by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory through the President and Directors Fund, by King
Abdulaziz University, and by King Abdullah University of Science and Technology.

1

