Combinatorial Cascading Bandits
Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA
kveton@adobe.com

Zheng Wen
Yahoo Labs
Sunnyvale, CA
zhengwen@yahoo-inc.com

Azin Ashkan
Technicolor Research
Los Altos, CA
azin.ashkan@technicolor.com

Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
szepesva@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract
We propose combinatorial cascading bandits, a class of partial monitoring problems where at each step a learning agent chooses a tuple of ground items subject
to constraints and receives a reward if and only if the weights of all chosen items
are one. The weights of the items are binary, stochastic, and drawn independently
of each other. The agent observes the index of the first chosen item whose weight
is zero. This observation model arises in network routing, for instance, where the
learning agent may only observe the first link in the routing path which is down,
and blocks the path. We propose a UCB-like algorithm for solving our problems,
CombCascade; and prove gap-dependent and gap-free upper bounds on its n-step
regret. Our proofs build on recent work in stochastic combinatorial semi-bandits
but also address two novel challenges of our setting, a non-linear reward function
and partial observability. We evaluate CombCascade on two real-world problems
and show that it performs well even when our modeling assumptions are violated.
We also demonstrate that our setting requires a new learning algorithm.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization [16] has many real-world applications. In this work, we study a class of
combinatorial optimization problems with a binary objective function that returns one if and only if
the weights of all chosen items are one. The weights of the items are binary, stochastic, and drawn
independently of each other. Many popular optimization problems can be formulated in our setting.
Network routing is a problem of choosing a routing path in a computer network that maximizes the
probability that all links in the chosen path are up. Recommendation is a problem of choosing a list
of items that minimizes the probability that none of the recommended items are attractive. Both of
these problems are closely related and can be solved using similar techniques (Section 2.3).
Combinatorial cascading bandits are a novel framework for online learning of the aforementioned
problems where the distribution over the weights of items is unknown. Our goal is to maximize the
expected cumulative reward of a learning agent in n steps. Our learning problem is challenging for
two main reasons. First, the reward function is non-linear in the weights of chosen items. Second,
we only observe the index of the first chosen item with a zero weight. This kind of feedback arises
frequently in network routing, for instance, where the learning agent may only observe the first link
in the routing path which is down, and blocks the path. This feedback model was recently proposed
in the so-called cascading bandits [10]. The main difference in our work is that the feasible set can
be arbitrary. The feasible set in cascading bandits is a uniform matroid.
1

