Robust Gaussian Graphical Modeling with the
Trimmed Graphical Lasso

Aurélie C. Lozano
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
aclozano@us.ibm.com

Eunho Yang
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
eunhyang@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs) are popular tools for studying network structures. However, many modern applications such as gene network discovery and
social interactions analysis often involve high-dimensional noisy data with outliers or heavier tails than the Gaussian distribution. In this paper, we propose the
Trimmed Graphical Lasso for robust estimation of sparse GGMs. Our method
guards against outliers by an implicit trimming mechanism akin to the popular
Least Trimmed Squares method used for linear regression. We provide a rigorous
statistical analysis of our estimator in the high-dimensional setting. In contrast,
existing approaches for robust sparse GGMs estimation lack statistical guarantees. Our theoretical results are complemented by experiments on simulated and
real gene expression data which further demonstrate the value of our approach.

1

Introduction

Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) form a powerful class of statistical models for representing distributions over a set of variables [1]. These models employ undirected graphs to encode conditional
independence assumptions among the variables, which is particularly convenient for exploring network structures. GGMs are widely used in variety of domains, including computational biology [2],
natural language processing [3], image processing [4, 5, 6], statistical physics [7], and spatial statistics [8]. In many modern applications, the number of variables p can exceed the number of observations n. For instance, the number of genes in microarray data is typically larger than the sample
size. In such high-dimensional settings, sparsity constraints are particularly pertinent for estimating GGMs, as they encourage only a few parameters to be non-zero and induce graphs with few
edges. The most widely used estimator among others (see e.g. [9]) minimizes the Gaussian negative
log-likelihood regularized by the `1 norm of the entries (or the off-diagonal entries) of the precision
matrix (see [10, 11, 12]). This estimator enjoys strong statistical guarantees (see e.g. [13]). The
corresponding optimization problem is a log-determinant program that can be solved with interior
point methods [14] or by co-ordinate descent algorithms [11, 12]. Alternatively neighborhood selection [15, 16] can be employed to estimate conditional independence relationships separately for
each node in the graph, via Lasso linear regression, [17]. Under certain assumptions, the sparse
GGM structure can still be recovered even under high-dimensional settings.
The aforementioned approaches rest on a fundamental assumption: the multivariate normality of the
observations. However, outliers and corruption are frequently encountered in high-dimensional data
(see e.g. [18] for gene expression data). Contamination of a few observations can drastically affect
the quality of model estimation. It is therefore imperative to devise procedures that can cope with
observations deviating from the model assumption. Despite this fact, little attention has been paid to
robust estimation of high-dimensional graphical models. Relevant work includes [19], which leverages multivariate t-distributions for robustified inference and the EM algorithm. They also propose
an alternative t-model which adds flexibility to the classical t but requires the use of Monte Carlo
EM or variational approximation as the likelihood function is not available explicitly. Another per1

