Rate-Agnostic (Causal) Structure Learning

David Danks
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
ddanks@cmu.edu

Sergey Plis
The Mind Research Network,
Albuquerque, NM
s.m.plis@gmail.com

Vince Calhoun
The Mind Research Network
ECE Dept., University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM
vcalhoun@mrn.org

Cynthia Freeman
The Mind Research Network,
CS Dept., University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM
cynthiaw2004@gmail.com

Abstract
Causal structure learning from time series data is a major scientific challenge. Extant algorithms assume that measurements occur sufficiently quickly; more precisely, they assume approximately equal system and measurement timescales. In
many domains, however, measurements occur at a significantly slower rate than
the underlying system changes, but the size of the timescale mismatch is often
unknown. This paper develops three causal structure learning algorithms, each
of which discovers all dynamic causal graphs that explain the observed measurement data, perhaps given undersampling. That is, these algorithms all learn causal
structure in a “rate-agnostic” manner: they do not assume any particular relation
between the measurement and system timescales. We apply these algorithms to
data from simulations to gain insight into the challenge of undersampling.

1

Introduction

Dynamic causal systems are a major focus of scientific investigation in diverse domains, including neuroscience, economics, meteorology, and education. One significant limitation in all of these
sciences is the difficulty of measuring the relevant variables at an appropriate timescale for the particular scientific domain. This challenge is particularly salient in neuroimaging: standard fMRI
experiments sample the brain’s bloodflow approximately every one or two seconds, though the underlying neural activity (i.e., the major driver of bloodflow) occurs much more rapidly. Moreover,
the precise timescale of the underlying causal system is unknown; it is almost certainly faster than
the fMRI measurements, but it is unknown how much faster.
In this paper, we aim to learn the causal structure of a system that evolves at timescale τS , given
measurements at timescale τM . We focus on the case in which τS is faster than τM to an unknown
degree. We assume that the underlying causal structure can be modeled as a directed graphical
model G without simultaneous influence. There has been substantial work on modeling the statistics of time series, but relatively less on learning causal structure, and almost all of that assumes that
the measurement and causal timescales match [1–5]. The problem of causal learning from “undersampled” time series data was explicitly addressed by [6, 7], but they assumed that the degree of
undersampling—i.e., the ratio of τS to τM —was both known and small. In contrast, we focus on
the significantly harder challenge of causal learning when that ratio is unknown.
We provide a formal specification of the problem and representational framework in Section 2. We
then present three different Rate-Agnostic Structure Learning (RASL) algorithms in Section 3. We
finish in Section 4 by exploring their performance on synthetic data.
1

