Algorithms with Logarithmic or Sublinear Regret for
Constrained Contextual Bandits
Huasen Wu
University of California at Davis
hswu@ucdavis.edu

R. Srikant
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
rsrikant@illinois.edu

Xin Liu
University of California at Davis
liu@cs.ucdavis.edu

Chong Jiang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
jiang17@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study contextual bandits with budget and time constraints, referred to as constrained contextual bandits. The time and budget constraints significantly complicate the exploration and exploitation tradeoff because they introduce complex
coupling among contexts over time. To gain insight, we first study unit-cost systems with known context distribution. When the expected rewards are known, we
develop an approximation of the oracle, referred to Adaptive-Linear-Programming
(ALP), which achieves near-optimality and only requires the ordering of expected
rewards. With these highly desirable features, we then combine ALP with the
upper-confidence-bound (UCB) method in the general case where the expected
rewards are unknown a priori. We show that the proposed UCB-ALP algorithm
achieves logarithmic regret except for certain boundary cases. Further, we design algorithms and obtain similar regret bounds for more general systems with
unknown context distribution and heterogeneous costs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that shows how to achieve logarithmic regret in constrained contextual bandits. Moreover, this work also sheds light on the study of
computationally efficient algorithms for general constrained contextual bandits.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit problem [1, 2, 3] is an important extension of the classic multi-armed bandit
(MAB) problem [4], where the agent can observe a set of features, referred to as context, before
making a decision. After the random arrival of a context, the agent chooses an action and receives
a random reward with expectation depending on both the context and action. To maximize the
total reward, the agent needs to make a careful tradeoff between taking the best action based on the
historical performance (exploitation) and discovering the potentially better alternative actions under
a given context (exploration). This model has attracted much attention as it fits the personalized
service requirement in many applications such as clinical trials, online recommendation, and online
hiring in crowdsourcing. Existing works try to reduce the regret of contextual bandits by leveraging
the structure of the context-reward models such as linearity [5] or similarity [6], and more recent
work [7] focuses on computationally efficient algorithms with minimum regret. For Markovian
context arrivals, algorithms such as UCRL [8] for more general reinforcement learning problem can
be used to achieve logarithmic regret.
However, traditional contextual bandit models do not capture an important characteristic of real
systems: in addition to time, there is usually a cost associated with the resource consumed by each
action and the total cost is limited by a budget in many applications. Taking crowdsourcing [9] as
an example, the budget constraint for a given set of tasks will limit the number of workers that an
employer can hire. Another example is the clinical trials [10], where each treatment is usually costly
and the budget of a trial is limited. Although budget constraints have been studied in non-contextual
bandits where logarithmic or sublinear regret is achieved [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], as we will see
later, these results are inapplicable in the case with observable contexts.
1

