On Elicitation Complexity

Rafael Frongillo
University of Colorado, Boulder

Ian A. Kash
Microsoft Research

raf@colorado.edu

iankash@microsoft.com

Abstract
Elicitation is the study of statistics or properties which are computable via empirical risk minimization. While several recent papers have approached the general question of which properties are elicitable, we suggest that this is the wrong
question—all properties are elicitable by first eliciting the entire distribution or
data set, and thus the important question is how elicitable. Specifically, what is
the minimum number of regression parameters needed to compute the property?
Building on previous work, we introduce a new notion of elicitation complexity
and lay the foundations for a calculus of elicitation. We establish several general
results and techniques for proving upper and lower bounds on elicitation complexity. These results provide tight bounds for eliciting the Bayes risk of any loss, a
large class of properties which includes spectral risk measures and several new
properties of interest.

1

Introduction

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a domininant framework for supervised machine learning,
and a key component of many learning algorithms. A statistic or property is simply a functional
assigning a vector of values to each distribution. We say that such a property is elicitable, if for
some loss function it can be represented as the unique minimizer of the expected loss under the
distribution. Thus, the study of which properties are elicitable can be viewed as the study of which
statistics are computable via ERM [1, 2, 3].
The study of property elicitation began in statistics [4, 5, 6, 7], and is gaining momentum in machine
learning [8, 1, 2, 3], economics [9, 10], and most recently, finance [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. A sequence of
papers starting with Savage [4] has looked at the full characterization of losses which elicit the mean
of a distribution, or more generally the expectation of a vector-valued random variable [16, 3]. The
case of real-valued properties is also now well in hand [9, 1]. The general vector-valued case is still
generally open, with recent progress in [3, 2, 15]. Recently, a parallel thread of research has been
underway in finance, to understand which financial risk measures, among several in use or proposed
to help regulate the risks of financial institutions, are computable via regression, i.e., elicitable (cf.
references above). More often than not, these papers have concluded that most risk measures under
consideration are not elicitable, notable exceptions being generalized quantiles (e.g. value-at-risk,
expectiles) and expected utility [13, 12].
Throughout the growing momentum of the study of elicitation, one question has been central: which
properties are elicitable? It is clear, however, that all properties are “indirectly” elicitable if one first
elicits the distribution using a standard proper scoring rule. Therefore, in the present work, we
suggest replacing this question with a more nuanced one: how elicitable are various properties?
Specifically, heeding the suggestion of Gneiting [7], we adapt to our setting the notion of elicitation
complexity introduced by Lambert et al. [17], which captures how many parameters one needs to
maintain in an ERM procedure for the property in question. Indeed, if a real-valued property is
found not to be elicitable, such as the variance, one should not abandon it, but rather ask how many
parameters are required to compute it via ERM.
1

