Tensorizing Neural Networks

Alexander Novikov1,4
Dmitry Podoprikhin1
Anton Osokin2
Dmitry Vetrov1,3
1
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
2
INRIA, SIERRA project-team, Paris, France
3
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
4
Institute of Numerical Mathematics of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
novikov@bayesgroup.ru podoprikhin.dmitry@gmail.com
anton.osokin@inria.fr vetrovd@yandex.ru

Abstract
Deep neural networks currently demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in several domains. At the same time, models of this class are very demanding in terms
of computational resources. In particular, a large amount of memory is required
by commonly used fully-connected layers, making it hard to use the models on
low-end devices and stopping the further increase of the model size. In this paper
we convert the dense weight matrices of the fully-connected layers to the Tensor
Train [17] format such that the number of parameters is reduced by a huge factor
and at the same time the expressive power of the layer is preserved. In particular,
for the Very Deep VGG networks [21] we report the compression factor of the
dense weight matrix of a fully-connected layer up to 200000 times leading to the
compression factor of the whole network up to 7 times.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks currently demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in many domains of largescale machine learning, such as computer vision, speech recognition, text processing, etc. These
advances have become possible because of algorithmic advances, large amounts of available data,
and modern hardware. For example, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13, 21] show by a large
margin superior performance on the task of image classification. These models have thousands of
nodes and millions of learnable parameters and are trained using millions of images [19] on powerful
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).
The necessity of expensive hardware and long processing time are the factors that complicate the
application of such models on conventional desktops and portable devices. Consequently, a large
number of works tried to reduce both hardware requirements (e. g. memory demands) and running
times (see Sec. 2).
In this paper we consider probably the most frequently used layer of the neural networks: the fullyconnected layer. This layer consists in a linear transformation of a high-dimensional input signal to a
high-dimensional output signal with a large dense matrix defining the transformation. For example,
in modern CNNs the dimensions of the input and output signals of the fully-connected layers are
of the order of thousands, bringing the number of parameters of the fully-connected layers up to
millions.
We use a compact multiliniear format – Tensor-Train (TT-format) [17] – to represent the dense
weight matrix of the fully-connected layers using few parameters while keeping enough flexibility to perform signal transformations. The resulting layer is compatible with the existing training
algorithms for neural networks because all the derivatives required by the back-propagation algorithm [18] can be computed using the properties of the TT-format. We call the resulting layer a
TT-layer and refer to a network with one or more TT-layers as TensorNet.
We apply our method to popular network architectures proposed for several datasets of different
scales: MNIST [15], CIFAR-10 [12], ImageNet [13]. We experimentally show that the networks
1

