Fast and Memory Optimal Low-Rank Matrix
Approximation

Se-Young Yun
MSR, Cambridge
seyoung.yun@inria.fr

Marc Lelarge ∗
Inria & ENS
marc.lelarge@ens.fr

Alexandre Proutiere †
KTH, EE School / ACL
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the problem of constructing a near-optimal rank k approximation of a matrix M ∈ [0, 1]m×n under the streaming data model where the
columns of M are revealed sequentially. We present SLA (Streaming Low-rank
Approximation),
an algorithm that is asymptotically accurate, when ksk+1 (M ) =
√
o( mn) where sk+1 (M ) is the (k + 1)-th largest singular value of M . This
means that its average mean-square error converges to 0 as m and n grow large
(i.e., kM̂ (k) −M (k) k2F = o(mn) with high probability, where M̂ (k) and M (k) denote the output of SLA and the optimal rank k approximation of M , respectively).
Our algorithm makes one pass on the data if the columns of M are revealed in
a random order, and two passes if the columns of M arrive in an arbitrary order.
To reduce its memory footprint and complexity, SLA uses random sparsification,
and samples each entry of M with a small probability δ. In turn, SLA is memory
optimal as its required memory space scales as k(m+n), the dimension of its output. Furthermore, SLA is computationally efficient as it runs in O(δkmn) time (a
constant number of operations is made for each observed entry of M ), which can
be as small as O(k log(m)4 n) for an appropriate choice of δ and if n ≥ m.

1

Introduction

We investigate the problem of constructing, in a memory and computationally efficient manner, an accurate estimate of the optimal rank k approximation M (k) of a large (m × n) matrix
M ∈ [0, 1]m×n . This problem is fundamental in machine learning, and has naturally found numerous applications in computer science. The optimal rank k approximation M (k) minimizes, over
all rank k matrices Z, the Frobenius norm kM − ZkF (and any norm that is invariant under rotation) and can be computed by Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of M in O(nm2 ) time (if we
assume that m ≤ n). For massive matrices M (i.e., when m and n are very large), this becomes
unacceptably slow. In addition, storing and manipulating M in memory may become difficult. In
this paper, we design a memory and computationally efficient algorithm, referred to as Streaming
Low-rank Approximation (SLA), that computes a near-optimal rank k approximation M̂ (k) . Under
mild assumptions on M , the SLA algorithm is asymptotically accurate in the sense that as m and n
grow large, its average mean-square error converges to 0, i.e., kM̂ (k) − M (k) k2F = o(mn) with high
probability (we interpret M (k) as the signal that we aim to recover form a noisy observation M ).
To reduce its memory footprint and running time, the proposed algorithm combines random sparsification and the idea of the streaming data model. More precisely, each entry of M is revealed to
the algorithm with probability δ, called the sampling rate. Moreover, SLA observes and treats the
∗
Work performed as part of MSR-INRIA joint research centre. M.L. acknowledges the support of the
French Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) under reference ANR-11-JS02-005-01 (GAP project).
†
A. Proutiere’s research is supported by the ERC FSA grant, and the SSF ICT-Psi project.

1

