Sum-of-Squares Lower Bounds for Sparse PCA
Tengyu Ma1∗ and Avi Wigderson2†
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
2
School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study

Abstract
This paper establishes a statistical versus computational trade-off for solving
a basic high-dimensional machine learning problem via a basic convex relaxation method. Specifically, we consider the Sparse Principal Component
Analysis (Sparse PCA) problem, and the family of Sum-of-Squares (SoS, aka
Lasserre/Parillo) convex relaxations. It was well known that in large dimension p,
a planted k-sparse unit vector can be in principle detected using only n ≈ k log p
(Gaussian or Bernoulli) samples, but all efficient (polynomial time) algorithms
known require n ≈ k 2 samples. It was also known that this quadratic gap cannot
be improved by the the most basic semi-definite (SDP, aka spectral) relaxation,
equivalent to a degree-2 SoS algorithms. Here we prove that also degree-4 SoS algorithms cannot improve this quadratic gap. This average-case lower bound adds
to the small collection of hardness results in machine learning for this powerful
family of convex relaxation algorithms. Moreover, our design of moments (or
“pseudo-expectations”) for this lower bound is quite different than previous lower
bounds. Establishing lower bounds for higher degree SoS algorithms for remains
a challenging problem.

1

Introduction

We start with a general discussion of the tension between sample size and computational efficiency in
statistical and learning problems. We then describe the concrete model and problem at hand: Sumof-Squares algorithms and the Sparse-PCA problem. All are broad topics studied from different
viewpoints, and the given references provide more information.
1.1

Statistical vs. computational sample-size

Modern machine learning and statistical inference problems are often high dimensional, and it is
highly desirable to solve them using far less samples than the ambient dimension. Luckily, we often
know, or assume, some underlying structure of the objects sought, which allows such savings in
principle. Typical such assumption is that the number of real degrees of freedom is far smaller
than the dimension; examples include sparsity constraints for vectors, and low rank for matrices
and tensors. The main difficulty that occurs in nearly all these problems is that while information
theoretically the sought answer is present (with high probability) in a small number of samples,
actually computing (or even approximating) it from these many samples is a computationally hard
problem. It is often expressed as a non-convex optimization program which is NP-hard in the worst
case, and seemingly hard even on random instances.
Given this state of affairs, relaxed formulations of such non-convex programs were proposed, which
can be solved efficiently, but sometimes to achieve accurate results seem to require far more samples
∗
†

Supported in part by Simons Award for Graduate Students in Theoretical Computer Science
Supported in part by NSF grant CCF-1412958

1

