Statistical Model Criticism
using Kernel Two Sample Tests

James Robert Lloyd
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge

Zoubin Ghahramani
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge

Abstract
We propose an exploratory approach to statistical model criticism using maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) two sample tests. Typical approaches to model criticism require a practitioner to select a statistic by which to measure discrepancies
between data and a statistical model. MMD two sample tests are instead constructed as an analytic maximisation over a large space of possible statistics and
therefore automatically select the statistic which most shows any discrepancy. We
demonstrate on synthetic data that the selected statistic, called the witness function, can be used to identify where a statistical model most misrepresents the data
it was trained on. We then apply the procedure to real data where the models being
assessed are restricted Boltzmann machines, deep belief networks and Gaussian
process regression and demonstrate the ways in which these models fail to capture
the properties of the data they are trained on.

1

Introduction

Statistical model criticism or checking1 is an important part of a complete statistical analysis. When
one fits a linear model to a data set a complete analysis includes computing e.g. Cook’s distances
[3] to identify influential points or plotting residuals against fitted values to identify non-linearity or
heteroscedasticity. Similarly, modern approaches to Bayesian statistics view model criticism as in
important component of a cycle of model construction, inference and criticism [4].
As statistical models become more complex and diverse in response to the challenges of modern
data sets there will be an increasing need for a greater range of model criticism procedures that are
either automatic or widely applicable. This will be especially true as automatic modelling methods
[e.g. 5, 6, 7] and probabilistic programming [e.g. 8, 9, 10, 11] mature.
Model criticism typically proceeds by choosing a statistic of interest, computing it on data and
comparing this to a suitable null distribution. Ideally these statistics are chosen to assess the utility
of the statistical model under consideration (see applied examples [e.g. 4]) but this can require
considerable expertise on the part of the modeller. We propose an alternative to this manual approach
by using a statistic defined as a supremum over a broad class of measures of discrepancy between two
distributions, the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [e.g. 12]). The advantage of this approach
is that the discrepancy measure attaining the supremum automatically identifies regions of the data
which are most poorly represented by the statistical model fit to the data.
We demonstrate MMD model criticism on toy examples, restricted Boltzmann machines and deep
belief networks trained on MNIST digits and Gaussian process regression models trained on several
time series. Our proposed method identifies discrepancies between the data and fitted models that
would not be apparent from predictive performance focused metrics. It is our belief that more effort
should be expended on attempting to falsify models fitted to data, using model criticism techniques
or otherwise. Not only would this aid research in targeting areas for improvement but it would give
greater confidence in any conclusions drawn from a model.
1

We follow Box [1] using the term ‘model criticism’ for similar reasons to O’Hagan [2].

1

