Color Constancy by Learning to Predict
Chromaticity from Luminance

Ayan Chakrabarti
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
6045 S. Kenwood Ave., Chicago, IL 60637
ayanc@ttic.edu

Abstract
Color constancy is the recovery of true surface color from observed color, and
requires estimating the chromaticity of scene illumination to correct for the bias
it induces. In this paper, we show that the per-pixel color statistics of natural
scenes—without any spatial or semantic context—can by themselves be a powerful cue for color constancy. Specifically, we describe an illuminant estimation
method that is built around a “classifier” for identifying the true chromaticity of
a pixel given its luminance (absolute brightness across color channels). During
inference, each pixel’s observed color restricts its true chromaticity to those values that can be explained by one of a candidate set of illuminants, and applying
the classifier over these values yields a distribution over the corresponding illuminants. A global estimate for the scene illuminant is computed through a simple
aggregation of these distributions across all pixels. We begin by simply defining the luminance-to-chromaticity classifier by computing empirical histograms
over discretized chromaticity and luminance values from a training set of natural
images. These histograms reflect a preference for hues corresponding to smooth
reflectance functions, and for achromatic colors in brighter pixels. Despite its
simplicity, the resulting estimation algorithm outperforms current state-of-the-art
color constancy methods. Next, we propose a method to learn the luminanceto-chromaticity classifier “end-to-end”. Using stochastic gradient descent, we set
chromaticity-luminance likelihoods to minimize errors in the final scene illuminant estimates on a training set. This leads to further improvements in accuracy,
most significantly in the tail of the error distribution.

1

Introduction

The spectral distribution of light reflected off a surface is a function of an intrinsic material property
of the surface—its reflectance—and also of the spectral distribution of the light illuminating the
surface. Consequently, the observed color of the same surface under different illuminants in different
images will be different. To be able to reliably use color computationally for identifying materials
and objects, researchers are interested in deriving an encoding of color from an observed image that
is invariant to changing illumination. This task is known as color constancy, and requires resolving
the ambiguity between illuminant and surface colors in an observed image. Since both of these
quantities are unknown, much of color constancy research is focused on identifying models and
statistical properties of natural scenes that are informative for color constancy. While pschophysical
experiments have demonstrated that the human visual system is remarkably successful at achieving
color constancy [1], it remains a challenging task computationally.
Early color constancy algorithms were based on relatively simple models for pixel colors. For
example, the gray world method [2] simply assumed that the average true intensities of different
color channels across all pixels in an image would be equal, while the white-patch retinex method [3]
1

