Fighting Bandits with a New Kind of Smoothness
Jacob Abernethy
University of Michigan
jabernet@umich.edu

Chansoo Lee
University of Michigan
chansool@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
We provide a new analysis framework for the adversarial multi-armed bandit
problem. Using the notion of convex smoothing, we define a novel family of
algorithms with minimax optimal regret guarantees. First, we show that regularizationp
via the Tsallis entropy, which includes EXP3 as a special case, matches
the O( N T ) minimax regret with a smaller constant factor. Second, we show
that a p
wide class of perturbation methods achieve a near-optimal regret as low
as O( N T log N ), as long as the perturbation distribution has a bounded hazard function. For example, the Gumbel, Weibull, Frechet, Pareto, and Gamma
distributions all satisfy this key property and lead to near-optimal algorithms.

1

Introduction

The classic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, generally attributed to the early work of Robbins
(1952), poses a generic online decision scenario in which an agent must make a sequence of choices
from a fixed set of options. After each decision is made, the agent receives some feedback in the
form of a loss (or gain) associated with her choice, but no information is provided on the outcomes
of alternative options. The agent’s goal is to minimize the total loss over time, and the agent is thus
faced with the balancing act of both experimenting with the menu of choices while also utilizing
the data gathered in the process to improve her decisions. The MAB framework is not only mathematically elegant, but useful for a wide range of applications including medical experiments design
(Gittins, 1996), automated poker playing strategies (Van den Broeck et al., 2009), and hyperparameter tuning (Pacula et al., 2012).
Early MAB results relied on stochastic assumptions (e.g., IID) on the loss sequence (Auer et al.,
2002; Gittins et al., 2011; Lai and Robbins, 1985). As researchers began to establish non-stochastic,
worst-case guarantees for sequential decision problems such as prediction with expert advice (Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994), a natural question arose as to whether similar guarantees were possible
for the bandit setting. The pioneering work of Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, Freund, and Schapire (2003) answered this in the affirmative by showing that their algorithm EXP3 possesses nearly-optimal regret
bounds with matching lower bounds. Attention later turned to the bandit version of online linear
optimization, and several associated guarantees were published the following decade (Abernethy
et al., 2012; Dani and Hayes, 2006; Dani et al., 2008; Flaxman et al., 2005; McMahan and Blum,
2004).
Nearly all proposed methods have relied on a particular algorithmic blueprint; they reduce the bandit problem to the full-information setting, while using randomization to make decisions and to
estimate the losses. A well-studied family of algorithms for the full-information setting is Follow
the Regularized Leader (FTRL), which optimizes the objective function of the following form:
arg min L> x + R(x)

(1)

x2K

where K is the decision set, L is (an estimate of) the cumulative loss vector, and R is a regularizer,
a convex function with suitable curvature to stabilize the objective. The choice of regularizer R is
1

