Winner-Take-All Autoencoders
Alireza Makhzani, Brendan Frey
University of Toronto
makhzani, frey@psi.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a winner-take-all method for learning hierarchical sparse
representations in an unsupervised fashion. We first introduce fully-connected
winner-take-all autoencoders which use mini-batch statistics to directly enforce a
lifetime sparsity in the activations of the hidden units. We then propose the convolutional winner-take-all autoencoder which combines the benefits of convolutional
architectures and autoencoders for learning shift-invariant sparse representations.
We describe a way to train convolutional autoencoders layer by layer, where in
addition to lifetime sparsity, a spatial sparsity within each feature map is achieved
using winner-take-all activation functions. We will show that winner-take-all autoencoders can be used to to learn deep sparse representations from the MNIST,
CIFAR-10, ImageNet, Street View House Numbers and Toronto Face datasets,
and achieve competitive classification performance.

1 Introduction
Recently, supervised learning has been developed and used successfully to produce representations
that have enabled leaps forward in classification accuracy for several tasks [1]. However, the question that has remained unanswered is whether it is possible to learn as “powerful” representations
from unlabeled data without any supervision. It is still widely recognized that unsupervised learning
algorithms that can extract useful features are needed for solving problems with limited label information. In this work, we exploit sparsity as a generic prior on the representations for unsupervised
feature learning. We first introduce the fully-connected winner-take-all autoencoders that learn to
do sparse coding by directly enforcing a winner-take-all lifetime sparsity constraint. We then introduce convolutional winner-take-all autoencoders that learn to do shift-invariant/convolutional sparse
coding by directly enforcing winner-take-all spatial and lifetime sparsity constraints.

2 Fully-Connected Winner-Take-All Autoencoders
Training sparse autoencoders has been well studied in the literature. For example, in [2], a “lifetime
sparsity” penalty function proportional to the KL divergence between the hidden unit marginals (ρ̂)
and the target sparsity probability (ρ) is added to the cost function: λKL(ρkρ̂). A major drawback
of this approach is that it only works for certain target sparsities and is often very difficult to find
the right λ parameter that results in a properly trained sparse autoencoder. Also KL divergence
was originally proposed for sigmoidal autoencoders, and it is not clear how it can be applied to
ReLU autoencoders where ρ̂ could be larger than one (in which case the KL divergence can not be
evaluated). In this paper, we propose Fully-Connected Winner-Take-All (FC-WTA) autoencoders to
address these concerns. FC-WTA autoencoders can aim for any target sparsity rate, train very fast
(marginally slower than a standard autoencoder), have no hyper-parameter to be tuned (except the
target sparsity rate) and efficiently train all the dictionary atoms even when very aggressive sparsity
rates (e.g., 1%) are enforced.
1

