A Reduced-Dimension fMRI Shared Response Model

Po-Hsuan Chen1 , Janice Chen2 , Yaara Yeshurun2 ,
Uri Hasson2 , James V. Haxby3 , Peter J. Ramadge1
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University
2
Princeton Neuroscience Institute and Department of Psychology, Princeton University
3
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
and Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Dartmouth College

Abstract
Multi-subject fMRI data is critical for evaluating the generality and validity
of findings across subjects, and its effective utilization helps improve analysis
sensitivity. We develop a shared response model for aggregating multi-subject
fMRI data that accounts for different functional topographies among anatomically
aligned datasets. Our model demonstrates improved sensitivity in identifying a
shared response for a variety of datasets and anatomical brain regions of interest.
Furthermore, by removing the identified shared response, it allows improved detection of group differences. The ability to identify what is shared and what is not
shared opens the model to a wide range of multi-subject fMRI studies.

1

Introduction

Many modern fMRI studies of the human brain use data from multiple subjects. The use of multiple
subjects is critical for assessing the generality and validity of the findings across subjects. It is also
increasingly important since from one subject one can gather at most a few thousand noisy instances
of functional response patterns. To increase the power of multivariate statistical analysis, one therefore needs to aggregate response data across multiple subjects. However, the successful aggregation
of fMRI brain imaging data across subjects requires resolving the major problem that both anatomical structure and functional topography vary across subjects [1, 2, 3, 4]. Moreover, it is well known
that standard methods of anatomical alignment [1, 4, 5] do not adequately align functional topography [4, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Hence anatomical alignment is often followed by spatial smoothing of the data
to blur functional topographies. Recently, functional spatial registration methods have appeared that
use cortical warping to maximize inter-subject correlation of time series [7] or inter-subject correlation of functional connectivity [8, 9]. A more radical approach learns a latent multivariate feature
that models the shared component of each subject’s response [10, 11, 12].
Multivariate statistical analysis often begins by identifying a set of features that capture the informative aspects of the data. For example, in fMRI analysis one might select a subset of voxels within an
anatomical region of interest (ROI), or select a subset of principal components of the ROI, then use
these features for subsequent analysis. In a similar way, one can think of the fMRI data aggregation
problem as a two step process. First use training data to learn a mapping of each subject’s measured
data to a shared feature space in a way that captures the across-subject shared response. Then use
these learned mappings to project held out data for each subject into the shared feature space and
perform a statistical analysis.
To make this more precise, let {Xi ∈ Rv×d }m
i=1 denote matrices of training data (v voxels in
the ROI, over d TRs) for m subjects. We propose using this data to learn subject specific bases
Wi ∈ Rv×k , where k is to be selected, and a shared matrix S ∈ Rk×d of feature responses such
that Xi = Wi S + Ei where Ei is an error term corresponding to unmodeled aspects of the subject’s
response. One can think of the bases Wi as representing the individual functional topographies and
S as a latent feature that captures the component of the response shared across subjects. We don’t
claim that S is a sufficient statistic, but that is a useful analogy.
1

