Regressive Virtual Metric Learning

Michaël Perrot, and Amaury Habrard
Université de Lyon, Université Jean Monnet de Saint-Etienne,
Laboratoire Hubert Curien, CNRS, UMR5516, F-42000, Saint-Etienne, France.
{michael.perrot,amaury.habrard}@univ-st-etienne.fr

Abstract
We are interested in supervised metric learning of Mahalanobis like distances.
Existing approaches mainly focus on learning a new distance using similarity
and dissimilarity constraints between examples. In this paper, instead of bringing closer examples of the same class and pushing far away examples of different
classes we propose to move the examples with respect to virtual points. Hence,
each example is brought closer to a a priori defined virtual point reducing the
number of constraints to satisfy. We show that our approach admits a closed form
solution which can be kernelized. We provide a theoretical analysis showing the
consistency of the approach and establishing some links with other classical metric learning methods. Furthermore we propose an efficient solution to the difficult
problem of selecting virtual points based in part on recent works in optimal transport. Lastly, we evaluate our approach on several state of the art datasets.

1

Introduction

The goal of a metric learning algorithm is to capture the idiosyncrasies in the data mainly by defining
a new space of representation where some semantic constraints between examples are fulfilled. In
the previous years the main focus of metric
learning algorithms has been to learn Mahalanobis like
p
distances of the form dM (x, x0 ) = (x − x0 )T M(x − x0 ) where M is a positive semi-definite
matrix (PSD) defining a set of parameters1 . Using a Cholesky decomposition M = LLT , one can
see that this is equivalent to learn a linear transformation from the input space.
Most of the existing approaches in metric learning use constraints of type must-link and cannot-link
between learning examples [1, 2]. For example, in a supervised classification task, the goal is to
bring closer examples of the same class and to push far away examples of different classes. The idea
is that the learned metric should affect a high value to dissimilar examples and a low value to similar
examples. Then, this new distance can be used in a classification algorithm like a nearest neighbor
classifier. Note that in this case the set of constraints is quadratic in the number of examples which
can be prohibitive when the number of examples increases. One heuristic is then to select only
a subset of the constraints but selecting such a subset is not trivial. In this paper, we propose to
consider a new kind of constraints where each example is associated with an a priori defined virtual
point. It allows us to consider the metric learning problem as a simple regression where we try
to minimize the differences between learning examples and virtual points. Fig. 1 illustrates the
differences between our approach and a classical metric learning approach. It can be noticed that
our algorithm only uses a linear number of constraints. However defining these constraints by hand
can be tedious and difficult. To overcome this problem, we present two approaches to automatically
define them. The first one is based on some recent advances in the field of Optimal Transport while
the second one uses a class-based representation space.
1

When M = I, the identity matrix, it corresponds to the Euclidean distance.

1

