Scalable Inference for Gaussian Process Models with
Black-Box Likelihoods
Edwin V. Bonilla
The University of New South Wales
e.bonilla@unsw.edu.au

Amir Dezfouli
The University of New South Wales
akdezfuli@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a sparse method for scalable automated variational inference (AVI) in
a large class of models with Gaussian process (GP) priors, multiple latent functions, multiple outputs and non-linear likelihoods. Our approach maintains the
statistical efficiency property of the original AVI method, requiring only expectations over univariate Gaussian distributions to approximate the posterior with a
mixture of Gaussians. Experiments on small datasets for various problems including regression, classification, Log Gaussian Cox processes, and warped GPs show
that our method can perform as well as the full method under high sparsity levels.
On larger experiments using the MNIST and the SARCOS datasets we show that
our method can provide superior performance to previously published scalable
approaches that have been handcrafted to specific likelihood models.

1

Introduction

Developing automated yet practical approaches to Bayesian inference is a problem that has attracted
considerable attention within the probabilisitic machine learning community (see e.g. [1, 2, 3, 4]).
In the case of models with Gaussian process (GP) priors, the main challenge is that of dealing
with a large number of highly-coupled latent variables. Although promising directions within the
sampling community such as Elliptical Slice Sampling (ESS, [5]) have been proposed, they have
been shown to be particularly slow compared to variational methods. In particular, [6] showed
that their automated variational inference (AVI) method can provide posterior distributions that are
practically indistinguishable from those obtained by ESS, while running orders of magnitude faster.
One of the fundamental properties of the method proposed in [6] is its statistical efficiency, which
means that, in order to approximate a posterior distribution via the maximization of the evidence
lower bound (ELBO), it only requires expectations over univariate Gaussian distributions regardless
of the likelihood model. Remarkably, this property holds for a large class of models involving
multiple latent functions and multiple outputs. However, this method is still impractical for large
datasets as it inherits the cubic computational cost of GP models on the number of observations (N ).
While there have been several approaches to large scale inference in GP models [7, 8, 9, 10, 11],
these have been focused on regression and classification problems. The main obstacle to apply these
approaches to inference with general likelihood models is that it is unclear how they can be extended
to frameworks such as those in [6], while maintaining that desirable property of statistical efficiency.
In this paper we build upon the inducing-point approach underpinning most sparse approximations
to GPs [12, 13] in order to scale up the automated inference method of [6]. In particular, for models
with multiple latent functions, multiple outputs and non-linear likelihoods (such as in multi-class
classification and Gaussian process regression networks [14]) we propose a sparse approximation
whose computational complexity is O(M 3 ) in time, where M  N is the number of inducing
points. This approximation maintains the statistical efficiency property of the original AVI method.
As the resulting ELBO decomposes over the training data points, our method can scale up to a very
1

