Lifted Inference Rules with Constraints
Happy Mittal, Anuj Mahajan
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Engg.
I.I.T. Delhi, Hauz Khas
New Delhi, 110016, India
happy.mittal@cse.iitd.ac.in,

Vibhav Gogate
Dept. of Comp. Sci.
Univ. of Texas Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080, USA

Parag Singla
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Engg.
I.I.T. Delhi, Hauz Khas
New Delhi, 110016, India

vgogate@hlt.utdallas.edu

parags@cse.iitd.ac.in

anujmahajan.iitd@gmail.com

Abstract
Lifted inference rules exploit symmetries for fast reasoning in statistical relational models. Computational complexity of these rules is highly dependent on
the choice of the constraint language they operate on and therefore coming up
with the right kind of representation is critical to the success of lifted inference.
In this paper, we propose a new constraint language, called setineq, which allows
subset, equality and inequality constraints, to represent substitutions over the variables in the theory. Our constraint formulation is strictly more expressive than
existing representations, yet easy to operate on. We reformulate the three main
lifting rules: decomposer, generalized binomial and the recently proposed single
occurrence for MAP inference, to work with our constraint representation. Experiments on benchmark MLNs for exact and sampling based inference demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach over several other existing techniques.

1

Introduction

Statistical relational models such as Markov logic [5] have the power to represent the rich relational
structure as well as the underlying uncertainty, both of which are the characteristics of several real
world application domains. Inference in these models can be carried out using existing probabilistic
inference techniques over the propositionalized theory (e.g., Belief propagation, MCMC sampling,
etc.). This approach can be sub-optimal since it ignores the rich underlying structure in the relational
representation, and as a result does not scale to even moderately sized domains in practice.
Lifted inference ameliorates the aforementioned problems by identifying indistinguishable atoms,
grouping them together and inferring directly over the groups instead of individual atoms. Starting
with the work of Poole [21], a number of lifted inference algorithms have been proposed. These
include lifted exact inference techniques such as lifted Variable Elimination (VE) [3, 17], lifted
approximate inference algorithms based on message passing such as belief propagation [23, 14, 24],
lifted sampling based algorithms [26, 12], lifted search [11], lifted variational inference [2, 20] and
lifted knowledge compilation [10, 6, 9]. There also has been some recent work which examines the
complexity of lifted inference independent of the specific algorithm used [13, 2, 8].
Just as probabilistic inference algorithms use various rules such as sum-out, conditioning and decomposition to exploit the problem structure, lifted inference algorithms use lifted inference rules
to exploit the symmetries. All of them work with an underlying constraint representation that specifies the allowed set of substitutions over variables appearing in the theory. Examples of various
constraint representations include weighted parfactors with constraints [3], normal form parfactors [17], hypercube based representations [24], tree based constraints [25] and the constraint free
normal form [13]. These formalisms differ from each other not only in terms of the underlying
constraint representation but also how these constraints are processed e.g., whether they require a
constraint solver, splitting as needed versus shattering [15], etc.
The choice of the underlying constraint language can have a significant impact on the time as well as
memory complexity of the inference procedure [15], and coming up with the right kind of constraint
representation is of prime importance for the success of lifted inference techniques. Although, there
1

