A Tractable Approximation to Optimal Point Process
Filtering: Application to Neural Encoding

Yuval Harel, Ron Meir
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Technion City, Haifa, Israel
{yharel@tx,rmeir@ee}.technion.ac.il

Manfred Opper
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Technical University Berlin
Berlin 10587, Germany
opperm@cs.tu-berlin.de

Abstract
The process of dynamic state estimation (filtering) based on point process observations is in general intractable. Numerical sampling techniques are often
practically useful, but lead to limited conceptual insight about optimal encoding/decoding strategies, which are of significant relevance to Computational Neuroscience. We develop an analytically tractable Bayesian approximation to optimal filtering based on point process observations, which allows us to introduce
distributional assumptions about sensory cell properties, that greatly facilitate the
analysis of optimal encoding in situations deviating from common assumptions of
uniform coding. The analytic framework leads to insights which are difficult to
obtain from numerical algorithms, and is consistent with experiments about the
distribution of tuning curve centers. Interestingly, we find that the information
gained from the absence of spikes may be crucial to performance.

1

Introduction

The task of inferring a hidden dynamic state based on partial noisy observations plays an important
role within both applied and natural domains. A widely studied problem is that of online inference
of the hidden state at a given time based on observations up to to that time, referred to as filtering
[1]. For the linear setting with Gaussian noise and quadratic cost, the solution is well known since
the early 1960s both for discrete and continuous times, leading to the celebrated Kalman and the
Kalman-Bucy filters [2, 3], respectively. In these cases the exact posterior distribution is Gaussian,
resulting in closed form recursive update equations for the mean and variance of this distribution,
implying finite-dimensional filters. However, beyond some very specific settings [4], the optimal
filter is infinite-dimensional and impossible to compute in closed form, requiring either approximate
analytic techniques (e.g., the extended Kalman filter (e.g., [1]), the unscented filter [5]) or numerical
procedures (e.g., particle filters [6]). The latter usually require time discretization and a finite number
of particles, resulting in loss of precision . For many practical tasks (e.g., queuing [7] and optical
communication [8]) and biologically motivated problems (e.g., [9]) a natural observation process is
given by a point process observer, leading to a nonlinear infinite-dimensional optimal filter (except
in specific settings, e.g., finite state spaces, [7, 10]).
We consider a continuous-state and continuous-time multivariate hidden Markov process observed
through a set of sensory neuron-like elements characterized by multi-dimensional unimodal tuning
functions, representing the elements’ average firing rate. The tuning function parameters are characterized by a distribution allowing much flexibility. The actual firing of each cell is random and is
given by a Poisson process with rate determined by the input and by the cell’s tuning function. Inferring the hidden state under such circumstances has been widely studied within the Computational
Neuroscience literature, mostly for static stimuli. In the more challenging and practically important
dynamic setting, much work has been devoted to the development of numerical sampling techniques
1

