Online Learning with Gaussian Payoffs and Side
Observations
Yifan Wu1
1

András György2

Dept. of Computing Science
University of Alberta
{ywu12,szepesva}@ualberta.ca

2

Csaba Szepesvári1

Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
a.gyorgy@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider a sequential learning problem with Gaussian payoffs and side observations: after selecting an action i, the learner receives information about the
payoff of every action j in the form of Gaussian observations whose mean is the
same as the mean payoff, but the variance depends on the pair (i, j) (and may be
infinite). The setup allows a more refined information transfer from one action to
another than previous partial monitoring setups, including the recently introduced
graph-structured feedback case. For the first time in the literature, we provide
non-asymptotic problem-dependent lower bounds on the regret of any algorithm,
which recover existing asymptotic problem-dependent lower bounds and finitetime minimax lower bounds available in the literature. We also provide algorithms
that achieve the problem-dependent lower bound (up to some universal constant
factor) or the minimax lower bounds (up to logarithmic factors).

1

Introduction

Online learning in stochastic environments is a sequential decision problem where in each time step
a learner chooses an action from a given finite set, observes some random feedback and receives
a random payoff. Several feedback models have been considered in the literature: The simplest is
the full information case where the learner observes the payoff of all possible actions at the end
of every round. A popular setup is the case of bandit feedback, where the learner only observes
its own payoff and receives no information about the payoff of other actions [1]. Recently, several
papers considered a more refined setup, called graph-structured feedback, that interpolates between
the full-information and the bandit case: here the feedback structure is described by a (possibly
directed) graph, and choosing an action reveals the payoff of all actions that are connected to the
selected one, including the chosen action itself. This problem, motivated for example by social
networks, has been studied extensively in both the adversarial [2, 3, 4, 5] and the stochastic cases
[6, 7]. However, most algorithms presented heavily depend on the self-observability assumption,
that is, that the payoff of the selected action can be observed. Removing this self-loop assumption
leads to the so-called partial monitoring case [5]. In the absolutely general partial monitoring setup
the learner receives some general feedback that depends on its choice (and the environment), with
some arbitrary (but known) dependence [8, 9]. While the partial monitoring setup covers all other
problems, its analysis has concentrated on the finite case where both the set of actions and the set
of feedback signals are finite [8, 9], which is in contrast to the standard full information and bandit
settings where the feedback is typically assumed to be real-valued. To our knowledge there are only
a few exceptions to this case: in [5], graph-structured feedback is considered without the self-loop
assumption, while continuous action spaces are considered in [10] and [11] with special feedback
structure (linear and censored observations, resp.).
In this paper we consider a generalization of the graph-structured feedback model that can also be
viewed as a general partial monitoring model with real-valued feedback. We assume that selecting
1

