Equilibrated adaptive learning rates for non-convex
optimization

Harm de Vries1
Université de Montréal
devries@iro.umontreal.ca

Yann N. Dauphin1
Université de Montréal
dauphiya@iro.umontreal.ca

Yoshua Bengio
Université de Montréal
yoshua.bengio@umontreal.ca

Abstract
Parameter-specific adaptive learning rate methods are computationally efficient
ways to reduce the ill-conditioning problems encountered when training large
deep networks. Following recent work that strongly suggests that most of the
critical points encountered when training such networks are saddle points, we find
how considering the presence of negative eigenvalues of the Hessian could help
us design better suited adaptive learning rate schemes. We show that the popular
Jacobi preconditioner has undesirable behavior in the presence of both positive
and negative curvature, and present theoretical and empirical evidence that the socalled equilibration preconditioner is comparatively better suited to non-convex
problems. We introduce a novel adaptive learning rate scheme, called ESGD,
based on the equilibration preconditioner. Our experiments show that ESGD performs as well or better than RMSProp in terms of convergence speed, always
clearly improving over plain stochastic gradient descent.

1

Introduction

One of the challenging aspects of deep learning is the optimization of the training criterion over millions of parameters: the difficulty comes from both the size of these neural networks and because the
training objective is non-convex in the parameters. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has remained
the method of choice for most practitioners of neural networks since the 80’s, in spite of a rich literature in numerical optimization. Although it is well-known that first-order methods considerably
slow down when the objective function is ill-conditioned, it remains unclear how to best exploit
second-order structure when training deep networks. Because of the large number of parameters,
storing the full Hessian or even a low-rank approximation is not practical, making parameter specific
learning rates, i.e diagonal preconditioners, one of the viable alternatives. One of the open questions
is how to set the learning rate for SGD adaptively, both over time and for different parameters, and
several methods have been proposed (see e.g. Schaul et al. (2013) and references therein).
On the other hand, recent work (Dauphin et al., 2014; Choromanska et al., 2014) has brought theoretical and empirical evidence suggesting that local minima are with high probability not the main
obstacle to optimizing large and deep neural networks, contrary to what was previously believed:
instead, saddle points are the most prevalent critical points on the optimization path (except when
we approach the value of the global minimum). These saddle points can considerably slow down
training, mostly because the objective function tends to be ill-conditioned in the neighborhood of
1

Denotes first authors

1

