A Complete Recipe for Stochastic Gradient MCMC

Yi-An Ma, Tianqi Chen, and Emily B. Fox
University of Washington {yianma@u,tqchen@cs,ebfox@stat}.washington.edu

Abstract
Many recent Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers leverage continuous
dynamics to define a transition kernel that efficiently explores a target distribution.
In tandem, a focus has been on devising scalable variants that subsample the data
and use stochastic gradients in place of full-data gradients in the dynamic simulations. However, such stochastic gradient MCMC samplers have lagged behind
their full-data counterparts in terms of the complexity of dynamics considered
since proving convergence in the presence of the stochastic gradient noise is nontrivial. Even with simple dynamics, significant physical intuition is often required
to modify the dynamical system to account for the stochastic gradient noise. In this
paper, we provide a general recipe for constructing MCMC samplers—including
stochastic gradient versions—based on continuous Markov processes specified via two matrices. We constructively prove that the framework is complete. That is,
any continuous Markov process that provides samples from the target distribution
can be written in our framework. We show how previous continuous-dynamic
samplers can be trivially “reinvented” in our framework, avoiding the complicated
sampler-specific proofs. We likewise use our recipe to straightforwardly propose
a new state-adaptive sampler: stochastic gradient Riemann Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (SGRHMC). Our experiments on simulated data and a streaming Wikipedia analysis demonstrate that the proposed SGRHMC sampler inherits the benefits
of Riemann HMC, with the scalability of stochastic gradient methods.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) has become a defacto tool for Bayesian posterior inference.
However, these methods notoriously mix slowly in complex, high-dimensional models and scale
poorly to large datasets. The past decades have seen a rise in MCMC methods that provide more efficient exploration of the posterior, such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [8, 12] and its Reimann
manifold variant [10]. This class of samplers is based on defining a potential energy function in
terms of the target posterior distribution and then devising various continuous dynamics to explore
the energy landscape, enabling proposals of distant states. The gain in efficiency of exploration often
comes at the cost of a significant computational burden in large datasets.
Recently, stochastic gradient variants of such continuous-dynamic samplers have proven quite useful
in scaling the methods to large datasets [17, 1, 6, 2, 7]. At each iteration, these samplers use data
subsamples—or minibatches—rather than the full dataset. Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics
(SGLD) [17] innovated in this area by connecting stochastic optimization with a first-order Langevin
dynamic MCMC technique, showing that adding the “right amount” of noise to stochastic gradient
ascent iterates leads to samples from the target posterior as the step size is annealed. Stochastic
gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) [6] builds on this idea, but importantly incorporates
the efficient exploration provided by the HMC momentum term. A key insight in that paper was that
the naı̈ve stochastic gradient variant of HMC actually leads to an incorrect stationary distribution
(also see [4]); instead a modification to the dynamics underlying HMC is needed to account for
1

