Online Learning for Adversaries with Memory:
Price of Past Mistakes
Elad Hazan
Princeton University
New York, USA
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu

Oren Anava
Technion
Haifa, Israel
oanava@tx.technion.ac.il

Shie Mannor
Technion
Haifa, Israel
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
The framework of online learning with memory naturally captures learning problems with temporal effects, and was previously studied for the experts setting. In
this work we extend the notion of learning with memory to the general Online
Convex Optimization (OCO) framework, and present two algorithms that attain
low regret. The first algorithm applies to Lipschitz continuous loss functions, obtaining optimal regret bounds for both convex and strongly convex losses. The
second algorithm attains the optimal regret bounds and applies more broadly to
convex losses without requiring Lipschitz continuity, yet is more complicated to
implement. We complement the theoretical results with two applications: statistical arbitrage in finance, and multi-step ahead prediction in statistics.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a well-established learning paradigm which has both theoretical and practical
appeals. The goal in this paradigm is to make a sequential decision, where at each trial the cost
associated with previous prediction tasks is given. In recent years, online learning has been widely
applied to several research fields including game theory, information theory, and optimization. We
refer the reader to [1, 2, 3] for more comprehensive survey.
One of the most well-studied frameworks of online learning is Online Convex Optimization (OCO).
In this framework, an online player iteratively chooses a decision in a convex set, then a convex loss
function is revealed, and the player suffers loss that is the convex function applied to the decision
she chose. It is usually assumed that the loss functions are chosen arbitrarily, possibly by an allpowerful adversary. The performance of the online player is measured using the regret criterion,
which compares the accumulated loss of the player with the accumulated loss of the best fixed
decision in hindsight.
The above notion of regret captures only memoryless adversaries who determine the loss based on
the player’s current decision, and fails to cope with bounded-memory adversaries who determine
the loss based on the player’s current and previous decisions. However, in many scenarios such
as coding, compression, portfolio selection and more, the adversary is not completely memoryless
and the previous decisions of the player affect her current loss. We are particularly concerned with
scenarios in which the memory is relatively short-term and simple, in contrast to state-action models
for which reinforcement learning models are more suitable [4].
1

