On the Accuracy of Self-Normalized
Log-Linear Models
Jacob Andreas∗, Maxim Rabinovich∗, Michael I. Jordan, Dan Klein
Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley
{jda,rabinovich,jordan,klein}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Calculation of the log-normalizer is a major computational obstacle in applications of log-linear models with large output spaces. The problem of fast normalizer computation has therefore attracted significant attention in the theoretical and
applied machine learning literature. In this paper, we analyze a recently proposed
technique known as “self-normalization”, which introduces a regularization term
in training to penalize log normalizers for deviating from zero. This makes it possible to use unnormalized model scores as approximate probabilities. Empirical
evidence suggests that self-normalization is extremely effective, but a theoretical
understanding of why it should work, and how generally it can be applied, is
largely lacking.
We prove upper bounds on the loss in accuracy due to self-normalization, describe
classes of input distributions that self-normalize easily, and construct explicit examples of high-variance input distributions. Our theoretical results make predictions about the difficulty of fitting self-normalized models to several classes of
distributions, and we conclude with empirical validation of these predictions.

1

Introduction

Log-linear models, a general class that includes conditional random fields (CRFs) and generalized
linear models (GLMs), offer a flexible yet tractable approach modeling conditional probability distributions p(x|y) [1, 2]. When the set of possible y values is large, however, the computational cost
of computing a normalizing constant for each x can be prohibitive—involving a summation with
many terms, a high-dimensional integral or an expensive dynamic program.
The machine translation community has recently described several procedures for training “selfnormalized” log-linear models [3, 4]. The goal of self-normalization is to choose model parameters that simultaneously yield accurate predictions and produce normalizers clustered around unity.
Model scores can then be used as approximate surrogates for probabilities, obviating the computation normalizer computation.
In particular, given a model of the form
T

with

pη (y | x) = eη T (y, x)−A(η, x)
A (η, x) = log

!

T

eη T (y, x) ,

(1)
(2)

y∈Y

we seek a setting of η such that A(x, η) is close enough to zero (with high probability under p(x))
to be ignored.
∗

Authors contributed equally.

1

