Learning From Small Samples: An Analysis of
Simple Decision Heuristics

Özgür Şimşek and Marcus Buckmann
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany
{ozgur, buckmann}@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

Abstract
Simple decision heuristics are models of human and animal behavior that use few
pieces of information—perhaps only a single piece of information—and integrate
the pieces in simple ways, for example, by considering them sequentially, one at
a time, or by giving them equal weight. We focus on three families of heuristics:
single-cue decision making, lexicographic decision making, and tallying. It is
unknown how quickly these heuristics can be learned from experience. We show,
analytically and empirically, that substantial progress in learning can be made with
just a few training samples. When training samples are very few, tallying performs
substantially better than the alternative methods tested. Our empirical analysis is
the most extensive to date, employing 63 natural data sets on diverse subjects.

1

Introduction

You may remember that, on January 15, 2009, in New York City, a commercial passenger plane
struck a flock of geese within two minutes of taking off from LaGuardia Airport. The plane immediately and completely lost thrust from both engines, leaving the crew facing a number of critical
decisions, one of which was whether they could safely return to LaGuardia. The answer depended
on many factors, including the weight, velocity, and altitude of the aircraft, as well as wind speed and
direction. None of these factors, however, are directly involved in how pilots make such decisions.
As copilot Jeffrey Skiles discussed in a later interview [1], pilots instead use a single piece of visual
information: whether the desired destination is staying stationary in the windshield. If the destination is rising or descending, the plane will undershoot or overshoot the destination, respectively.
Using this visual cue, the flight crew concluded that LaGuardia was out of reach, deciding instead
to land on the Hudson River. Skiles reported that subsequent simulation experiments consistently
showed that the plane would indeed have crashed before reaching the airport.
Simple decision heuristics, such as the one employed by the flight crew, can provide effective solutions to complex problems [2, 3]. Some of these heuristics use a single piece of information; others
use multiple pieces of information but combine them in simple ways, for example, by considering
them sequentially, one at a time, or by giving them equal weight.
Our work is concerned with two questions: How effective are simple decision heuristics? And
how quickly can they be learned from experience? We focus on problems of comparison, where the
objective is to decide which of a given set of objects has the highest value on an unobserved criterion.
These problems are of fundamental importance in intelligent behavior. Humans and animals spend
much of their time choosing an object to act on, with respect to some criterion whose value is
unobserved at the time. Choosing a mate, a prey to chase, an investment strategy for a retirement
fund, or a publisher for a book are just a few examples. Earlier studies on this problem have shown
1

