Local Smoothness in Variance Reduced Optimization
Daniel Vainsencher, Han Liu
Dept. of Operations Research & Financial Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
{daniel.vainsencher,han.liu}@princeton.edu

Tong Zhang
Dept. of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ, 08854

tzhang@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We propose a family of non-uniform sampling strategies to provably speed up
a class of stochastic optimization algorithms with linear convergence including
Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient (SVRG) and Stochastic Dual Coordinate
Ascent (SDCA). For a large family of penalized empirical risk minimization problems, our methods exploit data dependent local smoothness of the loss functions
near the optimum, while maintaining convergence guarantees. Our bounds are the
first to quantify the advantage gained from local smoothness which are significant
for some problems significantly better. Empirically, we provide thorough numerical results to back up our theory. Additionally we present algorithms exploiting
local smoothness in more aggressive ways, which perform even better in practice.

1 Introduction
We consider minimization of functions of form
n
X

−1
φi x⊤
P (w) = n
i w + R (w)
i=1

where the convex φi corresponds to a loss of w on some data xi , R is a convex regularizer and P
is µ strongly convex, so that P (w′ ) ≥ P (w) + hw′ − w, ▽P (w)i + µ2 kw′ − wk2 . In addition,
we assume each φi is smooth in general and near flat in some region; examples include SVM,
regression with the absolute error or ε insensitive loss, smooth approximations of those, and also
logistic regression.
Stochastic optimization algorithms consider one loss φi at a time, chosen at random according to
a distribution pt which may change over time. Recent algorithms combine φi with information
about previously seen losses to accelerate the process, achieving linear convergence rate, including
Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient (SVRG) [2], Stochastic Averaged Gradient (SAG) [4], and
Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent (SDCA) [6].
 The expected number of iterations required by these
algorithms is of form O (n + L/µ) log ε−1 where L is a Lipschitz constant of all loss gradients
▽φi , measuring their smoothness. Difficult problems, having a condition number L/µ much larger
than n, are called ill conditioned, and have motivated the development of accelerated algorithms
[5, 8, 3]. Some of these algorithms have been adapted to allow importance sampling where pt is non
uniform; the effect on convergence bounds is to replace the uniform bound L described above by
Lavg , the average over Li , loss specific Lipschitz bounds.
In practice, for an important class of problems, a large proportion of φi need to be sampled only
very few times, and others indefinitely. As an example we take an instance of smooth SVM, with
µ = n−1 and L ≈ 30, solved via standard SDCA. In Figure 1 we observe the decay of an upper
bound on the updates possible for different samples, where choosing a sample that is white produces
no update. The large majority of the figure is white, indicating wasted effort. For 95% of losses,
the algorithm captured all relevant information after just 3 visits. Since the non white zone is nearly
constant over time, detecting and focusing on the few important losses should be possible. This
1

