Collaborative Filtering with Graph Information:
Consistency and Scalable Methods
Nikhil Rao

Hsiang-Fu Yu

Pradeep Ravikumar

Inderjit S. Dhillon

{nikhilr, rofuyu, paradeepr, inderjit}@cs.utexas.edu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Low rank matrix completion plays a fundamental role in collaborative filtering
applications, the key idea being that the variables lie in a smaller subspace than
the ambient space. Often, additional information about the variables is known,
and it is reasonable to assume that incorporating this information will lead to
better predictions. We tackle the problem of matrix completion when pairwise
relationships among variables are known, via a graph. We formulate and derive
a highly efficient, conjugate gradient based alternating minimization scheme that
solves optimizations with over 55 million observations up to 2 orders of magnitude faster than state-of-the-art (stochastic) gradient-descent based methods. On
the theoretical front, we show that such methods generalize weighted nuclear norm
formulations, and derive statistical consistency guarantees. We validate our results
on both real and synthetic datasets.

1

Introduction

Low rank matrix completion approaches are among the most widely used collaborative filtering
methods, where a partially observed matrix is available to the practitioner, who needs to impute the
missing entries. Specifically, suppose there exists a ratings matrix Y 2 Rm⇥n , and we only observe
a subset of the entries Yij , 8(i, j) 2 ⌦, |⌦| = N ⌧ mn. The goal is to estimate Yi,j , 8(i, j) 2
/ ⌦.
To this end, one typically looks to solve one of the following (equivalent) programs:
1
Ẑ = arg min kP⌦ (Y
Z 2
1
Ŵ , Ĥ = arg min kP⌦ (Y
W,H 2

Z)k2F +

(1)

z kZk⇤

W H T )k2F +

w

2

kW k2F +

h

2

kHk2F

(2)

where the nuclear norm kZk⇤ , given by the sum of singular values, is a tight convex relaxation of the
non convex rank penalty, and is equivalent to the regularizer in (2). P⌦ (·) is the projection operator
that only retains those entries of the matrix that lie in the set ⌦.
In many cases however, one not only has the partially observed ratings matrix, but also has access
to additional information about the relationships between the variables involved. For example, one
might have access to a social network of users. Similarly, one might have access to attributes of
items, movies, etc. The nature of the attributes can be fairly arbitrary, but it is reasonable to assume
that “similar” users/items share “similar” attributes. A natural question to ask then, is if one can take
advantage of this additional information to make better predictions. In this paper, we assume that
the row and column variables lie on graphs. The graphs may naturally be part of the data (social
networks, product co-purchasing graphs) or they can be constructed from available features. The
idea then is to incorporate this additional structural information into the matrix completion setting.
1

