Latent Bayesian melding for integrating individual
and population models

Mingjun Zhong, Nigel Goddard, Charles Sutton
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
United Kingdom
{mzhong,nigel.goddard,csutton}@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
In many statistical problems, a more coarse-grained model may be suitable for
population-level behaviour, whereas a more detailed model is appropriate for accurate modelling of individual behaviour. This raises the question of how to integrate both types of models. Methods such as posterior regularization follow
the idea of generalized moment matching, in that they allow matching expectations between two models, but sometimes both models are most conveniently
expressed as latent variable models. We propose latent Bayesian melding, which
is motivated by averaging the distributions over populations statistics of both the
individual-level and the population-level models under a logarithmic opinion pool
framework. In a case study on electricity disaggregation, which is a type of singlechannel blind source separation problem, we show that latent Bayesian melding
leads to significantly more accurate predictions than an approach based solely on
generalized moment matching.

1

Introduction

Good statistical models of populations are often very different from good models of individuals.
As an illustration, the population distribution over human height might be approximately normal,
but to model an individual’s height, we might use a more detailed discriminative model based on
many features of the individual’s genotype. As another example, in social network analysis, simple
models like the preferential attachment model [3] replicate aggregate network statistics such as
degree distributions, whereas to predict whether two individuals have a link, a social networking
web site might well use a classifier with many features of each person’s previous history. Of course
every model of an individual implies a model of the population, but models whose goal is to model
individuals tend to be necessarily more detailed.
These two styles of modelling represent different types of information, so it is natural to want to
combine them. A recent line of research in machine learning has explored the idea of incorporating
constraints into Bayesian models that are difficult to encode in standard prior distributions. These
methods, which include posterior regularization [9], learning with measurements [16], and the generalized expectation criterion [18], tend to follow a moment matching idea, in which expectations of
the distribution of one model are encouraged to match values based on prior information.
Interestingly, these ideas have precursors in the statistical literature on simulation models. In particular, Bayesian melding [21] considers applications in which there is a computer simulation M that
maps from model parameters θ to a quantity φ = M (θ). For example, M might summarize the
output of a deterministic simulation of population dynamics or some other physical phenomenon.
Bayesian melding considers the case in which we can build meaningful prior distributions over both
θ and φ. These two prior distributions need to be merged because of the deterministic relationship;
1

