Shepard Convolutional Neural Networks

Jimmy SJ. Ren∗
SenseTime Group Limited
rensijie@sensetime.com

Li Xu
SenseTime Group Limited
xuli@sensetime.com

Qiong Yan
SenseTime Group Limited
yanqiong@sensetime.com

Wenxiu Sun
SenseTime Group Limited
sunwenxiu@sensetime.com

Abstract
Deep learning has recently been introduced to the field of low-level computer
vision and image processing. Promising results have been obtained in a number of tasks including super-resolution, inpainting, deconvolution, filtering, etc.
However, previously adopted neural network approaches such as convolutional
neural networks and sparse auto-encoders are inherently with translation invariant
operators. We found this property prevents the deep learning approaches from
outperforming the state-of-the-art if the task itself requires translation variant interpolation (TVI). In this paper, we draw on Shepard interpolation and design
Shepard Convolutional Neural Networks (ShCNN) which efficiently realizes endto-end trainable TVI operators in the network. We show that by adding only a few
feature maps in the new Shepard layers, the network is able to achieve stronger
results than a much deeper architecture. Superior performance on both image inpainting and super-resolution is obtained where our system outperforms previous
ones while keeping the running time competitive.

1 Introduction
In the past a few years, deep learning has been very successful in addressing many aspects of visual
perception problems such as image classification, object detection, face recognition [1, 2, 3], to name
a few. Inspired by the breakthrough in high-level computer vision, several attempts have been made
very recently to apply deep learning methods in low-level vision as well as image processing tasks.
Encouraging results has been obtained in a number of tasks including image super-resolution [4],
inpainting [5], denosing [6], image deconvolution [7], dirt removal [8], edge-aware filtering [9] etc.
Powerful models with multiple layers of nonlinearity such as convolutional neural networks (CNN),
sparse auto-encoders, etc. were used in the previous studies. Notwithstanding the rapid progress and
promising performance, we notice that the building blocks of these models are inherently translation
invariant when applying to images. The property makes the network architecture less efficient in
handling translation variant operators, exemplified by the image interpolation operation.
Figure 1 illustrates the problem of image inpainting, a typical translation variant interpolation (TVI)
task. The black region in figure 1(a) indicates the missing region where the four selected patches
with missing parts are visualized in figure 1(b). The interpolation process for the central pixel in
each patch is done by four different weighting functions shown in the bottom of figure 1(b). This
process cannot be simply modeled by a single kernel due to the inherent spatially varying property.
In fact, the TVI operations are common in many vision applications. Image super-resolution, which
aims to interpolate a high resolution image with a low resolution observation also suffers from the
∗

Project page: http://www.deeplearning.cc/shepardcnn

1

