Monotone k-Submodular Function Maximization
with Size Constraints
Yuichi Yoshida
National Institute of Informatics, and
Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

Naoto Ohsaka
The University of Tokyo
ohsaka@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
A k-submodular function is a generalization of a submodular function, where the
input consists of k disjoint subsets, instead of a single subset, of the domain.
Many machine learning problems, including influence maximization with k kinds
of topics and sensor placement with k kinds of sensors, can be naturally modeled
as the problem of maximizing monotone k-submodular functions. In this paper,
we give constant-factor approximation algorithms for maximizing monotone ksubmodular functions subject to several size constraints. The running time of our
algorithms are almost linear in the domain size. We experimentally demonstrate
that our algorithms outperform baseline algorithms in terms of the solution quality.

1

Introduction

The task of selecting a set of items subject to constraints on the size or the cost of the set is versatile
in machine learning problems. The objective can be often modeled as maximizing a function with
the diminishing return property, where for a finite set V , a function f : 2V → R satisfies the
diminishing return property if
f (S ∪ {e}) − f (S) ≥ f (T ∪ {e}) − f (T )
for any S ⊆ T and e ∈ V \ T . For example, sensor placement [13, 14], influence maximization
in social networks [11], document summarization [15], and feature selection [12] involve objectives
satisfying the diminishing return property. It is well known that the diminishing return property is
equivalent to submodularity, where a function f : 2V → R is submodular if
f (S) + f (T ) ≥ f (S ∩ T ) + f (S ∪ T )
holds for any S, T ⊆ V . When the objective function is submodular and hence satisfies the diminishing return property, we can find in polynomial time a solution with a provable guarantee on its
solution quality even with various constraints [2, 3, 18, 21].
In many practical applications, however, we want to select several disjoint sets of items instead of a
single set. To see this, let us describe two examples:
Influence maximization: Viral marketing is a cost-effective marketing strategy that promotes products by giving free (or discounted) items to a selected group of highly influential people in the hope
that, through the word-of-mouth effects, a large number of product adoptions will occur [4, 19].
Suppose that we have k kinds of items, each having a different topic and thus a different word-ofmouth effect. Then, we want to distribute these items to B people selected from a group V of n
people so as to maximize the (expected) number of product adoptions. It is natural to impose a constraint that each person can receive at most one item since giving many free items to one particular
person would be unfair.
Sensor placement: There are k kinds of sensors for different measures such as temperature,
humidity, and illuminance. Suppose that we have Bi many sensors of the i-th kind for each
1

