The Consistency of Common Neighbors for
Link Prediction in Stochastic Blockmodels
Deepayan Chakrabarti
IROM, McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
deepay@utexas.edu

Purnamrita Sarkar
Department of Statistics
University of Texas at Austin
purnamritas@austin.utexas.edu

Peter Bickel
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
bickel@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Link prediction and clustering are key problems for network-structured
data. While spectral clustering has strong theoretical guarantees under
the popular stochastic blockmodel formulation of networks, it can be expensive for large graphs. On the other hand, the heuristic of predicting
links to nodes that share the most common neighbors with the query node
is much fast, and works very well in practice. We show theoretically that
the common neighbors heuristic can extract clusters with high probability when the graph is dense enough, and can do so even in sparser graphs
with the addition of a “cleaning” step. Empirical results on simulated and
real-world data support our conclusions.

1

Introduction

Networks are the simplest representation of relationships between entities, and as such have
attracted significant attention recently. Their applicability ranges from social networks such
as Facebook, to collaboration networks of researchers, citation networks of papers, trust
networks such as Epinions, and so on. Common applications on such data include ranking,
recommendation, and user segmentation, which have seen wide use in industry. Most of
these applications can be framed in terms of two problems: (a) link prediction, where the
goal is to find a few similar nodes to a given query node, and (b) clustering, where we want
to find groups of similar individuals, either around a given seed node or a full partitioning
of all nodes in the network.
An appealing model of networks is the stochastic blockmodel, which posits the existence of
a latent cluster for each node, with link probabilities between nodes being simply functions
of their clusters. Inference of the latent clusters allows one to solve both the link prediction
problem and the clustering problem (predict all nodes in the query node’s cluster). Strong
theoretical and empirical results have been achieved by spectral clustering, which uses the
singular value decomposition of the network followed by a clustering step on the eigenvectors
to determine the latent clusters.
However, singular value decomposition can be expensive, particularly for (a) large graphs,
when (b) many eigenvectors are desired. Unfortunately, both of these are common requirements. Instead, many fast heuristic methods are often used, and are empirically observed
to yield good results [8]. One particularly common and effective method is to predict links
to nodes that share many “common neighbors” with the query node q, i.e., rank nodes
by |CN (q, i)|, where CN (q, i) = {u | q ∼ u ∼ i} (i ∼ j represents an edge between i
1

