The Pseudo-Dimension of Near-Optimal Auctions
Jamie Morgenstern⇤
Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
jamiemor@cis.upenn.edu

Tim Roughgarden
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA
tim@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper develops a general approach, rooted in statistical learning theory, to
learning an approximately revenue-maximizing auction from data. We introduce
t-level auctions to interpolate between simple auctions, such as welfare maximization with reserve prices, and optimal auctions, thereby balancing the competing
demands of expressivity and simplicity. We prove that such auctions have small
representation error, in the sense that for every product distribution F over bidders’ valuations, there exists a t-level auction with small t and expected revenue
close to optimal. We show that the set of t-level auctions has modest pseudodimension (for polynomial t) and therefore leads to small learning error. One
consequence of our results is that, in arbitrary single-parameter settings, one can
learn a mechanism with expected revenue arbitrarily close to optimal from a polynomial number of samples.

1

Introduction

In the traditional economic approach to identifying a revenue-maximizing auction, one first posits
a prior distribution over all unknown information, and then solves for the auction that maximizes
expected revenue with respect to this distribution. The first obstacle to making this approach operational is the difficulty of formulating an appropriate prior. The second obstacle is that, even if an
appropriate prior distribution is available, the corresponding optimal auction can be far too complex
and unintuitive for practical use. This motivates the goal of identifying auctions that are “simple”
and yet nearly-optimal in terms of expected revenue.
In this paper, we apply tools from learning theory to address both of these challenges. In our model,
we assume that bidders’ valuations (i.e., “willingness to pay”) are drawn from an unknown distribution F . A learning algorithm is given i.i.d. samples from F . For example, these could represent
the outcomes of comparable transactions that were observed in the past. The learning algorithm
suggests an auction to use for future bidders, and its performance is measured by comparing the
expected revenue of its output auction to that earned by the optimal auction for the distribution F .
The possible outputs of the learning algorithm correspond to some set C of auctions. We view C as a
design parameter that can be selected by a seller, along with the learning algorithm. A central goal of
this work is to identify classes C that balance representation error (the amount of revenue sacrificed
by restricting to auctions in C) with learning error (the generalization error incurred by learning over
C from samples). That is, we seek a set C that is rich enough to contain an auction that closely
approximates an optimal auction (whatever F might be), yet simple enough that the best auction
in C can be learned from a small amount of data. Learning theory offers tools both for rigorously
defining the “simplicity” of a set C of auctions, through well-known complexity measures such as the
⇤
Part of this work done while visiting Stanford University. Partially supported by a Simons Award for
Graduate Students in Theoretical Computer Science, as well as NSF grant CCF-1415460.

1

