Rapidly Mixing Gibbs Sampling for a Class of Factor
Graphs Using Hierarchy Width

Christopher De Sa, Ce Zhang, Kunle Olukotun, and Christopher Ré
cdesa@stanford.edu, czhang@cs.wisc.edu,
kunle@stanford.edu, chrismre@stanford.edu
Departments of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract
Gibbs sampling on factor graphs is a widely used inference technique, which often produces good empirical results. Theoretical guarantees for its performance
are weak: even for tree structured graphs, the mixing time of Gibbs may be exponential in the number of variables. To help understand the behavior of Gibbs sampling, we introduce a new (hyper)graph property, called hierarchy width. We show
that under suitable conditions on the weights, bounded hierarchy width ensures
polynomial mixing time. Our study of hierarchy width is in part motivated by a
class of factor graph templates, hierarchical templates, which have bounded hierarchy width—regardless of the data used to instantiate them. We demonstrate a
rich application from natural language processing in which Gibbs sampling provably mixes rapidly and achieves accuracy that exceeds human volunteers.

1

Introduction

We study inference on factor graphs using Gibbs sampling, the de facto Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method [8, p. 505]. Specifically, our goal is to compute the marginal distribution of some
query variables using Gibbs sampling, given evidence about some other variables and a set of factor
weights. We focus on the case where all variables are discrete. In this situation, a Gibbs sampler
randomly updates a single variable at each iteration by sampling from its conditional distribution
given the values of all the other variables in the model. Many systems—such as Factorie [14],
OpenBugs [12], PGibbs [5], DimmWitted [28], and others [15, 22, 25]—use Gibbs sampling for
inference because it is fast to run, simple to implement, and often produces high quality empirical
results. However, theoretical guarantees about Gibbs are lacking. The aim of the technical result of
this paper is to provide new cases in which one can guarantee that Gibbs gives accurate results.
For an MCMC sampler like Gibbs sampling, the standard measure of efficiency is the mixing time
of the underlying Markov chain. We say that a Gibbs sampler mixes rapidly over a class of models
if its mixing time is at most polynomial in the number of variables in the model. Gibbs sampling
is known to mix rapidly for some models. For example, Gibbs sampling on the Ising model on a
graph with bounded degree is known to mix in quasilinear time for high temperatures [10, p. 201].
Recent work has outlined conditions under which Gibbs sampling of Markov Random Fields mixes
rapidly [11]. Continuous-valued Gibbs sampling over models with exponential-family distributions
is also known to mix rapidly [2, 3]. Each of these celebrated results still leaves a gap: there are
many classes of factor graphs on which Gibbs sampling seems to work very well—including as part
of systems that have won quality competitions [24]—for which there are no theoretical guarantees
of rapid mixing.
Many graph algorithms that take exponential time in general can be shown to run in polynomial
time as long as some graph property is bounded. For inference on factor graphs, the most commonly
1

