Deep Knowledge Tracing

Chris Piech∗ , Jonathan Bassen∗ , Jonathan Huang∗‡ , Surya Ganguli∗ ,
Mehran Sahami∗ , Leonidas Guibas∗ , Jascha Sohl-Dickstein∗†
∗
Stanford University, † Khan Academy, ‡ Google
{piech,jbassen}@cs.stanford.edu, jascha@stanford.edu,

Abstract
Knowledge tracing—where a machine models the knowledge of a student as they
interact with coursework—is a well established problem in computer supported
education. Though effectively modeling student knowledge would have high educational impact, the task has many inherent challenges. In this paper we explore
the utility of using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to model student learning.
The RNN family of models have important advantages over previous methods
in that they do not require the explicit encoding of human domain knowledge,
and can capture more complex representations of student knowledge. Using neural networks results in substantial improvements in prediction performance on a
range of knowledge tracing datasets. Moreover the learned model can be used for
intelligent curriculum design and allows straightforward interpretation and discovery of structure in student tasks. These results suggest a promising new line of
research for knowledge tracing and an exemplary application task for RNNs.

1

Introduction

Computer-assisted education promises open access to world class instruction and a reduction in the
growing cost of learning. We can develop on this promise by building models of large scale student
trace data on popular educational platforms such as Khan Academy, Coursera, and EdX.
Knowledge tracing is the task of modelling student knowledge over time so that we can accurately
predict how students will perform on future interactions. Improvement on this task means that resources can be suggested to students based on their individual needs, and content which is predicted
to be too easy or too hard can be skipped or delayed. Already, hand-tuned intelligent tutoring systems that attempt to tailor content show promising results [28]. One-on-one human tutoring can
produce learning gains for the average student on the order of two standard deviations [5] and machine learning solutions could provide these benefits of high quality personalized teaching to anyone
in the world for free. The knowledge tracing problem is inherently difficult as human learning is
grounded in the complexity of both the human brain and human knowledge. Thus, the use of rich
models seems appropriate. However most previous work in education relies on first order Markov
models with restricted functional forms.
In this paper we present a formulation that we call Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) in which we
apply flexible recurrent neural networks that are ‘deep’ in time to the task of knowledge tracing. This
family of models represents latent knowledge state, along with its temporal dynamics, using large
vectors of artificial ‘neurons’, and allows the latent variable representation of student knowledge to
be learned from data rather than hard-coded. The main contributions of this work are:
1. A novel way to encode student interactions as input to a recurrent neural network.
2. A 25% gain in AUC over the best previous result on a knowledge tracing benchmark.
3. Demonstration that our knowledge tracing model does not need expert annotations.
4. Discovery of exercise influence and generation of improved exercise curricula.
1

