Linear Response Methods for Accurate Covariance
Estimates from Mean Field Variational Bayes
Ryan Giordano
UC Berkeley
rgiordano@berkeley.edu

Tamara Broderick
MIT
tbroderick@csail.mit.edu

Michael Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Mean ﬁeld variational Bayes (MFVB) is a popular posterior approximation
method due to its fast runtime on large-scale data sets. However, a well known major failing of MFVB is that it underestimates the uncertainty of model variables
(sometimes severely) and provides no information about model variable covariance. We generalize linear response methods from statistical physics to deliver
accurate uncertainty estimates for model variables—both for individual variables
and coherently across variables. We call our method linear response variational
Bayes (LRVB). When the MFVB posterior approximation is in the exponential
family, LRVB has a simple, analytic form, even for non-conjugate models. Indeed, we make no assumptions about the form of the true posterior. We demonstrate the accuracy and scalability of our method on a range of models for both
simulated and real data.

1

Introduction

With increasingly efﬁcient data collection methods, scientists are interested in quickly analyzing
ever larger data sets. In particular, the promise of these large data sets is not simply to ﬁt old models
but instead to learn more nuanced patterns from data than has been possible in the past. In theory,
the Bayesian paradigm yields exactly these desiderata. Hierarchical modeling allows practitioners
to capture complex relationships between variables of interest. Moreover, Bayesian analysis allows
practitioners to quantify the uncertainty in any model estimates—and to do so coherently across all
of the model variables.
Mean ﬁeld variational Bayes (MFVB), a method for approximating a Bayesian posterior distribution, has grown in popularity due to its fast runtime on large-scale data sets [1–3]. But a well known
major failing of MFVB is that it gives underestimates of the uncertainty of model variables that
can be arbitrarily bad, even when approximating a simple multivariate Gaussian distribution [4–
6]. Also, MFVB provides no information about how the uncertainties in different model variables
interact [5–8].
By generalizing linear response methods from statistical physics [9–12] to exponential family variational posteriors, we develop a methodology that augments MFVB to deliver accurate uncertainty
estimates for model variables—both for individual variables and coherently across variables. In
particular, as we elaborate in Section 2, when the approximating posterior in MFVB is in the exponential family, MFVB deﬁnes a ﬁxed-point equation in the means of the approximating posterior,
1

