Regularization Path of
Cross-Validation Error Lower Bounds
Atsushi Shibagaki, Yoshiki Suzuki, Masayuki Karasuyama, and Ichiro Takeuchi
Nagoya Institute of Technology
Nagoya, 466-8555, Japan
{shibagaki.a.mllab.nit,suzuki.mllab.nit}@gmail.com
{karasuyama,takeuchi.ichiro}@nitech.ac.jp

Abstract
Careful tuning of a regularization parameter is indispensable in many machine
learning tasks because it has a significant impact on generalization performances.
Nevertheless, current practice of regularization parameter tuning is more of an art
than a science, e.g., it is hard to tell how many grid-points would be needed in
cross-validation (CV) for obtaining a solution with sufficiently small CV error. In
this paper we propose a novel framework for computing a lower bound of the CV
errors as a function of the regularization parameter, which we call regularization
path of CV error lower bounds. The proposed framework can be used for providing a theoretical approximation guarantee on a set of solutions in the sense that
how far the CV error of the current best solution could be away from best possible CV error in the entire range of the regularization parameters. Our numerical
experiments demonstrate that a theoretically guaranteed choice of a regularization
parameter in the above sense is possible with reasonable computational costs.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks involve careful tuning of a regularization parameter that controls the
balance between an empirical loss term and a regularization term. A regularization parameter is
usually selected by comparing the cross-validation (CV) errors at several different regularization
parameters. Although its choice has a significant impact on the generalization performances, the
current practice is still more of an art than a science. For example, in commonly used grid-search, it
is hard to tell how many grid points we should search over for obtaining sufficiently small CV error.
In this paper we introduce a novel framework for a class of regularized binary classification problems
that can compute a regularization path of CV error lower bounds. For an ε ∈ [0, 1], we define εapproximate regularization parameters to be a set of regularization parameters such that the CV
error of the solution at the regularization parameter is guaranteed to be no greater by ε than the best
possible CV error in the entire range of regularization parameters. Given a set of solutions obtained,
for example, by grid-search, the proposed framework allows us to provide a theoretical guarantee
of the current best solution by explicitly quantifying its approximation level ε in the above sense.
Furthermore, when a desired approximation level ε is specified, the proposed framework can be used
for efficiently finding one of the ε-approximate regularization parameters.
The proposed framework is built on a novel CV error lower bound represented as a function of the
regularization parameter, and this is why we call it as a regularization path of CV error lower bounds.
Our CV error lower bound can be computed by only using a finite number of solutions obtained by
arbitrary algorithms. It is thus easy to apply our framework to common regularization parameter tuning strategies such as grid-search or Bayesian optimization. Furthermore, the proposed framework
can be used not only with exact optimal solutions but also with sufficiently good approximate solu1

