Fast Two-Sample Testing with Analytic
Representations of Probability Measures
Kacper Chwialkowski
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL
kacper.chwialkowski@gmail.com
Dino Sejdinovic
Dept of Statistics, University of Oxford
dino.sejdinovic@gmail.com

Aaditya Ramdas
Dept. of EECS and Statistics, UC Berkeley
aramdas@cs.berkeley.edu

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a class of nonparametric two-sample tests with a cost linear in the
sample size. Two tests are given, both based on an ensemble of distances between analytic functions representing each of the distributions. The first test uses
smoothed empirical characteristic functions to represent the distributions, the second uses distribution embeddings in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. Analyticity implies that differences in the distributions may be detected almost surely at a
finite number of randomly chosen locations/frequencies. The new tests are consistent against a larger class of alternatives than the previous linear-time tests based
on the (non-smoothed) empirical characteristic functions, while being much faster
than the current state-of-the-art quadratic-time kernel-based or energy distancebased tests. Experiments on artificial benchmarks and on challenging real-world
testing problems demonstrate that our tests give a better power/time tradeoff than
competing approaches, and in some cases, better outright power than even the
most expensive quadratic-time tests. This performance advantage is retained even
in high dimensions, and in cases where the difference in distributions is not observable with low order statistics.

1 Introduction
Testing whether two random variables are identically distributed without imposing any parametric
assumptions on their distributions is important in a variety of scientific applications. These include
data integration in bioinformatics [6], benchmarking for steganography [20] and automated model
checking [19]. Such problems are addressed in the statistics literature via two-sample tests (also
known as homogeneity tests).
Traditional approaches to two-sample testing are based on distances between representations of the
distributions, such as density functions, cumulative distribution functions, characteristic functions or
mean embeddings in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) [27, 26]. These representations are
infinite dimensional objects, which poses challenges when defining a distance between distributions.
Examples of such distances include the classical Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance (sup-norm between
cumulative distribution functions); the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [9], an RKHS norm
of the difference between mean embeddings, and the N-distance (also known as energy distance)
[34, 31, 4], which is an MMD-based test for a particular family of kernels [25] . Tests may also be
based on quantities other than distances, an example being the Kernel Fisher Discriminant (KFD)
[12], the estimation of which still requires calculating the RKHS norm of a difference of mean
embeddings, with normalization by an inverse covariance operator.
1

