High-dimensional neural spike train analysis with
generalized count linear dynamical systems

Lars Buesing
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
lars@stat.columbia.edu

Yuanjun Gao
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
yg2312@columbia.edu
Krishna V. Shenoy
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
shenoy@stanford.edu

John P. Cunningham
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
Latent factor models have been widely used to analyze simultaneous recordings of
spike trains from large, heterogeneous neural populations. These models assume
the signal of interest in the population is a low-dimensional latent intensity that
evolves over time, which is observed in high dimension via noisy point-process
observations. These techniques have been well used to capture neural correlations
across a population and to provide a smooth, denoised, and concise representation of high-dimensional spiking data. One limitation of many current models
is that the observation model is assumed to be Poisson, which lacks the flexibility to capture under- and over-dispersion that is common in recorded neural data,
thereby introducing bias into estimates of covariance. Here we develop the generalized count linear dynamical system, which relaxes the Poisson assumption by
using a more general exponential family for count data. In addition to containing Poisson, Bernoulli, negative binomial, and other common count distributions
as special cases, we show that this model can be tractably learned by extending recent advances in variational inference techniques. We apply our model to
data from primate motor cortex and demonstrate performance improvements over
state-of-the-art methods, both in capturing the variance structure of the data and
in held-out prediction.

1

Introduction

Many studies and theories in neuroscience posit that high-dimensional populations of neural spike
trains are a noisy observation of some underlying, low-dimensional, and time-varying signal of
interest. As such, over the last decade researchers have developed and used a number of methods
for jointly analyzing populations of simultaneously recorded spike trains, and these techniques have
become a critical part of the neural data analysis toolkit [1]. In the supervised setting, generalized
linear models (GLM) have used stimuli and spiking history as covariates driving the spiking of the
neural population [2, 3, 4, 5]. In the unsupervised setting, latent variable models have been used
to extract low-dimensional hidden structure that captures the variability of the recorded data, both
temporally and across the population of neurons [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
1

