Active Learning from Weak and Strong Labelers

Chicheng Zhang
UC San Diego
chichengzhang@ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
UC San Diego
kamalika@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
An active learner is given a hypothesis class, a large set of unlabeled examples and
the ability to interactively query labels to an oracle of a subset of these examples;
the goal of the learner is to learn a hypothesis in the class that ﬁts the data well by
making as few label queries as possible.
This work addresses active learning with labels obtained from strong and weak
labelers, where in addition to the standard active learning setting, we have an extra
weak labeler which may occasionally provide incorrect labels. An example is
learning to classify medical images where either expensive labels may be obtained
from a physician (oracle or strong labeler), or cheaper but occasionally incorrect
labels may be obtained from a medical resident (weak labeler). Our goal is to
learn a classiﬁer with low error on data labeled by the oracle, while using the weak
labeler to reduce the number of label queries made to this labeler. We provide an
active learning algorithm for this setting, establish its statistical consistency, and
analyze its label complexity to characterize when it can provide label savings over
using the strong labeler alone.

1

Introduction

An active learner is given a hypothesis class, a large set of unlabeled examples and the ability to
interactively make label queries to an oracle on a subset of these examples; the goal of the learner is
to learn a hypothesis in the class that ﬁts the data well by making as few oracle queries as possible.
As labeling examples is a tedious task for any one person, many applications of active learning
involve synthesizing labels from multiple experts who may have slightly different labeling patterns.
While a body of recent empirical work [27, 28, 29, 25, 26, 11] has developed methods for combining
labels from multiple experts, little is known on the theory of actively learning with labels from
multiple annotators. For example, what kind of assumptions are needed for methods that use labels
from multiple sources to work, when these methods are statistically consistent, and when they can
yield beneﬁts over plain active learning are all open questions.
This work addresses these questions in the context of active learning from strong and weak labelers.
Speciﬁcally, in addition to unlabeled data and the usual labeling oracle in standard active learning,
we have an extra weak labeler. The labeling oracle is a gold standard – an expert on the problem
domain – and it provides high quality but expensive labels. The weak labeler is cheap, but may provide incorrect labels on some inputs. An example is learning to classify medical images where either
expensive labels may be obtained from a physician (oracle), or cheaper but occasionally incorrect
labels may be obtained from a medical resident (weak labeler). Our goal is to learn a classiﬁer in a
hypothesis class whose error with respect to the data labeled by the oracle is low, while exploiting
the weak labeler to reduce the number of queries made to this oracle. Observe that in our model
the weak labeler can be incorrect anywhere, and does not necessarily provide uniformly noisy labels
everywhere, as was assumed by some previous works [7, 23].
1

