Interactive Control of Diverse Complex Characters
with Neural Networks
Igor Mordatch, Kendall Lowrey, Galen Andrew, Zoran Popovic, Emanuel Todorov
Department of Computer Science, University of Washington
{mordatch,lowrey,galen,zoran,todorov}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We present a method for training recurrent neural networks to act as near-optimal
feedback controllers. It is able to generate stable and realistic behaviors for a
range of dynamical systems and tasks – swimming, flying, biped and quadruped
walking with different body morphologies. It does not require motion capture or
task-specific features or state machines. The controller is a neural network, having
a large number of feed-forward units that learn elaborate state-action mappings,
and a small number of recurrent units that implement memory states beyond the
physical system state. The action generated by the network is defined as velocity.
Thus the network is not learning a control policy, but rather the dynamics under an
implicit policy. Essential features of the method include interleaving supervised
learning with trajectory optimization, injecting noise during training, training for
unexpected changes in the task specification, and using the trajectory optimizer to
obtain optimal feedback gains in addition to optimal actions.

Figure 1: Illustration of the dynamical systems and tasks we have been able to control using the
same method and architecture. See the video accompanying the submission.

1

Introduction

Interactive real-time controllers that are capable of generating complex, stable and realistic movements have many potential applications including robotic control, animation and gaming. They can
also serve as computational models in biomechanics and neuroscience. Traditional methods for designing such controllers are time-consuming and largely manual, relying on motion capture datasets
or task-specific state machines. Our goal is to automate this process, by developing universal synthesis methods applicable to arbitrary behaviors, body morphologies, online changes in task objectives,
perturbations due to noise and modeling errors. This is also the ambitious goal of much work in
Reinforcement Learning and stochastic optimal control, however the goal has rarely been achieved
in continuous high-dimensional spaces involving complex dynamics.
Deep learning techniques on modern computers have produced remarkable results on a wide range
of tasks, using methods that are not significantly different from what was used decades ago. The
objective of the present paper is to design training methods that scale to larger and harder control
problems, even if most of the components were already known. Specifically, we combine supervised
1

