Robust Feature-Sample Linear Discriminant Analysis
for Brain Disorders Diagnosis

Ehsan Adeli-Mosabbeb, Kim-Han Thung, Le An, Feng Shi, Dinggang Shen, for the ADNI∗
Department of Radiology and BRIC
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA
{eadeli,khthung,le_an,fengshi,dgshen}@med.unc.edu

Abstract
A wide spectrum of discriminative methods is increasingly used in diverse applications for classification or regression tasks. However, many existing discriminative methods assume that the input data is nearly noise-free, which limits their
applications to solve real-world problems. Particularly for disease diagnosis, the
data acquired by the neuroimaging devices are always prone to different sources
of noise. Robust discriminative models are somewhat scarce and only a few attempts have been made to make them robust against noise or outliers. These
methods focus on detecting either the sample-outliers or feature-noises. Moreover, they usually use unsupervised de-noising procedures, or separately de-noise
the training and the testing data. All these factors may induce biases in the learning process, and thus limit its performance. In this paper, we propose a classification method based on the least-squares formulation of linear discriminant analysis, which simultaneously detects the sample-outliers and feature-noises. The
proposed method operates under a semi-supervised setting, in which both labeled
training and unlabeled testing data are incorporated to form the intrinsic geometry
of the sample space. Therefore, the violating samples or feature values are identified as sample-outliers or feature-noises, respectively. We test our algorithm on
one synthetic and two brain neurodegenerative databases (particularly for Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease). The results demonstrate that our method
outperforms all baseline and state-of-the-art methods, in terms of both accuracy
and the area under the ROC curve.

1

Introduction

Discriminative methods pursue a direct mapping from the input to the output space for a classification or a regression task. As an example, linear discriminant analysis (LDA) aims to find the
mapping that reduces the input dimensionality, while preserving the most class discriminatory information. Discriminative methods usually achieve good classification results compared to the generative models, when there are enough number of training samples. But they are limited when there
are small number of labeled data, as well as when the data is noisy. Various efforts have been made
to add robustness to these methods. For instance, [17] and [9] proposed robust Fisher/linear discriminant analysis methods, and [19] introduced a worst-case LDA, by minimizing the upper bound of
the LDA cost function. These methods are all robust to sample-outliers. On the other hand, some
methods were proposed to deal with the intra-sample-outliers (or feature-noises), such as [12, 15].
∗
Parts of the data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (http://adni.loni.ucla.edu). The investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or
writing of this paper. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.
ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/howtoapply/ADNIAcknowledgementList.pdf.

1

