A Gaussian Process Model of Quasar
Spectral Energy Distributions

Andrew Miller∗ , Albert Wu
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
acm@seas.harvard.edu, awu@college.harvard.edu
Jeffrey Regier, Jon McAuliffe
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
{jeff, jon}@stat.berkeley.edu

Dustin Lang
McWilliams Center for Cosmology
Carnegie Mellon University
dstn@cmu.edu
Ryan Adams †
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
rpa@seas.harvard.edu

Prabhat, David Schlegel
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
{prabhat, djschlegel}@lbl.gov

Abstract
We propose a method for combining two sources of astronomical data, spectroscopy and photometry, that carry information about sources of light (e.g., stars,
galaxies, and quasars) at extremely different spectral resolutions. Our model treats
the spectral energy distribution (SED) of the radiation from a source as a latent
variable that jointly explains both photometric and spectroscopic observations.
We place a flexible, nonparametric prior over the SED of a light source that admits a physically interpretable decomposition, and allows us to tractably perform
inference. We use our model to predict the distribution of the redshift of a quasar
from five-band (low spectral resolution) photometric data, the so called “photoz” problem. Our method shows that tools from machine learning and Bayesian
statistics allow us to leverage multiple resolutions of information to make accurate predictions with well-characterized uncertainties.

1

Introduction

Enormous amounts of astronomical data are collected by a range of instruments at multiple spectral
resolutions, providing information about billions of sources of light in the observable universe [1,
10]. Among these data are measurements of the spectral energy distributions (SEDs) of sources of
light (e.g. stars, galaxies, and quasars). The SED describes the distribution of energy radiated by a
source over the spectrum of wavelengths or photon energy levels. SEDs are of interesting because
they convey information about a source’s physical properties, including type, chemical composition,
and redshift, which will be an estimand of interest in this work.
The SED can be thought of as a latent function of which we can only obtain noisy measurements.
Measurements of SEDs, however, are produced by instruments at widely varying spectral resolutions – some instruments measure many wavelengths simultaneously (spectroscopy), while others
∗
†

http://people.seas.harvard.edu/~acm/
http://people.seas.harvard.edu/~rpa/

1

