Orthogonal NMF through Subspace Exploration

Megasthenis Asteris
The University of Texas at Austin
megas@utexas.edu

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of California, Berkeley
dimitrisp@berkeley.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
The University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Orthogonal Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (ONMF) aims to approximate a
nonnegative matrix as the product of two k-dimensional nonnegative factors, one
of which has orthonormal columns. It yields potentially useful data representations as superposition of disjoint parts, while it has been shown to work well
for clustering tasks where traditional methods underperform. Existing algorithms
rely mostly on heuristics, which despite their good empirical performance, lack
provable performance guarantees.
We present a new ONMF algorithm with provable approximation guarantees. For
any constant dimension k, we obtain an additive EPTAS without any assumptions
on the input. Our algorithm relies on a novel approximation to the related Nonnegative Principal Component Analysis (NNPCA) problem; given an arbitrary
data matrix, NNPCA seeks k nonnegative components that jointly capture most
of the variance. Our NNPCA algorithm is of independent interest and generalizes
previous work that could only obtain guarantees for a single component.
We evaluate our algorithms on several real and synthetic datasets and show that
their performance matches or outperforms the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Orthogonal NMF The success of Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) in a range of disciplines spanning data mining, chemometrics, signal processing and more, has driven an extensive
practical and theoretical study [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Its power lies in its potential to generate
meaningful decompositions of data into non-subtractive combinations of a few nonnegative parts.
Orthogonal NMF (ONMF) [9] is a variant of NMF with an additional orthogonality constraint: given
a real nonnegative m × n matrix M and a target dimension k, typically much smaller than m and n,
we seek to approximate M by the product of an m × k nonnegative matrix W with orthogonal
(w.l.o.g, orthonormal) columns, and an n × k nonnegative matrix H. In the form of an optimization,
(ONMF)

E⋆ ,

min

W≥0, H≥0
W⊤ W=Ik

kM − WH⊤ k2F .

(1)

Since W is nonnegative, its columns are orthogonal if and only if they have disjoint supports. In
turn, each row of M is approximated by a scaled version of a single (transposed) column of H.
Despite the admittedly limited representational power compared to NMF, ONMF yields sparser partbased representations that are potentially easier to interpret, while it naturally lends itself to certain
applications. In a clustering setting, for example, W serves as a cluster membership matrix and the
1

