Model-Based Relative Entropy Stochastic Search

Abbas Abdolmaleki1,2,3 , Rudolf Lioutikov4 , Nuno Lau1 , Luis Paulo Reis2,3 ,
Jan Peters4,6 , and Gerhard Neumann5
1: IEETA, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
2: DSI, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
3: LIACC, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
4: IAS, 5: CLAS, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
6: Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Stuttgart, Germany
{Lioutikov,peters,neumann}@ias.tu-darmstadt.de
{abbas.a, nunolau}@ua.pt, lpreis@dsi.uminho.pt

Abstract
Stochastic search algorithms are general black-box optimizers. Due to their ease
of use and their generality, they have recently also gained a lot of attention in operations research, machine learning and policy search. Yet, these algorithms require
a lot of evaluations of the objective, scale poorly with the problem dimension, are
affected by highly noisy objective functions and may converge prematurely. To
alleviate these problems, we introduce a new surrogate-based stochastic search
approach. We learn simple, quadratic surrogate models of the objective function.
As the quality of such a quadratic approximation is limited, we do not greedily exploit the learned models. The algorithm can be misled by an inaccurate optimum
introduced by the surrogate. Instead, we use information theoretic constraints to
bound the ‘distance’ between the new and old data distribution while maximizing
the objective function. Additionally the new method is able to sustain the exploration of the search distribution to avoid premature convergence. We compare our
method with state of art black-box optimization methods on standard uni-modal
and multi-modal optimization functions, on simulated planar robot tasks and a
complex robot ball throwing task. The proposed method considerably outperforms the existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Stochastic search algorithms [1, 2, 3, 4] are black box optimizers of an objective function that is
either unknown or too complex to be modeled explicitly. These algorithms only make weak assumption on the structure of underlying objective function. They only use the objective values and don’t
require gradients or higher derivatives of the objective function. Therefore, they are well suited
for black box optimization problems. Stochastic search algorithms typically maintain a stochastic search distribution over parameters of the objective function, which is typically a multivariate
Gaussian distribution [1, 2, 3]. This policy is used to create samples from the objective function.
Subsequently, a new stochastic search distribution is computed by either computing gradient based
updates [2, 4, 5], evolutionary strategies [1], the cross-entropy method [7], path integrals [3, 8], or
information-theoretic policy updates [9]. Information-theoretic policy updates [10, 9, 2] bound the
relative entropy (also called Kullback Leibler or KL divergence) between two subsequent policies.
Using a KL-bound for the update of the search distribution is a common approach in the stochastic
search. However, such information theoretic bounds could so far only be approximately applied
either by using Taylor-expansions of the KL-divergence resulting in natural evolutionary strategies (NES) [2, 11], or sample-based approximations, resulting in the relative entropy policy search
1

