Learning with a Wasserstein Loss
Charlie Frogner⇤ Chiyuan Zhang⇤
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
frogner@mit.edu, chiyuan@mit.edu
Mauricio Araya-Polo
Shell International E & P, Inc.
Mauricio.Araya@shell.com

Hossein Mobahi
CSAIL
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
hmobahi@csail.mit.edu
Tomaso Poggio
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
tp@ai.mit.edu

Abstract
Learning to predict multi-label outputs is challenging, but in many problems there
is a natural metric on the outputs that can be used to improve predictions. In this
paper we develop a loss function for multi-label learning, based on the Wasserstein
distance. The Wasserstein distance provides a natural notion of dissimilarity for
probability measures. Although optimizing with respect to the exact Wasserstein
distance is costly, recent work has described a regularized approximation that is
efficiently computed. We describe an efficient learning algorithm based on this
regularization, as well as a novel extension of the Wasserstein distance from probability measures to unnormalized measures. We also describe a statistical learning
bound for the loss. The Wasserstein loss can encourage smoothness of the predictions with respect to a chosen metric on the output space. We demonstrate this
property on a real-data tag prediction problem, using the Yahoo Flickr Creative
Commons dataset, outperforming a baseline that doesn’t use the metric.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning to predict a non-negative measure over a finite set. This problem includes many common machine learning scenarios. In multiclass classification, for example,
one often predicts a vector of scores or probabilities for the classes. And in semantic segmentation [1], one can model the segmentation as being the support of a measure defined over the pixel
locations. Many problems in which the output of the learning machine is both non-negative and
multi-dimensional might be cast as predicting a measure.
We specifically focus on problems in which the output space has a natural metric or similarity structure, which is known (or estimated) a priori. In practice, many learning problems have such structure. In the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge [ILSVRC] [2], for example, the
output dimensions correspond to 1000 object categories that have inherent semantic relationships,
some of which are captured in the WordNet hierarchy that accompanies the categories. Similarly, in
the keyword spotting task from the IARPA Babel speech recognition project, the outputs correspond
to keywords that likewise have semantic relationships. In what follows, we will call the similarity
structure on the label space the ground metric or semantic similarity.
Using the ground metric, we can measure prediction performance in a way that is sensitive to relationships between the different output dimensions. For example, confusing dogs with cats might
⇤

1

Authors contributed equally.
Code and data are available at http://cbcl.mit.edu/wasserstein.

1

