Learning Theory and Algorithms for
Forecasting Non-Stationary Time Series
Vitaly Kuznetsov
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10011

Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google Research
New York, NY 10011

vitaly@cims.nyu.edu

mohri@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present data-dependent learning bounds for the general scenario of nonstationary non-mixing stochastic processes. Our learning guarantees are expressed
in terms of a data-dependent measure of sequential complexity and a discrepancy
measure that can be estimated from data under some mild assumptions. We use
our learning bounds to devise new algorithms for non-stationary time series forecasting for which we report some preliminary experimental results.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays a crucial role in a number of domains ranging from weather forecasting and earthquake prediction to applications in economics and finance. The classical statistical
approaches to time series analysis are based on generative models such as the autoregressive moving
average (ARMA) models, or their integrated versions (ARIMA) and several other extensions [Engle, 1982, Bollerslev, 1986, Brockwell and Davis, 1986, Box and Jenkins, 1990, Hamilton, 1994].
Most of these models rely on strong assumptions about the noise terms, often assumed to be i.i.d.
random variables sampled from a Gaussian distribution, and the guarantees provided in their support
are only asymptotic.
An alternative non-parametric approach to time series analysis consists of extending the standard
i.i.d. statistical learning theory framework to that of stochastic processes. In much of this work, the
process is assumed to be stationary and suitably mixing [Doukhan, 1994]. Early work along this
approach consisted of the VC-dimension bounds for binary classification given by Yu [1994] under
the assumption of stationarity and -mixing. Under the same assumptions, Meir [2000] presented
bounds in terms of covering numbers for regression losses and Mohri and Rostamizadeh [2009]
proved general data-dependent Rademacher complexity learning bounds. Vidyasagar [1997] showed
that PAC learning algorithms in the i.i.d. setting preserve their PAC learning property in the -mixing
stationary scenario. A similar result was proven by Shalizi and Kontorovitch [2013] for mixtures
of -mixing processes and by Berti and Rigo [1997] and Pestov [2010] for exchangeable random
variables. Alquier and Wintenberger [2010] and Alquier et al. [2014] also established PAC-Bayesian
learning guarantees under weak dependence and stationarity.
A number of algorithm-dependent bounds have also been derived for the stationary mixing setting.
Lozano et al. [2006] studied the convergence of regularized boosting. Mohri and Rostamizadeh
[2010] gave data-dependent generalization bounds for stable algorithms for '-mixing and -mixing
stationary processes. Steinwart and Christmann [2009] proved fast learning rates for regularized
algorithms with ↵-mixing stationary sequences and Modha and Masry [1998] gave guarantees for
certain classes of models under the same assumptions.
However, stationarity and mixing are often not valid assumptions. For example, even for Markov
chains, which are among the most widely used types of stochastic processes in applications, stationarity does not hold unless the Markov chain is started with an equilibrium distribution. Similarly,
1

