On the Limitation of Spectral Methods:
From the Gaussian Hidden Clique Problem to
Rank-One Perturbations of Gaussian Tensors
Andrea Montanari
Department of Electrical Engineering and Department of Statistics. Stanford University.
montanari@stanford.edu
Daniel Reichman
Department of Cognitive and Brain Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA
daniel.reichman@gmail.com
Ofer Zeitouni
Faculty of Mathematics, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100, Israel
and Courant Institute, New York University
ofer.zeitouni@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the following detection problem: given a realization of a symmetric
matrix X of dimension n, distinguish between the hypothesis that all upper triangular variables are i.i.d. Gaussians variables with mean 0 and variance 1 and
the hypothesis that there is a planted principal submatrix B of dimension L for
which all upper triangular variables are i.i.d. Gaussians with mean 1 and variance
1, whereas all other upper triangular elements of X not in B are i.i.d. Gaussians
variables with mean 0 and variance 1.√ We refer to this as the ‘Gaussian hidden
clique problem’. When L = (1 + ) n ( > 0), it is possible to solve this detection problem with probability 1 − on (1) by computing the spectrum of √
X and
considering the largest eigenvalue of X. We prove that when L < (1 − ) n no
algorithm that examines only the eigenvalues of X can detect the existence of a
hidden Gaussian clique, with error probability vanishing as n → ∞. The result
above is an immediate consequence of a more general result on rank-one perturbations of k-dimensional Gaussian tensors. In this context we establish a lower
bound on the critical signal-to-noise ratio below which a rank-one signal cannot
be detected.

1

Introduction

Consider the following detection problem. One is given a symmetric matrix X = X(n) of dimension n, such that the n2 + n entries (Xi,j )i≤j are mutually independent random variables. Given
(a realization of) X one would like to distinguish between the hypothesis that all random variables
Xi,j have the same distribution F0 to the hypothesis where there is a set U ⊆ [n], with L := |U |,
so that all random variables in the submatrix XU := (Xs,t : s, t ∈ U ) have a distribution F1 that is
different from the distribution of all other elements in X which are still distributed as F0 . We refer
to XU as the hidden submatrix.
1

