Mixed Robust/Average Submodular Partitioning:
Fast Algorithms, Guarantees, and Applications

Kai Wei1

Rishabh Iyer1

Shengjie Wang2

Wenruo Bai1

Jeff Bilmes1

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Washington
{kaiwei, rkiyer, wangsj, wrbai, bilmes}@u.washington.edu

Abstract
We investigate two novel mixed robust/average-case submodular data partitioning
problems that we collectively call Submodular Partitioning. These problems generalize purely robust instances of the problem, namely max-min submodular fair
allocation (SFA) [12] and min-max submodular load balancing (SLB) [25], and
also average-case instances, that is the submodular welfare problem (SWP) [26]
and submodular multiway partition (SMP) [5]. While the robust versions have been
studied in the theory community [11, 12, 16, 25, 26], existing work has focused
on tight approximation guarantees, and the resultant algorithms are not generally
scalable to large real-world applications. This is in contrast to the average case,
where most of the algorithms are scalable. In the present paper, we bridge this gap,
by proposing several new algorithms (including greedy, majorization-minimization,
minorization-maximization, and relaxation algorithms) that not only scale to large
datasets but that also achieve theoretical approximation guarantees comparable
to the state-of-the-art. We moreover provide new scalable algorithms that apply
to additive combinations of the robust and average-case objectives. We show that
these problems have many applications in machine learning (ML), including data
partitioning and load balancing for distributed ML, data clustering, and image segmentation. We empirically demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithms on real-world
problems involving data partitioning for distributed optimization (of convex and
deep neural network objectives), and also purely unsupervised image segmentation.

1

Introduction

The problem of data partitioning is of great importance to many machine learning (ML) and data
science applications as is evidenced by the wealth of clustering procedures that have been and continue
to be developed and used. Most data partitioning problems are based on expected, or average-case,
utility objectives where the goal is to optimize a sum of cluster costs, and this includes the ubiquitous
k-means procedure [1]. Other algorithms are based on robust objective functions [10], where the
goal is to optimize the worst-case cluster cost. Such robust algorithms are particularly important
in mission critical applications, such as parallel and distributed computing, where one single poor
partition block can significantly slow down an entire parallel machine (as all compute nodes might
need to spin while waiting for a slow node to complete a round of computation). Taking a weighted
combination of both robust and average case objective functions allows one to balance between
optimizing worst-case and overall performance. We are unaware, however, of any previous work that
allows for a mixing between worst- and average-case objectives in the context of data partitioning.
This paper studies two new mixed robust/average-case partitioning problems of the following form:
1

