Kullback-Leibler Proximal Variational Inference
Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan∗
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
emtiyaz@gmail.com

Pierre Baqué∗
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
pierre.baque@epfl.ch
Pascal Fua
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.fua@epfl.ch

François Fleuret
Idiap Research Institute
Martigny, Switzerland
francois.fleuret@idiap.ch

Abstract
We propose a new variational inference method based on a proximal framework
that uses the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence as the proximal term. We make
two contributions towards exploiting the geometry and structure of the variational
bound. First, we propose a KL proximal-point algorithm and show its equivalence
to variational inference with natural gradients (e.g., stochastic variational inference). Second, we use the proximal framework to derive efficient variational algorithms for non-conjugate models. We propose a splitting procedure to separate
non-conjugate terms from conjugate ones. We linearize the non-conjugate terms
to obtain subproblems that admit a closed-form solution. Overall, our approach
converts inference in a non-conjugate model to subproblems that involve inference
in well-known conjugate models. We show that our method is applicable to a wide
variety of models and can result in computationally efficient algorithms. Applications to real-world datasets show comparable performances to existing methods.

1

Introduction

Variational methods are a popular alternative to Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods for
Bayesian inference. They have been used extensively for their speed and ease of use. In particular,
methods based on the evidence lower bound optimization (ELBO) are quite popular because they
convert a difficult integration problem to an optimization problem. This reformulation enables the
application of optimization techniques for large-scale Bayesian inference.
Recently, an approach called stochastic variational inference (SVI) has gained popularity for inference in conditionally-conjugate exponential family models [1]. SVI exploits the geometry of the
posterior distribution by using natural gradients and uses a stochastic method to improve scalability.
The resulting updates are simple and easy to implement.
Several generalizations of SVI have been proposed for general latent-variable models where the
lower bound might be intractable [2, 3, 4]. These generalizations, although important, do not take
the geometry of the posterior distribution into account.
In addition, none of these approaches exploit the structure of the lower bound. In practice, not all
factors of the joint distribution introduce difficulty in the optimization. It is therefore desirable to
treat “difficult” terms differently from “easy” terms.
∗
A note on contributions: P. Baqué proposed the use of the KL proximal term and showed that the resulting
proximal steps have closed-form solutions. The rest of the work was carried out by M. E. Khan.

1

