Double or Nothing: Multiplicative
Incentive Mechanisms for Crowdsourcing
Nihar B. Shah
University of California, Berkeley
nihar@eecs.berkeley.edu

Dengyong Zhou
Microsoft Research
dengyong.zhou@microsoft.com

Abstract
Crowdsourcing has gained immense popularity in machine learning applications
for obtaining large amounts of labeled data. Crowdsourcing is cheap and fast, but
suffers from the problem of low-quality data. To address this fundamental challenge in crowdsourcing, we propose a simple payment mechanism to incentivize
workers to answer only the questions that they are sure of and skip the rest. We
show that surprisingly, under a mild and natural “no-free-lunch” requirement, this
mechanism is the one and only incentive-compatible payment mechanism possible. We also show that among all possible incentive-compatible mechanisms
(that may or may not satisfy no-free-lunch), our mechanism makes the smallest possible payment to spammers. Interestingly, this unique mechanism takes a
“multiplicative” form. The simplicity of the mechanism is an added benefit. In
preliminary experiments involving over several hundred workers, we observe a
significant reduction in the error rates under our unique mechanism for the same
or lower monetary expenditure.

1

Introduction

Complex machine learning tools such as deep learning are gaining increasing popularity and are
being applied to a wide variety of problems. These tools, however, require large amounts of labeled
data [HDY+ 12, RYZ+ 10, DDS+ 09, CBW+ 10]. These large labeling tasks are being performed by
coordinating crowds of semi-skilled workers through the Internet. This is known as crowdsourcing.
Crowdsourcing as a means of collecting labeled training data has now become indispensable to the
engineering of intelligent systems.
Most workers in crowdsourcing are not experts. As a consequence, labels obtained from crowdsourcing typically have a significant amount of error [KKKMF11, VdVE11, WLC+ 10]. Recent
efforts have focused on developing statistical techniques to post-process the noisy labels in order
to improve its quality (e.g., [RYZ+ 10, ZLP+ 15, KOS11, IPSW14]). However, when the inputs to
these algorithms are erroneous, it is difficult to guarantee that the processed labels will be reliable
enough for subsequent use by machine learning or other applications. In order to avoid “garbage in,
garbage out”, we take a complementary approach to this problem: cleaning the data at the time of
collection.
We consider crowdsourcing settings where the workers are paid for their services, such as in the
popular crowdsourcing platforms of Amazon Mechanical Turk and others. These commercial platforms have gained substantial popularity due to their support for a diverse range of tasks for machine
learning labeling, varying from image annotation and text recognition to speech captioning and machine translation. We consider problems that are objective in nature, that is, have a definite answer.
Figure 1a depicts an example of such a question where the worker is shown a set of images, and for
each image, the worker is required to identify if the image depicts the Golden Gate Bridge.
1

