Sample Complexity of Episodic Fixed-Horizon
Reinforcement Learning

Emma Brunskill
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
ebrun@cs.cmu.edu

Christoph Dann
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
cdann@cdann.net

Abstract
Recently, there has been significant progress in understanding reinforcement
learning in discounted infinite-horizon Markov decision processes (MDPs) by deriving tight sample complexity bounds. However, in many real-world applications,
an interactive learning agent operates for a fixed or bounded period of time, for
example tutoring students for exams or handling customer service requests. Such
scenarios can often be better treated as episodic fixed-horizon MDPs, for which
only looser bounds on the sample complexity exist. A natural notion of sample
complexity in this setting is the number of episodes required to guarantee a certain
performance with high probability (PAC guarantee). In this paper, we derive an
2
2
2
1
upper PAC bound Õ( |S| |A|H
ln 1δ ) and a lower PAC bound Ω̃( |S||A|H
ln δ+c
)
2
2
that match up to log-terms and an additional linear dependency on the number of
states |S|. The lower bound is the first of its kind for this setting. Our upper bound
leverages Bernstein’s inequality to improve on previous bounds for episodic finitehorizon MDPs which have a time-horizon dependency of at least H 3 .

1

Introduction and Motivation

Consider test preparation software that tutors students for a national advanced placement exam taken
at the end of a year, or maximizing business revenue by the end of each quarter. Each individual
task instance requires making a sequence of decisions for a fixed number of steps H (e.g., tutoring
one student to take an exam in spring 2015 or maximizing revenue for the end of the second quarter
of 2014). Therefore, they can be viewed as a finite-horizon sequential decision making under uncertainty problem, in contrast to an infinite horizon setting in which the number of time steps is infinite.
When the domain parameters (e.g. Markov decision process parameters) are not known in advance,
and there is the opportunity to repeat the task many times (teaching a new student for each year’s
exam, maximizing revenue for each new quarter), this can be treated as episodic fixed-horizon reinforcement learning (RL). One important question is to understand how much experience is required
to act well in this setting. We formalize this as the sample complexity of reinforcement learning [1],
which is the number of time steps on which the algorithm may select an action whose value is not
near-optimal. RL algorithms with a sample complexity that is a polynomial function of the domain
parameters are referred to as Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) [2, 3, 4, 1]. Though there has
been significant work on PAC RL algorithms for the infinite horizon setting, there has been relatively
little work on the finite horizon scenario.
In this paper we present the first, to our knowledge, lower bound, and a new upper bound on the
sample complexity of episodic finite horizon PAC reinforcement learning in discrete state-action
spaces. Our bounds are tight up to log-factors in the time horizon H, the accuracy , the number
of actions |A| and up to an additive constant in the failure probability δ. These bounds improve
upon existing results by a factor of at least H. Our results also apply when the reward model
is a function of the within-episode time step in addition to the state and action space. While we
assume a stationary transition model, our results can be extended readily to time-dependent state1

