Hessian-free Optimization for Learning
Deep Multidimensional Recurrent Neural Networks

Minhyung Cho
Chandra Shekhar Dhir
Jaehyung Lee
Applied Research Korea, Gracenote Inc.
{mhyung.cho,shekhardhir}@gmail.com
jaehyung.lee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multidimensional recurrent neural networks (MDRNNs) have shown a remarkable performance in the area of speech and handwriting recognition. The performance of an MDRNN is improved by further increasing its depth, and the difficulty of learning the deeper network is overcome by using Hessian-free (HF)
optimization. Given that connectionist temporal classification (CTC) is utilized as
an objective of learning an MDRNN for sequence labeling, the non-convexity of
CTC poses a problem when applying HF to the network. As a solution, a convex
approximation of CTC is formulated and its relationship with the EM algorithm
and the Fisher information matrix is discussed. An MDRNN up to a depth of 15
layers is successfully trained using HF, resulting in an improved performance for
sequence labeling.

1

Introduction

Multidimensional recurrent neural networks (MDRNNs) constitute an efficient architecture for
building a multidimensional context into recurrent neural networks [1]. End-to-end training of
MDRNNs in conjunction with connectionist temporal classification (CTC) has been shown to
achieve a state-of-the-art performance in on/off-line handwriting and speech recognition [2, 3, 4].
In previous approaches, the performance of MDRNNs having a depth of up to five layers, which
is limited as compared to the recent progress in feedforward networks [5], was demonstrated. The
effectiveness of MDRNNs deeper than five layers has thus far been unknown.
Training a deep architecture has always been a challenging topic in machine learning. A notable
breakthrough was achieved when deep feedforward neural networks were initialized using layerwise pre-training [6]. Recently, approaches have been proposed in which supervision is added to
intermediate layers to train deep networks [5, 7]. To the best of our knowledge, no such pre-training
or bootstrapping method has been developed for MDRNNs.
Alternatively, Hesssian-free (HF) optimization is an appealing approach to training deep neural
networks because of its ability to overcome pathological curvature of the objective function [8].
Furthermore, it can be applied to any connectionist model provided that its objective function is
differentiable. The recent success of HF for deep feedforward and recurrent neural networks [8, 9]
supports its application to MDRNNs.
In this paper, we claim that an MDRNN can benefit from a deeper architecture, and the application of
second order optimization such as HF allows its successful learning. First, we offer details of the development of HF optimization for MDRNNs. Then, to apply HF optimization for sequence labeling
tasks, we address the problem of the non-convexity of CTC, and formulate a convex approximation.
In addition, its relationship with the EM algorithm and the Fisher information matrix is discussed.
Experimental results for offline handwriting and phoneme recognition show that an MDRNN with
HF optimization performs better as the depth of the network increases up to 15 layers.
1

