Smooth Interactive Submodular Set Cover
Yisong Yue
California Institute of Technology
yyue@caltech.edu

Bryan He
Stanford University
bryanhe@stanford.edu

Abstract
Interactive submodular set cover is an interactive variant of submodular set cover
over a hypothesis class of submodular functions, where the goal is to satisfy
all sufficiently plausible submodular functions to a target threshold using as few
(cost-weighted) actions as possible. It models settings where there is uncertainty
regarding which submodular function to optimize. In this paper, we propose a new
extension, which we call smooth interactive submodular set cover, that allows the
target threshold to vary depending on the plausibility of each hypothesis. We
present the first algorithm for this more general setting with theoretical guarantees
on optimality. We further show how to extend our approach to deal with realvalued functions, which yields new theoretical results for real-valued submodular
set cover for both the interactive and non-interactive settings.

1

Introduction

In interactive submodular set cover (ISSC) [10, 11, 9], the goal is to interactively satisfy all plausible
submodular functions in as few actions as possible. ISSC is a wide-encompassing framework that
generalizes both submodular set cover [24] by virtue of being interactive, as well as some instances
of active learning by virtue of many active learning criteria being submodular [12, 9].
A key characteristic of ISSC is the a priori uncertainty regarding the correct submodular function to
optimize. For example, in personalized recommender systems, the system does not know the user’s
preferences a priori, but can learn them interactively via user feedback. Thus, any algorithm must
choose actions in order to disambiguate between competing hypotheses as well as optimize for the
most plausible ones – this issue is also known as the exploration-exploitation tradeoff.
In this paper, we propose the smooth interactive submodular set cover problem, which addresses
two important limitations of previous work. The first limitation is that conventional ISSC [10, 11, 9]
only allows for a single threshold to satisfy, and this “all or nothing” nature can be inflexible for
settings where the covering goal should vary smoothly (e.g., based on plausibility). In smooth ISSC,
one can smoothly vary the target threshold of the candidate submodular functions according to their
plausibility. In other words, the less plausible a hypothesis is, the less we emphasize maximizing
its associated utility function. We present a simple greedy algorithm for smooth ISSC with provable guarantees on optimality. We also show that our smooth ISSC framework and algorithm fully
generalize previous instances of and algorithms for ISSC by reducing back to just one threshold.
One consequence of smooth ISSC is the need to optimize for real-valued functions, which leads
to the second limitation of previous work. Many natural classes of submodular functions are realvalued (cf. [25, 5, 17, 21]). However, submodular set cover (both interactive and non-interactive)
has only been rigorously studied for integral or rational functions with fixed denominator, which
highlights a significant gap between theory and practice. We propose a relaxed version of smooth
ISSC using an approximation tolerance , such that one needs only to satisfy the set cover criterion to
within . We extend our greedy algorithm to provably optimize for real-valued submodular functions
within this  tolerance. To the best of our knowledge, this yields the first theoretically rigorous
algorithm for real-valued submodular set cover (both interactive and non-interactive).
1

