Weakly-supervised Disentangling with
Recurrent Transformations for 3D View Synthesis
Jimei Yang1

Scott Reed2

Ming-Hsuan Yang1

Honglak Lee2

1

University of California, Merced
{jyang44, mhyang}@ucmerced.edu
2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{reedscot, honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
An important problem for both graphics and vision is to synthesize novel views
of a 3D object from a single image. This is in particular challenging due to the
partial observability inherent in projecting a 3D object onto the image space, and
the ill-posedness of inferring object shape and pose. However, we can train a
neural network to address the problem if we restrict our attention to specific object
classes (in our case faces and chairs) for which we can gather ample training
data. In this paper, we propose a novel recurrent convolutional encoder-decoder
network that is trained end-to-end on the task of rendering rotated objects starting
from a single image. The recurrent structure allows our model to capture longterm dependencies along a sequence of transformations, and we demonstrate the
quality of its predictions for human faces on the Multi-PIE dataset and for a dataset
of 3D chair models, and also show its ability of disentangling latent data factors
without using object class labels.

1

Introduction

Numerous graphics algorithms have been established to synthesize photorealistic images from 3D
models and environmental variables (lighting and viewpoints), commonly known as rendering. At
the same time, recent advances in vision algorithms enable computers to gain some form of understanding of objects contained in images, such as classification [16], detection [10], segmentation [18], and caption generation [26], to name a few. These approaches typically aim to deduce
abstract representations from raw image pixels. However, it has been a long-standing problem for
both graphics and vision to automatically synthesize novel images of applying intrinsic transformations (e.g. 3D rotation and deformation) to the subject of an input image. From an artificial
intelligent perspective, this can be viewed as answering questions about object appearance when the
view angle or illumination is changed, or some action is taken. These synthesized images may then
be perceived by humans in photo editing [14], or evaluated by other machine vision systems, such
as the game playing agent with vision-based reinforcement learning [20].
In this paper, we consider the problem of predicting transformed appearances of an object when
it is rotated in 3D from a single image. In general this is an ill-posed problem due to the loss of
information inherent in projecting a 3D object into the image space. Classic geometry-based approaches either recover a 3D object model from multiple related images, i.e. multi-view stereo and
structure-from-motion, or register a single image of a known object class to its prior 3D model, e.g.
faces [5]. The resulting mesh can be used to re-render the scene from novel viewpoints. However,
having 3D meshes as intermediate representations, these methods are 1) limited to particular object
classes, 2) vulnerable to image alignment mistakes and 3) easy to generate artifacts during unseen
texture synthesis. To overcome these limitations, we propose a learning approach without explicit
3D model recovery. Having observed rotations of similar 3D objects (e.g. faces, chairs, household
objects), the trained model can both 1) better infer the true pose, shape and texture of the object,
and 2) make plausible assumptions about potentially ambiguous aspects of appearance in novel
1

