Exploring Models and Data for Image Question
Answering

Mengye Ren1 , Ryan Kiros1 , Richard S. Zemel1,2
University of Toronto1
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research2
{mren, rkiros, zemel}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
This work aims to address the problem of image-based question-answering (QA)
with new models and datasets. In our work, we propose to use neural networks
and visual semantic embeddings, without intermediate stages such as object detection and image segmentation, to predict answers to simple questions about images. Our model performs 1.8 times better than the only published results on an
existing image QA dataset. We also present a question generation algorithm that
converts image descriptions, which are widely available, into QA form. We used
this algorithm to produce an order-of-magnitude larger dataset, with more evenly
distributed answers. A suite of baseline results on this new dataset are also presented.

1

Introduction

Combining image understanding and natural language interaction is one of the grand dreams of
artificial intelligence. We are interested in the problem of jointly learning image and text through a
question-answering task. Recently, researchers studying image caption generation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10] have developed powerful methods of jointly learning from image and text inputs to form
higher level representations from models such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on
object recognition, and word embeddings trained on large scale text corpora. Image QA involves
an extra layer of interaction between human and computers. Here the model needs to pay attention
to details of the image instead of describing it in a vague sense. The problem also combines many
computer vision sub-problems such as image labeling and object detection.
In this paper we present our contributions to the problem: a generic end-to-end QA model using
visual semantic embeddings to connect a CNN and a recurrent neural net (RNN), as well as comparisons to a suite of other models; an automatic question generation algorithm that converts description
sentences into questions; and a new QA dataset (COCO-QA) that was generated using the algorithm,
and a number of baseline results on this new dataset.
In this work we assume that the answers consist of only a single word, which allows us to treat the
problem as a classification problem. This also makes the evaluation of the models easier and more
robust, avoiding the thorny evaluation issues that plague multi-word generation problems.

2

Related Work

Malinowski and Fritz [11] released a dataset with images and question-answer pairs, the DAtaset
for QUestion Answering on Real-world images (DAQUAR). All images are from the NYU depth v2
dataset [12], and are taken from indoor scenes. Human segmentation, image depth values, and object
labeling are available in the dataset. The QA data has two sets of configurations, which differ by the
1

