Community Detection via Measure Space Embedding

Shie Mannor
The Technion, Haifa, Israel
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Mark Kozdoba
The Technion, Haifa, Israel
markk@tx.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We present a new algorithm for community detection. The algorithm uses random walks to embed the graph in a space of measures, after which a modification
of k-means in that space is applied. The algorithm is therefore fast and easily
parallelizable. We evaluate the algorithm on standard random graph benchmarks,
including some overlapping community benchmarks, and find its performance to
be better or at least as good as previously known algorithms. We also prove a
linear time (in number of edges) guarantee for the algorithm
on a p, q-stochastic
q
1
1
block model with where p ≥ c · N − 2 + and p − q ≥ c0 pN − 2 + log N .

1

Introduction

Community detection in graphs, also known as graph clustering, is a problem where one wishes to
identify subsets of the vertices of a graph such that the connectivity inside the subset is in some
way denser than the connectivity of the subset with the rest of the graph. Such subsets are referred
to as communities, and it often happens in applications that if two vertices belong to the same
community, they have similar application-related qualities. This in turn may allow for a higher level
analysis of the graph, in terms of communities instead of individual nodes. Community detection
finds applications in a diversity of fields, such as social networks analysis, communication and traffic
design, in biological networks, and, generally, in most fields where meaningful graphs can arise (see,
for instance, [1] for a survey). In addition to direct applications to graphs, community detection can,
for instance, be also applied to general Euclidean space clustering problems, by transforming the
metric to a weighted graph structure (see [2] for a survey).
Community detection problems come in different flavours, depending on whether the graph in question is simple, or weighted, or/and directed. Another important distinction is whether the communities are allowed to overlap or not. In the overlapping communities case, each vertex can belong to
several subsets.
A difficulty with community detection is that the notion of community is not well defined. Different algorithms may employ different formal notions of a community, and can sometimes produce
different results. Nevertheless, there exist several widely adopted benchmarks – synthetic models
and real-life graphs – where the ground truth communities are known, and algorithms are evaluated based on the similarity of the produced output to the ground truth, and based on the amount
of required computations. On the theoretical side, most of the effort is concentrated on developing
algorithms with guaranteed recovery of clusters for graphs generated from variants of the Stochastic
Block Model (referred to as SBM in what follows, [1]).
In this paper we present a new algorithm, DER (Diffusion Entropy Reducer, for reasons to be clarified later), for non-overlapping community detection. The algorithm is an adaptation of the k-means
algorithm to a space of measures which are generated by short random walks from the nodes of the
graph. The adaptation is done by introducing a certain natural cost on the space of the measures.
As detailed below, we evaluate the DER on several benchmarks and find its performance to be as
good or better than the best alternative method. In addition, we establish some theoretical guarantees
1

