Optimal Linear Estimation under Unknown
Nonlinear Transform
Xinyang Yi
The University of Texas at Austin
yixy@utexas.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Princeton University
zhaoran@princeton.edu

Constantine Caramanis
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Han Liu
Princeton University
hanliu@princeton.edu

Abstract
Linear regression studies the problem of estimating a model parameter β ∗ ∈ Rp ,
from n observations {(yi , xi )}ni=1 from linear model yi = hxi , β ∗ i + i . We
consider a significant generalization in which the relationship between hxi , β ∗ i
and yi is noisy, quantized to a single bit, potentially nonlinear, noninvertible, as
well as unknown. This model is known as the single-index model in statistics, and,
among other things, it represents a significant generalization of one-bit compressed
sensing. We propose a novel spectral-based estimation procedure and show that
we can recover β ∗ in settings (i.e., classes of link function f ) where previous
algorithms fail. In general, our algorithm requires only very mild restrictions on the
(unknown) functional relationship between yi and hxi , β ∗ i. We also consider the
high dimensional setting where β ∗ is sparse, and introduce a two-stage nonconvex
framework that addresses estimation challenges in high dimensional regimes where
p  n. For a broad class of link functions between hxi , β ∗ i and yi , we establish
minimax lower bounds that demonstrate the optimality of our estimators in both
the classical and high dimensional regimes.

1

Introduction

We consider a generalization of the one-bit quantized regression problem, where we seek to recover
the regression coefficient β ∗ ∈ Rp from one-bit measurements. Specifically, suppose that X is a
random vector in Rp and Y is a binary random variable taking values in {−1, 1}. We assume the
conditional distribution of Y given X takes the form
1
1
P(Y = 1|X = x) = f (hx, β ∗ i) + ,
(1.1)
2
2
where f : R → [−1, 1] is called the link function. We aim to estimate β ∗ from n i.i.d. observations
{(yi , xi )}ni=1 of the pair (Y, X). In particular, we assume the link function f is unknown. Without
any loss of generality, we take β ∗ to be on the unit sphere Sp−1 since its magnitude can always be
incorporated into the link function f .
The model in (1.1) is simple but general. Under specific choices of the link function f , (1.1) immediately leads to many practical models in machine learning and signal processing, including logistic
regression and one-bit compressed sensing. In the settings where the link function is assumed to
be known, a popular estimation procedure is to calculate an estimator that minimizes a certain loss
1

