Sparse and Low-Rank Tensor Decomposition

Parikshit Shah
parikshit@yahoo-inc.com

Nikhil Rao
nikhilr@cs.utexas.edu

Gongguo Tang
gtang@mines.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the problem of robust factorization of a low-rank tensor, we study
the question of sparse and low-rank tensor decomposition. We present an efficient
computational algorithm that modifies Leurgans’ algoirthm for tensor factorization. Our method relies on a reduction of the problem to sparse and low-rank matrix decomposition via the notion of tensor contraction. We use well-understood
convex techniques for solving the reduced matrix sub-problem which then allows
us to perform the full decomposition of the tensor. We delineate situations where
the problem is recoverable and provide theoretical guarantees for our algorithm.
We validate our algorithm with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Tensors are useful representational objects to model a variety of problems such as graphical models
with latent variables [1], audio classification [20], psychometrics [8], and neuroscience [3]. One
concrete example proposed in [1] involves topic modeling in an exchangeable bag-of-words model
wherein given a corpus of documents one wishes to estimate parameters related to the different topics of the different documents (each document has a unique topic associated to it). By computing
the empirical moments associated to (exchangeable) bi-grams and tri-grams of words in the documents, [1] shows that this problem reduces to that of a (low rank) tensor decomposition. A number of
other machine learning tasks, such as Independent Component Analysis [11], and learning Gaussian
mixtures [2] are reducible to that of tensor decomposition. While most tensor problems are computationally intractable [12] there has been renewed interest in developing tractable and principled
approaches for the same [4, 5, 12, 15, 19, 21, 24–27].
In this paper we consider the problem of performing tensor decompositions when a subset of the
entries of a low-rank tensor X are corrupted adversarially, so that the tensor observed is Z = X +Y
where Y is the corruption. One may view this problem as the tensor version of a sparse and low-rank
matrix decomposition problem as studied in [6, 9, 10, 13]. We develop an algorithm for performing
such a decomopsition and provide theoretical guarantees as to when such decomposition is possible.
Our work draws on two sets of tools: (a) The line of work addressing the Robust PCA problem in
the matrix case [6, 9], and (b) Application of Leaurgans’ algorithm for tensor decomposition and
tensor inverse problems [4, 17, 24].
Our algorithm is computationally efficient and scalable, it relies on the key notion of tensor contraction which effectively reduces a tensor problem of dimension n × n × n to four decompostion
problems for matrices of size n×n. One can then apply convex methods for sparse and low-rank matrix decomposition followed by certain linear algebraic operations to recover the constituent tensors.
Our algorithm not only produces the correct decomposition of Z into X and Y , but also produces
the low rank factorization of X. We are able to avoid tensor unfolding based approaches [14,21,26]
which are expensive and would lead to solving convex problems that are larger by orders of magnitude; in the 3rd order case the unfolded matrix would be n2 × n. Furthermore, our method is
1

