When are Kalman-Filter Restless Bandits Indexable?
Christopher Dance and Tomi Silander
Xerox Research Centre Europe
6 chemin de Maupertuis, Meylan, Isère, France
{dance,silander}@xrce.xerox.com

Abstract
We study the restless bandit associated with an extremely simple scalar Kalman
filter model in discrete time. Under certain assumptions, we prove that the problem is indexable in the sense that the Whittle index is a non-decreasing function of
the relevant belief state. In spite of the long history of this problem, this appears
to be the first such proof. We use results about Schur-convexity and mechanical
words, which are particular binary strings intimately related to palindromes.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of monitoring several time series so as to maintain a precise belief while minimising the cost of sensing. Such problems can be viewed as POMDPs with belief-dependent rewards [3] and their applications include active sensing [7], attention mechanisms for multiple-object
tracking [22], as well as online summarisation of massive data from time-series [4]. Specifically, we
discuss the restless bandit [24] associated with the discrete-time Kalman filter [19]. Restless bandits
generalise bandit problems [6, 8] to situations where the state of each arm (project, site or target)
continues to change even if the arm is not played. As with bandit problems, the states of the arms
evolve independently given the actions taken, suggesting that there might be efficient algorithms for
large-scale settings, based on calculating an index for each arm, which is a real number associated
with the (belief-)state of that arm alone. However, while bandits always have an optimal index policy (select the arm with the largest index), it is known that no index policy can be optimal for some
discrete-state restless bandits [17] and such problems are in general PSPACE-hard even to approximate to any non-trivial factor [10]. Further, in this paper we address restless bandits with real-valued
rather than discrete states. On the other hand, Whittle proposed a natural index policy for restless
bandits [24], but this policy only makes sense when the restless bandit is indexable (Section 2).
Briefly, a restless bandit is said to be indexable when an optimal solution to a relaxed version of the
problem consists in playing all arms whose indices exceed a given threshold. (The relaxed version
of the problem relaxes the constraint on the number of arms pulled per turn to a constraint on the
average number of arms pulled per turn). Under certain conditions, indexability implies a form of
asymptotic optimality of Whittle’s policy for the original problem [23, 20].
Restless bandits associated with scalar Kalman(-Bucy) filters in continuous time were recently
shown to be indexable [12] and the corresponding discrete-time problem has attracted considerable
attention over a long period [15, 11, 16, 21]. However, that attention has produced no satisfactory
proof of indexability – even for scalar time-series and even if we assume that there is a monotone
optimal policy for the single-arm problem, which is a policy that plays the arm if and only if the
relevant belief-state exceeds some threshold (here the relevant belief-state is a posterior variance).
Theorem 1 of this paper addresses that gap. After formalising the problem (Section 2), we describe the concepts and intuition (Section 3) behind the main result (Section 4). The main tools
are mechanical words (which are not sufficiently well-known) and Schur convexity. As these tools
are associated with rather general theorems, we believe that future work (Section 5) should enable
substantial generalisation of our results.
1

