Softstar: Heuristic-Guided Probabilistic Inference
Mathew Monfort
Computer Science Department
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
mmonfo2@uic.edu

Brenden M. Lake
Center for Data Science
New York University
New York, NY 10003
brenden@nyu.edu

Patrick Lucey
Disney Research Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15232
patrick.lucey@disneyresearch.com

Brian D. Ziebart
Computer Science Department
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
bziebart@uic.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Brain and Cognitive Sciences Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
Recent machine learning methods for sequential behavior prediction estimate the
motives of behavior rather than the behavior itself. This higher-level abstraction
improves generalization in different prediction settings, but computing predictions often becomes intractable in large decision spaces. We propose the Softstar algorithm, a softened heuristic-guided search technique for the maximum
entropy inverse optimal control model of sequential behavior. This approach supports probabilistic search with bounded approximation error at a significantly reduced computational cost when compared to sampling based methods. We present
the algorithm, analyze approximation guarantees, and compare performance with
simulation-based inference on two distinct complex decision tasks.

1

Introduction

Inverse optimal control (IOC) [13], also known as inverse reinforcement learning [18, 1] and inverse
planning [3], has become a powerful technique for learning to control or make decisions based on
expert demonstrations [1, 20]. IOC estimates the utilities of a decision process that rationalizes an
expert’s demonstrated control sequences. Those estimated utilities can then be used in an (optimal)
controller to solve new decision problems, producing behavior that is similar to demonstrations.
Predictive extensions to IOC [17, 23, 2, 16, 19, 6] recognize the inconsistencies, and inherent suboptimality, of repeated behavior by incorporating uncertainty. They provide probabilistic forecasts
of future decisions in which stochasticity is due to this uncertainty rather than the stochasticity of
the decision process’s dynamics. These models’ distributions over plans and policies can typically
be defined as softened versions of optimal sequential decision criteria.
A key challenge for predictive IOC is that many decision sequences are embedded within large
decision processes. Symmetries in the decision process can be exploited to improve efficiency [21],
but decision processes are not guaranteed to be (close to) symmetric. Approximation approaches to
probabilistic structured prediction include approximate maxent IOC [12], heuristic-guided sampling
[15], and graph-based IOC [7]. However, few guarantees are provided by these approaches; they are
not complete and the set of variable assignments uncovered may not be representative of the model’s
distribution.
Seeking to provide stronger guarantees and improve efficiency over previous methods, we present
Softstar, a heuristic-guided probabilistic search algorithm for inverse optimal control. Our approach
1

