Black-box optimization of noisy functions with
unknown smoothness
Jean-Bastien Grill
Michal Valko
SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France
jean-bastien.grill@inria.fr

michal.valko@inria.fr

Rémi Munos
Google DeepMind, UK∗
munos@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of black-box optimization of a function f of any dimension, given function evaluations perturbed by noise. The function is assumed to
be locally smooth around one of its global optima, but this smoothness is unknown. Our contribution is an adaptive optimization algorithm, POO or parallel
optimistic optimization, that is able to deal with this setting. POO performs almost
as well as the best known algorithms requiring the knowledge of the smoothness.
Furthermore, POO works for a larger class of functions than what was previously
considered, especially for functions that are difficult to optimize, in a very precise
sense. We provide a finite-time analysis of POO’s√performance, which shows that
its error after n evaluations is at most a factor of ln n away from the error of the
best known optimization algorithms using the knowledge of the smoothness.

1

Introduction

We treat the problem of optimizing a function f : X → R given a finite budget of n noisy evaluations. We consider that the cost of any of these function evaluations is high. That means, we care
about assessing the optimization performance in terms of the sample complexity, i.e., the number
of n function evaluations. This is typically the case when one needs to tune parameters for a complex
system seen as a black-box, which performance can only be evaluated by a costly simulation. One
such example, is the hyper-parameter tuning where the sensitivity to perturbations is large and the
derivatives of the objective function with respect to these parameters do not exist or are unknown.
Such setting fits the sequential decision-making setting under bandit feedback. In this setting, the
actions are the points that lie in a domain X . At each step t, an algorithm selects an action xt ∈ X
and receives a reward rt , which is a noisy function evaluation such that rt = f (xt ) + εt , where εt is
a bounded noise with E [εt |xt ] = 0. After n evaluations, the algorithm outputs its best guess x(n),
which can be different from xn . The performance measure we want to minimize is the value of the
function at the returned point compared to the optimum, also referred to as simple regret,
def

Rn = sup f (x) − f (x (n)) .
x∈X

We assume there exists at least one point x? ∈ X such that f (x? ) = supx∈X f (x).
The relationship with bandit settings motivated UCT [10, 8], an empirically successful heuristic
that hierarchically partitions domain X and selects the next point xt ∈ X using upper confidence
bounds [1]. The empirical success of UCT on one side but the absence of performance guarantees for
it on the other, incited research on similar but theoretically founded algorithms [4, 9, 12, 2, 6].
As the global optimization of the unknown function without absolutely any assumptions would
be a daunting needle-in-a-haystack problem, most of the algorithms assume at least a very weak
∗

on the leave from SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France

1

