Exactness of Approximate MAP Inference in
Continuous MRFs
Nicholas Ruozzi
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080

Abstract
Computing the MAP assignment in graphical models is generally intractable. As a
result, for discrete graphical models, the MAP problem is often approximated using linear programming relaxations. Much research has focused on characterizing
when these LP relaxations are tight, and while they are relatively well-understood
in the discrete case, only a few results are known for their continuous analog.
In this work, we use graph covers to provide necessary and sufficient conditions
for continuous MAP relaxations to be tight. We use this characterization to give
simple proofs that the relaxation is tight for log-concave decomposable and logsupermodular decomposable models. We conclude by exploring the relationship
between these two seemingly distinct classes of functions and providing specific
conditions under which the MAP relaxation can and cannot be tight.

1

Introduction

Graphical models are a popular modeling tool for both discrete and continuous distributions. We are
commonly interested in one of two inference tasks in graphical models: finding the most probable
assignment (a.k.a., MAP inference) and computing marginal distributions. These problems are NPhard in general, and a variety of approximate inference schemes are used in practice.
In this work, we will focus on approximate MAP inference. For discrete state spaces, linear programming relaxations of the MAP problem (specifically, the MAP LP) are quite common [1; 2; 3].
These relaxations replace global marginalization constraints with a collection of local marginalization constraints. Wald and Globerson [4] refer to these as local consistency relaxations (LCRs). The
advantage of LCRs is that they are often much easier to specify and to optimize over (e.g., by using
a message-passing algorithm such as loopy belief propagation (LBP)). However, the analogous relaxations for continuous state spaces may not be compactly specified and can lead to an unbounded
number of constraints (except in certain special cases). To overcome this problem, further relaxations have been proposed [5; 4]. By construction, each of these further relaxations can only be tight
if the initial LCR was tight. As a result, there are compelling theoretical and algorithmic reasons to
investigate when LCRs are tight.
Among the most well-studied continuous models are the Gaussian graphical models. For this class
of models, it is known that the continuous MAP relaxation is tight when the corresponding inverse
covariance matrix is positive definite and scaled diagonally dominant (a special case of the so-called
log-concave decomposable models)[4; 6; 7]. In addition, LBP is known to converge to the correct
solution for Gaussian graphical models and log-concave decomposable models that satisfy a scaled
diagonal dominance condition [8; 9]. While much of the prior work in this domain has focused on
log-concave graphical models, in this work, we provide a general necessary and sufficient condition
for the continuous MAP relaxation to be tight. This condition mirrors the known results for the
discrete case and is based on the notion of graph covers: the MAP LP is tight if and only if the
1

