GAP Safe screening rules for sparse multi-task and
multi-class models
Eugene Ndiaye Olivier Fercoq Alexandre Gramfort Joseph Salmon
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay
Paris, 75013, France
firstname.lastname@telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract
High dimensional regression benefits from sparsity promoting regularizations.
Screening rules leverage the known sparsity of the solution by ignoring some
variables in the optimization, hence speeding up solvers. When the procedure
is proven not to discard features wrongly the rules are said to be safe. In this paper
we derive new safe rules for generalized linear models regularized with `1 and
`1 {`2 norms. The rules are based on duality gap computations and spherical safe
regions whose diameters converge to zero. This allows to discard safely more variables, in particular for low regularization parameters. The GAP Safe rule can cope
with any iterative solver and we illustrate its performance on coordinate descent
for multi-task Lasso, binary and multinomial logistic regression, demonstrating
significant speed ups on all tested datasets with respect to previous safe rules.

1

Introduction

The computational burden of solving high dimensional regularized regression problem has lead to a
vast literature in the last couple of decades to accelerate the algorithmic solvers. With the increasing
popularity of `1 -type regularization ranging from the Lasso [18] or group-Lasso [24] to regularized
logistic regression and multi-task learning, many algorithmic methods have emerged to solve the
associated optimization problems. Although for the simple `1 regularized least square a specific
algorithm (e.g., the LARS [8]) can be considered, for more general formulations, penalties, and
possibly larger dimension, coordinate descent has proved to be a surprisingly efficient strategy [12].
Our main objective in this work is to propose a technique that can speed-up any solver for such
learning problems, and that is particularly well suited for coordinate descent method, thanks to
active set strategies.
The safe rules introduced by [9] for generalized `1 regularized problems, is a set of rules that allows
to eliminate features whose associated coefficients are proved to be zero at the optimum. Relaxing
the safe rule, one can obtain some more speed-up at the price of possible mistakes. Such heuristic
strategies, called strong rules [19] reduce the computational cost using an active set strategy, but
require difficult post-precessing to check for features possibly wrongly discarded. Another road to
speed-up screening method has been the introduction of sequential safe rules [21, 23, 22]. The idea
is to improve the screening thanks to the computations done for a previous regularization parameter.
This scenario is particularly relevant in machine learning, where one computes solutions over a
grid of regularization parameters, so as to select the best one (e.g., to perform cross-validation).
Nevertheless, such strategies suffer from the same problem as strong rules, since relevant features
can be wrongly disregarded: sequential rules usually rely on theoretical quantities that are not known
by the solver, but only approximated. Especially, for such rules to work one needs the exact dual
optimal solution from the previous regularization parameter.
1

