On-the-Job Learning with Bayesian Decision Theory

Keenon Werling
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
keenon@cs.stanford.edu

Arun Chaganty
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
chaganty@cs.stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Christopher D. Manning
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
manning@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Our goal is to deploy a high-accuracy system starting with zero training examples.
We consider an on-the-job setting, where as inputs arrive, we use real-time crowdsourcing to resolve uncertainty where needed and output our prediction when confident. As the model improves over time, the reliance on crowdsourcing queries
decreases. We cast our setting as a stochastic game based on Bayesian decision
theory, which allows us to balance latency, cost, and accuracy objectives in a principled way. Computing the optimal policy is intractable, so we develop an approximation based on Monte Carlo Tree Search. We tested our approach on three
datasets—named-entity recognition, sentiment classification, and image classification. On the NER task we obtained more than an order of magnitude reduction
in cost compared to full human annotation, while boosting performance relative to
the expert provided labels. We also achieve a 8% F1 improvement over having a
single human label the whole set, and a 28% F1 improvement over online learning.
“Poor is the pupil who does not surpass his master.”
– Leonardo da Vinci

1

Introduction

There are two roads to an accurate AI system today: (i) gather a huge amount of labeled training
data [1] and do supervised learning [2]; or (ii) use crowdsourcing to directly perform the task [3, 4].
However, both solutions require non-trivial amounts of time and money. In many situations, one
wishes to build a new system — e.g., to do Twitter information extraction [5] to aid in disaster relief
efforts or monitor public opinion — but one simply lacks the resources to follow either the pure ML
or pure crowdsourcing road.
In this paper, we propose a framework called on-the-job learning (formalizing and extending ideas
first implemented in [6]), in which we produce high quality results from the start without requiring
a trained model. When a new input arrives, the system can choose to asynchronously query the
crowd on parts of the input it is uncertain about (e.g. query about the label of a single token in a
sentence). After collecting enough evidence the system makes a prediction. The goal is to maintain
high accuracy by initially using the crowd as a crutch, but gradually becoming more self-sufficient
as the model improves. Online learning [7] and online active learning [8, 9, 10] are different in that
they do not actively seek new information prior to making a prediction, and cannot maintain high
accuracy independent of the number of data instances seen so far. Active classification [11], like us,
1

