Planar Ultrametrics for Image Segmentation

Charless C. Fowlkes
Department of Computer Science
University of California Irvine
fowlkes@ics.uci.edu

Julian Yarkony
Experian Data Lab
San Diego, CA 92130
julian.yarkony@experian.com

Abstract
We study the problem of hierarchical clustering on planar graphs. We formulate
this in terms of finding the closest ultrametric to a specified set of distances and
solve it using an LP relaxation that leverages minimum cost perfect matching as
a subroutine to efficiently explore the space of planar partitions. We apply our
algorithm to the problem of hierarchical image segmentation.

1

Introduction

We formulate hierarchical image segmentation from the perspective of estimating an ultrametric
distance over the set of image pixels that agrees closely with an input set of noisy pairwise distances.
An ultrametric space replaces the usual triangle inequality with the ultrametric inequality d(u, v) ≤
max{d(u, w), d(v, w)} which captures the transitive property of clustering (if u and w are in the
same cluster and v and w are in the same cluster, then u and v must also be in the same cluster).
Thresholding an ultrametric immediately yields a partition into sets whose diameter is less than
the given threshold. Varying this distance threshold naturally produces a hierarchical clustering in
which clusters at high thresholds are composed of clusters at lower thresholds.
Inspired by the approach of [1], our method represents an ultrametric explicitly as a hierarchical
collection of segmentations. Determining the appropriate segmentation at a single distance threshold
is equivalent to finding a minimum-weight multicut in a graph with both positive and negative edge
weights [3, 14, 2, 11, 20, 21, 4, 19, 7]. Finding an ultrametric imposes the additional constraint that
these multicuts are hierarchically consistent across different thresholds. We focus on the case where
the input distances are specified by a planar graph. This arises naturally in the domain of image
segmentation where elements are pixels or superpixels and distances are defined between neighbors
and allows us to exploit fast combinatorial algorithms for partitioning planar graphs that yield tighter
LP relaxations than the local polytope relaxation often used in graphical inference [20].
The paper is organized as follows. We first introduce the closest ultrametric problem and the relation between multicuts and ultrametrics. We then describe an LP relaxation that uses a delayed
column generation approach and exploits planarity to efficiently find cuts via the classic reduction
to minimum-weight perfect matching [13, 8, 9, 10]. We apply our algorithm to the task of natural
image segmentation and demonstrate that our algorithm converges rapidly and produces optimal or
near-optimal solutions in practice.

2

Closest Ultrametric and Multicuts

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted graph with non-negative edge weights θ indexed by edges e =
(u, v) ∈ E. Our goal is to find an ultrametric distance d(u,v) over vertices of the graph that is
P
close to θ in the sense that the distortion (u,v)∈E kθ(u,v) − d(u,v) k22 is minimized. We begin by
reformulating this closest ultrametric problem in terms of finding a set of nested multicuts in a family
of weighted graphs.
1

