Preconditioned Spectral Descent for Deep Learning

David E. Carlson,1 Edo Collins,2 Ya-Ping Hsieh,2 Lawrence Carin,3 Volkan Cevher2
1
Department of Statistics, Columbia University
2
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS), EPFL
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University

Abstract
Deep learning presents notorious computational challenges. These challenges include, but are not limited to, the non-convexity of learning objectives and estimating the quantities needed for optimization algorithms, such as gradients. While we
do not address the non-convexity, we present an optimization solution that exploits
the so far unused “geometry” in the objective function in order to best make use
of the estimated gradients. Previous work attempted similar goals with preconditioned methods in the Euclidean space, such as L-BFGS, RMSprop, and ADAgrad. In stark contrast, our approach combines a non-Euclidean gradient method
with preconditioning. We provide evidence that this combination more accurately
captures the geometry of the objective function compared to prior work. We theoretically formalize our arguments and derive novel preconditioned non-Euclidean
algorithms. The results are promising in both computational time and quality
when applied to Restricted Boltzmann Machines, Feedforward Neural Nets, and
Convolutional Neural Nets.

1

Introduction

In spite of the many great successes of deep learning, efficient optimization of deep networks remains a challenging open problem due to the complexity of the model calculations, the non-convex
nature of the implied objective functions, and their inhomogeneous curvature [6]. It is established
both theoretically and empirically that finding a local optimum in many tasks often gives comparable performance to the global optima [4], so the primary goal is to find a local optimum quickly. It
is speculated that an increase in computational power and training efficiency will drive performance
of deep networks further by utilizing more complicated networks and additional data [14].
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is the most widespread algorithm of choice for practitioners
of machine learning. However, the objective functions typically found in deep learning problems,
such as feed-forward neural networks and Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs), have inhomogeneous curvature, rendering SGD ineffective. A common technique for improving efficiency is to
use adaptive step-size methods for SGD [25], where each layer in a deep model has an independent
step-size. Quasi-Newton methods have shown promising results in networks with sparse penalties
[16], and factorized second order approximations have also shown improved performance [18]. A
popular alternative to these methods is to use an element-wise adaptive learning rate, which has
shown improved performance in ADAgrad [7], ADAdelta [30], and RMSprop [5].
The foundation of all of the above methods lies in the hope that the objective function can be wellapproximated by Euclidean (e.g., Frobenius or `2 ) norms. However, recent work demonstrated that
the matrix of connection weights in an RBM has a tighter majorization bound on the objective
function with respect to the Schatten-∞ norm compared to the Frobenius norm [1]. A majorizationminimization approach with the non-Euclidean majorization bound leads to an algorithm denoted
as Stochastic Spectral Descent (SSD), which sped up the learning of RBMs and other probabilistic
1

