Attention-Based Models for Speech Recognition

Dzmitry Bahdanau
Jacobs University Bremen, Germany

Jan Chorowski
University of Wrocław, Poland
jan.chorowski@ii.uni.wroc.pl
Dmitriy Serdyuk
Université de Montréal

Kyunghyun Cho
Université de Montréal

Yoshua Bengio
Université de Montréal
CIFAR Senior Fellow

Abstract
Recurrent sequence generators conditioned on input data through an attention
mechanism have recently shown very good performance on a range of tasks including machine translation, handwriting synthesis [1, 2] and image caption generation [3]. We extend the attention-mechanism with features needed for speech
recognition. We show that while an adaptation of the model used for machine
translation in [2] reaches a competitive 18.7% phoneme error rate (PER) on the
TIMIT phoneme recognition task, it can only be applied to utterances which are
roughly as long as the ones it was trained on. We offer a qualitative explanation of
this failure and propose a novel and generic method of adding location-awareness
to the attention mechanism to alleviate this issue. The new method yields a model
that is robust to long inputs and achieves 18% PER in single utterances and 20%
in 10-times longer (repeated) utterances. Finally, we propose a change to the attention mechanism that prevents it from concentrating too much on single frames,
which further reduces PER to 17.6% level.

1

Introduction

Recently, attention-based recurrent networks have been successfully applied to a wide variety of
tasks, such as handwriting synthesis [1], machine translation [2], image caption generation [3] and
visual object classification [4].1 Such models iteratively process their input by selecting relevant
content at every step. This basic idea significantly extends the applicability range of end-to-end
training methods, for instance, making it possible to construct networks with external memory [6, 7].
We introduce extensions to attention-based recurrent networks that make them applicable to speech
recognition. Learning to recognize speech can be viewed as learning to generate a sequence (transcription) given another sequence (speech). From this perspective it is similar to machine translation
and handwriting synthesis tasks, for which attention-based methods have been found suitable [2, 1].
However, compared to machine translation, speech recognition principally differs by requesting
much longer input sequences (thousands of frames instead of dozens of words), which introduces a
challenge of distinguishing similar speech fragments2 in a single utterance. It is also different from
handwriting synthesis, since the input sequence is much noisier and does not have as clear structure.
For these reasons speech recognition is an interesting testbed for developing new attention-based
architectures capable of processing long and noisy inputs.
Application of attention-based models to speech recognition is also an important step toward building fully end-to-end trainable speech recognition systems, which is an active area of research. The
1
2

An early version of this work was presented at the NIPS 2014 Deep Learning Workshop [5].
Explained in more detail in Sec. 2.1.

1

