Learning visual biases from human imagination

Carl Vondrick
Hamed Pirsiavash†
Aude Oliva Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology †University of Maryland, Baltimore County
{vondrick,oliva,torralba}@mit.edu hpirsiav@umbc.edu

Abstract
Although the human visual system can recognize many concepts under challenging conditions, it still has some biases. In this paper, we investigate whether
we can extract these biases and transfer them into a machine recognition system. We introduce a novel method that, inspired by well-known tools in human
psychophysics, estimates the biases that the human visual system might use for
recognition, but in computer vision feature spaces. Our experiments are surprising, and suggest that classifiers from the human visual system can be transferred
into a machine with some success. Since these classifiers seem to capture favorable biases in the human visual system, we further present an SVM formulation
that constrains the orientation of the SVM hyperplane to agree with the bias from
human visual system. Our results suggest that transferring this human bias into
machines may help object recognition systems generalize across datasets and perform better when very little training data is available.

1

Introduction

Computer vision researchers often go through great lengths to remove dataset biases from their
models [32, 20]. However, not all biases are adversarial. Even natural recognition systems, such as
the human visual system, have biases. Some of the most well known human biases, for example, are
the canonical perspective (prefer to see objects from a certain perspective) [26] and Gestalt laws of
grouping (tendency to see objects in collections of parts) [11].
We hypothesize that biases in the human visual system can be beneficial for visual understanding.
Since recognition is an underconstrained problem, the biases that the human visual system developed
may provide useful priors for perception. In this paper, we develop a novel method to learn some
biases from the human visual system and incorporate them into computer vision systems.
We focus our approach on learning the biases that people may have for the appearance of objects.
To illustrate our method, consider what may seem like an odd experiment. Suppose we sample i.i.d.
white noise from a standard normal distribution, and treat it as a point in a visual feature space, e.g.
CNN or HOG. What is the chance that this sample corresponds to visual features of a car image?
Fig.1a visualizes some samples [35] and, as expected, we see noise. But, let us not stop there. We
next generate one hundred fifty thousand points from the same distribution, and ask workers on
Amazon Mechanical Turk to classify visualizations of each sample as a car or not. Fig.1c visualizes
the average of visual features that workers believed were cars. Although our dataset consists of only
white noise, a car emerges!
Sampling noise may seem unusual to computer vision researchers, but a similar procedure, named
classification images, has gained popularity in human psychophysics [2] for estimating an approximate template the human visual system internally uses for recognition [18, 4]. In the procedure,
an observer looks at an image perturbed with random noise and indicates whether they perceive a
target category. After a large number of trials, psychophysics researchers can apply basic statistics
to extract an approximation of the internal template the observer used for recognition. Since the
1

