Deeply Learning the Messages in Message
Passing Inference

Guosheng Lin, Chunhua Shen, Ian Reid, Anton van den Hengel
The University of Adelaide, Australia; and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
E-mail: {guosheng.lin,chunhua.shen,ian.reid,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Deep structured output learning shows great promise in tasks like semantic image segmentation. We proffer a new, efficient deep structured model learning
scheme, in which we show how deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
can be used to directly estimate the messages in message passing inference for
structured prediction with Conditional Random Fields (CRFs). With such CNN
message estimators, we obviate the need to learn or evaluate potential functions
for message calculation. This confers significant efficiency for learning, since otherwise when performing structured learning for a CRF with CNN potentials it is
necessary to undertake expensive inference for every stochastic gradient iteration.
The network output dimension of message estimators is the same as the number
of classes, rather than exponentially growing in the order of the potentials. Hence
it is more scalable for cases that involve a large number of classes. We apply
our method to semantic image segmentation and achieve impressive performance,
which demonstrates the effectiveness and usefulness of our CNN message learning method.

1

Introduction

Learning deep structured models has attracted considerable research attention recently. One popular approach to deep structured model is formulating conditional random fields (CRFs) using deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for the potential functions. This combines the power of
CNNs for feature representation learning and of the ability for CRFs to model complex relations.
The typical approach for the joint learning of CRFs and CNNs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], is to learn the CNN
potential functions by optimizing the CRF objective, e.g., maximizing the log-likelihood. The CNN
and CRF joint learning has shown impressive performance for semantic image segmentation.
For the joint learning of CNNs and CRFs, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is typically applied for
optimizing the conditional likelihood. This approach requires the marginal inference for calculating
the gradient. For loopy graphs, marginal inference is generally expensive even when using approximate solutions. Given that learning the CNN potential functions typically requires a large number of
gradient iterations, repeated marginal inference would make the training intractably slow. Applying
an approximate training objective is a solution to avoid repeat inference; pseudo-likelihood learning
[6] and piecewise learning [7, 3] are examples of this kind of approach. In this work, we advocate a
new direction for efficient deep structured model learning.
In conventional CRF approaches, the final prediction is the result of inference based on the learned
potentials. However, our ultimate goal is the final prediction (not the potentials themselves), so we
propose to directly optimize the inference procedure for the final prediction. Our focus here is on
the extensively studied message passing based inference algorithms. As discussed in [8], we can
directly learn message estimators to output the required messages in the inference procedure, rather

