Streaming, Distributed Variational Inference for
Bayesian Nonparametrics

Trevor Campbell1

Julian Straub2 John W. Fisher III2 Jonathan P. How1
1
LIDS, 2 CSAIL, MIT
{tdjc@ , jstraub@csail. , fisher@csail. , jhow@}mit.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a methodology for creating streaming, distributed inference algorithms for Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) models. In the proposed framework,
processing nodes receive a sequence of data minibatches, compute a variational
posterior for each, and make asynchronous streaming updates to a central model.
In contrast to previous algorithms, the proposed framework is truly streaming, distributed, asynchronous, learning-rate-free, and truncation-free. The key challenge
in developing the framework, arising from the fact that BNP models do not impose
an inherent ordering on their components, is finding the correspondence between
minibatch and central BNP posterior components before performing each update.
To address this, the paper develops a combinatorial optimization problem over
component correspondences, and provides an efficient solution technique. The
paper concludes with an application of the methodology to the DP mixture model,
with experimental results demonstrating its practical scalability and performance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) stochastic processes are streaming priors – their unique feature is
that they specify, in a probabilistic sense, that the complexity of a latent model should grow as the
amount of observed data increases. This property captures common sense in many data analysis
problems – for example, one would expect to encounter far more topics in a document corpus after
reading 106 documents than after reading 10 – and becomes crucial in settings with unbounded, persistent streams of data. While their fixed, parametric cousins can be used to infer model complexity
for datasets with known magnitude a priori [1, 2], such priors are silent with respect to notions of
model complexity growth in streaming data settings.
Bayesian nonparametrics are also naturally suited to parallelization of data processing, due to the
exchangeability, and thus conditional independence, they often exhibit via de Finetti’s theorem. For
example, labels from the Chinese Restaurant process [3] are rendered i.i.d. by conditioning on the
underlying Dirichlet process (DP) random measure, and feature assignments from the Indian Buffet
process [4] are rendered i.i.d. by conditioning on the underlying beta process (BP) random measure.
Given these properties, one might expect there to be a wealth of inference algorithms for BNPs that
address the challenges associated with parallelization and streaming. However, previous work has
only addressed these two settings in concert for parametric models [5, 6], and only recently has each
been addressed individually for BNPs. In the streaming setting, [7] and [8] developed streaming
inference for DP mixture models using sequential variational approximation. Stochastic variational
inference [9] and related methods [10–13] are often considered streaming algorithms, but their performance depends on the choice of a learning rate and on the dataset having known, fixed size a
priori [5]. Outside of variational approaches, which are the focus of the present paper, there exist
exact parallelized MCMC methods for BNPs [14, 15]; the tradeoff in using such methods is that they
provide samples from the posterior rather than the distribution itself, and results regarding assessing
1

