Structured Estimation with Atomic Norms:
General Bounds and Applications

Sheng Chen
Arindam Banerjee
Dept. of Computer Science & Engg., University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
{shengc,banerjee}@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
For structured estimation problems with atomic norms, recent advances in the literature express sample complexity and estimation error bounds in terms of certain
geometric measures, in particular Gaussian width of the unit norm ball, Gaussian
width of a spherical cap induced by a tangent cone, and a restricted norm compatibility constant. However, given an atomic norm, bounding these geometric
measures can be difficult. In this paper, we present general upper bounds for such
geometric measures, which only require simple information of the atomic norm under consideration, and we establish tightness of these bounds by providing
the corresponding lower bounds. We show applications of our analysis to certain
atomic norms, especially k-support norm, for which existing result is incomplete.

1

Introduction

Accurate recovery of structured sparse signal/parameter vectors from noisy linear measurements has
been extensively studied in the field of compressed sensing, statistics, etc. The goal is to recover
a high-dimensional signal (parameter) θ ∗ ∈ Rp which is sparse (only has a few nonzero entries),
possibly with additional structure such as group sparsity. Typically one assume linear models, y =
Xθ ∗ + ω, in which X ∈ Rn×p is the design matrix consisting of n samples, y ∈ Rn is the observed
response vector, and ω ∈ Rn is an unknown noise vector. By leveraging the sparsity of θ ∗ , previous
work has shown that certain L1 -norm based estimators [22, 7, 8] can find a good approximation of
θ ∗ using sample size n  p. Recent work has extended the notion of unstructured sparsity to other
structures in θ ∗ which can be captured or approximated by some norm R(·) [10, 18, 3, 11, 6, 19]
other than L1 , e.g., (non)overlapping group sparsity with L1 /L2 norm [24, 15], etc. In general, two
broad classes of estimators are considered in recovery analysis: (i) Lasso-type estimators [22, 18, 3],
which solve the regularized optimization problem
θ̂λn = argmin
θ∈Rp

1
kXθ − yk22 + λn R(θ) ,
2n

(1)

and (ii) Dantzig-type estimators [7, 11, 6], which solve the constrained problem
θ̂λn = argmin R(θ) s.t. R∗ (XT (Xθ − y)) ≤ λn ,

(2)

θ∈Rp

where R∗ (·) is the dual norm of R(·). Variants of these estimators exist [10, 19, 23], but the recovery
analysis proceeds along similar lines as these two classes of estimators.
To establish recovery guarantees, [18] focused on Lasso-type estimators and R(·) from the class of
decomposable norm, e.g., L1 , non-overlapping L1 /L2 norm. The upper bound for the estimation
error kθ̂λn −θ ∗ k2 for any decomposable norm is characterized in terms of three geometric measures:
(i) a dual norm bound, as an upper bound for R∗ (XT ω), (ii) sample complexity, the minimal sample
size needed for a certain restricted eigenvalue (RE) condition to be true [4, 18], and (iii) a restricted
1

