Enforcing balance allows local supervised learning in
spiking recurrent networks

Sophie Deneve
Group For Neural Theory, ENS Paris
Rue dUlm, 29, Paris, France
sophie.deneve@ens.fr

Ralph Bourdoukan
Group For Neural Theory, ENS Paris
Rue dUlm, 29, Paris, France
ralph.bourdoukan@gmail.com

Abstract
To predict sensory inputs or control motor trajectories, the brain must constantly learn temporal dynamics based on error feedback. However, it remains
unclear how such supervised learning is implemented in biological neural networks. Learning in recurrent spiking networks is notoriously difficult because local changes in connectivity may have an unpredictable effect on the global dynamics. The most commonly used learning rules, such as temporal back-propagation,
are not local and thus not biologically plausible. Furthermore, reproducing the
Poisson-like statistics of neural responses requires the use of networks with balanced excitation and inhibition. Such balance is easily destroyed during learning.
Using a top-down approach, we show how networks of integrate-and-fire neurons can learn arbitrary linear dynamical systems by feeding back their error as
a feed-forward input. The network uses two types of recurrent connections: fast
and slow. The fast connections learn to balance excitation and inhibition using a
voltage-based plasticity rule. The slow connections are trained to minimize the
error feedback using a current-based Hebbian learning rule. Importantly, the balance maintained by fast connections is crucial to ensure that global error signals
are available locally in each neuron, in turn resulting in a local learning rule for
the slow connections. This demonstrates that spiking networks can learn complex
dynamics using purely local learning rules, using E/I balance as the key rather
than an additional constraint. The resulting network implements a given function
within the predictive coding scheme, with minimal dimensions and activity.
The brain constantly predicts relevant sensory inputs or motor trajectories. For example, there is
evidence that neural circuits mimic the dynamics of motor effectors using internal models [1]. If the
dynamics of the predicted sensory and motor variables change in time, these models may become
false [2] and therefore need to be readjusted through learning based on error feedback.
From a modeling perspective, supervised learning in recurrent networks faces many challenges.
Earlier models have succeeded in learning useful functions at the cost of non local learning rules
that are biologically implausible [3, 4]. More recent models based on reservoir computing [5–7]
transfer the learning from the recurrent network (with now “random”, fixed weights) to the readout
weights. Using this simple scheme, the network can learn to generate complex patterns. However,
the majority of these models use abstract rate units and are yet to be translated into more realistic
spiking networks. Moreover, to provide a sufficiently large reservoir, the recurrent network needs
to be large, balanced and have a rich and high dimensional dynamics. This typically generates far
more activity than strictly required, a redundancy that can be seen as inefficient.
On the other hand, supervised learning models involving spiking neurons have essentially concentrated on the learning of precise spike sequences [8–10]. With some exceptions [10,11] these models
use feed-forward architectures [12]. In a balanced recurrent network with asynchronous, irregular
and highly variable spike trains, such as those found in cortex, the activity has been shown to be
1

