Biologically Inspired Dynamic Textures
for Probing Motion Perception

Andrew Isaac Meso
Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone
UMR 7289 CNRS/Aix-Marseille Université
13385 Marseille Cedex 05, FRANCE
andrew.meso@univ-amu.fr

Jonathan Vacher
CNRS UNIC and Ceremade
Univ. Paris-Dauphine
75775 Paris Cedex 16, FRANCE
vacher@ceremade.dauphine.fr
Laurent Perrinet
Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone
UMR 7289 CNRS/Aix-Marseille Université
13385 Marseille Cedex 05, FRANCE
laurent.perrinet@univ-amu.fr

Gabriel Peyré
CNRS and Ceremade
Univ. Paris-Dauphine
75775 Paris Cedex 16, FRANCE
peyre@ceremade.dauphine.fr

Abstract
Perception is often described as a predictive process based on an optimal inference
with respect to a generative model. We study here the principled construction
of a generative model specifically crafted to probe motion perception. In that
context, we first provide an axiomatic, biologically-driven derivation of the model.
This model synthesizes random dynamic textures which are defined by stationary
Gaussian distributions obtained by the random aggregation of warped patterns.
Importantly, we show that this model can equivalently be described as a stochastic
partial differential equation. Using this characterization of motion in images, it
allows us to recast motion-energy models into a principled Bayesian inference
framework. Finally, we apply these textures in order to psychophysically probe
speed perception in humans. In this framework, while the likelihood is derived
from the generative model, the prior is estimated from the observed results and
accounts for the perceptual bias in a principled fashion.

1

Motivation

A normative explanation for the function of perception is to infer relevant hidden parameters from
the sensory input with respect to a generative model [7]. Equipped with some prior knowledge
about this representation, this corresponds to the Bayesian brain hypothesis, as has been perfectly
illustrated by the particular case of motion perception [19]. However, the Gaussian hypothesis
related to the parameterization of knowledge in these models —for instance in the formalization
of the prior and of the likelihood functions— does not always fit with psychophysical results [17].
As such, a major challenge is to refine the definition of generative models so that they conform to
the widest variety of results.
From this observation, the estimation problem inherent to perception is linked to the definition of an
adequate generative model. In particular, the simplest generative model to describe visual motion
is the luminance conservation equation. It states that luminance I(x, t) for (x, t) ∈ R2 × R is
approximately conserved along trajectories defined as integral lines of a vector field v(x, t) ∈ R2 ×
R. The corresponding generative model defines random fields as solutions to the stochastic partial
differential equation (sPDE),
∂I
hv, ∇Ii +
= W,
(1)
∂t
1

