Learning Causal Graphs with Small Interventions
Karthikeyan Shanmugam1 , Murat Kocaoglu2 , Alexandros G. Dimakis3 , Sriram Vishwanath4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin, USA
1
karthiksh@utexas.edu,2 mkocaoglu@utexas.edu,
3
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu,4 sriram@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning causal networks with interventions, when
each intervention is limited in size under Pearl’s Structural Equation Model with
independent errors (SEM-IE). The objective is to minimize the number of experiments to discover the causal directions of all the edges in a causal graph. Previous
work has focused on the use of separating systems for complete graphs for this
task. We prove that any deterministic adaptive algorithm needs to be a separating system in order to learn complete graphs in the worst case. In addition, we
present a novel separating system construction, whose size is close to optimal and
is arguably simpler than previous work in combinatorics. We also develop a novel
information theoretic lower bound on the number of interventions that applies in
full generality, including for randomized adaptive learning algorithms.
For general chordal graphs, we derive worst case lower bounds on the number
of interventions. Building on observations about induced trees, we give a new
deterministic adaptive algorithm to learn directions on any chordal skeleton completely. In the worst case, our achievable scheme is an ↵-approximation algorithm
where ↵ is the independence number of the graph. We also show that there exist
graph classes for which the sufficient number of experiments is close to the lower
bound. In the other extreme, there are graph classes for which the required number
of experiments is multiplicatively ↵ away from our lower bound.
In simulations, our algorithm almost always performs very close to the lower
bound, while the approach based on separating systems for complete graphs is
significantly worse for random chordal graphs.

1

Introduction

Causality is a fundamental concept in sciences and philosophy. The mathematical formulation of
a theory of causality in a probabilistic sense has received significant attention recently (e.g. [1–5]).
A formulation advocated by Pearl considers the structural equation models: In this framework,
X is a cause of Y , if Y can be written as f (X, E), for some deterministic function f and some
latent random variable E. Given two causally related variables X and Y , it is not possible to infer
whether X causes Y or Y causes X from random samples, unless certain assumptions are made
on the distribution of E and/or on f [6, 7]. For more than two random variables, directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) are the most common tool used for representing causal relations. For a given DAG
D = (V, E), the directed edge (X, Y ) 2 E shows that X is a cause of Y .

If we make no assumptions on the data generating process, the standard way of inferring the causal
directions is by performing experiments, the so-called interventions. An intervention requires modifying the process that generates the random variables: The experimenter has to enforce values on
the random variables. This process is different than conditioning as explained in detail in [1].
1

