Max-Margin Deep Generative Models

Chongxuan Li† , Jun Zhu† , Tianlin Shi‡ , Bo Zhang†
†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys., TNList Lab,
Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
‡
Dept. of Comp. Sci., Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
{licx14@mails., dcszj@, dcszb@}tsinghua.edu.cn; stl501@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep generative models (DGMs) are effective on learning multilayered representations of complex data and performing inference of input data by exploring the
generative ability. However, little work has been done on examining or empowering the discriminative ability of DGMs on making accurate predictions. This paper presents max-margin deep generative models (mmDGMs), which explore the
strongly discriminative principle of max-margin learning to improve the discriminative power of DGMs, while retaining the generative capability. We develop an
efficient doubly stochastic subgradient algorithm for the piecewise linear objective. Empirical results on MNIST and SVHN datasets demonstrate that (1) maxmargin learning can significantly improve the prediction performance of DGMs
and meanwhile retain the generative ability; and (2) mmDGMs are competitive to
the state-of-the-art fully discriminative networks by employing deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) as both recognition and generative models.

1

Introduction

Max-margin learning has been effective on learning discriminative models, with many examples
such as univariate-output support vector machines (SVMs) [5] and multivariate-output max-margin
Markov networks (or structured SVMs) [30, 1, 31]. However, the ever-increasing size of complex
data makes it hard to construct such a fully discriminative model, which has only single layer of
adjustable weights, due to the facts that: (1) the manually constructed features may not well capture
the underlying high-order statistics; and (2) a fully discriminative approach cannot reconstruct the
input data when noise or missing values are present.
To address the first challenge, previous work has considered incorporating latent variables into
a max-margin model, including partially observed maximum entropy discrimination Markov networks [37], structured latent SVMs [32] and max-margin min-entropy models [20]. All this work
has primarily focused on a shallow structure of latent variables. To improve the flexibility, learning SVMs with a deep latent structure has been presented in [29]. However, these methods do not
address the second challenge, which requires a generative model to describe the inputs. The recent work on learning max-margin generative models includes max-margin Harmoniums [4], maxmargin topic models [34, 35], and nonparametric Bayesian latent SVMs [36] which can infer the
dimension of latent features from data. However, these methods only consider the shallow structure
of latent variables, which may not be flexible enough to describe complex data.
Much work has been done on learning generative models with a deep structure of nonlinear hidden
variables, including deep belief networks [25, 16, 23], autoregressive models [13, 9], and stochastic
variations of neural networks [3]. For such models, inference is a challenging problem, but fortunately there exists much recent progress on stochastic variational inference algorithms [12, 24].
However, the primary focus of deep generative models (DGMs) has been on unsupervised learning,
1

