Sample Complexity of Learning Mahalanobis
Distance Metrics
Kristin Branson
Janelia Research Campus, HHMI
bransonk@janelia.hhmi.org

Nakul Verma
Janelia Research Campus, HHMI
verman@janelia.hhmi.org

Abstract
Metric learning seeks a transformation of the feature space that enhances prediction quality for a given task. In this work we provide PAC-style sample complexity
rates for supervised metric learning. We give matching lower- and upper-bounds
showing that sample complexity scales with the representation dimension when
no assumptions are made about the underlying data distribution. In addition, by
leveraging the structure of the data distribution, we provide rates fine-tuned to a
specific notion of the intrinsic complexity of a given dataset, allowing us to relax
the dependence on representation dimension. We show both theoretically and empirically that augmenting the metric learning optimization criterion with a simple
norm-based regularization is important and can help adapt to a dataset’s intrinsic complexity yielding better generalization, thus partly explaining the empirical
success of similar regularizations reported in previous works.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning tasks, data is represented in a high-dimensional Euclidean space. The
L2 distance in this space is then used to compare observations in methods such as clustering and
nearest-neighbor classification. Often, this distance is not ideal for the task at hand. For example,
the presence of uninformative or mutually correlated measurements arbitrarily inflates the distances
between pairs of observations. Metric learning has emerged as a powerful technique to learn a
metric in the representation space that emphasizes feature combinations that improve prediction
while suppressing spurious measurements. This has been done by exploiting class labels [1, 2] or
other forms of supervision [3] to find a Mahalanobis distance metric that respects these annotations.
Despite the popularity of metric learning methods, few works have studied how problem complexity
scales with key attributes of the dataset. In particular, how do we expect generalization error to
scale—both theoretically and practically—as one varies the number of informative and uninformative measurements, or changes the noise levels? In this work, we develop two general frameworks
for PAC-style analysis of supervised metric learning. The distance-based metric learning framework uses class label information to derive distance constraints. The objective is to learn a metric
that yields smaller distances between examples from the same class than those from different classes.
Algorithms that optimize such distance-based objectives include Mahalanobis Metric for Clustering
(MMC) [4], Large Margin Nearest Neighbor (LMNN) [1] and Information Theoretic Metric Learning (ITML) [2]. Instead of using distance comparisons as a proxy, however, one can also optimize
for a specific prediction task directly. The second framework, the classifier-based metric learning
framework, explicitly incorporates the hypotheses associated with the prediction task to learn effective distance metrics. Examples in this regime include [5] and [6].
1

