A Bayesian Framework for Modeling Confidence in
Perceptual Decision Making

Koosha Khalvati, Rajesh P. N. Rao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
{koosha, rao}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
The degree of confidence in one’s choice or decision is a critical aspect of perceptual decision making. Attempts to quantify a decision maker’s confidence by
measuring accuracy in a task have yielded limited success because confidence and
accuracy are typically not equal. In this paper, we introduce a Bayesian framework
to model confidence in perceptual decision making. We show that this model,
based on partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs), is able to
predict confidence of a decision maker based only on the data available to the
experimenter. We test our model on two experiments on confidence-based decision making involving the well-known random dots motion discrimination task.
In both experiments, we show that our model’s predictions closely match experimental data. Additionally, our model is also consistent with other phenomena
such as the hard-easy effect in perceptual decision making.

1

Introduction

The brain is faced with the persistent challenge of decision making under uncertainty due to noise in
the sensory inputs and perceptual ambiguity . A mechanism for self-assessment of one’s decisions
is therefore crucial for evaluating the uncertainty in one’s decisions. This kind of decision making,
called perceptual decision making, and the associated self-assessment, called confidence, have received considerable attention in decision making experiments in recent years [9, 10, 12, 13]. One
possible way of estimating the confidence of a decision maker is to assume that it is equal to the
accuracy (or performance) on the task. However, the decision maker’s belief about the chance of
success and accuracy need not be equal because the decision maker may not have access to information that the experimenter has access to [3]. For example, in the well-known task of random dots
motion discrimination [18], on each trial, the experimenter knows the difficulty of the task (coherence or motion strength of the dots), but not the decision maker [3, 13]. In this case, when the data is
binned based on difficulty of the task, the accuracy is not equal to decision confidence. An alternate
way to estimate the subject’s confidence is to use auxiliary tasks such as post-decision wagering [15]
or asking the decision maker to estimate confidence explicitly [12]. These methods however only
provide an indirect window into the subject’s confidence and are not always applicable.
In this paper, we explain how a model of decision making based on Partially Observable Decision
Making Processes (POMDPs) [16, 5] can be used to estimate a decision maker’s confidence based on
experimental data. POMDPs provide a unifying Bayesian framework for modeling several important aspects of perceptual decision making including evidence accumulation via Bayesian updates,
the role of priors, costs and rewards of actions, etc. One of the advantages of the POMDP model
over the other models is that it can incorporate various types of uncertainty in computing the optimal
This research was supported by NSF grants EEC-1028725 and 1318733, and ONR grant N000141310817.

1

