Path-SGD: Path-Normalized Optimization in
Deep Neural Networks

Behnam Neyshabur
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
bneyshabur@ttic.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science
University of Toronto
rsalakhu@cs.toronto.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We revisit the choice of SGD for training deep neural networks by reconsidering
the appropriate geometry in which to optimize the weights. We argue for a geometry invariant to rescaling of weights that does not affect the output of the network,
and suggest Path-SGD, which is an approximate steepest descent method with respect to a path-wise regularizer related to max-norm regularization. Path-SGD is
easy and efficient to implement and leads to empirical gains over SGD and AdaGrad.

1

Introduction

Training deep networks is a challenging problem [16, 2] and various heuristics and optimization
algorithms have been suggested in order to improve the efficiency of the training [5, 9, 4]. However,
training deep architectures is still considerably slow and the problem has remained open. Many
of the current training methods rely on good initialization and then performing Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD), sometimes together with an adaptive stepsize or momentum term [16, 1, 6].
Revisiting the choice of gradient descent, we recall that optimization is inherently tied to a choice of
geometry or measure of distance, norm or divergence. Gradient descent for example is tied to the `2
norm as it is the steepest descent with respect to `2 norm in the parameter space, while coordinate
descent corresponds to steepest descent with respect to the `1 norm and exp-gradient (multiplicative
weight) updates is tied to an entropic divergence. Moreover, at least when the objective function is
convex, convergence behavior is tied to the corresponding norms or potentials. For example, with
gradient descent, or SGD, convergence speeds depend on the `2 norm of the optimum. The norm
or divergence can be viewed as a regularizer for the updates. There is therefore also a strong link
between regularization for optimization and regularization for learning: optimization may provide
implicit regularization in terms of its corresponding geometry, and for ideal optimization performance the optimization geometry should be aligned with inductive bias driving the learning [14].
Is the `2 geometry on the weights the appropriate geometry for the space of deep networks? Or
can we suggest a geometry with more desirable properties that would enable faster optimization and
perhaps also better implicit regularization? As suggested above, this question is also linked to the
choice of an appropriate regularizer for deep networks.
Focusing on networks with RELU activations, we observe that scaling down the incoming edges to
a hidden unit and scaling up the outgoing edges by the same factor yields an equivalent network
1

