Learning with Group Invariant Features:
A Kernel Perspective.

Youssef Mroueh
IBM Watson Group
mroueh@us.ibm.com

Stephen Voinea∗
CBMM, MIT.
voinea@mit.edu
∗Co-first author

Tomaso Poggio
CBMM, MIT .
tp@ai.mit.edu

Abstract
We analyze in this paper a random feature map based on a theory of invariance
(I-theory) introduced in [1]. More specifically, a group invariant signal signature
is obtained through cumulative distributions of group-transformed random projections. Our analysis bridges invariant feature learning with kernel methods, as
we show that this feature map defines an expected Haar-integration kernel that is
invariant to the specified group action. We show how this non-linear random feature map approximates this group invariant kernel uniformly on a set of N points.
Moreover, we show that it defines a function space that is dense in the equivalent
Invariant Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space. Finally, we quantify error rates of
the convergence of the empirical risk minimization, as well as the reduction in the
sample complexity of a learning algorithm using such an invariant representation
for signal classification, in a classical supervised learning setting.

1

Introduction

Encoding signals or building similarity kernels that are invariant to the action of a group is a key
problem in unsupervised learning, as it reduces the complexity of the learning task and mimics how
our brain represents information invariantly to symmetries and various nuisance factors (change in
lighting in image classification and pitch variation in speech recognition) [1, 2, 3, 4]. Convolutional
neural networks [5, 6] achieve state of the art performance in many computer vision and speech
recognition tasks, but require a large amount of labeled examples as well as augmented data, where
we reflect symmetries of the world through virtual examples [7, 8] obtained by applying identitypreserving transformations such as shearing, rotation, translation, etc., to the training data. In this
work, we adopt the approach of [1], where the representation of the signal is designed to reflect
the invariant properties and model the world symmetries with group actions. The ultimate aim is
to bridge unsupervised learning of invariant representations with invariant kernel methods, where
we can use tools from classical supervised learning to easily address the statistical consistency and
sample complexity questions [9, 10]. Indeed, many invariant kernel methods and related invariant
kernel networks have been proposed. We refer the reader to the related work section for a review
(Section 5) and we start by showing how to accomplish this invariance through group-invariant Haarintegration kernels [11], and then show how random features derived from a memory-based theory
of invariances introduced in [1] approximate such a kernel.
1.1

Group Invariant Kernels

We start by reviewing group-invariant Haar-integration kernels introduced in [11], and their use in a
binary classification problem. This section highlights the conceptual advantages of such kernels as
well as their practical inconvenience, putting into perspective the advantage of approximating them
with explicit and invariant random feature maps.
1

