Smooth and Strong:
MAP Inference with Linear Convergence
Ofer Meshi
TTI Chicago

Mehrdad Mahdavi
TTI Chicago

Alexander G. Schwing
University of Toronto

Abstract
Maximum a-posteriori (MAP) inference is an important task for many applications. Although the standard formulation gives rise to a hard combinatorial optimization problem, several effective approximations have been proposed and studied in recent years. We focus on linear programming (LP) relaxations, which have
achieved state-of-the-art performance in many applications. However, optimization of the resulting program is in general challenging due to non-smoothness and
complex non-separable constraints.
Therefore, in this work we study the benefits of augmenting the objective function
of the relaxation with strong convexity. Specifically, we introduce strong convexity by adding a quadratic term to the LP relaxation objective. We provide theoretical guarantees for the resulting programs, bounding the difference between their
optimal value and the original optimum. Further, we propose suitable optimization
algorithms and analyze their convergence.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models are an elegant framework for reasoning about multiple variables with
structured dependencies. They have been applied in a variety of domains, including computer vision, natural language processing, computational biology, and many more. Throughout, finding the
maximum a-posteriori (MAP) configuration, i.e., the most probable assignment, is one of the central
tasks for these models. Unfortunately, in general the MAP inference problem is NP-hard. Despite
this theoretical barrier, in recent years it has been shown that approximate inference methods based
on linear programming (LP) relaxations often provide high quality MAP solutions in practice. Although tractable in principle, LP relaxations pose a real computational challenge. In particular, for
many applications, standard LP solvers perform poorly due to the large number of variables and
constraints [33]. Therefore, significant research effort has been put into designing efficient solvers
that exploit the special structure of the MAP inference problem.
Some of the proposed algorithms optimize the primal LP directly, however this is hard due to complex coupling constraints between the variables. Therefore, most of the specialized MAP solvers
optimize the dual function, which is often easier since it preserves the structure of the underlying
model and facilitates elegant message-passing algorithms. Nevertheless, the resulting optimization
problem is still challenging since the dual function is piecewise linear and therefore non-smooth.
In fact, it was recently shown that LP relaxations for MAP inference are not easier than general
LPs [22]. This result implies that there exists an inherent trade-off between the approximation error
(accuracy) of the relaxation and its optimization error (efficiency).
In this paper we propose new ways to explore this trade-off. Specifically, we study the benefits of
adding strong convexity in the form of a quadratic term to the MAP LP relaxation objective. We
show that adding strong convexity to the primal LP results in a new smooth dual objective, which
serves as an alternative to soft-max. This smooth objective can be computed efficiently and optimized via gradient-based methods, including accelerated gradient. On the other hand, introducing
strong convexity in the dual leads to a new primal formulation in which the coupling constraints
are enforced softly, through a penalty term in the objective. This allows us to derive an efficient
1

