Structured Transforms for
Small-Footprint Deep Learning

Vikas Sindhwani

Tara N. Sainath
Sanjiv Kumar
Google, New York
{sindhwani, tsainath, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
We consider the task of building compact deep learning pipelines suitable for deployment on storage and power constrained mobile devices. We propose a unified framework to learn a broad family of structured parameter matrices that are
characterized by the notion of low displacement rank. Our structured transforms
admit fast function and gradient evaluation, and span a rich range of parameter
sharing configurations whose statistical modeling capacity can be explicitly tuned
along a continuum from structured to unstructured. Experimental results show
that these transforms can significantly accelerate inference and forward/backward
passes during training, and offer superior accuracy-compactness-speed tradeoffs
in comparison to a number of existing techniques. In keyword spotting applications in mobile speech recognition, our methods are much more effective than
standard linear low-rank bottleneck layers and nearly retain the performance of
state of the art models, while providing more than 3.5-fold compression.

1

Introduction

Non-linear vector-valued transforms of the form, f (x, M) = s(Mx), where s is an elementwise
nonlinearity, x is an input vector, and M is an m × n matrix of parameters are building blocks
of complex deep learning pipelines and non-parametric function estimators arising in randomized
kernel methods [20]. When M is a large general dense matrix, the cost of storing mn parameters
and computing matrix-vector products in O(mn) time can make it prohibitive to deploy such models
on lightweight mobile devices and wearables where battery life is precious and storage is limited.
This is particularly relevant for “always-on” mobile applications, such as continuously looking for
specific keywords spoken by the user or processing a live video stream onboard a mobile robot. In
such settings, the models may need to be hosted on specialized low-power digital signal processing
components which are even more resource constrained than the device CPU.
A parsimonious structure typically imposed on parameter matrices is that of low-rankness [22]. If
M is a rank r matrix, with r  min(m, n), then it has a (non-unique) product representation of the
form M = GHT where G, H have only r columns. Clearly, this representation reduces the storage
requirements to (mr + nr) parameters, and accelerates the matrix-vector multiplication time to
O(mr+nr) via Mx = G(HT x). Another popular structure is that of sparsity [6] typically imposed
during optimization via zero-inducing l0 or l1 regularizers. Other techniques include freezing M
to be a random matrix as motivated via approximations to kernel functions [20], storing M in low
fixed-precision formats [7, 24], using specific parameter sharing mechanisms [3], or training smaller
models on outputs of larger models (“distillation”) [11].
Structured Matrices: An m × n matrix which can be described in much fewer than mn parameters is referred to as a structured matrix. Typically, the structure should not only reduce memory
1

