Estimating Jaccard Index with Missing Observations:
A Matrix Calibration Approach

Wenye Li
Macao Polytechnic Institute
Macao SAR, China
wyli@ipm.edu.mo

Abstract
The Jaccard index is a standard statistics for comparing the pairwise similarity between data samples. This paper investigates the problem of estimating a Jaccard
index matrix when there are missing observations in data samples. Starting from
a Jaccard index matrix approximated from the incomplete data, our method calibrates the matrix to meet the requirement of positive semi-definiteness and other
constraints, through a simple alternating projection algorithm. Compared with
conventional approaches that estimate the similarity matrix based on the imputed
data, our method has a strong advantage in that the calibrated matrix is guaranteed to be closer to the unknown ground truth in the Frobenius norm than the
un-calibrated matrix (except in special cases they are identical). We carried out a
series of empirical experiments and the results confirmed our theoretical justification. The evaluation also reported significantly improved results in real learning
tasks on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

A critical task in data analysis is to determine how similar two data samples are. The applications
arise in many science and engineering disciplines. For example, in statistical and computing sciences, similarity analysis lays a foundation for cluster analysis, pattern classification, image analysis
and recommender systems [15, 8, 17].
A variety of similarity models have been established for different types of data. When data samples
can be represented as algebraic vectors, popular choices include cosine similarity model, linear
kernel model, and so on [24, 25]. When each vector element takes a value of zero or one, the
Jaccard index model is routinely applied, which measures the similarity by the ratio of the number
of unique elements common to two samples against the total number of unique elements in either of
them [14, 23].
Despite the wide applications, the Jaccard index model faces a non-trivial challenge when data
samples are not fully observed. As a treatment, imputation approaches may be applied, which
replace the missing observations with substituted values and then calculate the Jaccard index based
on the imputed data. Unfortunately, with a large portion of missing observations, imputing data
samples often becomes un-reliable or even infeasible, as evidenced in our evaluation.
Instead of trying to fill in the missing values, this paper investigates a completely different approach
based on matrix calibration. Starting from an approximate Jaccard index matrix that is estimated
from incomplete samples, the proposed method calibrates the matrix to meet the requirement of
positive semi-definiteness and other constraints. The calibration procedure is carried out with a
simple yet flexible alternating projection algorithm.
1

