Individual Planning in Inﬁnite-Horizon Multiagent
Settings: Inference, Structure and Scalability
Xia Qu
Epic Systems
Verona, WI 53593
quxiapisces@gmail.com

Prashant Doshi
THINC Lab, Dept. of Computer Science
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30622
pdoshi@cs.uga.edu

Abstract
This paper provides the ﬁrst formalization of self-interested planning in multiagent settings using expectation-maximization (EM). Our formalization in the context of inﬁnite-horizon and ﬁnitely-nested interactive POMDPs (I-POMDP) is
distinct from EM formulations for POMDPs and cooperative multiagent planning
frameworks. We exploit the graphical model structure speciﬁc to I-POMDPs, and
present a new approach based on block-coordinate descent for further speed up.
Forward ﬁltering-backward sampling – a combination of exact ﬁltering with sampling – is explored to exploit problem structure.

1

Introduction

Generalization of bounded policy iteration (BPI) to ﬁnitely-nested interactive partially observable
Markov decision processes (I-POMDP) [1] is currently the leading method for inﬁnite-horizon selfinterested multiagent planning and obtaining ﬁnite-state controllers as solutions. However, interactive BPI is acutely prone to converge to local optima, which severely limits the quality of its solutions
despite the limited ability to escape from these local optima.
Attias [2] posed planning using MDP as a likelihood maximization problem where the “data” is
the initial state and the ﬁnal goal state or the maximum total reward. Toussaint et al. [3] extended
this to infer ﬁnite-state automata for inﬁnite-horizon POMDPs. Experiments reveal good quality
controllers of small sizes although run time is a concern. Given BPI’s limitations and the compelling
potential of this approach in bringing advances in inferencing to bear on planning, we generalize it
to inﬁnite-horizon and ﬁnitely-nested I-POMDPs. Our generalization allows its use toward planning
for an individual agent in noncooperation where we may not assume common knowledge of initial
beliefs or common rewards, due to which others’ beliefs, capabilities and preferences are modeled.
Analogously to POMDPs, we formulate a mixture of ﬁnite-horizon DBNs. However, the DBNs
differ by including models of other agents in a special model node. Our approach, labeled as I-EM,
improves on the straightforward extension of Toussaint et al.’s EM to I-POMDPs by utilizing various
types of structure. Instead of ascribing as many level 0 ﬁnite-state controllers as candidate models
and improving each using its own EM, we use the underlying graphical structure of the model node
and its update to formulate a single EM that directly provides the marginal of others’ actions across
all models. This rests on a new insight, which considerably simpliﬁes and speeds EM at level 1.
We present a general approach based on block-coordinate descent [4, 5] for speeding up the nonasymptotic rate of convergence of the iterative EM. The problem is decomposed into optimization
subproblems in which the objective function is optimized with respect to a small subset (block) of
variables, while holding other variables ﬁxed. We discuss the unique challenges and present the ﬁrst
effective application of this iterative scheme to multiagent planning.
Finally, sampling offers a way to exploit the embedded problem structure such as information in distributions. The exact forward-backward E-step is replaced with forward ﬁltering-backward sampling
1

