Convolutional Networks on Graphs
for Learning Molecular Fingerprints

David Duvenaud† , Dougal Maclaurin†, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Timothy Hirzel, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Ryan P. Adams
Harvard University

Abstract
We introduce a convolutional neural network that operates directly on graphs.
These networks allow end-to-end learning of prediction pipelines whose inputs
are graphs of arbitrary size and shape. The architecture we present generalizes
standard molecular feature extraction methods based on circular fingerprints. We
show that these data-driven features are more interpretable, and have better predictive performance on a variety of tasks.

1

Introduction

Recent work in materials design used neural networks to predict the properties of novel molecules
by generalizing from examples. One difficulty with this task is that the input to the predictor, a
molecule, can be of arbitrary size and shape. Currently, most machine learning pipelines can only
handle inputs of a fixed size. The current state of the art is to use off-the-shelf fingerprint software
to compute fixed-dimensional feature vectors, and use those features as inputs to a fully-connected
deep neural network or other standard machine learning method. This formula was followed by
[28, 3, 19]. During training, the molecular fingerprint vectors were treated as fixed.
In this paper, we replace the bottom layer of this stack – the function that computes molecular
fingerprint vectors – with a differentiable neural network whose input is a graph representing the
original molecule. In this graph, vertices represent individual atoms and edges represent bonds. The
lower layers of this network is convolutional in the sense that the same local filter is applied to each
atom and its neighborhood. After several such layers, a global pooling step combines features from
all the atoms in the molecule.
These neural graph fingerprints offer several advantages over fixed fingerprints:
• Predictive performance. By using data adapting to the task at hand, machine-optimized
fingerprints can provide substantially better predictive performance than fixed fingerprints.
We show that neural graph fingerprints match or beat the predictive performance of standard fingerprints on solubility, drug efficacy, and organic photovoltaic efficiency datasets.
• Parsimony. Fixed fingerprints must be extremely large to encode all possible substructures
without overlap. For example, [28] used a fingerprint vector of size 43,000, after having
removed rarely-occurring features. Differentiable fingerprints can be optimized to encode
only relevant features, reducing downstream computation and regularization requirements.
• Interpretability. Standard fingerprints encode each possible fragment completely distinctly, with no notion of similarity between fragments. In contrast, each feature of a neural
graph fingerprint can be activated by similar but distinct molecular fragments, making the
feature representation more meaningful.
†

Equal contribution.

1

