Gradient Estimation Using
Stochastic Computation Graphs

1

John Schulman1,2
joschu@eecs.berkeley.edu

Nicolas Heess1
heess@google.com

Theophane Weber1
theophane@google.com

Pieter Abbeel2
pabbeel@eecs.berkeley.edu

Google DeepMind

2

University of California, Berkeley, EECS Department

Abstract
In a variety of problems originating in supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning, the loss function is defined by an expectation over a collection
of random variables, which might be part of a probabilistic model or the external world. Estimating the gradient of this loss function, using samples, lies at
the core of gradient-based learning algorithms for these problems. We introduce
the formalism of stochastic computation graphs—directed acyclic graphs that include both deterministic functions and conditional probability distributions—and
describe how to easily and automatically derive an unbiased estimator of the loss
function’s gradient. The resulting algorithm for computing the gradient estimator
is a simple modification of the standard backpropagation algorithm. The generic
scheme we propose unifies estimators derived in variety of prior work, along with
variance-reduction techniques therein. It could assist researchers in developing intricate models involving a combination of stochastic and deterministic operations,
enabling, for example, attention, memory, and control actions.

1

Introduction

The great success of neural networks is due in part to the simplicity of the backpropagation algorithm, which allows one to efficiently compute the gradient of any loss function defined as a
composition of differentiable functions. This simplicity has allowed researchers to search in the
space of architectures for those that are both highly expressive and conducive to optimization; yielding, for example, convolutional neural networks in vision [12] and LSTMs for sequence data [9].
However, the backpropagation algorithm is only sufficient when the loss function is a deterministic,
differentiable function of the parameter vector.
A rich class of problems arising throughout machine learning requires optimizing loss functions
that involve an expectation over random variables. Two broad categories of these problems are (1)
likelihood maximization in probabilistic models with latent variables [17, 18], and (2) policy gradients in reinforcement learning [5, 23, 26]. Combining ideas from from those two perennial topics,
recent models of attention [15] and memory [29] have used networks that involve a combination of
stochastic and deterministic operations.
In most of these problems, from probabilistic modeling to reinforcement learning, the loss functions
and their gradients are intractable, as they involve either a sum over an exponential number of latent
variable configurations, or high-dimensional integrals that have no analytic solution. Prior work (see
Section 6) has provided problem-specific derivations of Monte-Carlo gradient estimators, however,
to our knowledge, no previous work addresses the general case.
Appendix C recalls several classic and recent techniques in variational inference [14, 10, 21] and reinforcement learning [23, 25, 15], where the loss functions can be straightforwardly described using
1

