Minimum Weight Perfect Matching
via Blossom Belief Propagation

Sungsoo Ahn∗

Sejun Park∗
Michael Chertkov†
Jinwoo Shin∗
∗
School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea
†
Theoretical Division and Center for Nonlinear Studies,
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, USA
∗
†
{sungsoo.ahn, sejun.park, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
chertkov@lanl.gov

Abstract
Max-product Belief Propagation (BP) is a popular message-passing algorithm for
computing a Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP) assignment over a distribution represented by a Graphical Model (GM). It has been shown that BP can solve a number of combinatorial optimization problems including minimum weight matching,
shortest path, network flow and vertex cover under the following common assumption: the respective Linear Programming (LP) relaxation is tight, i.e., no integrality
gap is present. However, when LP shows an integrality gap, no model has been
known which can be solved systematically via sequential applications of BP. In
this paper, we develop the first such algorithm, coined Blossom-BP, for solving
the minimum weight matching problem over arbitrary graphs. Each step of the
sequential algorithm requires applying BP over a modified graph constructed by
contractions and expansions of blossoms, i.e., odd sets of vertices. Our scheme
guarantees termination in O(n2 ) of BP runs, where n is the number of vertices in
the original graph. In essence, the Blossom-BP offers a distributed version of the
celebrated Edmonds’ Blossom algorithm by jumping at once over many sub-steps
with a single BP. Moreover, our result provides an interpretation of the Edmonds’
algorithm as a sequence of LPs.

1

Introduction

Graphical Models (GMs) provide a useful representation for reasoning in a number of scientific disciplines [1, 2, 3, 4]. Such models use a graph structure to encode the joint probability distribution,
where vertices correspond to random variables and edges specify conditional dependencies. An
important inference task in many applications involving GMs is to find the most-likely assignment
to the variables in a GM, i.e., Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP). Belief Propagation (BP) is a popular algorithm for approximately solving the MAP inference problem and it is an iterative, message
passing one that is exact on tree structured GMs. BP often shows remarkably strong heuristic performance beyond trees, i.e., over loopy GMs. Furthermore, BP is of a particular relevance to large-scale
problems due to its potential for parallelization [5] and its ease of programming within the modern
programming models for parallel computing, e.g., GraphLab [6], GraphChi [7] and OpenMP [8].
The convergence and correctness of BP was recently established for a certain class of loopy GM formulations of several classical combinatorial optimization problems, including matching [9, 10, 11],
perfect matching [12], shortest path [13], independent set [14], network flow [15] and vertex cover
[16]. The important common feature of these models is that BP converges to a correct assignment
when the Linear Programming (LP) relaxation of the combinatorial optimization is tight, i.e., when
it shows no integrality gap. The LP tightness is an inevitable condition to guarantee the performance
of BP and no combinatorial optimization instance has been known where BP would be used to solve
1

