Is Approval Voting Optimal Given Approval Votes?

Nisarg Shah
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
nkshah@cs.cmu.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Some crowdsourcing platforms ask workers to express their opinions by approving a set of k good alternatives. It seems that the only reasonable way to aggregate
these k-approval votes is the approval voting rule, which simply counts the number of times each alternative was approved. We challenge this assertion by proposing a probabilistic framework of noisy voting, and asking whether approval voting
yields an alternative that is most likely to be the best alternative, given k-approval
votes. While the answer is generally positive, our theoretical and empirical results
call attention to situations where approval voting is suboptimal.

1

Introduction

It is surely no surprise to the reader that modern machine learning algorithms thrive on large
amounts of data — preferably labeled. Online labor markets, such as Amazon Mechanical Turk
(www.mturk.com), have become a popular way to obtain labeled data, as they harness the power
of a large number of human workers, and offer significantly lower costs compared to expert opinions. But this low-cost, large-scale data may require compromising quality: the workers are often
unqualified or unwilling to make an effort, leading to a high level of noise in their submitted labels.
To overcome this issue, it is common to hire multiple workers for the same task, and aggregate their
noisy opinions to find more accurate labels. For example, TurKit [17] is a toolkit for creating and
managing crowdsourcing tasks on Mechanical Turk. For our purposes its most important aspect
is that it implements plurality voting: among available alternatives (e.g., possible labels), workers
report the best alternative in their opinion, and the alternative that receives the most votes is selected.
More generally, workers may be asked to report the k best alternatives in their opinion; such a vote
is known as a k-approval vote. This has an advantage over plurality (1-approval) in noisy situations
where a worker may not be able to pinpoint the best alternative accurately, but can recognize that
it is among the top k alternatives [23].1 At the same time, k-approval votes, even for k > 1, are
much easier to elicit than, say, rankings of the alternatives, not to mention full utility functions. For
example, EteRNA [16] — a citizen science game whose goal is to design RNA molecules that fold
into stable structures — uses 8-approval voting on submitted designs, that is, each player approves
up to 8 favorite designs; the designs that received the largest number of approval votes are selected
for synthesis in the lab.
So, the elicitation of k-approval votes is common practice and has significant advantages. And it
may seem that the only reasonable way to aggregate these votes, once collected, is via the approval
voting rule, that is, tally the number of approvals for each alternative, and select the most approved
one.2 But is it? In other words, do the k-approval votes contain useful information that can lead to
1

k-approval is also used for picking k winners, e.g., various cities in the US such as San Francisco, Chicago,
and New York use it in their so-called “participatory budgeting” process [15].
2
There is a subtle distinction, which we will not belabor, between k-approval voting, which is the focus of
this paper, and approval voting [8], which allows voters to approve as many alternatives as they wish. The latter

1

