Particle Gibbs for Infinite Hidden Markov Models
Nilesh Tripuraneni*
University of Cambridge
nt357@cam.ac.uk

Shixiang Gu*
University of Cambridge
MPI for Intelligent Systems
sg717@cam.ac.uk

Hong Ge
University of Cambridge
hg344@cam.ac.uk

Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge
zoubin@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Infinite Hidden Markov Models (iHMM’s) are an attractive, nonparametric generalization of the classical Hidden Markov Model which can automatically infer the
number of hidden states in the system. However, due to the infinite-dimensional
nature of the transition dynamics, performing inference in the iHMM is difficult.
In this paper, we present an infinite-state Particle Gibbs (PG) algorithm to resample state trajectories for the iHMM. The proposed algorithm uses an efficient
proposal optimized for iHMMs and leverages ancestor sampling to improve the
mixing of the standard PG algorithm. Our algorithm demonstrates significant convergence improvements on synthetic and real world data sets.

1

Introduction

Hidden Markov Models (HMM’s) are among the most widely adopted latent-variable models used
to model time-series datasets in the statistics and machine learning communities. They have also
been successfully applied in a variety of domains including genomics, language, and finance where
sequential data naturally arises [Rabiner, 1989; Bishop, 2006].
One possible disadvantage of the finite-state space HMM framework is that one must a-priori specify the number of latent states K. Standard model selection techniques can be applied to the finite state-space
HMM but bear a high computational overhead since they require the repetitive

training exploration of many HMM’s of different sizes.
Bayesian nonparametric methods offer an attractive alternative to this problem by adapting their
effective model complexity to fit the data. In particular, Beal et al. [2001] constructed an HMM over
a countably infinite state-space using a Hierarchical Dirichlet Process (HDP) prior over the rows
of the transition matrix. Various
 approaches have been taken to perform full posterior inference
over the latent states, transition emission distributions and hyperparameters since it is impossible
to directly apply the forward-backwards algorithm due to the infinite-dimensional size of the state
space. The original Gibbs sampling approach proposed in Teh et al. [2006] suffered from slow
mixing due to the strong correlations between nearby time steps often present in time-series data
[Scott, 2002]. However, Van Gael et al. [2008] introduced a set of auxiliary slice variables to
dynamically “truncate” the state space to be finite (referred to as beam sampling), allowing them
to use dynamic programming to jointly resample the latent states thus circumventing the problem.
Despite the power of the beam-sampling scheme, Fox et al. [2008] found that application of the
beam sampler to the (sticky) iHMM resulted in slow mixing relative to an inexact, blocked sampler
due to the introduction of auxiliary slice variables in the sampler.
*equal contribution.

1

