Fixed-Length Poisson MRF:
Adding Dependencies to the Multinomial

David I. Inouye

Pradeep Ravikumar
Inderjit S. Dhillon
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
{dinouye,pradeepr,inderjit}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel distribution that generalizes the Multinomial distribution to
enable dependencies between dimensions. Our novel distribution is based on the
parametric form of the Poisson MRF model [1] but is fundamentally different because of the domain restriction to a fixed-length vector like in a Multinomial where
the number of trials is fixed or known. Thus, we propose the Fixed-Length Poisson MRF (LPMRF) distribution. We develop AIS sampling methods to estimate
the likelihood and log partition function (i.e. the log normalizing constant), which
was not developed for the Poisson MRF model. In addition, we propose novel
mixture and topic models that use LPMRF as a base distribution and discuss the
similarities and differences with previous topic models such as the recently proposed Admixture of Poisson MRFs [2]. We show the effectiveness of our LPMRF
distribution over Multinomial models by evaluating the test set perplexity on a
dataset of abstracts and Wikipedia. Qualitatively, we show that the positive dependencies discovered by LPMRF are interesting and intuitive. Finally, we show
that our algorithms are fast and have good scaling (code available online).

1

Introduction & Related Work

The Multinomial distribution seems to be a natural distribution for modeling count-valued data
such as text documents. Indeed, most topic models such as PLSA [3], LDA [4] and numerous
extensions—see [5] for a survey of probabilistic topic models—use the Multinomial as the fundamental base distribution while adding complexity using other latent variables. This is most likely
due to the extreme simplicity of Multinomial parameter estimation—simple frequency counts—that
is usually smoothed by the simple Dirichlet conjugate prior. In addition, because the Multinomial
requires the length of a document to be fixed or pre-specified, usually a Poisson distribution on document length is assumed. This yields a Poisson-Multinomial distribution—which by well-known
results is merely an independent Poisson model.1 However, the Multinomial assumes independence
between the words because the Multinomial is merely the sum of independent categorical variables.
This restriction does not seem to fit with real-world text. For example, words like “neural” and
“network” will tend to co-occur quite frequently together in NIPS papers. Thus, we seek to relax
the word independence assumption of the Multinomial.
The Poisson MRF distribution (PMRF) [1] seems to be a potential replacement for the PoissonMultinomial because it allows some dependencies between words. The Poisson MRF is developed
by assuming that every conditional distribution is 1D Poisson. However, the original formulation
in [1] only allowed for negative dependencies. Thus, several modifications were proposed in [6]
to allow for positive dependencies. One proposal, the Truncated Poisson MRF (TPMRF), simply
truncated the PMRF by setting a max count for every word. While this formulation may provide
1

The assumption of Poisson document length is not important for most topic models [4].

1

