Subsampled Power Iteration: a Unified Algorithm for
Block Models and Planted CSP’s
Will Perkins
University of Birmingham
w.f.perkins@bham.ac.uk

Vitaly Feldman
IBM Research - Almaden
vitaly@post.harvard.edu

Santosh Vempala
Georgia Tech
vempala@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
We present an algorithm for recovering planted solutions in two well-known models, the stochastic block model and planted constraint satisfaction problems (CSP),
via a common generalization in terms of random bipartite graphs. Our algorithm
matches up to a constant factor the best-known bounds for the number of edges (or
constraints) needed for perfect recovery and its running time is linear in the number of edges used. The time complexity is significantly better than both spectral
and SDP-based approaches.
The main contribution of the algorithm is in the case of unequal sizes in the bipartition that arises in our reduction from the planted CSP. Here our algorithm
succeeds at a significantly lower density than the spectral approaches, surpassing
a barrier based on the spectral norm of a random matrix.
Other significant features of the algorithm and analysis include (i) the critical use
of power iteration with subsampling, which might be of independent interest; its
analysis requires keeping track of multiple norms of an evolving solution (ii) the
algorithm can be implemented statistically, i.e., with very limited access to the
input distribution (iii) the algorithm is extremely simple to implement and runs in
linear time, and thus is practical even for very large instances.

1

Introduction

A broad class of learning problems fits into the framework of obtaining a sequence of independent
random samples from a unknown distribution, and then (approximately) recovering this distribution
using as few samples as possible. We consider two natural instances of this framework: the stochastic block model in which a random graph is formed by choosing edges independently at random
with probabilities that depend on whether an edge crosses a planted partition, and planted k-CSP’s
(or planted k-SAT) in which width-k boolean constraints are chosen independently at random with
probabilities that depend on their evaluation on a planted assignment to a set of boolean variables.
We propose a natural bipartite generalization of the stochastic block model, and then show that
planted k-CSP’s can be reduced to this model, thus unifying graph partitioning and planted CSP’s
into one problem. We then give an algorithm for solving random instances of the model. Our
algorithm is optimal up to a constant factor in terms of number of sampled edges and running time
for the bipartite block model; for planted CSP’s the algorithm matches up to log factors the best
possible sample complexity in several restricted computational models and the best-known bounds
for any algorithm. A key feature of the algorithm is that when one side of the bipartition is much
1

