Improved Iteration Complexity Bounds of Cyclic
Block Coordinate Descent for Convex Problems
Ruoyu Sun∗, Mingyi Hong† ‡

Abstract
The iteration complexity of the block-coordinate descent (BCD) type algorithm
has been under extensive investigation. It was recently shown that for convex
problems the classical cyclic BCGD (block coordinate gradient descent) achieves
an O(1/r) complexity (r is the number of passes of all blocks). However, such
bounds are at least linearly depend on K (the number of variable blocks), and
are at least K times worse than those of the gradient descent (GD) and proximal
gradient (PG) methods. In this paper, we close such theoretical performance gap
between cyclic BCD and GD/PG. First we show that for a family of quadratic
nonsmooth problems, the complexity bounds for cyclic Block Coordinate Proximal Gradient (BCPG), a popular variant of BCD, can match those of the GD/PG
in terms of dependency on K (up to a log2 (K) factor). Second, we establish an
improved complexity bound for Coordinate Gradient Descent (CGD) for general
convex problems which can match that of GD in certain scenarios. Our bounds
are sharper than the known bounds as they are always at least K times worse than
GD. Our analyses do not depend on the update order of block variables inside
each cycle, thus our results also apply to BCD methods with random permutation
(random sampling without replacement, another popular variant).

1 Introduction
Consider the following convex optimization problem
min f (x) = g(x1 , · · · , xK ) +

K


hk (xk ),

s.t.

xk ∈ Xk , ∀ k = 1, · · · K,

(1)

k=1

where g : X → R is a convex smooth function; h : X → R is a convex lower semi-continuous
possibly nonsmooth function; xk ∈ Xk ⊆ RN is a block variable. A very popular method for
solving this problem is the so-called block coordinate descent (BCD) method [5], where each time
a single block variable is optimized while the rest of the variables remain fixed. Using the classical
cyclic block selection rule, the BCD method can be described below.
Algorithm 1: The Cyclic Block Coordinate Descent (BCD)
At each iteration r + 1, update the variable blocks by:


(r)
(r)
xk ∈ min g xk , w−k + hk (xk ), k = 1, · · · , K.
xk ∈Xk

(2)

∗
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
ruoyu@stanford.edu
†
Department of Industrial & Manufacturing Systems Engineering and Department of Electrical & Computer
Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, mingyi@iastate.edu
‡
The authors contribute equally to this work.

1

