Fast Second-Order Stochastic Backpropagation for
Variational Inference
Kai Fan
Duke University
kai.fan@stat.duke.edu

Ziteng Wang∗
HKUST†
wangzt2012@gmail.com

Jeffrey Beck
Duke University
jeff.beck@duke.edu

Katherine Heller
Duke University
kheller@gmail.com

James T. Kwok
HKUST
jamesk@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
We propose a second-order (Hessian or Hessian-free) based optimization method
for variational inference inspired by Gaussian backpropagation, and argue that
quasi-Newton optimization can be developed as well. This is accomplished
by generalizing the gradient computation in stochastic backpropagation via a
reparametrization trick with lower complexity. As an illustrative example, we apply this approach to the problems of Bayesian logistic regression and variational
auto-encoder (VAE). Additionally, we compute bounds on the estimator variance
of intractable expectations for the family of Lipschitz continuous function. Our
method is practical, scalable and model free. We demonstrate our method on several real-world datasets and provide comparisons with other stochastic gradient
methods to show substantial enhancement in convergence rates.

1

Introduction

Generative models have become ubiquitous in machine learning and statistics and are now widely
used in fields such as bioinformatics, computer vision, or natural language processing. These models
benefit from being highly interpretable and easily extended. Unfortunately, inference and learning
with generative models is often intractable, especially for models that employ continuous latent
variables, and so fast approximate methods are needed. Variational Bayesian (VB) methods [1] deal
with this problem by approximating the true posterior that has a tractable parametric form and then
identifying the set of parameters that maximize a variational lower bound on the marginal likelihood.
That is, VB methods turn an inference problem into an optimization problem that can be solved, for
example, by gradient ascent.
Indeed, efficient stochastic gradient variational Bayesian (SGVB) estimators have been developed for auto-encoder models [17] and a number of papers have followed up on this approach
[28, 25, 19, 16, 15, 26, 10]. Recently, [25] provided a complementary perspective by using stochastic
backpropagation that is equivalent to SGVB and applied it to deep latent gaussian models. Stochastic backpropagation overcomes many limitations of traditional inference methods such as the meanfield or wake-sleep algorithms [12] due to the existence of efficient computations of an unbiased
estimate of the gradient of the variational lower bound. The resulting gradients can be used for parameter estimation via stochastic optimization methods such as stochastic gradient decent(SGD) or
adaptive version (Adagrad) [6].
∗
†

Equal Contribution to this work
Refer to Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

1

