Variational Dropout and
the Local Reparameterization Trick
Diederik P. Kingma⇤ , Tim Salimans⇥ and Max Welling⇤†
⇤
Machine Learning Group, University of Amsterdam
⇥
Algoritmica
†
University of California, Irvine, and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)
D.P.Kingma@uva.nl, salimans.tim@gmail.com, M.Welling@uva.nl

Abstract
We investigate a local reparameterizaton technique for greatly reducing the variance of stochastic gradients for variational Bayesian inference (SGVB) of a posterior over model parameters, while retaining parallelizability. This local reparameterization translates uncertainty about global parameters into local noise that
is independent across datapoints in the minibatch. Such parameterizations can be
trivially parallelized and have variance that is inversely proportional to the minibatch size, generally leading to much faster convergence. Additionally, we explore
a connection with dropout: Gaussian dropout objectives correspond to SGVB with
local reparameterization, a scale-invariant prior and proportionally fixed posterior
variance. Our method allows inference of more flexibly parameterized posteriors;
specifically, we propose variational dropout, a generalization of Gaussian dropout
where the dropout rates are learned, often leading to better models. The method
is demonstrated through several experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are a flexible family of models that easily scale to millions of parameters and
datapoints, but are still tractable to optimize using minibatch-based stochastic gradient ascent. Due
to their high flexibility, neural networks have the capacity to fit a wide diversity of nonlinear patterns
in the data. This flexbility often leads to overfitting when left unchecked: spurious patterns are found
that happen to fit well to the training data, but are not predictive for new data. Various regularization
techniques for controlling this overfitting are used in practice; a currently popular and empirically
effective technique being dropout [10]. In [22] it was shown that regular (binary) dropout has a
Gaussian approximation called Gaussian dropout with virtually identical regularization performance
but much faster convergence. In section 5 of [22] it is shown that Gaussian dropout optimizes a lower
bound on the marginal likelihood of the data. In this paper we show that a relationship between
dropout and Bayesian inference can be extended and exploited to greatly improve the efficiency of
variational Bayesian inference on the model parameters. This work has a direct interpretation as a
generalization of Gaussian dropout, with the same fast convergence but now with the freedom to
specify more flexibly parameterized posterior distributions.
Bayesian posterior inference over the neural network parameters is a theoretically attractive method
for controlling overfitting; exact inference is computationally intractable, but efficient approximate
schemes can be designed. Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a class of approximate inference
methods with asymptotic guarantees, pioneered by [16] for the application of regularizing neural
networks. Later useful refinements include [23] and [1].
An alternative to MCMC is variational inference [11] or the equivalent minimum description length
(MDL) framework. Modern variants of stochastic variational inference have been applied to neural
1

