Bayesian Optimization with Exponential Convergence

Kenji Kawaguchi
MIT
Cambridge, MA, 02139
kawaguch@mit.edu

Leslie Pack Kaelbling
MIT
Cambridge, MA, 02139
lpk@csail.mit.edu

Tomás Lozano-Pérez
MIT
Cambridge, MA, 02139
tlp@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a Bayesian optimization method with exponential convergence without the need of auxiliary optimization and without the δ-cover sampling. Most Bayesian optimization methods require auxiliary optimization: an additional non-convex global optimization problem, which can be time-consuming
and hard to implement in practice. Also, the existing Bayesian optimization
method with exponential convergence [1] requires access to the δ-cover sampling,
which was considered to be impractical [1, 2]. Our approach eliminates both requirements and achieves an exponential convergence rate.

1

Introduction

We consider a general global optimization problem: maximize f (x) subject to x ∈ Ω ⊂ RD where
f : Ω → R is a non-convex black-box deterministic function. Such a problem arises in many realworld applications, such as parameter tuning in machine learning [3], engineering design problems
[4], and model parameter fitting in biology [5]. For this problem, one performance measure of an
algorithm is the simple regret, rn , which is given by rn = supx∈Ω f (x) − f (x+ ) where x+ is the
best input vector found by the algorithm. For brevity, we use the term “regret” to mean simple regret.
The general global optimization problem is known to be intractable if we make no further assumptions [6]. The simplest additional assumption to restore tractability is to assume the existence of a
bound on the slope of f . A well-known variant of this assumption is Lipschitz continuity with a
known Lipschitz constant, and many algorithms have been proposed in this setting [7, 8, 9]. These
algorithms successfully guaranteed certain bounds on the regret. However appealing from a theoretical point of view, a practical concern was soon raised regarding the assumption that a tight Lipschitz
constant is known. Some researchers relaxed this somewhat strong assumption by proposing procedures to estimate a Lipschitz constant during the optimization process [10, 11, 12].
Bayesian optimization is an efficient way to relax this assumption of complete knowledge of the Lipschitz constant, and has become a well-recognized method for solving global optimization problems
with non-convex black-box functions. In the machine learning community, Bayesian optimization—
especially by means of a Gaussian process (GP)—is an active research area [13, 14, 15]. With the
requirement of the access to the δ-cover sampling procedure (it samples the function uniformly such
that the density of samples doubles in the feasible regions at each iteration), de Freitas et al. [1] recently proposed a theoretical procedure that maintains an exponential convergence rate (exponential
regret). However, as pointed out by Wang et al. [2], one remaining problem is to derive a GP-based
optimization method with an exponential convergence rate without the δ-cover sampling procedure,
which is computationally too demanding in many cases.
In this paper, we propose a novel GP-based global optimization algorithm, which maintains an
exponential convergence rate and converges rapidly without the δ-cover sampling procedure.
1

