Tractable Bayesian Network Structure Learning with
Bounded Vertex Cover Number
Janne H. Korhonen
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
janne.h.korhonen@helsinki.fi
Pekka Parviainen
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
pekka.parviainen@aalto.fi

Abstract
Both learning and inference tasks on Bayesian networks are NP-hard in general.
Bounded tree-width Bayesian networks have recently received a lot of attention as
a way to circumvent this complexity issue; however, while inference on bounded
tree-width networks is tractable, the learning problem remains NP-hard even for
tree-width 2. In this paper, we propose bounded vertex cover number Bayesian
networks as an alternative to bounded tree-width networks. In particular, we show
that both inference and learning can be done in polynomial time for any fixed
vertex cover number bound k, in contrast to the general and bounded tree-width
cases; on the other hand, we also show that learning problem is W[1]-hard in
parameter k. Furthermore, we give an alternative way to learn bounded vertex
cover number Bayesian networks using integer linear programming (ILP), and
show this is feasible in practice.

1

Introduction

Bayesian networks are probabilistic graphical models representing joint probability distributions
of random variables. They can be used as a model in a variety of prediction tasks, as they enable
computing the conditional probabilities of a set of random variables given another set of random
variables; this is called the inference task. However, to use a Bayesian network as a model for
inference, one must first obtain the network. Typically, this is done by estimating the network based
on observed data; this is called the learning task.
Both the inference and learning tasks are NP-hard in general [3, 4, 6]. One approach to deal with
this issue has been to investigate special cases where these problems would be tractable. That is,
the basic idea is to select models from a restricted class of Bayesian networks that have structural
properties enabling fast learning or inference; this way, the computational complexity will not be
an issue, though possibly at the cost of accuracy if the true distribution is far from the model family.
Most notably, it is known that the inference task can be solved in polynomial time if the network
has bounded tree-width, or more precisely, the inference task is fixed-parameter tractable in the
tree-width of the network. Moreover, this is in a sense optimal, as bounded tree-width is necessary
for polynomial-time inference unless the exponential time hypothesis (ETH) fails [17].
1

