Spectral Learning of Large Structured HMMs for
Comparative Epigenomics
Chicheng Zhang
UC San Diego
chz038@eng.ucsd.edu

Jimin Song
Rutgers University
song@dls.rutgers.edu

Kevin C Chen
Rutgers University
kcchen@dls.rutgers.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
UC San Diego
kamalika@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We develop a latent variable model and an efﬁcient spectral algorithm motivated
by the recent emergence of very large data sets of chromatin marks from multiple
human cell types. A natural model for chromatin data in one cell type is a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM); we model the relationship between multiple cell types by
connecting their hidden states by a ﬁxed tree of known structure.
The main challenge with learning parameters of such models is that iterative methods such as EM are very slow, while naive spectral methods result in time and
space complexity exponential in the number of cell types. We exploit properties
of the tree structure of the hidden states to provide spectral algorithms that are
more computationally efﬁcient for current biological datasets. We provide sample
complexity bounds for our algorithm and evaluate it experimentally on biological
data from nine human cell types. Finally, we show that beyond our speciﬁc model,
some of our algorithmic ideas can be applied to other graphical models.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we develop a latent variable model and efﬁcient spectral algorithm motivated by the
recent emergence of very large data sets of chromatin marks from multiple human cell types [7, 9].
Chromatin marks are chemical modiﬁcations on the genome which are important in many basic
biological processes. After standard preprocessing steps, the data consists of a binary vector (one
bit for each chromatin mark) for each position in the genome and for each cell type.
A natural model for chromatin data in one cell type is a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [8, 13],
for which efﬁcient spectral algorithms are known. On biological data sets, spectral algorithms have
been shown to have several practical advantages over maximum likelihood-based methods, including
speed, prediction accuracy and biological interpretability [24]. Here we extend the approach by
modeling multiple cell types together. We model the relationships between cell types by connecting
their hidden states by a ﬁxed tree, the standard model in biology for relationships between cell
types. This comparative approach leverages the information shared between the different data sets
in a statistically uniﬁed and biologically motivated manner.
Formally, our model is an HMM where the hidden state zt at time t has a structure represented by
a tree graphical model of known structure. For each tree node u we can associate an individual
u
hidden state ztu that depends not only on the previous hidden state zt−1
for the same tree node u but
also on the individual hidden state of its parent node. Additionally, there is an observation variable
xut for each node u, and the observation xut is independent of other state and observation variables
1

