Sample Complexity Bounds for Iterative Stochastic
Policy Optimization

Marin Kobilarov
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
marin@jhu.edu

Abstract
This paper is concerned with robustness analysis of decision making under uncertainty. We consider a class of iterative stochastic policy optimization problems
and analyze the resulting expected performance for each newly updated policy
at each iteration. In particular, we employ concentration-of-measure inequalities to compute future expected cost and probability of constraint violation using
empirical runs. A novel inequality bound is derived that accounts for the possibly unbounded change-of-measure likelihood ratio resulting from iterative policy
adaptation. The bound serves as a high-confidence certificate for providing future
performance or safety guarantees. The approach is illustrated with a simple robot
control scenario and initial steps towards applications to challenging aerial vehicle
navigation problems are presented.

1

Introduction

We consider a general class of stochastic optimization problems formulated as
ξ ∗ = arg min Eτ ∼p(·|ξ) [J(τ )],
ξ

(1)

where ξ defines a vector of decision variables, τ represents the system response defined through
the density p(τ |ξ), and J(τ ) defines a positive cost function which can be non-smooth and nonconvex. It is assumed that p(τ |ξ) is either known or can be sampled from, e.g. in a black-box
manner. The objective is to obtain high-confidence sample complexity bounds on the expected cost
for a given decision strategy by observing past realizations of possibly different strategies. Such
bounds are useful for two reasons: 1) for providing robustness guarantees for future executions, and
2) for designing new algorithms that directly minimize the bound and therefore are expected to have
built-in robustness.
Our primary motivation arises from applications in robotics, for instance when a robot executes
control policies to achieve a given task such as navigating to a desired state while perceiving the
environment and avoiding obstacles. Such problems are traditionally considered in the framework
of reinforcement learning and addressed using policy search algorithms, e.g. [1, 2] (see also [3] for a
comprehensive overview with a focus on robotic applications [4]). When an uncertain system model
is available the problem is equivalent to robust model-predictive control (MPC) [5].
Our specific focus is on providing formal guarantees on future executions of control algorithms in
terms of maximum expected cost (quantifying performance) and maximum probability of constraint
violation (quantifying safety). Such bounds determine the reliability of control in the presence of
process, measurement and parameter uncertainties, and contextual changes in the task. In this work
we make no assumptions about nature of the system structure, such as linearity, convexity, or Gaussianity. In addition, the proposed approach applies either to a physical system without an available
1

