Submodular Hamming Metrics

Jennifer Gillenwater† , Rishabh Iyer† , Bethany Lusch∗ , Rahul Kidambi† , Jeff Bilmes†
†
University of Washington, Dept. of EE, Seattle, U.S.A.
∗
University of Washington, Dept. of Applied Math, Seattle, U.S.A.
{jengi, rkiyer, herwaldt, rkidambi, bilmes}@uw.edu

Abstract
We show that there is a largely unexplored class of functions (positive polymatroids) that can define proper discrete metrics over pairs of binary vectors and
that are fairly tractable to optimize over. By exploiting submodularity, we are
able to give hardness results and approximation algorithms for optimizing over
such metrics. Additionally, we demonstrate empirically the effectiveness of these
metrics and associated algorithms on both a metric minimization task (a form of
clustering) and also a metric maximization task (generating diverse k-best lists).

1

Introduction

A good distance metric is often the key to an effective machine learning algorithm. For instance,
when clustering, the distance metric largely defines which points end up in which clusters. Similarly,
in large-margin learning, the distance between different labelings can contribute as much to the
definition of the margin as the objective function itself. Likewise, when constructing diverse k-best
lists, the measure of diversity is key to ensuring meaningful differences between list elements.
We consider distance metrics d : {0, 1}n × {0, 1}n → R+ over binary vectors, x ∈ {0, 1}n . If
we define the set V = {1, . . . , n}, then each x = 1A can seen as the characteristic vector of a
set A ⊆ V , where 1A (v) = 1 if v ∈ A, and 1A (v) = 0 otherwise. For sets A, B ⊆ V , with
4 representing the symmetricP
difference, A4B ,
Pn(A \ B) ∪ (B \ A), the Hamming distance is
n
then: dH (A, B) = |A4B| = i=1 1A4B (i) = i=1 1(1A (i) 6= 1B (i)). A Hamming distance
between two vectors assumes that each entry difference contributes value one. Weighted Hamming
distance generalizes this slightly, allowing each entry a unique weight. The Mahalanobis distance
further extends this. For many practical applications, however, it is desirable to have entries interact
with each other in more complex and higher-order ways than Hamming or Mahalanobis allow. Yet,
arbitrary interactions would result in non-metric functions whose optimization would be intractable.
In this work, therefore, we consider an alternative class of functions that goes beyond pairwise
interactions, yet is computationally feasible, is natural for many applications, and preserves metricity.
Given a set function f : 2V → R, we can define a distortion between two binary vectors as
follows: df (A, B) = f (A4B). By asking f to satisfy certain properties, we will arrive at a class
of discrete metrics that is feasible to optimize and preserves metricity. We say that f is positive
if f (A) > 0 whenever A 6= ∅; f is normalized if f (∅) = 0; f is monotone if f (A) ≤ f (B)
for all A ⊆ B ⊆ V ; f is subadditive if f (A) + f (B) ≥ f (A ∪ B) for all A, B ⊆ V ; f is
modular if f (A) + f (B) = f (A ∪ B) + f (B ∩ A) for all A, B ⊆ V ; and f is submodular
if f (A) + f (B) ≥ f (A ∪ B) + f (B ∩ A) for all A, B ⊆ V . If we assume that f is positive,
normalized, monotone, and subadditive then df (A, B) is a metric (see Theorem 3.1), but without
useful computational properties. If f is positive, normalized, monotone, and modular, then we recover
the weighted Hamming distance. In this paper, we assume that f is positive, normalized, monotone,
and submodular (and hence also subadditive). These conditions are sufficient to ensure the metricity
of df , but allow for a significant generalization over the weighted Hamming distance. Also, thanks to
the properties of submodularity, this class yields efficient optimization algorithms with guarantees
1

