Learning to Linearize Under Uncertainty

1

Ross Goroshin∗1 Michael Mathieu∗1 Yann LeCun1,2
Dept. of Computer Science, Courant Institute of Mathematical Science, New York, NY
2
Facebook AI Research, New York, NY
{goroshin,mathieu,yann}@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract
Training deep feature hierarchies to solve supervised learning tasks has achieved
state of the art performance on many problems in computer vision. However, a
principled way in which to train such hierarchies in the unsupervised setting has
remained elusive. In this work we suggest a new architecture and loss for training
deep feature hierarchies that linearize the transformations observed in unlabeled
natural video sequences. This is done by training a generative model to predict
video frames. We also address the problem of inherent uncertainty in prediction
by introducing latent variables that are non-deterministic functions of the input
into the network architecture.

1

Introduction

The recent success of deep feature learning in the supervised setting has inspired renewed interest
in feature learning in weakly supervised and unsupervised settings. Recent findings in computer
vision problems have shown that the representations learned for one task can be readily transferred
to others [10], which naturally leads to the question: does there exist a generically useful feature
representation, and if so what principles can be exploited to learn it?
Recently there has been a flurry of work on learning features from video using varying degrees of
supervision [14][12][13]. Temporal coherence in video can be considered as a form of weak supervision that can be exploited for feature learning. More precisely, if we assume that data occupies
some low dimensional “manifold” in a high dimensional space, then videos can be considered as
one-dimensional trajectories on this manifold parametrized by time. Many unsupervised learning
algorithms can be viewed as various parameterizations (implicit or explicit) of the data manifold
[1]. For instance, sparse coding implicitly assumes a locally linear model of the data manifold [9].
In this work, we assume that deep convolutional networks are good parametric models for natural
data. Parameterizations of the data manifold can be learned by training these networks to linearize
short temporal trajectories, thereby implicitly learning a local parametrization.
In this work we cast the linearization objective as a frame prediction problem. As in many other
unsupervised learning schemes, this necessitates a generative model. Several recent works have also
trained deep networks for the task of frame prediction [12][14][13]. However, unlike other works
that focus on prediction as a final objective, in this work prediction is regarded as a proxy for learning representations. We introduce a loss and architecture that addresses two main problems in frame
prediction: (1) minimizing L2 error between the predicted and actual frame leads to unrealistically
blurry predictions, which potentially compromises the learned representation, and (2) copying the
most recent frame to the input seems to be a hard-to-escape trap of the objective function, which
results in the network learning little more than the identity function. We argue that the source of
blur partially stems from the inherent unpredictability of natural data; in cases where multiple valid
predictions are plausible, a deterministic network will learn to average between all the plausible predictions. To address the first problem we introduce a set of latent variables that are non-deterministic
∗

Equal contribution

1

