Learning Bayesian Networks with Thousands of
Variables
Mauro Scanagatta
IDSIA∗ , SUPSI† , USI‡
Lugano, Switzerland
mauro@idsia.ch

Cassio P. de Campos
Queen’s University Belfast
Northern Ireland, UK
c.decampos@qub.ac.uk

Giorgio Corani
IDSIA∗ , SUPSI† , USI‡
Lugano, Switzerland
giorgio@idsia.ch

Marco Zaffalon
IDSIA∗
Lugano, Switzerland
zaffalon@idsia.ch

Abstract
We present a method for learning Bayesian networks from data sets containing
thousands of variables without the need for structure constraints. Our approach
is made of two parts. The first is a novel algorithm that effectively explores the
space of possible parent sets of a node. It guides the exploration towards the
most promising parent sets on the basis of an approximated score function that
is computed in constant time. The second part is an improvement of an existing
ordering-based algorithm for structure optimization. The new algorithm provably
achieves a higher score compared to its original formulation. Our novel approach
consistently outperforms the state of the art on very large data sets.

1

Introduction

Learning the structure of a Bayesian network from data is NP-hard [2]. We focus on score-based
learning, namely finding the structure which maximizes a score that depends on the data [9]. Several
exact algorithms have been developed based on dynamic programming [12, 17], branch and bound
[7], linear and integer programming [4, 10], shortest-path heuristic [19, 20].
Usually structural learning is accomplished in two steps: parent set identification and structure
optimization. Parent set identification produces a list of suitable candidate parent sets for each
variable. Structure optimization assigns a parent set to each node, maximizing the score of the
resulting structure without introducing cycles.
The problem of parent set identification is unlikely to admit a polynomial-time algorithm with a
good quality guarantee [11]. This motivates the development of effective search heuristics. Usually
however one decides the maximum in-degree (number of parents per node) k and then simply computes the score of all parent sets. At that point one performs structural optimization. An exception is
the greedy search of the K2 algorithm [3], which has however been superseded by the more modern
approaches mentioned above.
A higher in-degree implies a larger search space and allows achieving a higher score; however it
also requires higher computational time. When choosing the in-degree the user makes a trade-off
between these two objectives. However when the number of variables is large, the in-degree is
∗

Istituto Dalle Molle di studi sull’Intelligenza Artificiale (IDSIA)
Scuola universitaria professionale della Svizzera italiana (SUPSI)
‡
Università della Svizzera italiana (USI)
†

1

