Teaching Machines to Read and Comprehend
Karl Moritz Hermann† Tomáš Kočiský†‡ Edward Grefenstette†
Lasse Espeholt† Will Kay† Mustafa Suleyman† Phil Blunsom†‡
†
Google DeepMind ‡ University of Oxford
{kmh,tkocisky,etg,lespeholt,wkay,mustafasul,pblunsom}@google.com

Abstract
Teaching machines to read natural language documents remains an elusive challenge. Machine reading systems can be tested on their ability to answer questions
posed on the contents of documents that they have seen, but until now large scale
training and test datasets have been missing for this type of evaluation. In this
work we define a new methodology that resolves this bottleneck and provides
large scale supervised reading comprehension data. This allows us to develop a
class of attention based deep neural networks that learn to read real documents and
answer complex questions with minimal prior knowledge of language structure.

1

Introduction

Progress on the path from shallow bag-of-words information retrieval algorithms to machines capable of reading and understanding documents has been slow. Traditional approaches to machine
reading and comprehension have been based on either hand engineered grammars [1], or information
extraction methods of detecting predicate argument triples that can later be queried as a relational
database [2]. Supervised machine learning approaches have largely been absent from this space due
to both the lack of large scale training datasets, and the difficulty in structuring statistical models
flexible enough to learn to exploit document structure.
While obtaining supervised natural language reading comprehension data has proved difficult, some
researchers have explored generating synthetic narratives and queries [3, 4]. Such approaches allow
the generation of almost unlimited amounts of supervised data and enable researchers to isolate the
performance of their algorithms on individual simulated phenomena. Work on such data has shown
that neural network based models hold promise for modelling reading comprehension, something
that we will build upon here. Historically, however, many similar approaches in Computational
Linguistics have failed to manage the transition from synthetic data to real environments, as such
closed worlds inevitably fail to capture the complexity, richness, and noise of natural language [5].
In this work we seek to directly address the lack of real natural language training data by introducing a novel approach to building a supervised reading comprehension data set. We observe that
summary and paraphrase sentences, with their associated documents, can be readily converted to
context–query–answer triples using simple entity detection and anonymisation algorithms. Using
this approach we have collected two new corpora of roughly a million news stories with associated
queries from the CNN and Daily Mail websites.
We demonstrate the efficacy of our new corpora by building novel deep learning models for reading
comprehension. These models draw on recent developments for incorporating attention mechanisms
into recurrent neural network architectures [6, 7, 8, 4]. This allows a model to focus on the aspects of
a document that it believes will help it answer a question, and also allows us to visualises its inference
process. We compare these neural models to a range of baselines and heuristic benchmarks based
upon a traditional frame semantic analysis provided by a state-of-the-art natural language processing
1

