Barrier Frank-Wolfe for Marginal Inference

Rahul G. Krishnan
Courant Institute
New York University

Simon Lacoste-Julien
INRIA - Sierra Project-Team
École Normale Supérieure, Paris

David Sontag
Courant Institute
New York University

Abstract
We introduce a globally-convergent algorithm for optimizing the tree-reweighted
(TRW) variational objective over the marginal polytope. The algorithm is based
on the conditional gradient method (Frank-Wolfe) and moves pseudomarginals
within the marginal polytope through repeated maximum a posteriori (MAP) calls.
This modular structure enables us to leverage black-box MAP solvers (both exact
and approximate) for variational inference, and obtains more accurate results than
tree-reweighted algorithms that optimize over the local consistency relaxation.
Theoretically, we bound the sub-optimality for the proposed algorithm despite
the TRW objective having unbounded gradients at the boundary of the marginal
polytope. Empirically, we demonstrate the increased quality of results found by
tightening the relaxation over the marginal polytope as well as the spanning tree
polytope on synthetic and real-world instances.

1

Introduction

Markov random fields (MRFs) are used in many areas of computer science such as vision and
speech. Inference in these undirected graphical models is generally intractable. Our work focuses on
performing approximate marginal inference by optimizing the Tree Re-Weighted (TRW) objective
(Wainwright et al., 2005). The TRW objective is concave, is exact for tree-structured MRFs, and
provides an upper bound on the log-partition function.
Fast combinatorial solvers for the TRW objective exist, including Tree-Reweighted Belief Propagation (TRBP) (Wainwright et al., 2005), convergent message-passing based on geometric programming (Globerson and Jaakkola, 2007), and dual decomposition (Jancsary and Matz, 2011). These
methods optimize over the set of pairwise consistency constraints, also called the local polytope.
Sontag and Jaakkola (2007) showed that significantly better results could be obtained by optimizing
over tighter relaxations of the marginal polytope. However, deriving a message-passing algorithm
for the TRW objective over tighter relaxations of the marginal polytope is challenging. Instead,
Sontag and Jaakkola (2007) use the conditional gradient method (also called Frank-Wolfe) and offthe-shelf linear programming solvers to optimize TRW over the cycle consistency relaxation. Rather
than optimizing over the cycle relaxation, Belanger et al. (2013) optimize the TRW objective over
the exact marginal polytope. Then, using Frank-Wolfe, the linear minimization performed in the
inner loop can be shown to correspond to MAP inference.
The Frank-Wolfe optimization algorithm has seen increasing use in machine learning, thanks in
part to its efficient handling of complex constraint sets appearing with structured data (Jaggi, 2013;
Lacoste-Julien and Jaggi, 2015). However, applying Frank-Wolfe to variational inference presents
challenges that were never resolved in previous work. First, the linear minimization performed
in the inner loop is computationally expensive, either requiring repeatedly solving a large linear
program, as in Sontag and Jaakkola (2007), or performing MAP inference, as in Belanger et al.
(2013). Second, the TRW objective involves entropy terms whose gradients go to infinity near the
boundary of the feasible set, therefore existing convergence guarantees for Frank-Wolfe do not apply.
Third, variational inference using TRW involves both an outer and inner loop of Frank-Wolfe, where
the outer loop optimizes the edge appearance probabilities in the TRW entropy bound to tighten it.
1

