Inverse Reinforcement Learning with Locally
Consistent Reward Functions
Quoc Phong Nguyen† , Kian Hsiang Low† , and Patrick Jaillet§
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA§
{qphong,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg† , jaillet@mit.edu§

Abstract
Existing inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) algorithms have assumed each expert’s demonstrated trajectory to be produced by only a single reward function.
This paper presents a novel generalization of the IRL problem that allows each
trajectory to be generated by multiple locally consistent reward functions, hence
catering to more realistic and complex experts’ behaviors. Solving our generalized IRL problem thus involves not only learning these reward functions but
also the stochastic transitions between them at any state (including unvisited
states). By representing our IRL problem with a probabilistic graphical model,
an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm can be devised to iteratively learn
the different reward functions and the stochastic transitions between them in order
to jointly improve the likelihood of the expert’s demonstrated trajectories. As a
result, the most likely partition of a trajectory into segments that are generated
from different locally consistent reward functions selected by EM can be derived.
Empirical evaluation on synthetic and real-world datasets shows that our IRL algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art EM clustering with maximum likelihood
IRL, which is, interestingly, a reduced variant of our approach.

1

Introduction

The reinforcement learning problem in Markov decision processes (MDPs) involves an agent using
its observed rewards to learn an optimal policy that maximizes its expected total reward for a given
task. However, such observed rewards or the reward function defining them are often not available
nor known in many real-world tasks. The agent can therefore learn its reward function from an
expert associated with the given task by observing the expert’s behavior or demonstration, and this
approach constitutes the inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) problem.
Unfortunately, the IRL problem is ill-posed because infinitely many reward functions are consistent
with the expert’s observed behavior. To resolve this issue, existing IRL algorithms have proposed
alternative choices of the agent’s reward function that minimize different dissimilarity measures defined using various forms of abstractions of the agent’s generated optimal behavior vs. the expert’s
observed behavior, as briefly discussed below (see [17] for a detailed review): (a) The projection
algorithm [1] selects a reward function that minimizes the squared Euclidean distance between the
feature expectations obtained by following the agent’s generated optimal policy and the empirical
feature expectations observed from the expert’s demonstrated state-action trajectories; (b) the multiplicative weights algorithm for apprentice learning [24] adopts a robust minimax approach to deriving the agent’s behavior, which is guaranteed to perform no worse than the expert and is equivalent
to choosing a reward function that minimizes the difference between the expected average reward
under the agent’s generated optimal policy and the expert’s empirical average reward approximated
using the agent’s reward weights; (c) the linear programming apprentice learning algorithm [23]
picks its reward function by minimizing the same dissimilarity measure but incurs much less time
empirically; (d) the policy matching algorithm [16] aims to match the agent’s generated optimal
behavior to the expert’s observed behavior by choosing a reward function that minimizes the sum of
1

