Attractor Network Dynamics Enable Preplay and
Rapid Path Planning in Maze–like Environments

Wulfram Gerstner
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
wulfram.gerstner@epfl.ch

Dane Corneil
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
dane.corneil@epfl.ch

Abstract
Rodents navigating in a well–known environment can rapidly learn and revisit observed reward locations, often after a single trial. While the mechanism for rapid
path planning is unknown, the CA3 region in the hippocampus plays an important
role, and emerging evidence suggests that place cell activity during hippocampal “preplay” periods may trace out future goal–directed trajectories. Here, we
show how a particular mapping of space allows for the immediate generation of
trajectories between arbitrary start and goal locations in an environment, based
only on the mapped representation of the goal. We show that this representation
can be implemented in a neural attractor network model, resulting in bump–like
activity profiles resembling those of the CA3 region of hippocampus. Neurons
tend to locally excite neurons with similar place field centers, while inhibiting
other neurons with distant place field centers, such that stable bumps of activity
can form at arbitrary locations in the environment. The network is initialized to
represent a point in the environment, then weakly stimulated with an input corresponding to an arbitrary goal location. We show that the resulting activity can
be interpreted as a gradient ascent on the value function induced by a reward at
the goal location. Indeed, in networks with large place fields, we show that the
network properties cause the bump to move smoothly from its initial location to
the goal, around obstacles or walls. Our results illustrate that an attractor network
with hippocampal–like attributes may be important for rapid path planning.

1

Introduction

While early human case studies revealed the importance of the hippocampus in episodic memory [1,
2], the discovery of “place cells” in rats [3] established its role for spatial representation. Recent
results have further suggested that, along with these functions, the hippocampus is involved in active
spatial planning: experiments in “one–shot learning” have revealed the critical role of the CA3
region [4, 5] and the intermediate hippocampus [6] in returning to goal locations that the animal has
seen only once. This poses the question of whether and how hippocampal dynamics could support
a representation of the current location, a representation of a goal, and the relation between the two.
In this article, we propose that a model of CA3 as a “bump attractor” [7] can be be used for path
planning. The attractor map represents not only locations within the environment, but also the spatial
relationship between locations. In particular, broad activity profiles (like those found in intermediate
and ventral hippocampus [8]) can be viewed as a condensed map of a particular environment. The
planned path presents as rapid sequential activity from the current position to the goal location,
similar to the “preplay” observed experimentally in hippocampal activity during navigation tasks [9,
10], including paths that require navigating around obstacles. In the model, the activity is produced
by supplying input to the network consistent with the sensory input that would be provided at the
1

