Inference for determinantal point processes
without spectral knowledge

Rémi Bardenet∗
CNRS & CRIStAL
UMR 9189, Univ. Lille, France
remi.bardenet@gmail.com
∗

Michalis K. Titsias∗
Department of Informatics
Athens Univ. of Economics and Business, Greece
mtitsias@aueb.gr

Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are point process models that naturally encode diversity between the points of a given realization, through a
positive definite kernel K. DPPs possess desirable properties, such as exact sampling or analyticity of the moments, but learning the parameters of
kernel K through likelihood-based inference is not straightforward. First,
the kernel that appears in the likelihood is not K, but another kernel L
related to K through an often intractable spectral decomposition. This
issue is typically bypassed in machine learning by directly parametrizing
the kernel L, at the price of some interpretability of the model parameters.
We follow this approach here. Second, the likelihood has an intractable
normalizing constant, which takes the form of a large determinant in the
case of a DPP over a finite set of objects, and the form of a Fredholm
determinant in the case of a DPP over a continuous domain. Our main
contribution is to derive bounds on the likelihood of a DPP, both for finite
and continuous domains. Unlike previous work, our bounds are cheap to
evaluate since they do not rely on approximating the spectrum of a large
matrix or an operator. Through usual arguments, these bounds thus yield
cheap variational inference and moderately expensive exact Markov chain
Monte Carlo inference methods for DPPs.

1

Introduction

Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are point processes [1] that encode repulsiveness using
algebraic arguments. They first appeared in [2], and have since then received much attention,
as they arise in many fields, e.g. random matrix theory, combinatorics, quantum physics.
We refer the reader to [3, 4, 5] for detailed tutorial reviews, respectively aimed at audiences of
machine learners, statisticians, and probabilists. More recently, DPPs have been considered
as a modelling tool, see e.g. [4, 3, 6]: DPPs appear to be a natural alternative to Poisson
processes when realizations should exhibit repulsiveness. In [3], for example, DPPs are used
to model diversity among summary timelines in a large news corpus. In [7], DPPs model
diversity among the results of a search engine for a given query. In [4], DPPs model the
spatial repartition of trees in a forest, as similar trees compete for nutrients in the ground,
and thus tend to grow away from each other. With these modelling applications comes
the question of learning a DPP from data, either through a parametrized form [4, 7], or
non-parametrically [8, 9]. We focus in this paper on parametric inference.
1

