Rectified Factor Networks
Djork-Arné Clevert, Andreas Mayr, Thomas Unterthiner and Sepp Hochreiter
Institute of Bioinformatics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
{okko,mayr,unterthiner,hochreit}@bioinf.jku.at

Abstract
We propose rectified factor networks (RFNs) to efficiently construct very sparse,
non-linear, high-dimensional representations of the input. RFN models identify
rare and small events in the input, have a low interference between code units,
have a small reconstruction error, and explain the data covariance structure. RFN
learning is a generalized alternating minimization algorithm derived from the posterior regularization method which enforces non-negative and normalized posterior means. We proof convergence and correctness of the RFN learning algorithm.
On benchmarks, RFNs are compared to other unsupervised methods like autoencoders, RBMs, factor analysis, ICA, and PCA. In contrast to previous sparse
coding methods, RFNs yield sparser codes, capture the data’s covariance structure more precisely, and have a significantly smaller reconstruction error. We
test RFNs as pretraining technique for deep networks on different vision datasets,
where RFNs were superior to RBMs and autoencoders. On gene expression data
from two pharmaceutical drug discovery studies, RFNs detected small and rare
gene modules that revealed highly relevant new biological insights which were so
far missed by other unsupervised methods.
RFN package for GPU/CPU is available at http://www.bioinf.jku.at/software/rfn.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning is to a large part based on advanced and efficient input representations
[1, 2, 3, 4]. These representations are sparse and hierarchical. Sparse representations of the input
are in general obtained by rectified linear units (ReLU) [5, 6] and dropout [7]. The key advantage of
sparse representations is that dependencies between coding units are easy to model and to interpret.
Most importantly, distinct concepts are much less likely to interfere in sparse representations. Using
sparse representations, similarities of samples often break down to co-occurrences of features in
these samples. In bioinformatics sparse codes excelled in biclustering of gene expression data [8]
and in finding DNA sharing patterns between humans and Neanderthals [9].
Representations learned by ReLUs are not only sparse but also non-negative. Non-negative representations do not code the degree of absence of events or objects in the input. As the vast majority of
events is supposed to be absent, to code for their degree of absence would introduce a high level of
random fluctuations. We also aim for non-linear input representations to stack models for constructing hierarchical representations. Finally, the representations are supposed to have a large number
of coding units to allow coding of rare and small events in the input. Rare events are only observed
in few samples like seldom side effects in drug design, rare genotypes in genetics, or small customer
groups in e-commerce. Small events affect only few input components like pathways with few genes
in biology, few relevant mutations in oncology, or a pattern of few products in e-commerce. In summary, our goal is to construct input representations that (1) are sparse, (2) are non-negative, (3) are
non-linear, (4) use many code units, and (5) model structures in the input data (see next paragraph).
Current unsupervised deep learning approaches like autoencoders or restricted Boltzmann machines
(RBMs) do encode all peculiarities in the data (including noise). Generative models can be design
1

