Regret Lower Bound and Optimal Algorithm in
Finite Stochastic Partial Monitoring

Junpei Komiyama
The University of Tokyo
junpei@komiyama.info

Junya Honda
The University of Tokyo
honda@stat.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Hiroshi Nakagawa
The University of Tokyo
nakagawa@dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Partial monitoring is a general model for sequential learning with limited feedback formalized as a game between two players. In this game, the learner chooses
an action and at the same time the opponent chooses an outcome, then the learner
suffers a loss and receives a feedback signal. The goal of the learner is to minimize the total loss. In this paper, we study partial monitoring with finite actions
and stochastic outcomes. We derive a logarithmic distribution-dependent regret
lower bound that defines the hardness of the problem. Inspired by the DMED
algorithm (Honda and Takemura, 2010) for the multi-armed bandit problem, we
propose PM-DMED, an algorithm that minimizes the distribution-dependent regret. PM-DMED significantly outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms in numerical experiments. To show the optimality of PM-DMED with respect to the regret
bound, we slightly modify the algorithm by introducing a hinge function (PMDMED-Hinge). Then, we derive an asymptotically optimal regret upper bound of
PM-DMED-Hinge that matches the lower bound.

1 Introduction
Partial monitoring is a general framework for sequential decision making problems with imperfect
feedback. Many classes of problems, including prediction with expert advice [1], the multi-armed
bandit problem [2], dynamic pricing [3], the dark pool problem [4], label efficient prediction [5],
and linear and convex optimization with full or bandit feedback [6, 7] can be modeled as an instance
of partial monitoring.
Partial monitoring is formalized as a repeated game played by two players called a learner and an
opponent. At each round, the learner chooses an action, and at the same time the opponent chooses
an outcome. Then, the learner observes a feedback signal from a given set of symbols and suffers
some loss, both of which are deterministic functions of the selected action and outcome.
The goal of the learner is to find the optimal action that minimizes his/her cumulative loss. Alternatively, we can define the regret as the difference between the cumulative losses of the learner and
the single optimal action, and minimization of the loss is equivalent to minimization of the regret.
A learner with a small regret balances exploration (acquisition of information about the strategy of
the opponent) and exploitation (utilization of information). The rate of regret indicates how fast the
learner adapts to the problem: a linear regret indicates the inability of the learner to find the optimal
action, whereas a sublinear regret indicates that the learner can approach the optimal action given
sufficiently large time steps.
1

