Multi-Layer Feature Reduction for Tree Structured
Group Lasso via Hierarchical Projection

Jie Wang1 , Jieping Ye1,2
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{jwangumi, jpye}@umich.edu
1

Abstract
Tree structured group Lasso (TGL) is a powerful technique in uncovering the tree
structured sparsity over the features, where each node encodes a group of features.
It has been applied successfully in many real-world applications. However, with
extremely large feature dimensions, solving TGL remains a significant challenge
due to its highly complicated regularizer. In this paper, we propose a novel MultiLayer Feature reduction method (MLFre) to quickly identify the inactive nodes
(the groups of features with zero coefficients in the solution) hierarchically in a
top-down fashion, which are guaranteed to be irrelevant to the response. Thus, we
can remove the detected nodes from the optimization without sacrificing accuracy. The major challenge in developing such testing rules is due to the overlaps
between the parents and their children nodes. By a novel hierarchical projection algorithm, MLFre is able to test the nodes independently from any of their
ancestor nodes. Moreover, we can integrate MLFre—that has a low computational cost—with any existing solvers. Experiments on both synthetic and real data
sets demonstrate that the speedup gained by MLFre can be orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Tree structured group Lasso (TGL) [13, 30] is a powerful regression technique in uncovering the
hierarchical sparse patterns among the features. The key of TGL, i.e., the tree guided regularization,
is based on a pre-defined tree structure and the group Lasso penalty [29], where each node represents
a group of features. In recent years, TGL has achieved great success in many real-world applications
such as brain image analysis [10, 18], gene data analysis [14], natural language processing [27, 28],
and face recognition [12]. Many algorithms have been proposed to improve the efficiency of TGL
[1, 6, 11, 7, 16]. However, the application of TGL to large-scale problems remains a challenge due
to its highly complicated regularizer.
As an emerging and promising technique in scaling large-scale problems, screening has received
much attention in the past few years. Screening aims to identify the zero coefficients in the sparse
solutions by simple testing rules such that the corresponding features can be removed from the
optimization. Thus, the size of the data matrix can be significantly reduced, leading to substantial
savings in computational cost and memory usage. Typical examples include TLFre [25], FLAMS
[22], EDPP [24], Sasvi [17], DOME [26], SAFE [8], and strong rules [21]. We note that strong rules
are inexact in the sense that features with nonzero coefficients may be mistakenly discarded, while
the others are exact. Another important direction of screening is to detect the non-support vectors for
support vector machine (SVM) and least absolute deviation (LAD) [23, 19]. Empirical studies have
shown that the speedup gained by screening methods can be several orders of magnitude. Moreover,
the exact screening methods improve the efficiency without sacrificing optimality.
However, to the best of our knowledge, existing screening methods are only applicable to sparse
models with simple structures such as Lasso, group Lasso, and sparse group Lasso. In this paper, we
1

