Learning Large-Scale Poisson DAG Models based on
OverDispersion Scoring

Gunwoong Park
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
parkg@stat.wisc.edu

Garvesh Raskutti
Department of Statistics
Department of Computer Science
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, Optimization Group
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
raskutti@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address the question of identifiability and learning algorithms
for large-scale Poisson Directed Acyclic Graphical (DAG) models. We define
general Poisson DAG models as models where each node is a Poisson random
variable with rate parameter depending on the values of the parents in the underlying DAG. First, we prove that Poisson DAG models are identifiable from observational data, and present a polynomial-time algorithm that learns the Poisson
DAG model under suitable regularity conditions. The main idea behind our algorithm is based on overdispersion, in that variables that are conditionally Poisson
are overdispersed relative to variables that are marginally Poisson. Our algorithms
exploits overdispersion along with methods for learning sparse Poisson undirected
graphical models for faster computation. We provide both theoretical guarantees
and simulation results for both small and large-scale DAGs.

1

Introduction

Modeling large-scale multivariate count data is an important challenge that arises in numerous applications such as neuroscience, systems biology and amny others. One approach that has received
significant attention is the graphical modeling framework since graphical models include a broad
class of dependence models for different data types. Broadly speaking, there are two sets of graphical models: (1) undirected graphical models or Markov random fields and (2) directed acyclic
graphical (DAG) models or Bayesian networks.
Between undirected graphical models and DAGs, undirected graphical models have generally received more attention in the large-scale data setting since both learning and inference algorithms
scale to larger datasets. In particular, for multivariate count data Yang et al. [1] introduce undirected
Poisson graphical models. Yang et al. [1] define undirected Poisson graphical models so that each
node is a Poisson random variable with rate parameter depending only on its neighboring nodes in
the graph. As pointed out in Yang et al. [1] one of the major challenges with Poisson undirected
graphical models is ensuring global normalizability.
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) or Bayesian networks are a different class of generative models that
model directional or causal relationships (see e.g. [2, 3] for details). Such directional relationships
naturally arise in most applications but are difficult to model based on observational data. One of
the benefits of DAG models is that they have a straightforward factorization into conditional distributions [4], and hence no issues of normalizability arise as they do for undirected graphical models
as mentioned earlier. However a number of challenges arise that make learning DAG models often impossible for large datasets even when variables have a natural causal or directional structure.
1

