The Pareto Regret Frontier for Bandits
Tor Lattimore
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta, Canada
tor.lattimore@gmail.com

Abstract
Given a multi-armed bandit problem it may be desirable to achieve a smallerthan-usual worst-case regret for some special actions. I show that the price for
such unbalanced worst-case regret guarantees is rather high. Specifically, if an
algorithm enjoys a worst-case regret of B with respect to some action, then there
must exist another action for which the worst-case regret is at least Ω(nK/B),
where n is the horizon and K the number of actions. I also give upper bounds
in both the stochastic and adversarial settings showing that this result cannot be
improved. For the stochastic case the pareto regret frontier is characterised exactly
up to constant factors.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit is the simplest class of problems that exhibit the exploration/exploitation
dilemma. In each time step the learner chooses one of K actions and receives a noisy reward signal
for the chosen action. A learner’s performance is measured in terms of the regret, which is the
(expected) difference between the rewards it actually received and those it would have received (in
expectation) by choosing the optimal action.
Prior work on the regret criterion for finite-armed bandits has treated all actions uniformly and has
aimed for bounds on the regret that do not depend on which action turned out to be optimal. I
take a different approach and ask what can be achieved if some actions are given special treatment.
Focussing on worst-case bounds, I ask whether or not it is possible to achieve improved worst-case
regret for some actions, and what is the cost in terms of the regret for the remaining actions. Such
results may be useful in a variety of cases. For example, a company that is exploring some new
strategies might expect an especially small regret if its existing strategy turns out to be (nearly)
optimal.
This problem has previously been considered in the experts setting where the learner is allowed
to observe the reward for all actions in every round, not only for the action actually chosen. The
earliest work seems to be by Hutter and Poland [2005] where it is√shown that the learner can assign
a prior weight to each action and pays a worst-case regret of O( −n log ρi ) for expert i where ρi
is the prior belief in expert i and n is the horizon.
The uniform regret is obtained by choosing ρi =
√
1/K, which leads to the well-known O( n log K) bound achieved by the exponential weighting
algorithm [Cesa-Bianchi, 2006]. The consequence of this is that an algorithm can enjoy a constant
regret with respect to a single action while suffering minimally on the remainder. The problem was
studied in more detail by Koolen [2013] where (remarkably) the author was able to exactly describe
the pareto regret frontier when K = 2.
Other related work (also in the experts setting) is where the objective is to obtain an improved regret
against a mixture of available experts/actions [Even-Dar et al., 2008, Kapralov and Panigrahy, 2011].
In a similar vain, Sani et al. [2014] showed that algorithms for prediction with expert advice can be
combined with minimal cost to obtain the best of both worlds. In the bandit setting I am only aware
1

