Optimal Testing for Properties of Distributions
Jayadev Acharya, Constantinos Daskalakis, Gautam Kamath
EECS, MIT
{jayadev, costis, g}@mit.edu

Abstract
Given samples from an unknown discrete distribution p, is it possible to distinguish whether p belongs to some class of distributions C versus p being far from
every distribution in C? This fundamental question has received tremendous attention in statistics, focusing primarily on asymptotic analysis, as well as in information theory and theoretical computer science, where the emphasis has been
on small sample size and computational complexity. Nevertheless, even for basic properties of discrete distributions such as monotonicity, independence, logconcavity, unimodality, and monotone-hazard rate, the optimal sample complexity
is unknown.
We provide a general approach via which we obtain sample-optimal and computationally efficient testers for all these distribution families. At the core of our
approach is an algorithm which solves the following problem: Given samples
from an unknown distribution p, and a known distribution q, are p and q close in
2
-distance, or far in total variation distance?
The optimality of our testers is established by providing matching lower bounds,
up to constant factors. Finally, a necessary building block for our testers and
an important byproduct of our work are the first known computationally efficient
proper learners for discrete log-concave, monotone hazard rate distributions.

1

Introduction

The quintessential scientific question is whether an unknown object has some property, i.e. whether a
model from a specific class fits the object’s observed behavior. If the unknown object is a probability
distribution, p, to which we have sample access, we are typically asked to distinguish whether p
belongs to some class C or whether it is sufficiently far from it.

This question has received tremendous attention in the field of statistics (see, e.g., [1, 2]), where test
statistics for important properties such as the ones we consider here have been proposed. Nevertheless, the emphasis has been on asymptotic analysis, characterizing the rates of convergence of test
statistics under null hypotheses, as the number of samples tends to infinity. In contrast, we wish to
study the following problem in the small sample regime:
⇧(C, "): Given a family of distributions C, some " > 0, and sample access to an unknown
distribution p over a discrete support, how many samples are required to distinguish between
p 2 C versus dTV (p, C) > "?1
The problem has been studied intensely in the literature on property testing and sublinear algorithms
[3, 4, 5], where the emphasis has been on characterizing the optimal tradeoff between p’s support
size and the accuracy " in the number of samples. Several results have been obtained, roughly
1
We want success probability at least 2/3, which can be boosted to 1
times and taking the majority.

1

by repeating the test O(log(1/ ))

