Human Memory Search as Initial-Visit Emitting
Random Walk

∗

Kwang-Sung Jun∗ , Xiaojin Zhu† , Timothy Rogers‡
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, † Department of Computer Sciences, ‡ Department of Psychology
University of Wisconsin-Madison
kjun@discovery.wisc.edu, jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu, ttrogers@wisc.edu
Ming Yuan
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
myuan@stat.wisc.edu

Zhuoran Yang
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Tsinghua University
yzr11@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Imagine a random walk that outputs a state only when visiting it for the first time.
The observed output is therefore a repeat-censored version of the underlying walk,
and consists of a permutation of the states or a prefix of it. We call this model
initial-visit emitting random walk (INVITE). Prior work has shown that the random walks with such a repeat-censoring mechanism explain well human behavior
in memory search tasks, which is of great interest in both the study of human
cognition and various clinical applications. However, parameter estimation in INVITE is challenging, because naive likelihood computation by marginalizing over
infinitely many hidden random walk trajectories is intractable. In this paper, we
propose the first efficient maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) for INVITE by decomposing the censored output into a series of absorbing random walks. We also
prove theoretical properties of the MLE including identifiability and consistency.
We show that INVITE outperforms several existing methods on real-world human
response data from memory search tasks.

1

Human Memory Search as a Random Walk

A key goal for cognitive science has been to understand the mental structures and processes that
underlie human semantic memory search. Semantic fluency has provided the central paradigm for
this work: given a category label as a cue (e.g. animals, vehicles, etc.) participants must generate as
many example words as possible in 60 seconds without repetition. The task is useful because, while
exceedingly easy to administer, it yields rich information about human semantic memory. Participants do not generate responses in random order but produce “bursts” of related items, beginning
with the highly frequent and prototypical, then moving to subclusters of related items. This ordinal
structure sheds light on associative structures in memory: retrieval of a given item promotes retrieval
of a related item, and so on, so that the temporal proximity of items in generated lists reflects the
degree to which the two items are related in memory [14, 5]. The task also places demands on other
important cognitive contributors to memory search: for instance, participants must retain a mental trace of previously-generated items and use it to refrain from repetition, so that the task draws
upon working memory and cognitive control in addition to semantic processes. For these reasons
the task is a central tool in all commonly-used metrics for diagnosing cognitive dysfunction (see
e.g. [6]). Performance is generally sensitive to a variety of neurological disorders [19], but different
syndromes also give rise to different patterns of impairment, making it useful for diagnosis [17]. For
these reasons the task has been widely employed both in basic science and applied health research.
Nevertheless, the representations and processes that support category fluency remain poorly understood. Beyond the general observation that responses tend to be clustered by semantic relatedness,
1

