Dependent Multinomial Models Made Easy:
Stick Breaking with the Pólya-Gamma Augmentation

Scott W. Linderman∗
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
swl@seas.harvard.edu

Matthew J. Johnson∗
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
mattjj@csail.mit.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Twitter & Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
rpa@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Many practical modeling problems involve discrete data that are best represented
as draws from multinomial or categorical distributions. For example, nucleotides
in a DNA sequence, children’s names in a given state and year, and text documents
are all commonly modeled with multinomial distributions. In all of these cases,
we expect some form of dependency between the draws: the nucleotide at one
position in the DNA strand may depend on the preceding nucleotides, children’s
names are highly correlated from year to year, and topics in text may be correlated and dynamic. These dependencies are not naturally captured by the typical
Dirichlet-multinomial formulation. Here, we leverage a logistic stick-breaking
representation and recent innovations in Pólya-gamma augmentation to reformulate the multinomial distribution in terms of latent variables with jointly Gaussian
likelihoods, enabling us to take advantage of a host of Bayesian inference techniques for Gaussian models with minimal overhead.

1

Introduction

It is often desirable to model discrete data in terms of continuous latent structure. In applications involving text corpora, discrete-valued time series, or polling and purchasing decisions, we may want
to learn correlations or spatiotemporal dynamics and leverage these structures to improve inferences
and predictions. However, adding these continuous latent dependence structures often comes at the
cost of significantly complicating inference: such models may require specialized, one-off inference
algorithms, such as a non-conjugate variational optimization, or they may only admit very general
inference tools like particle MCMC [1] or elliptical slice sampling [2], which can be inefficient and
difficult to scale. Developing, extending, and applying these models has remained a challenge.
In this paper we aim to provide a class of such models that are easy and efficient. We develop models
for categorical and multinomial data in which dependencies among the multinomial parameters are
modeled via latent Gaussian distributions or Gaussian processes, and we show that this flexible class
of models admits a simple auxiliary variable method that makes inference easy, fast, and modular.
This construction not only makes these models simple to develop and apply, but also allows the
resulting inference methods to use off-the-shelf algorithms and software for Gaussian processes and
linear Gaussian dynamical systems.
The paper is organized as follows. After providing background material and defining our general
models and inference methods, we demonstrate the utility of this class of models by applying it to
three domains as case studies. First, we develop a correlated topic model for text corpora. Second,
we study an application to modeling the spatial and temporal patterns in birth names given only
sparse data. Finally, we provide a new continuous state-space model for discrete-valued sequences,
∗

These authors contributed equally.

1

