Statistical Topological Data Analysis –
A Kernel Perspective

Stefan Huber
IST Austria
stefan.huber@ist.ac.at

Roland Kwitt
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg
rkwitt@gmx.at
Marc Niethammer
Department of Computer Science and BRIC
UNC Chapel Hill
mn@cs.unc.edu

Weili Lin
Department of Radiology and BRIC
UNC Chapel Hill
weili_lin@med.unc.edu

Ulrich Bauer
Department of Mathematics
Technische Universität München (TUM)
ulrich@bauer.org

Abstract
We consider the problem of statistical computations with persistence diagrams, a
summary representation of topological features in data. These diagrams encode
persistent homology, a widely used invariant in topological data analysis. While
several avenues towards a statistical treatment of the diagrams have been explored
recently, we follow an alternative route that is motivated by the success of methods
based on the embedding of probability measures into reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces. In fact, a positive definite kernel on persistence diagrams has recently
been proposed, connecting persistent homology to popular kernel-based learning
techniques such as support vector machines. However, important properties of that
kernel enabling a principled use in the context of probability measure embeddings
remain to be explored. Our contribution is to close this gap by proving universality
of a variant of the original kernel, and to demonstrate its effective use in twosample hypothesis testing on synthetic as well as real-world data.

1

Introduction

Over the past years, advances in adopting methods from algebraic topology to study the “shape” of
data (e.g., point clouds, images, shapes) have given birth to the field of topological data analysis
(TDA) [5]. In particular, persistent homology has been widely established as a tool for capturing
“relevant” topological features at multiple scales. The output is a summary representation in the
form of so called barcodes or persistence diagrams, which, roughly speaking, encode the life span
of the features. These “topological summaries” have been successfully used in a variety of different
fields, including, but not limited to, computer vision and medical imaging. Applications range from
the analysis of cortical surface thickness [8] to the structure of brain networks [15], brain artery trees
[2] or histology images for breast cancer analysis [22].
Despite the success of TDA in these areas, a statistical treatment of persistence diagrams (e.g.,
computing means or variances) turns out to be difficult, not least because of the unusual structure
of the barcodes as intervals, rather than numerical quantities [1]. While substantial advancements in
1

