Competitive Distribution Estimation:
Why is Good-Turing Good

Ananda Theertha Suresh
UC San Diego
asuresh@ucsd.edu

Alon Orlitsky
UC San Diego
alon@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Estimating distributions over large alphabets is a fundamental machine-learning
tenet. Yet no method is known to estimate all distributions well. For example,
add-constant estimators are nearly min-max optimal but often perform poorly in
practice, and practical estimators such as absolute discounting, Jelinek-Mercer,
and Good-Turing are not known to be near optimal for essentially any distribution.
We describe the first universally near-optimal probability estimators. For every
discrete distribution, they are provably nearly the best in the following two competitive ways. First they estimate every distribution nearly as well as the best
estimator designed with prior knowledge of the distribution up to a permutation.
Second, they estimate every distribution nearly as well as the best estimator designed with prior knowledge of the exact distribution, but as all natural estimators,
restricted to assign the same probability to all symbols appearing the same number
of times.
Specifically, for distributions over k symbols and n samples, we show that for
both comparisons, a simple variant of Good-Turing estimator is always within KL
divergence of (3 + on (1))/n1/3 from the best estimator, and that a more involved
√
estimator is within O˜n (min(k/n, 1/ n)). Conversely, we show that any estimator must have a KL divergence at least Ω̃n (min(k/n, 1/n2/3 )) over the best
√
estimator for the first comparison, and at least Ω̃n (min(k/n, 1/ n)) for the second.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Many learning applications, ranging from language-processing staples such as speech recognition
and machine translation to biological studies in virology and bioinformatics, call for estimating large
discrete distributions from their samples. Probability estimation over large alphabets has therefore
long been the subject of extensive research, both by practitioners deriving practical estimators [1, 2],
and by theorists searching for optimal estimators [3].
Yet even after all this work, provably-optimal estimators remain elusive. The add-constant estimators frequently analyzed by theoreticians are nearly min-max optimal, yet perform poorly for
many practical distributions, while common practical estimators, such as absolute discounting [4],
Jelinek-Mercer [5], and Good-Turing [6], are not well understood and lack provable performance
guarantees.
To understand the terminology and approach a solution we need a few definitions. The performance
of an estimator q for an underlying distribution p is typically evaluated in terms of the Kullback1

