Expressing an Image Stream with a Sequence of
Natural Sentences
Cesc Chunseong Park
Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{park.chunseong,gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/cesc-park/CRCN

Abstract
We propose an approach for retrieving a sequence of natural sentences for an
image stream. Since general users often take a series of pictures on their special
moments, it would better take into consideration of the whole image stream to produce natural language descriptions. While almost all previous studies have dealt
with the relation between a single image and a single natural sentence, our work
extends both input and output dimension to a sequence of images and a sequence
of sentences. To this end, we design a multimodal architecture called coherent
recurrent convolutional network (CRCN), which consists of convolutional neural
networks, bidirectional recurrent neural networks, and an entity-based local coherence model. Our approach directly learns from vast user-generated resource of
blog posts as text-image parallel training data. We demonstrate that our approach
outperforms other state-of-the-art candidate methods, using both quantitative measures (e.g. BLEU and top-K recall) and user studies via Amazon Mechanical Turk.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been a hike of interest in automatically generating natural language descriptions
for images in the research of computer vision, natural language processing, and machine learning
(e.g. [5, 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 26, 21, 30]). While most of existing work aims at discovering the relation
between a single image and a single natural sentence, we extend both input and output dimension to
a sequence of images and a sequence of sentences, which may be an obvious next step toward joint
understanding of the visual content of images and language descriptions, albeit under-addressed in
current literature. Our problem setup is motivated by that general users often take a series of pictures
on their memorable moments. For example, many people who visit New York City (NYC) would
capture their experiences with large image streams, and thus it would better take the whole photo
stream into consideration for the translation to a natural language description.

Figure 1: An intuition of our problem statement with a New York City example. We aim at expressing an image
stream with a sequence of natural sentences. (a) We leverage natural blog posts to learn the relation between
image streams and sentence sequences. (b) We propose coherent recurrent convolutional networks (CRCN)
that integrate convolutional networks, bidirectional recurrent networks, and the entity-based coherence model.

1

