M-Best-Diverse Labelings
for Submodular Energies and Beyond

Alexander Kirillov1
Dmitrij Schlesinger1
Dmitry Vetrov2
1
Carsten Rother
Bogdan Savchynskyy1
1
2
TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
Skoltech, Moscow, Russia
alexander.kirillov@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
We consider the problem of finding M best diverse solutions of energy minimization problems for graphical models. Contrary to the sequential method of Batra
et al., which greedily finds one solution after another, we infer all M solutions
jointly. It was shown recently that such jointly inferred labelings not only have
smaller total energy but also qualitatively outperform the sequentially obtained
ones. The only obstacle for using this new technique is the complexity of the corresponding inference problem, since it is considerably slower algorithm than the
method of Batra et al. In this work we show that the joint inference of M best
diverse solutions can be formulated as a submodular energy minimization if the
original MAP-inference problem is submodular, hence fast inference techniques
can be used. In addition to the theoretical results we provide practical algorithms
that outperform the current state-of-the-art and can be used in both submodular
and non-submodular case.

1

Introduction

A variety of tasks in machine learning can be formulated in the form of an energy minimization
problem, known also as maximum a posteriori (MAP) or maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
inference in an undirected graphical models (related to Markov or conditional random fields). Its
modeling power and importance are well-recognized, which resulted into specialized benchmark,
i.e. [18] and computational challenges [8] for its solvers. This underlines the importance of finding
the most probable solution. Following [3] and [25] we argue, however, that finding M > 1 diverse
configurations with low energies is also of importance in a number of scenarios, such as: (a) Expressing uncertainty of the found solution [27]; (b) Faster training of model parameters [14]; (c)
Ranking of inference results [32]; (d) Empirical risk minimization [26].
We build on the new formulation for finding M -best-diverse-configurations, which was recently
proposed in [19]. In this formulation all M configurations are inferred jointly, contrary to the established method [3], where a sequential greedy procedure is used. As shown in [19], the new
formulation does not only reliably produce configurations with lower total energy, but also leads
to better results in several application scenarios. In particular, for the image segmentation scenario
the results of [19] significantly outperform those of [3]. This is true even when [19] uses a plain
Hamming distance as a diversity measure and [3] uses more powerful diversity measures.
Our contributions.
• We show that finding M -best-diverse configurations of a binary submodular energy minimization can be formulated as a submodular MAP-inference problem, and hence can be solved
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 647769). D. Vetrov was supported by
RFBR proj. (No. 15-31-20596) and by Microsoft (RPD 1053945).

1

