Parallelizing MCMC with Random Partition Trees

Xiangyu Wang
Dept. of Statistical Science
Duke University
xw56@stat.duke.edu

Fangjian Guo
Dept. of Computer Science
Duke University
guo@cs.duke.edu

Katherine A. Heller
Dept. of Statistical Science
Duke University
kheller@stat.duke.edu

David B. Dunson
Dept. of Statistical Science
Duke University
dunson@stat.duke.edu

Abstract
The modern scale of data has brought new challenges to Bayesian inference. In
particular, conventional MCMC algorithms are computationally very expensive
for large data sets. A promising approach to solve this problem is embarrassingly
parallel MCMC (EP-MCMC), which first partitions the data into multiple subsets
and runs independent sampling algorithms on each subset. The subset posterior
draws are then aggregated via some combining rules to obtain the final approximation. Existing EP-MCMC algorithms are limited by approximation accuracy and
difficulty in resampling. In this article, we propose a new EP-MCMC algorithm
PART that solves these problems. The new algorithm applies random partition
trees to combine the subset posterior draws, which is distribution-free, easy to resample from and can adapt to multiple scales. We provide theoretical justification
and extensive experiments illustrating empirical performance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian methods are popular for their success in analyzing complex data sets. However, for large
data sets, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, widely used in Bayesian inference, can
suffer from huge computational expense. With large data, there is increasing time per iteration, increasing time to convergence, and difficulties with processing the full data on a single machine due
to memory limits. To ameliorate these concerns, various methods such as stochastic gradient Monte
Carlo [1] and sub-sampling based Monte Carlo [2] have been proposed. Among directions that have
been explored, embarrassingly parallel MCMC (EP-MCMC) seems most promising. EP-MCMC
algorithms typically divide the data into multiple subsets and run independent MCMC chains simultaneously on each subset. The posterior draws are then aggregated according to some rules to
produce the final approximation. This approach is clearly more efficient as now each chain involves
a much smaller data set and the sampling is communication-free. The key to a successful EP-MCMC
algorithm lies in the speed and accuracy of the combining rule.
Existing EP-MCMC algorithms can be roughly divided into three categories. The first relies on
asymptotic normality of posterior distributions. [3] propose a “Consensus Monte Carlo” algorithm,
which produces final approximation by a weighted averaging over all subset draws. This approach is
effective when the posterior distributions are close to Gaussian, but could suffer from huge bias when
skewness and multi-modes are present. The second category relies on calculating an appropriate
variant of a mean or median of the subset posterior measures [4, 5]. These approaches rely on
asymptotics (size of data increasing to infinity) to justify accuracy, and lack guarantees in finite
samples. The third category relies on the product density equation (PDE) in (1). Assuming X is the
1

