Segregated Graphs and Marginals of Chain Graph
Models
Ilya Shpitser
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
ilyas@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Bayesian networks are a popular representation of asymmetric (for example
causal) relationships between random variables. Markov random fields (MRFs)
are a complementary model of symmetric relationships used in computer vision,
spatial modeling, and social and gene expression networks. A chain graph model
under the Lauritzen-Wermuth-Frydenberg interpretation (hereafter a chain graph
model) generalizes both Bayesian networks and MRFs, and can represent asymmetric and symmetric relationships together.
As in other graphical models, the set of marginals from distributions in a chain
graph model induced by the presence of hidden variables forms a complex model.
One recent approach to the study of marginal graphical models is to consider a
well-behaved supermodel. Such a supermodel of marginals of Bayesian networks,
defined only by conditional independences, and termed the ordinary Markov
model, was studied at length in [6].
In this paper, we show that special mixed graphs which we call segregated graphs
can be associated, via a Markov property, with supermodels of marginals of chain
graphs defined only by conditional independences. Special features of segregated
graphs imply the existence of a very natural factorization for these supermodels, and imply many existing results on the chain graph model, and the ordinary
Markov model carry over. Our results suggest that segregated graphs define an
analogue of the ordinary Markov model for marginals of chain graph models.
We illustrate the utility of segregated graphs for analyzing outcome interference
in causal inference via simulated datasets.

1

Introduction

Graphical models are a flexible and widely used tool for modeling and inference in high dimensional
settings. Directed acyclic graph (DAG) models, also known as Bayesian networks [11, 8], are often
used to model relationships with an inherent asymmetry, perhaps induced by a temporal order on
variables, or cause-effect relationships. Models represented by undirected graphs (UGs), such as
Markov random fields (MRFs), are used to model symmetric relationships, for instance proximity in
social graphs, expression co-occurrence in gene networks, coinciding magnetization of neighboring
atoms, or similar colors of neighboring pixels in an image.
Some graphical models can represent both symmetric and asymmetric relationships together. One
such model is the chain graph model under the Lauritzen-Wermuth-Frydenberg interpretation, which
we will shorten to “the chain graph model.” We will not consider the chain graph model under the
Andersen-Madigan-Perlman (AMP) interpretation, or other chain graph models [22, 1] discussed in
[4] in this paper. Just as the DAG models and MRFs, the chain graph model has a set of equivalent
(under some assumptions) definitions via a set of Markov properties, and a factorization.
1

