Private Graphon Estimation for Sparse Graphs∗

Christian Borgs
Jennifer T. Chayes
Microsoft Research New England
Cambridge, MA, USA.
{cborgs,jchayes}@microsoft.com

Adam Smith
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA.
asmith@psu.edu

Abstract
We design algorithms for fitting a high-dimensional statistical model to a large,
sparse network without revealing sensitive information of individual members.
Given a sparse input graph G, our algorithms output a node-differentially private
nonparametric block model approximation. By node-differentially private, we
mean that our output hides the insertion or removal of a vertex and all its adjacent
edges. If G is an instance of the network obtained from a generative nonparametric
model defined in terms of a graphon W , our model guarantees consistency: as the
number of vertices tends to infinity, the output of our algorithm converges to W in
an appropriate version of the L2 norm. In particular, this means we can estimate
the sizes of all multi-way cuts in G.
Our results hold as long as W is bounded, the average degree of G grows at least
like the log of the number of vertices, and the number of blocks goes to infinity
at an appropriate rate. We give explicit error bounds in terms of the parameters of
the model; in several settings, our bounds improve on or match known nonprivate
results.

1

Introduction

Differential Privacy. Social and communication networks have been the subject of intense study
over the last few years. However, while these networks comprise a rich source of information for
science, they also contain highly sensitive private information. What kinds of information can we
release about these networks while preserving the privacy of their users? Simple measures, such as
removing obvious identifiers, do not work; for example, several studies reidentified individuals in
the graph of a social network even after all vertex and edge attributes were removed. Such attacks
highlight the need for statistical and learning algorithms that provide rigorous privacy guarantees.
Differential privacy [17] provides meaningful guarantees in the presence of arbitrary side information. In the context of traditional statistical data sets, differential privacy is now well-developed.
By contrast, differential privacy in the context of graph data is much less developed. There are two
main variants of graph differential privacy: edge and node differential privacy. Intuitively, edge
differential privacy ensures that an algorithm’s output does not reveal the inclusion or removal of a
particular edge in the graph, while node differential privacy hides the inclusion or removal of a node
together with all its adjacent edges. Edge privacy is a weaker notion (hence easier to achieve) and
has been studied more extensively. Several authors designed edge-differentially private algorithms
for fitting generative graph models (e.g. [24]; see the full version for further references), but these
do not appear to generalize to node privacy with meaningful accuracy guarantees.
The stronger notion, node privacy, corresponds more closely to what was achieved in the case of
traditional data sets, and to what one would want to protect an individual’s data: it ensures that no
matter what an analyst observing the released information knows ahead of time, she learns the same
∗

A full version of this extended abstract is available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.06162

1

