Semi-Supervised Factored Logistic Regression for
High-Dimensional Neuroimaging Data
Danilo Bzdok, Michael Eickenberg, Olivier Grisel, Bertrand Thirion, Gaël Varoquaux
INRIA, Parietal team, Saclay, France
CEA, Neurospin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Imaging neuroscience links human behavior to aspects of brain biology in everincreasing datasets. Existing neuroimaging methods typically perform either discovery of unknown neural structure or testing of neural structure associated with
mental tasks. However, testing hypotheses on the neural correlates underlying
larger sets of mental tasks necessitates adequate representations for the observations. We therefore propose to blend representation modelling and task classification into a unified statistical learning problem. A multinomial logistic regression
is introduced that is constrained by factored coefficients and coupled with an autoencoder. We show that this approach yields more accurate and interpretable
neural models of psychological tasks in a reference dataset, as well as better generalization to other datasets.
keywords: Brain Imaging, Cognitive Science, Semi-Supervised Learning, Systems Biology

1

Introduction

Methods for neuroimaging research can be grouped by discovering neurobiological structure or assessing the neural correlates associated with mental tasks. To discover, on the one hand, spatial
distributions of neural activity structure across time, independent component analysis (ICA) is often
used [6]. It decomposes the BOLD (blood-oxygen level-dependent) signals into the primary modes
of variation. The ensuing spatial activity patterns are believed to represent brain networks of functionally interacting regions [26]. Similarly, sparse principal component analysis (SPCA) has been
used to separate BOLD signals into parsimonious network components [28]. The extracted brain
networks are probably manifestations of electrophysiological oscillation frequencies [17]. Their
fundamental organizational role is further attested by continued covariation during sleep and anesthesia [10]. Network discovery by applying ICA or SPCA is typically performed on task-unrelated
(i.e., unlabeled) “resting-state” data. These capture brain dynamics during ongoing random thought
without controlled environmental stimulation. In fact, a large portion of the BOLD signal variation
is known not to correlate with a particular behavior, stimulus, or experimental task [10].
To test, on the other hand, the neural correlates underlying mental tasks, the general linear model
(GLM) is the dominant approach [13]. The contribution of individual brain voxels is estimated according to a design matrix of experimental tasks. Alternatively, psychophysiological interactions
(PPI) elucidate the influence of one brain region on another conditioned by experimental tasks [12].
As a last example, an increasing number of neuroimaging studies model experimental tasks by training classification algorithms on brain signals [23]. All these methods are applied to task-associated
(i.e., labeled) data that capture brain dynamics during stimulus-guided behavior. Two important
conclusions can be drawn. First, the mentioned supervised neuroimaging analyses typically yield
results in a voxel space. This ignores the fact that the BOLD signal exhibits spatially distributed
1

