End-To-End Memory Networks

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar
Dept. of Computer Science
Courant Institute, New York University
sainbar@cs.nyu.edu

Arthur Szlam
Jason Weston
Rob Fergus
Facebook AI Research
New York
{aszlam,jase,robfergus}@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce a neural network with a recurrent attention model over a possibly
large external memory. The architecture is a form of Memory Network [23]
but unlike the model in that work, it is trained end-to-end, and hence requires
significantly less supervision during training, making it more generally applicable
in realistic settings. It can also be seen as an extension of RNNsearch [2] to the
case where multiple computational steps (hops) are performed per output symbol.
The flexibility of the model allows us to apply it to tasks as diverse as (synthetic)
question answering [22] and to language modeling. For the former our approach
is competitive with Memory Networks, but with less supervision. For the latter,
on the Penn TreeBank and Text8 datasets our approach demonstrates comparable
performance to RNNs and LSTMs. In both cases we show that the key concept
of multiple computational hops yields improved results.

1

Introduction

Two grand challenges in artificial intelligence research have been to build models that can make
multiple computational steps in the service of answering a question or completing a task, and
models that can describe long term dependencies in sequential data.
Recently there has been a resurgence in models of computation using explicit storage and a notion
of attention [23, 8, 2]; manipulating such a storage offers an approach to both of these challenges.
In [23, 8, 2], the storage is endowed with a continuous representation; reads from and writes to the
storage, as well as other processing steps, are modeled by the actions of neural networks.
In this work, we present a novel recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture where the recurrence
reads from a possibly large external memory multiple times before outputting a symbol. Our model
can be considered a continuous form of the Memory Network implemented in [23]. The model in
that work was not easy to train via backpropagation, and required supervision at each layer of the
network. The continuity of the model we present here means that it can be trained end-to-end from
input-output pairs, and so is applicable to more tasks, i.e. tasks where such supervision is not available, such as in language modeling or realistically supervised question answering tasks. Our model
can also be seen as a version of RNNsearch [2] with multiple computational steps (which we term
“hops”) per output symbol. We will show experimentally that the multiple hops over the long-term
memory are crucial to good performance of our model on these tasks, and that training the memory
representation can be integrated in a scalable manner into our end-to-end neural network model.

2

Approach

Our model takes a discrete set of inputs x1 , ..., xn that are to be stored in the memory, a query q, and
outputs an answer a. Each of the xi , q, and a contains symbols coming from a dictionary with V
words. The model writes all x to the memory up to a fixed buffer size, and then finds a continuous
representation for the x and q. The continuous representation is then processed via multiple hops to
output a. This allows backpropagation of the error signal through multiple memory accesses back
to the input during training.
1

