Parallel Predictive Entropy Search for Batch Global
Optimization of Expensive Objective Functions

Amar Shah
Department of Engineering
Cambridge University
as793@cam.ac.uk

Zoubin Ghahramani
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
zoubin@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We develop parallel predictive entropy search (PPES), a novel algorithm for
Bayesian optimization of expensive black-box objective functions. At each iteration, PPES aims to select a batch of points which will maximize the information
gain about the global maximizer of the objective. Well known strategies exist
for suggesting a single evaluation point based on previous observations, while far
fewer are known for selecting batches of points to evaluate in parallel. The few
batch selection schemes that have been studied all resort to greedy methods to
compute an optimal batch. To the best of our knowledge, PPES is the first nongreedy batch Bayesian optimization strategy. We demonstrate the benefit of this
approach in optimization performance on both synthetic and real world applications, including problems in machine learning, rocket science and robotics.

1

Introduction

Finding the global maximizer of a non-concave objective function based on sequential, noisy observations is a fundamental problem in various real world domains e.g. engineering design [1], finance
[2] and algorithm optimization [3]. We are interesed in objective functions which are unknown but
may be evaluated pointwise at some expense, be it computational, economical or other. The challenge is to find the maximizer of the expensive objective function in as few sequential queries as
possible, in order to minimize the total expense.
A Bayesian approach to this problem would probabilistically model the unknown objective function,
f . Based on posterior belief about f given evaluations of the the objective function, you can decide
where to evaluate f next in order to maximize a chosen utility function. Bayesian optimization [4]
has been successfully applied in a range of difficult, expensive global optimization tasks including
optimizing a robot controller to maximize gait speed [5] and discovering a chemical derivative of a
particular molecule which best treats a particular disease [6].
Two key choices need to be made when implementing a Bayesian optimization algorithm: (i) a
model choice for f and (ii) a strategy for deciding where to evaluate f next. A common approach
for modeling f is to use a Gaussian process prior [7], as it is highly flexible and amenable to analytic
calculations. However, other models have shown to be useful in some Bayesian optimization tasks
e.g. Student-t process priors [8] and deep neural networks [9]. Most research in the Bayesian
optimization literature considers the problem of deciding how to choose a single location where
f should be evaluated next. However, it is often possible to probe several points in parallel. For
example, you may possess 2 identical robots on which you can test different gait parameters in
parallel. Or your computer may have multiple cores on which you can run algorithms in parallel
with different hyperparameter settings.
Whilst there are many established strategies to select a single point to probe next e.g. expected
improvement, probability of improvement and upper confidence bound [10], there are few well
known strategies for selecting batches of points. To the best of our knowledge, every batch selection
1

