Local Causal Discovery of Direct Causes and Effects

Tian Gao
Qiang Ji
Department of ECSE
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180
{gaot, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
We focus on the discovery and identification of direct causes and effects of a target
variable in a causal network. State-of-the-art causal learning algorithms generally
need to find the global causal structures in the form of complete partial directed
acyclic graphs (CPDAG) in order to identify direct causes and effects of a target
variable. While these algorithms are effective, it is often unnecessary and wasteful
to find the global structures when we are only interested in the local structure of
one target variable (such as class labels). We propose a new local causal discovery algorithm, called Causal Markov Blanket (CMB), to identify the direct causes
and effects of a target variable based on Markov Blanket Discovery. CMB is designed to conduct causal discovery among multiple variables, but focuses only on
finding causal relationships between a specific target variable and other variables.
Under standard assumptions, we show both theoretically and experimentally that
the proposed local causal discovery algorithm can obtain the comparable identification accuracy as global methods but significantly improve their efficiency, often
by more than one order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery is the process to identify the causal relationships among a set of random variables.
It not only can aid predictions and classifications like feature selection [4], but can also help predict consequences of some given actions, facilitate counter-factual inference, and help explain the
underlying mechanisms of the data [13]. A lot of research efforts have been focused on predicting causality from observational data [13, 18]. They can be roughly divided into two sub-areas:
causal discovery between a pair of variables and among multiple variables. We focus on multivariate causal discovery, which searches for correlations and dependencies among variables in causal
networks [13]. Causal networks can be used for local or global causal prediction, and thus they can
be learned locally and globally. Many causal discovery algorithms for causal networks have been
proposed, and the majority of them belong to global learning algorithms as they seek to learn global
causal structures. The Spirtes-Glymour-Scheines (SGS) [18] and Peter-Clark (P-C) algorithm [19]
test for the existence of edges between every pair of nodes in order to first find the skeleton, or
undirected edges, of causal networks and then discover all the V-structures, resulting in a partially
directed acyclic graph (PDAG). The last step of these algorithms is then to orient the rest of edges
as much as possible using Meek rules [10] while maintaining consistency with the existing edges.
Given a causal network, causal relationships among variables can be directly read off the structure.
Due to the complexity of the P-C algorithm and unreliable high order conditional independence tests
[9], several works [23, 15] have incorporated the Markov Blanket (MB) discovery into the causal
discovery with a local-to-global approach. Growth and Shrink (GS) [9] algorithm uses the MBs
of each node to build the skeleton of a causal network, discover all the V-structures, and then use
the Meek rules to complete the global causal structure. The max-min hill climbing (MMHC) [23]
algorithm also finds MBs of each variable first, but then uses the MBs as constraints to reduce the
search space for the score-based standard hill climbing structure learning methods. In [15], authors
1

