Sparse Local Embeddings for Extreme Multi-label
Classification
Kush Bhatia† , Himanshu Jain§ , Purushottam Kar‡∗ , Manik Varma† , and Prateek Jain†
†
Microsoft Research, India
§
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
‡
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
{t-kushb,prajain,manik}@microsoft.com
himanshu.j689@gmail.com, purushot@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
The objective in extreme multi-label learning is to train a classifier that can automatically tag a novel data point with the most relevant subset of labels from an
extremely large label set. Embedding based approaches attempt to make training
and prediction tractable by assuming that the training label matrix is low-rank and
reducing the effective number of labels by projecting the high dimensional label
vectors onto a low dimensional linear subspace. Still, leading embedding approaches have been unable to deliver high prediction accuracies, or scale to large
problems as the low rank assumption is violated in most real world applications.
In this paper we develop the SLEEC classifier to address both limitations. The
main technical contribution in SLEEC is a formulation for learning a small ensemble of local distance preserving embeddings which can accurately predict infrequently occurring (tail) labels. This allows SLEEC to break free of the traditional
low-rank assumption and boost classification accuracy by learning embeddings
which preserve pairwise distances between only the nearest label vectors.
We conducted extensive experiments on several real-world, as well as benchmark data sets and compared our method against state-of-the-art methods for extreme multi-label classification. Experiments reveal that SLEEC can make significantly more accurate predictions then the state-of-the-art methods including both
embedding-based (by as much as 35%) as well as tree-based (by as much as 6%)
methods. SLEEC can also scale efficiently to data sets with a million labels which
are beyond the pale of leading embedding methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper we develop SLEEC (Sparse Local Embeddings for Extreme Classification), an extreme
multi-label classifier that can make significantly more accurate and faster predictions, as well as
scale to larger problems, as compared to state-of-the-art embedding based approaches.
eXtreme Multi-label Learning (XML) addresses the problem of learning a classifier that can automatically tag a data point with the most relevant subset of labels from a large label set. For instance,
there are more than a million labels (categories) on Wikipedia and one might wish to build a classifier that annotates a new article or web page with the subset of most relevant Wikipedia categories.
It should be emphasized that multi-label learning is distinct from multi-class classification where the
aim is to predict a single mutually exclusive label.
Challenges: XML is a hard problem that involves learning with hundreds of thousands, or even millions, of labels, features and training points. Although, some of these problems can be ameliorated
∗

This work was done while P.K. was a postdoctoral researcher at Microsoft Research India.

1

