Expectation Particle Belief Propagation

Thibaut Lienart, Yee Whye Teh, Arnaud Doucet
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
{lienart,teh,doucet}@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose an original particle-based implementation of the Loopy Belief Propagation (LPB) algorithm for pairwise Markov Random Fields (MRF) on a continuous state space. The algorithm constructs adaptively efficient proposal distributions approximating the local beliefs at each note of the MRF. This is achieved
by considering proposal distributions in the exponential family whose parameters
are updated iterately in an Expectation Propagation (EP) framework. The proposed particle scheme provides consistent estimation of the LBP marginals as the
number of particles increases. We demonstrate that it provides more accurate results than the Particle Belief Propagation (PBP) algorithm of [1] at a fraction of
the computational cost and is additionally more robust empirically. The computational complexity of our algorithm at each iteration is quadratic in the number
of particles. We also propose an accelerated implementation with sub-quadratic
computational complexity which still provides consistent estimates of the loopy
BP marginal distributions and performs almost as well as the original procedure.

1

Introduction

Undirected Graphical Models (also known as Markov Random Fields) provide a flexible framework
to represent networks of random variables and have been used in a large variety of applications in
machine learning, statistics, signal processing and related fields [2]. For many applications such as
tracking [3, 4], sensor networks [5, 6] or computer vision [7, 8, 9] it can be beneficial to define MRF
on continuous state-spaces.
Given a pairwise MRF, we are here interested in computing the marginal distributions at the nodes
of the graph. A popular approach to do this is to consider the Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP) algorithm [10, 11, 2]. LBP relies on the transmission of messages between nodes. However when dealing with continuous random variables, computing these messages exactly is generally intractable.
In practice, one must select a way to tractably represent these messages and a way to update these
representations following the LBP algorithm. The Nonparametric Belief Propagation (NBP) algorithm [12] represents the messages with mixtures of Gaussians while the Particle Belief Propagation
(PBP) algorithm [1] uses an importance sampling approach. NBP relies on restrictive integrability
conditions and does not offer consistent estimators of the LBP messages. PBP offers a way to circumvent these two issues but the implementation suggested proposes sampling from the estimated
beliefs which need not be integrable. Moreover, even when they are integrable, sampling from
the estimated beliefs is very expensive computationally. Practically the authors of [1] only sample
approximately from those using short MCMC runs, leading to biased estimators.
In our method, we consider a sequence of proposal distributions at each node from which one can
sample particles at a given iteration of the LBP algorithm. The messages are then computed using
importance sampling. The novelty of the approach is to propose a principled and automated way
of designing a sequence of proposals in a tractable exponential family using the Expectation Prop1

