Learning with Relaxed Supervision

Percy Liang
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Jacob Steinhardt
Stanford University
jsteinhardt@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
For weakly-supervised problems with deterministic constraints between the latent
variables and observed output, learning necessitates performing inference over latent variables conditioned on the output, which can be intractable no matter how
simple the model family is. Even finding a single latent variable setting that satisfies the constraints could be difficult; for instance, the observed output may be
the result of a latent database query or graphics program which must be inferred.
Here, the difficulty lies in not the model but the supervision, and poor approximations at this stage could lead to following the wrong learning signal entirely.
In this paper, we develop a rigorous approach to relaxing the supervision, which
yields asymptotically consistent parameter estimates despite altering the supervision. Our approach parameterizes a family of increasingly accurate relaxations,
and jointly optimizes both the model and relaxation parameters, while formulating constraints between these parameters to ensure efficient inference. These
efficiency constraints allow us to learn in otherwise intractable settings, while
asymptotic consistency ensures that we always follow a valid learning signal.

1

Introduction

We are interested in the problem of learning from intractable supervision. For example, for a
question answering application, we might want to learn a semantic parser that maps a question
x (e.g., “Which president is from Arkansas?”) to a logical form z (e.g., USPresident(e) ∧
PlaceOfBirth(e, Arkansas)) that executes to the answer y (e.g., BillClinton). If we are only
given (x, y) pairs as training data [1, 2, 3], then even if the model pθ (z | x) is tractable, it is still
intractable to incorporate the hard supervision constraint [S(z, y) = 1] since z and y live in a large
space and S(z, y) can be complex (e.g., S(z, y) = 1 iff z executes to y on a database). In addition to
semantic parsing, intractable supervision also shows up in inverse graphics [4, 5, 6], relation extraction [7, 8], program induction [9], and planning tasks with complex, long-term goals [10]. As we
scale to weaker supervision and richer output spaces, such intractabilities will become the norm.
One can handle the intractable constraints in various ways: by relaxing them [11], by applying them
in expectation [12], or by using approximate inference [8]. However, as these constraints are part of
the supervision rather than the model, altering them can fundamentally change the learning process;
this raises the question of when such approximations are faithful enough to learn a good model.
In this paper, we propose a framework that addresses these questions formally, by constructing a
relaxed supervision function with well-characterized statistical and computational properties. Our
approach is sketched in Figure 1: we start with an intractable supervision function q∞ (y | z) (given
by the constraint S), together with a model family pθ (z | x). We then replace q∞ by a family of
functions qβ (y | z) which contains q∞ , giving rise to a joint model pθ,β (y, z | x). We ensure
tractability of inference by constraining pθ (z | x) and pθ,β (z | x, y) to stay close together, so that
the supervision y is never too surprising to the model. Finally, we optimize θ and β subject to this
tractability constraint; when qβ (y | z) is properly normalized, there is always pressure to use the true
1

