Sampling from Probabilistic Submodular Models

Alkis Gotovos
ETH Zurich

S. Hamed Hassani
ETH Zurich

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich

alkisg@inf.ethz.ch

hamed@inf.ethz.ch

krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Submodular and supermodular functions have found wide applicability in machine learning, capturing notions such as diversity and regularity, respectively.
These notions have deep consequences for optimization, and the problem of (approximately) optimizing submodular functions has received much attention. However, beyond optimization, these notions allow specifying expressive probabilistic models that can be used to quantify predictive uncertainty via marginal inference. Prominent, well-studied special cases include Ising models and determinantal point processes, but the general class of log-submodular and log-supermodular
models is much richer and little studied. In this paper, we investigate the use of
Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling to perform approximate inference in general log-submodular and log-supermodular models. In particular, we consider a
simple Gibbs sampling procedure, and establish two sufficient conditions, the first
guaranteeing polynomial-time, and the second fast (O(n log n)) mixing. We also
evaluate the efficiency of the Gibbs sampler on three examples of such models,
and compare against a recently proposed variational approach.

1

Introduction

Modeling notions such as coverage, representativeness, or diversity is an important challenge in
many machine learning problems. These notions are well captured by submodular set functions.
Analogously, supermodular functions capture notions of smoothness, regularity, or cooperation. As
a result, submodularity and supermodularity, akin to concavity and convexity, have found numerous
applications in machine learning. The majority of previous work has focused on optimizing such
functions, including the development and analysis of algorithms for minimization [10] and maximization [9,26], as well as the investigation of practical applications, such as sensor placement [21],
active learning [12], influence maximization [19], and document summarization [25].
Beyond optimization, though, it is of interest to consider probabilistic models defined via submodular functions, that is, distributions over finite sets (or, equivalently, binary random vectors) defined
as p(S) ∝ exp(βF (S)), where F : 2V → R is a submodular or supermodular function (equivalently, either F or −F is submodular), and β ≥ 0 is a scaling parameter. Finding most likely sets in
such models captures classical submodular optimization. However, going beyond point estimates,
that is, performing general probabilistic (e.g., marginal) inference in them, allows us to quantify
uncertainty given some observations, as well as learn such models from data. Only few special
cases belonging to this class of models have been extensively studied in the past; most notably,
Ising models [20], which are log-supermodular in the usual case of attractive (ferromagnetic) potentials, or log-submodular under repulsive (anti-ferromagnetic) potentials, and determinantal point
processes [23], which are log-submodular.
Recently, Djolonga and Krause [6] considered a more general treatment of such models, and proposed a variational approach for performing approximate probabilistic inference for them. It is
natural to ask to what degree the usual alternative to variational methods, namely Monte Carlo sampling, is applicable to these models, and how it performs in comparison. To this end, in this paper
1

