Hidden Technical Debt in Machine Learning Systems

D. Sculley, Gary Holt, Daniel Golovin, Eugene Davydov, Todd Phillips
{dsculley,gholt,dgg,edavydov,toddphillips}@google.com
Google, Inc.
Dietmar Ebner, Vinay Chaudhary, Michael Young, Jean-François Crespo, Dan Dennison
{ebner,vchaudhary,mwyoung,jfcrespo,dennison}@google.com
Google, Inc.

Abstract
Machine learning offers a fantastically powerful toolkit for building useful complex prediction systems quickly. This paper argues it is dangerous to think of
these quick wins as coming for free. Using the software engineering framework
of technical debt, we find it is common to incur massive ongoing maintenance
costs in real-world ML systems. We explore several ML-specific risk factors to
account for in system design. These include boundary erosion, entanglement,
hidden feedback loops, undeclared consumers, data dependencies, configuration
issues, changes in the external world, and a variety of system-level anti-patterns.

1

Introduction

As the machine learning (ML) community continues to accumulate years of experience with live
systems, a wide-spread and uncomfortable trend has emerged: developing and deploying ML systems is relatively fast and cheap, but maintaining them over time is difficult and expensive.
This dichotomy can be understood through the lens of technical debt, a metaphor introduced by
Ward Cunningham in 1992 to help reason about the long term costs incurred by moving quickly in
software engineering. As with fiscal debt, there are often sound strategic reasons to take on technical
debt. Not all debt is bad, but all debt needs to be serviced. Technical debt may be paid down
by refactoring code, improving unit tests, deleting dead code, reducing dependencies, tightening
APIs, and improving documentation [8]. The goal is not to add new functionality, but to enable
future improvements, reduce errors, and improve maintainability. Deferring such payments results
in compounding costs. Hidden debt is dangerous because it compounds silently.
In this paper, we argue that ML systems have a special capacity for incurring technical debt, because
they have all of the maintenance problems of traditional code plus an additional set of ML-specific
issues. This debt may be difficult to detect because it exists at the system level rather than the code
level. Traditional abstractions and boundaries may be subtly corrupted or invalidated by the fact that
data influences ML system behavior. Typical methods for paying down code level technical debt are
not sufficient to address ML-specific technical debt at the system level.
This paper does not offer novel ML algorithms, but instead seeks to increase the community’s awareness of the difficult tradeoffs that must be considered in practice over the long term. We focus on
system-level interactions and interfaces as an area where ML technical debt may rapidly accumulate.
At a system-level, an ML model may silently erode abstraction boundaries. The tempting re-use or
chaining of input signals may unintentionally couple otherwise disjoint systems. ML packages may
be treated as black boxes, resulting in large masses of “glue code” or calibration layers that can lock
in assumptions. Changes in the external world may influence system behavior in unintended ways.
Even monitoring ML system behavior may prove difficult without careful design.
1

