BACK S HIFT : Learning causal cyclic graphs from

unknown shift interventions

Dominik Rothenhäusler⇤
Seminar für Statistik
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
rothenhaeusler@stat.math.ethz.ch
Jonas Peters
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
jonas.peters@tuebingen.mpg.de

Christina Heinze⇤
Seminar für Statistik
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
heinze@stat.math.ethz.ch

Nicolai Meinshausen
Seminar für Statistik
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
meinshausen@stat.math.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose a simple method to learn linear causal cyclic models in the presence
of latent variables. The method relies on equilibrium data of the model recorded
under a specific kind of interventions (“shift interventions”). The location and
strength of these interventions do not have to be known and can be estimated from
the data. Our method, called BACK S HIFT, only uses second moments of the data
and performs simple joint matrix diagonalization, applied to differences between
covariance matrices. We give a sufficient and necessary condition for identifiability of the system, which is fulfilled almost surely under some quite general
assumptions if and only if there are at least three distinct experimental settings,
one of which can be pure observational data. We demonstrate the performance on
some simulated data and applications in flow cytometry and financial time series.

1

Introduction

Discovering causal effects is a fundamentally important yet very challenging task in various disciplines, from public health research and sociological studies, economics to many applications in the
life sciences. There has been much progress on learning acyclic graphs in the context of structural
equation models [1], including methods that learn from observational data alone under a faithfulness assumption [2, 3, 4, 5], exploiting non-Gaussianity of the data [6, 7] or non-linearities [8].
Feedbacks are prevalent in most applications, and we are interested in the setting of [9], where we
observe the equilibrium data of a model that is characterized by a set of linear relations
x = Bx + e,

(1)

where x 2 R is a random vector and B 2 R
is the connectivity matrix with zeros on the diagonal (no self-loops). Allowing for self-loops would lead to an identifiability problem, independent
of the method. See Section B in the Appendix for more details on this setting. The graph corresponding to B has p nodes and an edge from node j to node i if and only if Bi,j 6= 0. The error
terms e are p-dimensional random variables with mean 0 and positive semi-definite covariance matrix ⌃e = E(eeT ). We do not assume that ⌃e is a diagonal matrix which allows the existence of
latent variables.
p

p⇥p

The solutions to (1) can be thought of as the deterministic equilibrium solutions (conditional on the
noise term) of a dynamic model governed by first-order difference equations with matrix B in the
⇤

Authors contributed equally.

1

