Gaussian Process Random Fields
David A. Moore and Stuart J. Russell
Computer Science Division
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94709
{dmoore, russell}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Gaussian processes have been successful in both supervised and unsupervised
machine learning tasks, but their computational complexity has constrained practical applications. We introduce a new approximation for large-scale Gaussian
processes, the Gaussian Process Random Field (GPRF), in which local GPs are
coupled via pairwise potentials. The GPRF likelihood is a simple, tractable, and
parallelizeable approximation to the full GP marginal likelihood, enabling latent
variable modeling and hyperparameter selection on large datasets. We demonstrate
its effectiveness on synthetic spatial data as well as a real-world application to
seismic event location.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks can be framed as learning a function given noisy information about
its inputs and outputs. In regression and classification, we are given inputs and asked to predict the
outputs; by contrast, in latent variable modeling we are given a set of outputs and asked to reconstruct
the inputs that could have produced them. Gaussian processes (GPs) are a flexible class of probability
distributions on functions that allow us to approach function-learning problems from an appealingly
principled and clean Bayesian perspective. Unfortunately, the time complexity of exact GP inference
is O(n3 ), where n is the number of data points. This makes exact GP calculations infeasible for
real-world data sets with n > 10000.
Many approximations have been proposed to escape this limitation. One particularly simple approximation is to partition the input space into smaller blocks, replacing a single large GP with a multitude
of local ones. This gains tractability at the price of a potentially severe independence assumption.
In this paper we relax the strong independence assumptions of independent local GPs, proposing
instead a Markov random field (MRF) of local GPs, which we call a Gaussian Process Random
Field (GPRF). A GPRF couples local models via pairwise potentials that incorporate covariance
information. This yields a surrogate for the full GP marginal likelihood that is simple to implement
and can be tractably evaluated and optimized on large datasets, while still enforcing a smooth
covariance structure. The task of approximating the marginal likelihood is motivated by unsupervised
applications such as the GP latent variable model [1], but examining the predictions made by our
model also yields a novel interpretation of the Bayesian Committee Machine [2].
We begin by reviewing GPs and MRFs, and some existing approximation methods for large-scale
GPs. In Section 3 we present the GPRF objective and examine its properties as an approximation to
the full GP marginal likelihood. We then evaluate it on synthetic data as well as an application to
seismic event location.
1

