A Market Framework for Eliciting Private Data

Bo Waggoner
Harvard SEAS
bwaggoner@fas.harvard.edu

Rafael Frongillo
University of Colorado
raf@colorado.edu

Jacob Abernethy
University of Michigan
jabernet@umich.edu

Abstract
We propose a mechanism for purchasing information from a sequence of participants. The participants may simply hold data points they wish to sell, or may have
more sophisticated information; either way, they are incentivized to participate as
long as they believe their data points are representative or their information will
improve the mechanism’s future prediction on a test set. The mechanism, which
draws on the principles of prediction markets, has a bounded budget and minimizes generalization error for Bregman divergence loss functions. We then show
how to modify this mechanism to preserve the privacy of participants’ information: At any given time, the current prices and predictions of the mechanism reveal
almost no information about any one participant, yet in total over all participants,
information is accurately aggregated.

1

Introduction

A firm that relies on the ability to make difficult predictions can gain a lot from a large collection
of data. The goal is often to estimate values y ∈ Y given observations x ∈ X according to an
appropriate class of hypotheses F describing the relationship between x and y (for example, y = a ·
x + b for linear regression). In classic statistical learning theory, the goal is formalized as attempting
to approximately solve
min E Loss(f ; (x, y))
(1)
f ∈F x,y

where Loss(·) is an appropriate inutility function and (x, y) is drawn from an unknown distribution.
In the present paper we are concerned with the case in which the data are not drawn or held by a
central authority but are instead inherently distributed. By this we mean that the data is (disjointly)
partitioned across a set of agents, with agent i privately possessing some portion of the dataset Si ,
and agents have no obvious incentive to reveal this data to the firm seeking it. The vast swaths of data
available in our personal email accounts could provide massive benefits to a range of companies, for
example, but users are typically loathe to provide account credentials, even when asked politely.
We will be concerned with the design of financial mechanisms that provide a community of agents,
each holding a private set of data, an incentive to contribute to the solution of a large learning or
prediction task. Here we use the term ‘mechanism’ to mean an algorithmic interface that can receive
and answer queries, as well as engage in monetary exchange (deposits and payouts). Our aim will
be to design such a mechanism that satisfies the following three properties:
1. The mechanism is efficient in that it approaches a solution to (1) as the amount of data and
participation grows while spending a constant, fixed total budget.
2. The mechanism is incentive-compatible in the sense that agents are rewarded when their
contributions provide marginal value in terms of improved hypotheses, and are not rewarded for bad or misleading information.
3. The mechanism provides reasonable privacy guarantees, so that no agent j (or outside
observer) can manipulate the mechanism in order to infer the contributions of agent i 6= j.
1

