Policy Gradient for Coherent Risk Measures

Yinlam Chow
Stanford University
ychow@stanford.edu

Aviv Tamar
UC Berkeley
avivt@berkeley.edu
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Adobe Research & INRIA
mohammad.ghavamzadeh@inria.fr

Shie Mannor
Technion
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Several authors have recently developed risk-sensitive policy gradient methods
that augment the standard expected cost minimization problem with a measure of
variability in cost. These studies have focused on specific risk-measures, such as
the variance or conditional value at risk (CVaR). In this work, we extend the policy gradient method to the whole class of coherent risk measures, which is widely
accepted in finance and operations research, among other fields. We consider
both static and time-consistent dynamic risk measures. For static risk measures,
our approach is in the spirit of policy gradient algorithms and combines a standard
sampling approach with convex programming. For dynamic risk measures, our approach is actor-critic style and involves explicit approximation of value function.
Most importantly, our contribution presents a unified approach to risk-sensitive
reinforcement learning that generalizes and extends previous results.

1

Introduction

Risk-sensitive optimization considers problems in which the objective involves a risk measure of
the random cost, in contrast to the typical expected cost objective. Such problems are important
when the decision-maker wishes to manage the variability of the cost, in addition to its expected
outcome, and are standard in various applications of finance and operations research. In reinforcement learning (RL) [27], risk-sensitive objectives have gained popularity as a means to regularize
the variability of the total (discounted) cost/reward in a Markov decision process (MDP).
Many risk objectives have been investigated in the literature and applied to RL, such as the celebrated Markowitz mean-variance model [16], Value-at-Risk (VaR) and Conditional Value at Risk
(CVaR) [18, 29, 21, 10, 8, 30]. The view taken in this paper is that the preference of one risk measure
over another is problem-dependent and depends on factors such as the cost distribution, sensitivity to
rare events, ease of estimation from data, and computational tractability of the optimization problem.
However, the highly influential paper of Artzner et al. [2] identified a set of natural properties that
are desirable for a risk measure to satisfy. Risk measures that satisfy these properties are termed coherent and have obtained widespread acceptance in financial applications, among others. We focus
on such coherent measures of risk in this work.
For sequential decision problems, such as MDPs, another desirable property of a risk measure is
time consistency. A time-consistent risk measure satisfies a “dynamic programming” style property:
if a strategy is risk-optimal for an n-stage problem, then the component of the policy from the t-th
time until the end (where t < n) is also risk-optimal (see principle of optimality in [5]). The recently
proposed class of dynamic Markov coherent risk measures [24] satisfies both the coherence and time
consistency properties.
In this work, we present policy gradient algorithms for RL with a coherent risk objective. Our
approach applies to the whole class of coherent risk measures, thereby generalizing and unifying
previous approaches that have focused on individual risk measures. We consider both static coherent
1

