Column Selection via Adaptive Sampling

Saurabh Paul
Global Risk Sciences, Paypal Inc.
saupaul@paypal.com

Malik Magdon-Ismail
CS Dept., Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
magdon@cs.rpi.edu

Petros Drineas
CS Dept., Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
drinep@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract
Selecting a good column (or row) subset of massive data matrices has found many
applications in data analysis and machine learning. We propose a new adaptive sampling algorithm that can be used to improve any relative-error column
selection algorithm. Our algorithm delivers a tighter theoretical bound on the approximation error which we also demonstrate empirically using two well known
relative-error column subset selection algorithms. Our experimental results on
synthetic and real-world data show that our algorithm outperforms non-adaptive
sampling as well as prior adaptive sampling approaches.

1

Introduction

In numerous machine learning and data analysis applications, the input data are modelled as a matrix
A ∈ Rm×n , where m is the number of objects (data points) and n is the number of features. Often,
it is desirable to represent your solution using a few features (to promote better generalization and
interpretability of the solutions), or using a few data points (to identify important coresets of the
data), for example PCA, sparse PCA, sparse regression, coreset based regression, etc. [1, 2, 3, 4].
These problems can be reduced to identifying a good subset of the columns (or rows) in the data
matrix, the column subset selection problem (CSSP). For example, finding an optimal sparse linear
encoder for the data (dimension reduction) can be explicitly reduced to CSSP [5]. Motivated by the
fact that in many practical applications, the left and right singular vectors of a matrix A lacks any
physical interpretation, a long line of work [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], focused on extracting
a subset of columns of the matrix A, which are approximately as good as Ak at reconstructing A.
To make our discussion more concrete, let us formally define CSSP.
Column Subset Selection Problem, CSSP: Find a matrix C ∈ Rm×c containing c columns of
A for which A − CC+ A F is small.1 In the prior work, one measures the quality of a CSSPsolution against Ak , the best rank-k approximation to A obtained via the singular value decomposition (SVD), where k is a user specified target rank parameter. For example, [15] gives efficient
algorithms to find C with c ≈ 2k/ columns, for which A − CC+ A F ≤ (1 + ) kA − Ak kF .
Our contribution is not to directly attack CSSP. We present a novel algorithm that can improve an
existing CSSP algorithm by adaptively invoking it, in a sense actively learning which columns to
sample next based on the columns you have already sampled. If you use the CSSP-algorithm from
[15] as a strawman benchmark, you can obtain c columns all at once and incur an error roughly
(1 + 2k/c) kA − Ak kF . Or, you can invoke the algorithm to obtain, for example, c/2 columns,
and then allow the algorithm to adapt to the columns already chosen (for example by modifying A)
before choosing the remaining c/2 columns. We refer to the former as continued sampling and to the
1

CC+ A is the best possible reconstruction of A by projection into the space spanned by the columns of C.

1

