Infinite Factorial Dynamical Model
Isabel Valera∗
Max Planck Institute for
Software Systems
ivalera@mpi-sws.org

Francisco J. R. Ruiz∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
f.ruiz@columbia.edu
Fernando Perez-Cruz
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, and
Bell Labs, Alcatel-Lucent
fernandop@ieee.org

Lennart Svensson
Department of Signals and Systems
Chalmers University of Technology
lennart.svensson@chalmers.se

Abstract
We propose the infinite factorial dynamic model (iFDM), a general Bayesian nonparametric model for source separation. Our model builds on the Markov Indian buffet process to consider a potentially unbounded number of hidden Markov
chains (sources) that evolve independently according to some dynamics, in which
the state space can be either discrete or continuous. For posterior inference, we
develop an algorithm based on particle Gibbs with ancestor sampling that can be
efficiently applied to a wide range of source separation problems. We evaluate the
performance of our iFDM on four well-known applications: multitarget tracking,
cocktail party, power disaggregation, and multiuser detection. Our experimental
results show that our approach for source separation does not only outperform
previous approaches, but it can also handle problems that were computationally
intractable for existing approaches.

1

Introduction

The central idea behind Bayesian nonparametrics (BNPs) is the replacement of classical finitedimensional prior distributions with general stochastic processes, allowing for an open-ended number of degrees of freedom in a model [8]. They constitute an approach to model selection and
adaptation in which the model complexity is allowed to grow with data size [17]. In the literature,
BNP priors have been applied for time series modeling. For example, the infinite hidden Markov
model [2, 20] considers a potentially infinite cardinality of the state space; and the BNP construction of switching linear dynamical systems (LDS) [4] considers an unbounded number of dynamical
systems with transitions among them occurring at any time during the observation period.
In the context of signal processing, the source separation problem has captured the attention of the
research community for decades due to its wide range of applications [12, 23, 7, 24]. The BNP
literature for source separation includes [10], in which the authors introduce the nonparametric
counterpart of independent component analysis (ICA), referred as infinite ICA (iICA); and [23],
where the authors present the Markov Indian buffet process (mIBP), which places a prior over an
infinite number of parallel Markov chains and is used to build the infinite factorial hidden Markov
model (iFHMM) and the ICA iFHMM. These approaches can effectively adapt the number of hidden
sources to fit the available data. However, they suffer from several limitations: i) the iFHMM is
restricted to binary on/off hidden states, which may lead to hidden chains that do not match the
actual hidden causes, and it is not able to deal with continuous-valued states, and ii) both the iICA
and the ICA iFHMM make independence assumptions between consecutive values of active hidden
states, which significantly restricts their ability to capture the underlying dynamical models. As a
result, we find that existing approaches are not applicable to many well-known source separation
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

1

