Unified View of Matrix Completion under General
Structural Constraints
Suriya Gunasekar
UT at Austin, USA
suriya@utexas.edu

Arindam Banerjee
UMN Twin Cities, USA
banerjee@cs.umn.edu

Joydeep Ghosh
UT at Austin, USA
ghosh@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Matrix completion problems have been widely studied under special low dimensional structures such as low rank or structure induced by decomposable norms.
In this paper, we present a unified analysis of matrix completion under general
low-dimensional structural constraints induced by any norm regularization. We
consider two estimators for the general problem of structured matrix completion,
and provide unified upper bounds on the sample complexity and the estimation
error. Our analysis relies on generic chaining, and we establish two intermediate
results of independent interest: (a) in characterizing the size or complexity of low
dimensional subsets in high dimensional ambient space, a certain partial complexity measure encountered in the analysis of matrix completion problems is characterized in terms of a well understood complexity measure of Gaussian widths, and
(b) it is shown that a form of restricted strong convexity holds for matrix completion problems under general norm regularization. Further, we provide several
non-trivial examples of structures included in our framework, notably including
the recently proposed spectral k-support norm.

1

Introduction

The task of completing the missing entries of a matrix from an incomplete subset of (potentially
noisy) entries is encountered in many applications including recommendation systems, data imputation, covariance matrix estimation, and sensor localization among others. Traditionally ill–posed
high dimensional estimation problems, where the number of parameters to be estimated is much
higher than the number of observations, has been extensively studied in the recent literature. However, matrix completion problems are particularly ill–posed as the observations are both limited
(high dimensional), and the measurements are extremely localized, i.e., the observations consist of
individual matrix entries. The localized measurement model, in contrast to random Gaussian or sub–
Gaussian measurements, poses additional complications in general high dimensional estimation.
For well–posed estimation in high dimensional problems including matrix completion, it is imperative that low dimensional structural constraints are imposed on the target. For matrix completion,
the special case of low–rank constraint has been widely studied. Several existing work propose
tractable estimators with near–optimal recovery guarantees for (approximate) low–rank matrix completion [8, 7, 28, 26, 18, 19, 22, 11, 20, 21]. A recent work [16] addresses the extension to structures
with decomposable norm regularization. However, the scope of matrix completion extends for low
dimensional structures far beyond simple low–rankness or decomposable norm structures.
In this paper, we consider a unified statistical analysis of matrix completion under a general set of
low dimensional structures that are induced by any suitable norm regularization. We provide statistical analysis of two generalized matrix completion estimators, the constrained norm minimizer, and
the generalized matrix Dantzig selector (Section 2.2). The main results in the paper (Theorem 1a–
1b) provide unified upper bounds on the sample complexity and estimation error of these estimators
1

