Finite-Time Analysis of Projected Langevin Monte
Carlo
Ronen Eldan
Weizmann Institute
roneneldan@gmail.com

Sébastien Bubeck
Microsoft Research
sebubeck@microsoft.com

Joseph Lehec
Université Paris-Dauphine
lehec@ceremade.dauphine.fr

Abstract
We analyze the projected Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) algorithm, a close cousin
of projected Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). We show that LMC allows to
sample in polynomial time from a posterior distribution restricted to a convex
body and with concave log-likelihood. This gives the first Markov chain to sample
from a log-concave distribution with a first-order oracle, as the existing chains
with provable guarantees (lattice walk, ball walk and hit-and-run) require a zerothorder oracle. Our proof uses elementary concepts from stochastic calculus which
could be useful more generally to understand SGD and its variants.

1

Introduction

A fundamental primitive in Bayesian learning is the ability to sample from the posterior distribution.
Similarly to the situation in optimization, convexity is a key property to obtain algorithms with
provable guarantees for this task. Indeed several Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods have been
analyzed for the case where the posterior distribution is supported on a convex set, and the negative
log-likelihood is convex. This is usually referred to as the problem of sampling from a log-concave
distribution. In this paper we propose and analyze a new Markov chain for this problem which
could have several advantages over existing chains for machine learning applications. We describe
formally our contribution in Section 1.1. Then in Section 1.2 we explain how this contribution relates
to various line of work in different fields such as theoretical computer science, statistics, stochastic
approximation, and machine learning.
1.1

Main result

Let K ⊂ Rn be a convex set such that 0 ∈ K, K contains a Euclidean ball of radius r > 0
and is contained in a Euclidean ball of radius R. Denote PK the Euclidean projection on K (i.e.,
PK (x) = argminy∈K |x − y| where | · | denotes the Euclidean norm in Rn ), and k · kK the gauge
of K defined by
kxkK = inf{t ≥ 0; x ∈ tK}, x ∈ Rn .
Let f : K → R be a L-Lipschitz and β-smooth convex function, that is f is differentiable and
satisfies ∀x, y ∈ K, |∇f (x) − ∇f (y)| ≤ β|x − y|, and |∇f (x)| ≤ L. We are interested in the problem of sampling from the probability measure µ on Rn whose density with respect to the Lebesgue
measure is given by:
Z
dµ
1
= exp(−f (x))1{x ∈ K}, where Z =
exp(−f (y))dy.
dx
Z
y∈K
1

