Learning spatiotemporal trajectories from
manifold-valued longitudinal data

Jean-Baptiste Schiratti2,1 , Stéphanie Allassonnière2 , Olivier Colliot1 , Stanley Durrleman1
1
ARAMIS Lab, INRIA Paris, Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière,
ICM, F-75013, Paris, France
2
CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
jean-baptiste.schiratti@cmap.polytechnique.fr,
stephanie.allassonniere@polytechnique.edu,
olivier.colliot@upmc.fr,stanley.durrleman@inria.fr

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian mixed-effects model to learn typical scenarios of changes
from longitudinal manifold-valued data, namely repeated measurements of the
same objects or individuals at several points in time. The model allows to estimate
a group-average trajectory in the space of measurements. Random variations of
this trajectory result from spatiotemporal transformations, which allow changes in
the direction of the trajectory and in the pace at which trajectories are followed.
The use of the tools of Riemannian geometry allows to derive a generic algorithm
for any kind of data with smooth constraints, which lie therefore on a Riemannian
manifold. Stochastic approximations of the Expectation-Maximization algorithm
is used to estimate the model parameters in this highly non-linear setting. The
method is used to estimate a data-driven model of the progressive impairments of
cognitive functions during the onset of Alzheimer’s disease. Experimental results
show that the model correctly put into correspondence the age at which each individual was diagnosed with the disease, thus validating the fact that it effectively
estimated a normative scenario of disease progression. Random effects provide
unique insights into the variations in the ordering and timing of the succession of
cognitive impairments across different individuals.

1

Introduction

Age-related brain diseases, such as Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are complex diseases
with multiple effects on the metabolism, structure and function of the brain. Models of disease progression showing the sequence and timing of these effects during the course of the disease remain
largely hypothetical [3, 13]. Large databases have been collected recently in the hope to give experimental evidence of the patterns of disease progression based on the estimation of data-driven
models. These databases are longitudinal, in the sense that they contain repeated measurements of
several subjects at multiple time-points, but which do not necessarily correspond across subjects.
Learning models of disease progression from such databases raises great methodological challenges.
The main difficulty lies in the fact that the age of a given individual gives no information about the
stage of disease progression of this individual. The onset of clinical symptoms of AD may vary from
forty and eighty years of age, and the duration of the disease from few years to decades. Moreover,
the onset of the disease does not correspond with the onset of the symptoms: according to recent
studies, symptoms are likely to be preceded by a silent phase of the disease, for which little is
known. As a consequence, statistical models based on the regression of measurements with age are
inadequate to model disease progression.
1

