Online Prediction at the Limit of Zero Temperature

Mark Herbster
Stephen Pasteris
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London WC1E 6BT, England, UK
{m.herbster,s.pasteris}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Shaona Ghosh
ECS
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK SO17 1BJ
ghosh.shaona@gmail.com

Abstract
We design an online algorithm to classify the vertices of a graph. Underpinning
the algorithm is the probability distribution of an Ising model isomorphic to the
graph. Each classification is based on predicting the label with maximum marginal
probability in the limit of zero-temperature with respect to the labels and vertices
seen so far. Computing these classifications is unfortunately based on a #P complete problem. This motivates us to develop an algorithm for which we give
a sequential guarantee in the online mistake bound framework. Our algorithm is
optimal when the graph is a tree matching the prior results in [1]. For a general
graph, the algorithm exploits the additional connectivity over a tree to provide a
per-cluster bound. The algorithm is efficient, as the cumulative time to sequentially predict all of the vertices of the graph is quadratic in the size of the graph.

1

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning is now a standard methodology in machine learning. A common approach
in semi-supervised learning is to build a graph [2] from a given set of labeled and unlabeled data
with each datum represented as a vertex. The hope is that the constructed graph will capture either
the cluster [3] or manifold [4] structure of the data. Typically, an edge in this graph indicates the
expectation that the joined data points are more likely to have the same label. One method to
exploit this representation is to use the semi-norm induced by the Laplacian of the graph [5, 4, 6, 7].
A shared idea of the Laplacian semi-norm based approaches is that the smoothness of a boolean
labeling of the graph is measured via the “cut”, which is just the number of edges that connect
disagreeing labels. In practice the semi-norm is then used as a regularizer in which the optimization
problem is relaxed from boolean to real values. Our approach also uses the “cut”, but unrelaxed, to
define an Ising distribution over the vertices of the graph.
Predicting with the vertex marginals of an Ising distribution in the limit of zero temperature was
shown to be optimal in the mistake bound model [1, Section 4.1] when the graph is a tree. The exact
computation of marginal probabilities in the Ising model is intractable on non-trees [8]. However, in
the limit of zero temperature, a rich combinatorial structure called the Picard-Queyranne graph [9]
emerges. We exploit this structure to give an algorithm which 1) is optimal on trees, 2) has a
quadratic cumulative computational complexity, and 3) has a mistake bound on generic graphs that
is stronger than previous bounds in many natural cases.
The paper is organized as follows. In the remainder of this section, we introduce the Ising model
and lightly review previous work in the online mistake bound model for predicting the labeling of a
graph. In Section 2 we review our key technical tool the Picard-Queyranne graph [9] and explain the
required notation. In the body of Section 3 we provide a mistake bound analysis of our algorithm
as well as the intractable 0-Ising algorithm and then conclude with a detailed comparison to the
state of the art. In the appendices we provide proofs as well as preliminary experimental results.
Ising model in the limit zero temperature. In our setting, the parameters of the Ising model
are an n-vertex graph G = (V (G), E(G)) and a temperature parameter τ > 0, where V (G) =
1

