From random walks to distances on
unweighted graphs

Tatsunori B. Hashimoto
MIT EECS
thashim@mit.edu

Yi Sun
MIT Mathematics
yisun@mit.edu

Tommi S. Jaakkola
MIT EECS
tommi@mit.edu

Abstract
Large unweighted directed graphs are commonly used to capture relations between entities. A fundamental problem in the analysis of such networks is to
properly define the similarity or dissimilarity between any two vertices. Despite
the significance of this problem, statistical characterization of the proposed metrics has been limited.
We introduce and develop a class of techniques for analyzing random walks on
graphs using stochastic calculus. Using these techniques we generalize results on
the degeneracy of hitting times and analyze a metric based on the Laplace transformed hitting time (LTHT). The metric serves as a natural, provably well-behaved
alternative to the expected hitting time. We establish a general correspondence
between hitting times of the Brownian motion and analogous hitting times on the
graph. We show that the LTHT is consistent with respect to the underlying metric
of a geometric graph, preserves clustering tendency, and remains robust against
random addition of non-geometric edges. Tests on simulated and real-world data
show that the LTHT matches theoretical predictions and outperforms alternatives.

1

Introduction

Many network metrics have been introduced to measure the similarity between any two vertices.
Such metrics can be used for a variety of purposes, including uncovering missing edges or pruning
spurious ones. Since the metrics tacitly assume that vertices lie in a latent (metric) space, one could
expect that they also recover the underlying metric in some well-defined limit. Surprisingly, there
are nearly no known results on this type of consistency. Indeed, it was recently shown [19] that the
expected hitting time degenerates and does not measure any notion of distance.
We analyze an improved hitting-time metric – Laplace transformed hitting time (LTHT) – and rigorously evaluate its consistency, cluster-preservation, and robustness under a general network model
which encapsulates the latent space assumption. This network model, specified in Section 2, posits
that vertices lie in a latent metric space, and edges are drawn between nearby vertices in that space.
To analyze the LTHT, we develop two key technical tools. We establish a correspondence between
functionals of hitting time for random walks on graphs, on the one hand, and limiting Itô processes
(Corollary 4.4) on the other. Moreover, we construct a weighted random walk on the graph whose
limit is a Brownian motion (Corollary 4.1). We apply these tools to obtain three main results.
First, our Theorem 3.5 recapitulates and generalizes the result of [19] pertaining to degeneration
of expected hitting time in the limit. Our proof is direct and demonstrates the broader applicability of the techniques to general random walk based algorithms. Second, we analyze the Laplace
transformed hitting time as a one-parameter family of improved distance estimators based on random walks on the graph. We prove that there exists a scaling limit for the parameter β such that
the LTHT can become the shortest path distance (Theorem S5.2) or a consistent metric estimator
averaging over many paths (Theorem 4.5). Finally, we prove that the LTHT captures the advantages
1

