Fast and Accurate Inference of Plackett–Luce Models
Lucas Maystre
EPFL
lucas.maystre@epfl.ch

Matthias Grossglauser
EPFL
matthias.grossglauser@epfl.ch

Abstract
We show that the maximum-likelihood (ML) estimate of models derived from
Luce’s choice axiom (e.g., the Plackett–Luce model) can be expressed as the
stationary distribution of a Markov chain. This conveys insight into several recently
proposed spectral inference algorithms. We take advantage of this perspective and
formulate a new spectral algorithm that is significantly more accurate than previous
ones for the Plackett–Luce model. With a simple adaptation, this algorithm can
be used iteratively, producing a sequence of estimates that converges to the ML
estimate. The ML version runs faster than competing approaches on a benchmark
of five datasets. Our algorithms are easy to implement, making them relevant for
practitioners at large.

1

Introduction

Aggregating pairwise comparisons and partial rankings are important problems with applications in
econometrics [1], psychometrics [2, 3], sports ranking [4, 5] and multiclass classification [6]. One
possible approach to tackle these problems is to postulate a statistical model of discrete choice. In
this spirit, Luce [7] stated the axiom of choice in a foundational work published over fifty years ago.
Denote p(i | A) the probability of choosing item i when faced with alternatives in the set A. Given
two items i and j, and any two sets of alternatives A and B containing i and j, the axiom posits that
p(i | B)
p(i | A)
=
.
p(j | A)
p(j | B)

(1)

In other words, the odds of choosing item i over item j are independent of the rest of the alternatives.
This simple assumption directly leads to a unique parametric choice model, known as the Bradley–
Terry model in the case of pairwise comparisons, and the Plackett–Luce model in the generalized case
of k-way rankings. In this paper, we highlight a connection between the maximum-likelihood (ML)
estimate under these models and the stationary distribution of a Markov chain parameterized by the
observed choices. Markov chains were already used in recent work [8, 9, 10] to aggregate pairwise
comparisons and rankings. These approaches reduce the problem to that of finding a stationary
distribution. By formalizing the link between the likelihood of observations under the choice model
and a certain Markov chain, we unify these algorithms and explicate them from an ML inference
perspective. We will also take a detour, and use this link in the reverse direction to give an alternative
proof to a recent result on the error rate of the ML estimate [11], by using spectral analysis techniques.
Beyond this, we make two contributions to statistical inference for this model. First, we develop
a simple, consistent and computationally efficient spectral algorithm that is applicable to a wide
range of models derived from the choice axiom. The exact formulation of the Markov chain used
in the algorithm is distinct from related work [9, 10] and achieves a significantly better statistical
efficiency at no additional computational cost. Second, we observe that with a small adjustment, the
algorithm can be used iteratively, and it then converges to the ML estimate. An evaluation on five
real-world datasets reveals that it runs consistently faster than competing approaches and has a much
more predictable performance that does not depend on the structure of the data. The key step, finding
a stationary distribution, can be offloaded to commonly available linear-algebra primitives, which
1

