Optimal Ridge Detection using Coverage Risk

Yen-Chi Chen
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
yenchic@andrew.cmu.edu

Christopher R. Genovese
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
genovese@stat.cmu.edu

Shirley Ho
Department of Physics
Carnegie Mellon University
shirleyh@andrew.cmu.edu

Larry Wasserman
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
larry@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce the concept of coverage risk as an error measure for density ridge
estimation. The coverage risk generalizes the mean integrated square error to set
estimation. We propose two risk estimators for the coverage risk and we show that
we can select tuning parameters by minimizing the estimated risk. We study the
rate of convergence for coverage risk and prove consistency of the risk estimators.
We apply our method to three simulated datasets and to cosmology data. In all
the examples, the proposed method successfully recover the underlying density
structure.

1

Introduction

Density ridges [10, 22, 15, 6] are one-dimensional curve-like structures that characterize high density regions. Density ridges have been applied to computer vision [2], remote sensing [21], biomedical imaging [1], and cosmology [5, 7]. Density ridges are similar to the principal curves [17, 18, 27].
Figure 1 provides an example for applying density ridges to learn the structure of our Universe.
To detect density ridges from data, [22] proposed the ‘Subspace Constrained Mean Shift (SCMS)’
algorithm. SCMS is a modification of usual mean shift algorithm [14, 8] to adapt to the local
geometry. Unlike mean shift that pushes every mesh point to a local mode, SCMS moves the meshes
along a projected gradient until arriving at nearby ridges. Essentially, the SCMS algorithm detects
the ridges of the kernel density estimator (KDE). Therefore, the SCMS algorithm requires a preselected parameter h, which acts as the role of smoothing bandwidth in the kernel density estimator.
Despite the wide application of the SCMS algorithm, the choice of h remains an unsolved problem.
Similar to the density estimation problem, a poor choice of h results in over-smoothing or undersmoothing for the density ridges. See the second row of Figure 1.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of coverage risk which is a generalization of the mean
integrated expected error from function estimation. We then show that one can consistently estimate
the coverage risk by using data splitting or the smoothed bootstrap. This leads us to a data-driven
selection rule for choosing the parameter h for the SCMS algorithm. We apply the proposed method
to several famous datasets including the spiral dataset, the three spirals dataset, and the NIPS dataset.
In all simulations, our selection rule allows the SCMS algorithm to detect the underlying structure
of the data.
1

