Bandit Smooth Convex Optimization:
Improving the Bias-Variance Tradeoff
Ofer Dekel
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
oferd@microsoft.com

Ronen Eldan
Weizmann Institute
Rehovot, Israel
roneneldan@gmail.com

Tomer Koren
Technion
Haifa, Israel
tomerk@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Bandit convex optimization is one of the fundamental problems in the field of
online learning. The best algorithm for the general bandit convex optimizae 5/6 ), while the best known lower bound
tion problem guarantees a regret of O(T
1/2
is ⌦(T ). Many attempts have been made to bridge the huge gap between these
bounds. A particularly interesting special case of this problem assumes that the
loss functions are smooth. In this case, the best known algorithm guarantees a ree 2/3 ). We present an efficient algorithm for the bandit smooth convex
gret of O(T
e 5/8 ). Our result rules out
optimization problem that guarantees a regret of O(T
an ⌦(T 2/3 ) lower bound and takes a significant step towards the resolution of this
open problem.

1

Introduction

Bandit convex optimization [11, 5] is the following online learning problem. First, an adversary
privately chooses a sequence of bounded and convex loss functions f1 , . . . , fT defined over a convex domain K in d-dimensional Euclidean space. Then, a randomized decision maker iteratively
chooses a sequence of points x1 , . . . , xT , where each xt 2 K. On iteration t, after choosing the
point xt , the decision maker incurs a loss of ft (xt ) and receives bandit feedback: he observes the
value of his loss but he does not receive any other information about the function ft . The decision
maker uses the feedback to make better choices on subsequent rounds. His goal is to minimize regret, which is the difference between his loss and the loss incurred by the best fixed point in K. If
the regret grows sublinearly with T , it indicates that the decision maker’s performance improves as
the length of the sequence increases, and therefore we say that he is learning.
Finding an optimal algorithm for bandit convex optimization is an elusive open problem. The first
algorithm for this problem was presented in Flaxman et al. [11] and guarantees a regret of R(T ) =
e
e notation hides
O(T 5/6 ) for any sequence of loss functions (here and throughout, the asymptotic O
a polynomial dependence on the dimension d as well as logarithmic factors). Despite the ongoing
effort to improve on this rate, it remains the state of the art. On the other hand, Dani et al. [9]
proves that for any algorithm there exists a worst-case sequence of loss functions for which R(T ) =
⌦(T 1/2 ), and the gap between the upper and lower bounds is huge.
While no progress has been made on the general form of the problem, some progress has been made
in interesting special cases. Specifically, if the bounded convex loss functions are also assumed to be
e 3/4 ). If the loss funcLipschitz, Flaxman et al. [11] improves their regret guarantee to R(T ) = O(T
tions are smooth (namely, their gradients are Lipschitz), Saha and Tewari [15] present an algorithm
with a guaranteed regret of e
O(T 2/3 ). Similarly, if the loss functions are bounded, Lipschitz, and
strongly convex, the guaranteed regret is e
O(T 2/3 ) [3]. If even stronger assumptions are made, an
1/2
e
optimal regret rate of ⇥(T ) can be guaranteed; namely, when the loss functions are both smooth
1

