NEXT: A System for Real-World Development,
Evaluation, and Application of Active Learning
Kevin Jamieson
UC Berkeley

Lalit Jain, Chris Fernandez, Nick Glattard, Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin - Madison

kjamieson@berkeley.edu

{ljain,crfernandez,glattard,rdnowak}@wisc.edu

Abstract
Active learning methods automatically adapt data collection by selecting the most
informative samples in order to accelerate machine learning. Because of this,
real-world testing and comparing active learning algorithms requires collecting
new datasets (adaptively), rather than simply applying algorithms to benchmark
datasets, as is the norm in (passive) machine learning research. To facilitate the
development, testing and deployment of active learning for real applications, we
have built an open-source software system for large-scale active learning research
and experimentation. The system, called NEXT, provides a unique platform for
real-world, reproducible active learning research. This paper details the challenges
of building the system and demonstrates its capabilities with several experiments.
The results show how experimentation can help expose strengths and weaknesses
of active learning algorithms, in sometimes unexpected and enlightening ways.

1

Introduction

We use the term “active learning” to refer to algorithms that employ adaptive data collection in
order to accelerate machine learning. By adaptive data collection we mean processes that automatically adjust, based on previously collected data, to collect the most useful data as quickly as
possible. This broad notion of active learning includes multi-armed bandits, adaptive data collection
in unsupervised learning (e.g. clustering, embedding, etc.), classification, regression, and sequential
experimental design. Perhaps the most familiar example of active learning arises in the context of
classification. There active learning algorithms select examples for labeling in a sequential, dataadaptive fashion, as opposed to passive learning algorithms based on preselected training data.
The key to active learning is adaptive data collection. Because of this, real-world testing and comparing active learning algorithms requires collecting new datasets (adaptively), rather than simply
applying algorithms to benchmark datasets, as is the norm in (passive) machine learning research.
In this adaptive paradigm, algorithm and network response time, human fatigue, the differing label
quality of humans, and the lack of i.i.d. responses are all real-world concerns of implementing active
learning algorithms. Due to many of these conditions being impossible to faithfully simulate active
learning algorithms must be evaluated on real human participants.
Adaptively collecting large-scale datasets can be difficult and time-consuming. As a result, active
learning has remained a largely theoretical research area, and practical algorithms and experiments
are few and far between. Most experimental work in active learning with real-world data is simulated
by letting the algorithm adaptively select a small number of labeled examples from a large labeled
dataset. This requires a large, labeled data set to begin with, which limits the scope and scale of
such experimental work. Also, it does not address the practical issue of deploying active learning
algorithms and adaptive data collection for real applications.
To address these issues, we have built a software system called NEXT, which provides a unique
platform for real-world, large-scale, reproducible active learning research, enabling
1

