Tree-Guided MCMC Inference for Normalized
Random Measure Mixture Models
Juho Lee and Seungjin Choi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology
77 Cheongam-ro, Nam-gu, Pohang 37673, Korea
{stonecold,seungjin}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Normalized random measures (NRMs) provide a broad class of discrete random
measures that are often used as priors for Bayesian nonparametric models. Dirichlet process is a well-known example of NRMs. Most of posterior inference methods for NRM mixture models rely on MCMC methods since they are easy to
implement and their convergence is well studied. However, MCMC often suffers
from slow convergence when the acceptance rate is low. Tree-based inference is
an alternative deterministic posterior inference method, where Bayesian hierarchical clustering (BHC) or incremental Bayesian hierarchical clustering (IBHC) have
been developed for DP or NRM mixture (NRMM) models, respectively. Although
IBHC is a promising method for posterior inference for NRMM models due to its
efficiency and applicability to online inference, its convergence is not guaranteed
since it uses heuristics that simply selects the best solution after multiple trials are
made. In this paper, we present a hybrid inference algorithm for NRMM models,
which combines the merits of both MCMC and IBHC. Trees built by IBHC outlines partitions of data, which guides Metropolis-Hastings procedure to employ
appropriate proposals. Inheriting the nature of MCMC, our tree-guided MCMC
(tgMCMC) is guaranteed to converge, and enjoys the fast convergence thanks to
the effective proposals guided by trees. Experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate the benefit of our method.

1

Introduction

Normalized random measures (NRMs) form a broad class of discrete random measures, including Dirichlet proccess (DP) [1] normalized inverse Gaussian process [2], and normalized generalized Gamma process [3, 4]. NRM mixture (NRMM) model [5] is a representative example where
NRM is used as a prior for mixture models. Recently NRMs were extended to dependent NRMs
(DNRMs) [6, 7] to model data where exchangeability fails. The posterior analysis for NRM mixture (NRMM) models has been developed [8, 9], yielding simple MCMC methods [10]. As in DP
mixture (DPM) models [11], there are two paradigms in the MCMC algorithms for NRMM models: (1) marginal samplers and (2) slice samplers. The marginal samplers simulate the posterior
distributions of partitions and cluster parameters given data (or just partitions given data provided
that conjugate priors are assumed) by marginalizing out the random measures. The marginal samplers include the Gibbs sampler [10], and the split-merge sampler [12], although it was not formally
extended to NRMM models. The slice sampler [13] maintains random measures and explicitly samples the weights and atoms of the random measures. The term ”slice” comes from the auxiliary slice
variables used to control the number of atoms to be used. The slice sampler is known to mix faster
than the marginal Gibbs sampler when applied to complicated DNRM mixture models where the
evaluation of marginal distribution is costly [7].
1

