Learning with Incremental Iterative Regularization
Lorenzo Rosasco
DIBRIS, Univ. Genova, ITALY
LCSL, IIT & MIT, USA
lrosasco@mit.edu

Silvia Villa
LCSL, IIT & MIT, USA
Silvia.Villa@iit.it

Abstract
Within a statistical learning setting, we propose and study an iterative regularization algorithm for least squares defined by an incremental gradient method. In
particular, we show that, if all other parameters are fixed a priori, the number of
passes over the data (epochs) acts as a regularization parameter, and prove strong
universal consistency, i.e. almost sure convergence of the risk, as well as sharp
finite sample bounds for the iterates. Our results are a step towards understanding
the effect of multiple epochs in stochastic gradient techniques in machine learning
and rely on integrating statistical and optimization results.

1 Introduction
Machine learning applications often require efficient statistical procedures to process potentially
massive amount of high dimensional data. Motivated by such applications, the broad objective of
our study is designing learning procedures with optimal statistical properties, and, at the same time,
computational complexities proportional to the generalization properties allowed by the data, rather
than their raw amount [6]. We focus on iterative regularization as a viable approach towards this
goal. The key observation behind these techniques is that iterative optimization schemes applied to
scattered, noisy data exhibit a self-regularizing property, in the sense that early termination (earlystop) of the iterative process has a regularizing effect [21, 24]. Indeed, iterative regularization algorithms are classical in inverse problems [15], and have been recently considered in machine learning
[36, 34, 3, 5, 9, 26], where they have been proved to achieve optimal learning bounds, matching
those of variational regularization schemes such as Tikhonov [8, 31].
In this paper, we consider an iterative regularization algorithm for the square loss, based on a recursive procedure processing one training set point at each iteration. Methods of the latter form, often
broadly referred to as online learning algorithms, have become standard in the processing of large
data-sets, because of their low iteration cost and good practical performance. Theoretical studies
for this class of algorithms have been developed within different frameworks. In composite and
stochastic optimization [19, 20, 29], in online learning, a.k.a. sequential prediction [11], and finally,
in statistical learning [10]. The latter is the setting of interest in this paper, where we aim at developing an analysis keeping into account simultaneously both statistical and computational aspects.
To place our contribution in context, it is useful to emphasize the role of regularization and different
ways in which it can be incorporated in online learning algorithms. The key idea of regularization
is that controlling the complexity of a solution can help avoiding overfitting and ensure stability and
generalization [33]. Classically, regularization is achieved penalizing the objective function with
some suitable functional, or minimizing the risk on a restricted space of possible solutions [33].
Model selection is then performed to determine the amount of regularization suitable for the data
at hand. More recently, there has been an interest in alternative, possibly more efficient, ways to
incorporate regularization. We mention in particular [1, 35, 32] where there is no explicit regularization by penalization, and the step-size of an iterative procedure is shown to act as a regularization
parameter. Here, for each fixed step-size, each data point is processed once, but multiple passes are
typically needed to perform model selection (that is, to pick the best step-size). We also mention
1

