Compressive spectral embedding: sidestepping the
SVD
Upamanyu Madhow
madhow@ece.ucsb.edu
ECE Department, UC Santa Barbara

Dinesh Ramasamy
dineshr@ece.ucsb.edu
ECE Department, UC Santa Barbara

Abstract
Spectral embedding based on the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is a
widely used “preprocessing” step in many learning tasks, typically leading to dimensionality reduction by projecting onto a number of dominant singular vectors
and rescaling the coordinate axes (by a predefined function of the singular value).
However, the number of such vectors required to capture problem structure grows
with problem size, and even partial SVD computation becomes a bottleneck. In
this paper, we propose a low-complexity compressive spectral embedding algorithm, which employs random projections and finite order polynomial expansions
to compute approximations to SVD-based embedding. For an m×n matrix with T
non-zeros, its time complexity is O ((T + m + n) log(m + n)), and the embedding dimension is O(log(m + n)), both of which are independent of the number
of singular vectors whose effect we wish to capture. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work to circumvent this dependence on the number of singular vectors for general SVD-based embeddings. The key to sidestepping the SVD is the
observation that, for downstream inference tasks such as clustering and classification, we are only interested in using the resulting embedding to evaluate pairwise
similarity metrics derived from the ℓ2 -norm, rather than capturing the effect of the
underlying matrix on arbitrary vectors as a partial SVD tries to do. Our numerical
results on network datasets demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method, and
motivate further exploration of its application to large-scale inference tasks.

1 Introduction
Inference tasks encountered in natural language processing, graph inference and manifold learning
employ the singular value decomposition (SVD) as a first step to reduce dimensionality while retaining useful structure in the input. Such spectral embeddings go under various guises: Principle
Component Analysis (PCA), Latent Semantic Indexing (natural language processing), Kernel Principal Component Analysis, commute time and diffusion embeddings of graphs, to name a few. In
this paper, we present a compressive approach for accomplishing SVD-based dimensionality reduction, or embedding, without actually performing the computationally expensive SVD step.
The setting is as follows. The input is represented in matrix form. This matrix could represent the
adjacency matrix or the Laplacian of a graph, the probability transition matrix of a random walker
on the graph, a bag-of-words representation of documents, the action of a kernel on a set of l points
{x(p) ∈ Rd : p = 1, . . . , m} (kernel PCA)[1][2] such as
A(p, q) = e −kx(p)−x(q)k / 2α
2

2

(or) A(p, q) = I(kx(p) − x(q)k < α), 1 ≤ p, q ≤ l,

(1)

where I(·) denotes the indicator function or matrices derived from K-nearest-neighbor graphs constructed from {x(p)}. We wish to compute a transformation of the rows of this m × n matrix
A which succinctly captures the global structure of A via euclidean distances (or similarity metrics derived from the ℓ2 -norm, such as normalized correlations). A common approach is to com1

