Efficient Learning of Continuous-Time Hidden
Markov Models for Disease Progression

Yu-Ying Liu, Shuang Li, Fuxin Li, Le Song, and James M. Rehg
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA

Abstract
The Continuous-Time Hidden Markov Model (CT-HMM) is an attractive approach to modeling disease progression due to its ability to describe noisy observations arriving irregularly in time. However, the lack of an efficient parameter
learning algorithm for CT-HMM restricts its use to very small models or requires
unrealistic constraints on the state transitions. In this paper, we present the first
complete characterization of efficient EM-based learning methods for CT-HMM
models. We demonstrate that the learning problem consists of two challenges: the
estimation of posterior state probabilities and the computation of end-state conditioned statistics. We solve the first challenge by reformulating the estimation
problem in terms of an equivalent discrete time-inhomogeneous hidden Markov
model. The second challenge is addressed by adapting three approaches from the
continuous time Markov chain literature to the CT-HMM domain. We demonstrate the use of CT-HMMs with more than 100 states to visualize and predict
disease progression using a glaucoma dataset and an Alzheimer’s disease dataset.

1

Introduction

The goal of disease progression modeling is to learn a model for the temporal evolution of a disease
from sequences of clinical measurements obtained from a longitudinal sample of patients. By distilling population data into a compact representation, disease progression models can yield insights
into the disease process through the visualization and analysis of disease trajectories. In addition,
the models can be used to predict the future course of disease in an individual, supporting the development of individualized treatment schedules and improved treatment efficiencies. Furthermore,
progression models can support phenotyping by providing a natural similarity measure between
trajectories which can be used to group patients based on their progression.
Hidden variable models are particularly attractive for modeling disease progression for three reasons: 1) they support the abstraction of a disease state via the latent variables; 2) they can deal with
noisy measurements effectively; and 3) they can easily incorporate dynamical priors and constraints.
While conventional hidden Markov models (HMMs) have been used to model disease progression,
they are not suitable in general because they assume that measurement data is sampled regularly
at discrete intervals. However, in reality patient visits are irregular in time, as a consequence of
scheduling issues, missed visits, and changes in symptomatology.
A Continuous-Time HMM (CT-HMM) is an HMM in which both the transitions between hidden
states and the arrival of observations can occur at arbitrary (continuous) times [1, 2]. It is therefore
suitable for irregularly-sampled temporal data such as clinical measurements [3, 4, 5]. Unfortunately, the additional modeling flexibility provided by CT-HMM comes at the cost of a more complex inference procedure. In CT-HMM, not only are the hidden states unobserved, but the transition
times at which the hidden states are changing are also unobserved. Moreover, multiple unobserved
hidden state transitions can occur between two successive observations. A previous method addressed these challenges by directly maximizing the data likelihood [2], but this approach is limited
1

