End-to-end Learning of LDA by Mirror-Descent Back
Propagation over a Deep Architecture
Jianshu Chen⇤ , Ji He† , Yelong Shen⇤ , Lin Xiao⇤ , Xiaodong He⇤ , Jianfeng Gao⇤ ,
Xinying Song⇤ and Li Deng⇤
⇤
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052, USA,
{jianshuc,yeshen,lin.xiao,xiaohe,jfgao,xinson,deng}@microsoft.com
†
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA,
jvking@uw.edu

Abstract
We develop a fully discriminative learning approach for supervised Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model using Back Propagation (i.e., BP-sLDA), which maximizes the posterior probability of the prediction variable given the input document. Different from traditional variational learning or Gibbs sampling approaches, the proposed learning method applies (i) the mirror descent algorithm
for maximum a posterior inference and (ii) back propagation over a deep architecture together with stochastic gradient/mirror descent for model parameter estimation, leading to scalable and end-to-end discriminative learning of the model. As
a byproduct, we also apply this technique to develop a new learning method for
the traditional unsupervised LDA model (i.e., BP-LDA). Experimental results on
three real-world regression and classification tasks show that the proposed methods significantly outperform the previous supervised topic models, neural networks, and is on par with deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [5], among various forms of topic models, is an important probabilistic generative model for analyzing large collections of text corpora. In LDA, each document is
modeled as a collection of words, where each word is assumed to be generated from a certain topic
drawn from a topic distribution. The topic distribution can be viewed as a latent representation of
the document, which can be used as a feature for prediction purpose (e.g., sentiment analysis). In
particular, the inferred topic distribution is fed into a separate classifier or regression model (e.g.,
logistic regression or linear regression) to perform prediction. Such a separate learning structure
usually significantly restricts the performance of the algorithm. For this purpose, various supervised
topic models have been proposed to model the documents jointly with the label information. In
[4], variational methods was applied to learn a supervised LDA (sLDA) model by maximizing the
lower bound of the joint probability of the input data and the labels. The DiscLDA method developed in [15] learns the transformation matrix from the latent topic representation to the output in a
discriminative manner, while learning the topic to word distribution in a generative manner similar
to the standard LDA. In [26], max margin supervised topic models are developed for classification and regression, which are trained by optimizing the sum of the variational bound for the log
marginal likelihood and an additional term that characterizes the prediction margin. These methods
successfully incorporate the information from both the input data and the labels, and showed better
performance in prediction compared to the vanilla LDA model.
One challenge in LDA is that the exact inference is intractable, i.e., the posterior distribution of the
topics given the input document cannot be evaluated explicitly. For this reason, various approximate
1

