Bounding errors of Expectation-Propagation

Simon Barthelmé
CNRS, Gipsa-lab
simon.barthelme@gipsa-lab.fr

Guillaume Dehaene
University of Geneva
guillaume.dehaene@gmail.com

Abstract
Expectation Propagation is a very popular algorithm for variational inference, but
comes with few theoretical guarantees. In this article, we prove that the approximation errors made by EP can be bounded. Our bounds have an asymptotic interpretation in the number n of datapoints, which allows us to study EP’s convergence with respect to the true posterior. In particular, we show that EP converges
at a rate of O(n−2 ) for the mean, up to an order of magnitude faster than the traditional Gaussian approximation at the mode. We also give similar asymptotic expansions for moments of order 2 to 4, as well as excess Kullback-Leibler cost (defined as the additional KL cost incurred by using EP rather than the ideal Gaussian
approximation). All these expansions highlight the superior convergence properties of EP. Our approach for deriving those results is likely applicable to many
similar approximate inference methods. In addition, we introduce bounds on the
moments of log-concave distributions that may be of independent interest.

Introduction
Expectation Propagation (EP, 1) is an efficient approximate inference algorithm that is known to give
good approximations, to the point of being almost exact in certain applications [2, 3]. It is surprising
that, while the method is empirically very successful, there are few theoretical guarantees on its
behavior. Indeed, most work on EP has focused on efficiently implementing the method in various
settings. Theoretical work on EP mostly represents new justifications of the method which, while
they offer intuitive insight, do not give mathematical proofs that the method behaves as expected.
One recent breakthrough is due to Dehaene and Barthelmé [4] who prove that, in the large datalimit, the EP iteration behaves like a Newton search and its approximation is asymptotically exact.
However, it remains unclear how good we can expect the approximation to be when we have only
finite data. In this article, we offer a characterization of the quality of the EP approximation in terms
of the worst-case distance between the true and approximate mean and variance.
When approximating a probability distribution p(x) that is, for some reason, close to being Gaussian,
a natural approximation to use is the Gaussian with mean equal to the mode (or argmax) of p(x) and
with variance the inverse log-Hessian at the mode. We call it the Canonical Gaussian Approximation
(CGA), and its use is usually justified by appealing to the Bernstein-von Mises theorem, which
shows that, in the limit of a large amount of independent observations, posterior distributions tend
towards their CGA. This powerful justification, and the ease with which the CGA is computed
(finding the mode can be done using Newton methods) makes it a good reference point for any
method like EP which aims to offer a better Gaussian approximation at a higher computational cost.
In section 1, we introduce the CGA and the EP approximation. In section 2, we give our theoretical
results bounding the quality of EP approximations.
1

