Scheduled Sampling for Sequence Prediction with
Recurrent Neural Networks
Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, Noam Shazeer
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, USA
{bengio,vinyals,ndjaitly,noam}@google.com

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks can be trained to produce sequences of tokens given
some input, as exemplified by recent results in machine translation and image
captioning. The current approach to training them consists of maximizing the
likelihood of each token in the sequence given the current (recurrent) state and the
previous token. At inference, the unknown previous token is then replaced by a
token generated by the model itself. This discrepancy between training and inference can yield errors that can accumulate quickly along the generated sequence.
We propose a curriculum learning strategy to gently change the training process
from a fully guided scheme using the true previous token, towards a less guided
scheme which mostly uses the generated token instead. Experiments on several sequence prediction tasks show that this approach yields significant improvements.
Moreover, it was used succesfully in our winning entry to the MSCOCO image
captioning challenge, 2015.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks can be used to process sequences, either as input, output or both. While
they are known to be hard to train when there are long term dependencies in the data [1], some
versions like the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [2] are better suited for this. In fact, they have
recently shown impressive performance in several sequence prediction problems including machine
translation [3], contextual parsing [4], image captioning [5] and even video description [6].
In this paper, we consider the set of problems that attempt to generate a sequence of tokens of
variable size, such as the problem of machine translation, where the goal is to translate a given
sentence from a source language to a target language. We also consider problems in which the input
is not necessarily a sequence, like the image captioning problem, where the goal is to generate a
textual description of a given image.
In both cases, recurrent neural networks (or their variants like LSTMs) are generally trained to
maximize the likelihood of generating the target sequence of tokens given the input. In practice, this
is done by maximizing the likelihood of each target token given the current state of the model (which
summarizes the input and the past output tokens) and the previous target token, which helps the
model learn a kind of language model over target tokens. However, during inference, true previous
target tokens are unavailable, and are thus replaced by tokens generated by the model itself, yielding
a discrepancy between how the model is used at training and inference. This discrepancy can be
mitigated by the use of a beam search heuristic maintaining several generated target sequences, but
for continuous state space models like recurrent neural networks, there is no dynamic programming
approach, so the effective number of sequences considered remains small, even with beam search.
1

