A Dual-Augmented Block Minimization Framework
for Learning with Limited Memory

Ian E.H. Yen ∗ Shan-Wei Lin † Shou-De Lin †
†
University of Texas at Austin
National Taiwan University
∗
ianyen@cs.utexas.edu {r03922067,sdlin}@csie.ntu.edu.tw
∗

Abstract
In past few years, several techniques have been proposed for training of linear
Support Vector Machine (SVM) in limited-memory setting, where a dual blockcoordinate descent (dual-BCD) method was used to balance cost spent on I/O and
computation. In this paper, we consider the more general setting of regularized
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) when data cannot fit into memory. In particular, we generalize the existing block minimization framework based on strong
duality and Augmented Lagrangian technique to achieve global convergence for
general convex ERM. The block minimization framework is flexible in the sense
that, given a solver working under sufficient memory, one can integrate it with
the framework to obtain a solver globally convergent under limited-memory condition. We conduct experiments on L1-regularized classification and regression
problems to corroborate our convergence theory and compare the proposed framework to algorithms adopted from online and distributed settings, which shows superiority of the proposed approach on data of size ten times larger than the memory
capacity.

1

Introduction

Nowadays data of huge scale are prevalent in many applications of statistical learning and data
mining. It has been argued that model performance can be boosted by increasing both number
of samples and features, and through crowdsourcing technology, annotated samples of terabytes
storage size can be generated [3]. As a result, the performance of model is no longer limited by the
sample size but the amount of available computational resources. In other words, the data size can
easily go beyond the size of physical memory of available machines. Under this setting, most of
learning algorithms become slow due to expensive I/O from secondary storage device [26].
When it comes to huge-scale data, two settings are often considered — online and distributed learning. In the online setting, each sample is processed only once without storage, while in the distributed setting, one has several machines that can jointly fit the data into memory. However, the
real cases are often not as extreme as these two — there are usually machines that can fit part of the
data, but not all of them. In this setting, an algorithm can only process a block of data at a time.
Therefore, balancing the time spent on I/O and computation becomes the key issue [26]. Although
one can employ an online-fashioned learning algorithm in this setting, it has been observed that online method requires large number of epoches to achieve comparable performance to batch method,
and at each epoch it spends most of time on I/O instead of computation [2, 21, 26]. The situation
for online method could become worse for problem of non-smooth, non-strongly convex objective
function, where a qualitatively slower convergence of online method is exhibited [15, 16] than that
proved for strongly-convex problem like SVM [14].
In the past few years, several algorithms have been proposed to solve large-scale linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) in the limited memory setting [2, 21, 26]. These approaches are based on a dual
1

