Generalization in Adaptive Data Analysis and
Holdout Reuse∗
Cynthia Dwork
Microsoft Research
Toniann Pitassi
University of Toronto

Vitaly Feldman
IBM Almaden Research Center†
Omer Reingold
Samsung Research America

Moritz Hardt
Google Research

Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Overfitting is the bane of data analysts, even when data are plentiful. Formal
approaches to understanding this problem focus on statistical inference and generalization of individual analysis procedures. Yet the practice of data analysis is
an inherently interactive and adaptive process: new analyses and hypotheses are
proposed after seeing the results of previous ones, parameters are tuned on the
basis of obtained results, and datasets are shared and reused. An investigation of
this gap has recently been initiated by the authors in [7], where we focused on the
problem of estimating expectations of adaptively chosen functions.
In this paper, we give a simple and practical method for reusing a holdout (or
testing) set to validate the accuracy of hypotheses produced by a learning algorithm
operating on a training set. Reusing a holdout set adaptively multiple times can
easily lead to overfitting to the holdout set itself. We give an algorithm that enables
the validation of a large number of adaptively chosen hypotheses, while provably
avoiding overfitting. We illustrate the advantages of our algorithm over the standard
use of the holdout set via a simple synthetic experiment.
We also formalize and address the general problem of data reuse in adaptive data
analysis. We show how the differential-privacy based approach given in [7] is
applicable much more broadly to adaptive data analysis. We then show that a
simple approach based on description length can also be used to give guarantees of
statistical validity in adaptive settings. Finally, we demonstrate that these incomparable approaches can be unified via the notion of approximate max-information
that we introduce. This, in particular, allows the preservation of statistical validity guarantees even when an analyst adaptively composes algorithms which have
guarantees based on either of the two approaches.

1

Introduction

The goal of machine learning is to produce hypotheses or models that generalize well to the unseen
instances of the problem. More generally, statistical data analysis is concerned with estimating
properties of the underlying data distribution, rather than properties that are specific to the finite data
set at hand. Indeed, a large body of theoretical and empirical research was developed for ensuring
generalization in a variety of settings. In this work, it is commonly assumed that each analysis
procedure (such as a learning algorithm) operates on a freshly sampled dataset – or if not, is validated
on a freshly sampled holdout (or testing) set.
∗
†

See [6] for the full version of this work.
Part of this work done while visiting the Simons Institute, UC Berkeley.

1

