Semi-supervised Sequence Learning

Andrew M. Dai
Google Inc.
adai@google.com

Quoc V. Le
Google Inc.
qvl@google.com

Abstract
We present two approaches to use unlabeled data to improve Sequence Learning
with recurrent networks. The first approach is to predict what comes next in a
sequence, which is a language model in NLP. The second approach is to use a
sequence autoencoder, which reads the input sequence into a vector and predicts
the input sequence again. These two algorithms can be used as a “pretraining”
algorithm for a later supervised sequence learning algorithm. In other words, the
parameters obtained from the pretraining step can then be used as a starting point
for other supervised training models. In our experiments, we find that long short
term memory recurrent networks after pretrained with the two approaches become more stable to train and generalize better. With pretraining, we were able to
achieve strong performance in many classification tasks, such as text classification
with IMDB, DBpedia or image recognition in CIFAR-10.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are powerful tools for modeling sequential data, yet training
them by back-propagation through time [37, 27] can be difficult [9]. For that reason, RNNs have
rarely been used for natural language processing tasks such as text classification despite their ability
to preserve word ordering.
On a variety of document classification tasks, we find that it is possible to train an LSTM [10] RNN
to achieve good performance with careful tuning of hyperparameters. We also find that a simple
pretraining step can significantly stabilize the training of LSTMs. A simple pretraining method is
to use a recurrent language model as a starting point of the supervised network. A slightly better
method is to use a sequence autoencoder, which uses a RNN to read a long input sequence into
a single vector. This vector will then be used to reconstruct the original sequence. The weights
obtained from pretraining can then be used as an initialization for the standard LSTM RNNs. We
believe that this semi-supervised approach [1] is superior to other unsupervised sequence learning
methods, e.g., Paragraph Vectors [19], because it can allow for easy fine-tuning.
In our experiments with document classification tasks with 20 Newsgroups [17] and DBpedia [20],
and sentiment analysis with IMDB [22] and Rotten Tomatoes [26], LSTMs pretrained by recurrent
language models or sequence autoencoders are usually better than LSTMs initialized randomly.
Another important result from our experiments is that it is possible to use unlabeled data from related tasks to improve the generalization of a subsequent supervised model. For example, using
unlabeled data from Amazon reviews to pretrain the sequence autoencoders can improve classification accuracy on Rotten Tomatoes from 79.0% to 83.3%, an equivalence of adding substantially
more labeled data. This evidence supports the thesis that it is possible to use unsupervised learning
with more unlabeled data to improve supervised learning. With sequence autoencoders, and outside
unlabeled data, LSTMs are able to match or surpass previously reported results.
1

