Revenue Optimization against
Strategic Buyers
Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
251 Mercer Street
New York, NY, 10012

Andrés Muñoz Medina⇤
Google Research
111 8th Avenue
New York, NY, 10011

Abstract
We present a revenue optimization algorithm for posted-price auctions when facing a buyer with random valuations who seeks to optimize his -discounted surplus. In order to analyze this problem we introduce the notion of ✏-strategic buyer,
a more natural notion of strategic behavior than what has been considered in the
past. We improve upon the previous state-of-the-art and achieve an optimal regret
bound in O(log T + 1/ log(1/ ))pwhen the seller selects prices from a finite set
and provide a regret bound in e
O( T + T 1/4 / log(1/ )) when the prices offered
are selected out of the interval [0, 1].

1

Introduction

Online advertisement is currently the fastest growing form of advertising. This growth has been
motivated, among other reasons, by the existence of well defined metrics of effectiveness such as
click-through-rate and conversion rates. Moreover, online advertisement enables the design of better
targeted campaigns by allowing advertisers to decide which type of consumers should see their
advertisement. These advantages have promoted the fast pace development of a large number of
advertising platforms. Among them, AdExchanges have increased in popularity in recent years. In
contrast to traditional advertising, AdExchanges do not involve contracts between publishers and
advertisers. Instead, advertisers are allowed to bid in real-time for the right to display their ad.
An AdExchange works as follows: when a user visits a publisher’s website, the publisher sends
this information to the AdExchange which runs a second-price auction with reserve (Vickrey, 1961;
Milgrom, 2004) among all interested advertisers. Finally, the winner of the auction gets the right
to display his ad on the publisher’s website and pays the maximum of the second highest bid and
the reserve price. In practice, this process is performed in milliseconds, resulting in millions of
transactions recorded daily by the AdExchange. Thus, one might expect that the AdExchange could
benefit from this information by learning how much an advertiser values the right to display his ad
and setting an optimal reserve price. This idea has recently motivated research in the learning community on revenue optimization in second-price auctions with reserve (Mohri and Medina, 2014a;
Cui et al., 2011; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2015).
The algorithms proposed by these authors heavily rely on the assumption that the advertisers’ bids
are drawn i.i.d. from some underlying distribution. However, if an advertiser is aware of the fact that
the AdExchange or publisher are using a revenue optimization algorithm, then, most likely, he would
adjust his behavior to trick the publisher into offering a more beneficial price in the future. Under
this scenario, the assumptions of (Mohri and Medina, 2014a) and (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2015) would
be violated. In fact, empirical evidence of strategic behavior by advertisers has been documented by
Edelman and Ostrovsky (2007). It is therefore critical to analyze the interactions between publishers
and strategic advertisers.
⇤

This work was partially done at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences.

1

