On some provably correct cases of variational
inference for topic models

Andrej Risteski
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
risteski@cs.princeton.edu

Pranjal Awasthi
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Variational inference is an efficient, popular heuristic used in the context of latent
variable models. We provide the first analysis of instances where variational inference algorithms converge to the global optimum, in the setting of topic models.
Our initializations are natural, one of them being used in LDA-c, the most popular
implementation of variational inference. In addition to providing intuition into
why this heuristic might work in practice, the multiplicative, rather than additive
nature of the variational inference updates forces us to use non-standard proof
arguments, which we believe might be of general theoretical interest.

1

Introduction

Over the last few years, heuristics for non-convex optimization have emerged as one of the most
fascinating phenomena for theoretical study in machine learning. Methods like alternating minimization, EM, variational inference and the like enjoy immense popularity among ML practitioners,
and with good reason: they’re vastly more efficient than alternate available methods like convex
relaxations, and are usually easily modified to suite different applications.
Theoretical understanding however is sparse and we know of very few instances where these methods come with formal guarantees. Among more classical results in this direction are the analyses of
Lloyd’s algorithm for K-means, which is very closely related to the EM algorithm for mixtures of
Gaussians [20], [13], [14]. The recent work of [9] also characterizes global convergence properties
of the EM algorithm for more general settings. Another line of recent work has focused on a different heuristic called alternating minimization in the context of dictionary learning. [1], [6] prove that
with appropriate initialization, alternating minimization can provably recover the ground truth. [22]
have proven similar results in the context of phase retreival.
Another popular heuristic which has so far eluded such attempts is known as variational inference [19]. We provide the first characterization of global convergence of variational inference based
algorithms for topic models [12]. We show that under natural assumptions on the topic-word matrix
and the topic priors, along with natural initialization, variational inference converges to the parameters of the underlying ground truth model. To prove our result we need to overcome a number
of technical hurdles which are unique to the nature of variational inference. Firstly, the difficulty
in analyzing alternating minimization methods for dictionary learning is alleviated by the fact that
one can come up with closed form expressions for the updates of the dictionary matrix. We do
not have this luxury. Second, the “norm” in which variational inference naturally operates is KL
divergence, which can be difficult to work with. We stress that the focus of this work is not to identify new instances of topic modeling that were previously not known to be efficiently solvable, but
rather providing understanding about the behaviour of variational inference, the defacto method for
learning and inference in the context of topic models.
1

