Sparse PCA via Bipartite Matchings

Megasthenis Asteris
The University of Texas at Austin
megas@utexas.edu

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of California, Berkeley
dimitrisp@berkeley.edu

Anastasios Kyrillidis
The University of Texas at Austin
anastasios@utexas.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
The University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the following multi-component sparse PCA problem: given a set of
data points, we seek to extract a small number of sparse components with disjoint
supports that jointly capture the maximum possible variance. Such components
can be computed one by one, repeatedly solving the single-component problem
and deflating the input data matrix, but this greedy procedure is suboptimal. We
present a novel algorithm for sparse PCA that jointly optimizes multiple disjoint
components. The extracted features capture variance that lies within a multiplicative factor arbitrarily close to 1 from the optimal. Our algorithm is combinatorial
and computes the desired components by solving multiple instances of the bipartite maximum weight matching problem. Its complexity grows as a low order
polynomial in the ambient dimension of the input data, but exponentially in its
rank. However, it can be effectively applied on a low-dimensional sketch of the
input data. We evaluate our algorithm on real datasets and empirically demonstrate that in many cases it outperforms existing, deflation-based approaches.

1

Introduction

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) reduces data dimensionality by projecting it onto principal
subspaces spanned by the leading eigenvectors of the sample covariance matrix. It is one of the
most widely used algorithms with applications ranging from computer vision, document clustering
to network anomaly detection (see e.g. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]). Sparse PCA is a useful variant that offers
higher data interpretability [6, 7, 8] a property that is sometimes desired even at the cost of statistical
fidelity [5]. Furthermore, when the obtained features are used in subsequent learning tasks, sparsity
potentially leads to better generalization error [9].
Given a real n × d data matrix S representing n centered data points in d variables, the first sparse
principal component is the sparse vector that maximizes the explained variance:
x⋆ ,

arg max

x⊤ Ax,

(1)

kxk2 =1,kxk0 =s

where A = 1/n · S⊤ S is the d × d empirical covariance matrix. Unfortunately, the directly enforced
sparsity constraint makes the problem NP-hard and hence computationally intractable in general. A
significant volume of prior work has focused on various algorithms for approximately solving this
optimization problem [3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], while some theoretical results have
also been established under statistical or spectral assumptions on the input data.
In most cases one is not interested in finding only the first sparse eigenvector, but rather the first k,
where k is the reduced dimension where the data will be projected. Contrary to the single-component
1

