COEVOLVE: A Joint Point Process Model for
Information Diffusion and Network Co-evolution
Mehrdad Farajtabar∗
Yichen Wang∗
Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez†
∗
∗
Shuang Li
Hongyuan Zha
Le Song∗
∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
MPI for Software Systems†
{mehrdad,yichen.wang,sli370}@gatech.edu
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org
{zha,lsong}@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Information diffusion in online social networks is affected by the underlying network topology, but it also has the power to change it. Online users are constantly
creating new links when exposed to new information sources, and in turn these
links are alternating the way information spreads. However, these two highly intertwined stochastic processes, information diffusion and network evolution, have
been predominantly studied separately, ignoring their co-evolutionary dynamics.
We propose a temporal point process model, COEVOLVE, for such joint dynamics, allowing the intensity of one process to be modulated by that of the other.
This model allows us to efficiently simulate interleaved diffusion and network
events, and generate traces obeying common diffusion and network patterns observed in real-world networks. Furthermore, we also develop a convex optimization framework to learn the parameters of the model from historical diffusion and
network evolution traces. We experimented with both synthetic data and data gathered from Twitter, and show that our model provides a good fit to the data as
well as more accurate predictions than alternatives.

1

Introduction

Online social networks, such as Twitter or Weibo, have become large information networks where
people share, discuss and search for information of personal interest as well as breaking news [1].
In this context, users often forward to their followers information they are exposed to via their
followees, triggering the emergence of information cascades that travel through the network [2],
and constantly create new links to information sources, triggering changes in the network itself
over time. Importantly, recent empirical studies with Twitter data have shown that both information
diffusion and network evolution are coupled and network changes are often triggered by information
diffusion [3, 4, 5].
While there have been many recent works on modeling information diffusion [2, 6, 7, 8] and network
evolution [9, 10, 11], most of them treat these two stochastic processes independently and separately,
ignoring the influence one may have on the other over time. Thus, to better understand information
diffusion and network evolution, there is an urgent need for joint probabilistic models of the two
processes, which are largely inexistent to date.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic generative model, COEVOLVE, for the joint dynamics of
information diffusion and network evolution. Our model is based on the framework of temporal
point processes, which explicitly characterize the continuous time interval between events, and it
consists of two interwoven and interdependent components (refer to Appendix B for an illustration):
I. Information diffusion process. We design an “identity revealing” multivariate Hawkes process [12] to capture the mutual excitation behavior of retweeting events, where the intensity of
such events in a user is boosted by previous events from her time-varying set of followees. Al1

