Basis Refinement Strategies for Linear Value
Function Approximation in MDPs

Gheorghe Comanici
School of Computer Science
McGill University
Montreal, Canada
gcoman@cs.mcgill.ca

Doina Precup
School of Computer Science
McGill University
Montreal, Canada
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Prakash Panangaden
School of Computer Science
McGill University
Montreal, Canada
prakash@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We provide a theoretical framework for analyzing basis function construction for
linear value function approximation in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). We
show that important existing methods, such as Krylov bases and Bellman-errorbased methods are a special case of the general framework we develop. We provide a general algorithmic framework for computing basis function refinements
which “respect” the dynamics of the environment, and we derive approximation
error bounds that apply for any algorithm respecting this general framework. We
also show how, using ideas related to bisimulation metrics, one can translate basis refinement into a process of finding “prototypes” that are diverse enough to
represent the given MDP.

1

Introduction

Finding optimal or close-to-optimal policies in large Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) requires
the use of approximation. A very popular approach is to use linear function approximation over a set
of features [Sutton and Barto, 1998, Szepesvari, 2010]. An important problem is that of determining
automatically this set of features in such a way as to obtain a good approximation of the problem
at hand. Many approaches have been explored, including adaptive discretizations [Bertsekas and
Castanon, 1989, Munos and Moore, 2002], proto-value functions [Mahadevan, 2005], Bellman error
basis functions (BEBFs) [Keller et al., 2006, Parr et al., 2008a], Fourier basis [Konidaris et al.,
2011], feature dependency discovery [Geramifard et al., 2011] etc. While many of these approaches
have nice theoretical guarantees when constructing features for fixed policy evaluation, this problem
is significantly more difficult in the case of optimal control, where multiple policies have to be
evaluated using the same representation.
We analyze this problem by introducing the concept of basis refinement, which can be used as a general framework that encompasses a large class of iterative algorithms for automatic feature extraction. The main idea is to start with a set of basis which are consistent with the reward function, i.e.
which allow only states with similar immediate reward to be grouped together. One-step look-ahead
is then used to find parts of the state space in which the current basis representation is inconsistent
with the environment dynamics, and the basis functions are adjusted to fix this problem. The process
continues iteratively. We show that BEBFs [Keller et al., 2006, Parr et al., 2008a] can be viewed as
a special case of this iterative framework. These methods iteratively expand an existing set of basis
functions in order to capture the residual Bellman error. The relationship between such features and
augmented Krylov bases allows us to show that every additional feature in these sets is consistently
refining intermediate bases. Based on similar arguments, it can be shown that other methods, such
as those based on the concept of MDP homomorphisms [Ravindran and Barto, 2002], bisimulation
metrics [Ferns et al., 2004], and partition refinement algorithms [Ruan et al., 2015], are also special cases of the framework. We provide approximation bounds for sequences of refinements, as
1

