Regret-Based Pruning in Extensive-Form Games

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Noam Brown
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
noamb@cmu.edu

Abstract
Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) is a leading algorithm for finding a
Nash equilibrium in large zero-sum imperfect-information games. CFR is an iterative algorithm that repeatedly traverses the game tree, updating regrets at each
information set. We introduce an improvement to CFR that prunes any path of play
in the tree, and its descendants, that has negative regret. It revisits that sequence
at the earliest subsequent CFR iteration where the regret could have become positive, had that path been explored on every iteration. The new algorithm maintains
CFR’s convergence guarantees while making iterations significantly faster—even
if previously known pruning techniques are used in the comparison. This improvement carries over to CFR+, a recent variant of CFR. Experiments show an order
of magnitude speed improvement, and the relative speed improvement increases
with the size of the game.

1

Introduction

Extensive-form imperfect-information games are a general model for strategic interaction. The last
ten years have witnessed a leap of several orders of magnitude in the size of two-player zero-sum
extensive-form imperfect-information games that can be solved to (near-)equilibrium [11][2][6].
This is the game class that this paper focuses on. For small games, a linear program (LP) can
find a solution (that is, a Nash equilibrium) to the game in polynomial time, even in the presence
of imperfect information. However, today’s leading LP solvers only scale to games with around
108 nodes in the game tree [4]. Instead, iterative algorithms are used to approximate solutions for
larger games. There are a variety of such iterative algorithms that are guaranteed to converge to a
solution [5, 3, 10]. Among these, Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) [16] has emerged as
the most popular, and CFR+ as the state-of-the-art variant thereof [13, 14].
CFR begins by exploring the entire game tree (though sampling variants exist as well [9]) and
calculating regret for every hypothetical situation in which the player could be. A key improvement
that makes CFR practical in large games is pruning. At a high level, pruning allows the algorithm to
avoid traversing the entire game tree while still maintaining the same convergence guarantees. The
classic version of pruning, which we will refer to as partial pruning, allows the algorithm to skip
updates for a player in a sequence if the other player’s current strategy does not reach the sequence
with positive probability. This dramatically reduces the cost of each iteration. The magnitude of this
reduction varies considerably depending on the game, but can easily be higher than 90% [9], which
improves the convergence speed of the algorithm by a factor of 10. Moreover, the benefit of partial
pruning empirically seems to be more significant as the size of the game increases.
While partial pruning leads to a large gain in speed, we observe that there is still room for much
larger speed improvement. Partial pruning only skips updates for a player if an opponent’s action
in the path leading to that point has zero probability. This can fail to prune paths that are actually
prunable. Consider a game where the first player to act (Player 1) has hundreds of actions to choose
1

