Semi-Supervised Learning with Ladder Networks
Antti Rasmus and Harri Valpola
The Curious AI Company, Finland

Mikko Honkala
Nokia Labs, Finland

Mathias Berglund and Tapani Raiko
Aalto University, Finland & The Curious AI Company, Finland

Abstract
We combine supervised learning with unsupervised learning in deep neural networks. The proposed model is trained to simultaneously minimize the sum of supervised and unsupervised cost functions by backpropagation, avoiding the need
for layer-wise pre-training. Our work builds on top of the Ladder network proposed by Valpola [1] which we extend by combining the model with supervision. We show that the resulting model reaches state-of-the-art performance in
semi-supervised MNIST and CIFAR-10 classification in addition to permutationinvariant MNIST classification with all labels.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we introduce an unsupervised learning method that fits well with supervised learning.
Combining an auxiliary task to help train a neural network was proposed by Suddarth and Kergosien
[2]. There are multiple choices for the unsupervised task, for example reconstruction of the inputs
at every level of the model [e.g., 3] or classification of each input sample into its own class [4].
Although some methods have been able to simultaneously apply both supervised and unsupervised
learning [3, 5], often these unsupervised auxiliary tasks are only applied as pre-training, followed
by normal supervised learning [e.g., 6]. In complex tasks there is often much more structure in
the inputs than can be represented, and unsupervised learning cannot, by definition, know what
will be useful for the task at hand. Consider, for instance, the autoencoder approach applied to
natural images: an auxiliary decoder network tries to reconstruct the original input from the internal
representation. The autoencoder will try to preserve all the details needed for reconstructing the
image at pixel level, even though classification is typically invariant to all kinds of transformations
which do not preserve pixel values.
Our approach follows Valpola [1] who proposed a Ladder network where the auxiliary task is to
denoise representations at every level of the model. The model structure is an autoencoder with
skip connections from the encoder to decoder and the learning task is similar to that in denoising
autoencoders but applied at every layer, not just the inputs. The skip connections relieve the pressure
to represent details at the higher layers of the model because, through the skip connections, the
decoder can recover any details discarded by the encoder. Previously the Ladder network has only
been demonstrated in unsupervised learning [1, 7] but we now combine it with supervised learning.
The key aspects of the approach are as follows:
Compatibility with supervised methods. The unsupervised part focuses on relevant details found
by supervised learning. Furthermore, it can be added to existing feedforward neural networks, for
example multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) or convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
1

