Scalable Semi-Supervised Aggregation of Classifiers

Yoav Freund
UC San Diego
yfreund@cs.ucsd.edu

Akshay Balsubramani
UC San Diego
abalsubr@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We present and empirically evaluate an efficient algorithm that learns to aggregate the predictions of an ensemble of binary classifiers. The algorithm uses the
structure of the ensemble predictions on unlabeled data to yield significant performance improvements. It does this without making assumptions on the structure or
origin of the ensemble, without parameters, and as scalably as linear learning. We
empirically demonstrate these performance gains with random forests.

1

Introduction

Ensemble-based learning is a very successful approach to learning classifiers, including well-known
methods like boosting [1], bagging [2], and random forests [3]. The power of these methods has
been clearly demonstrated in open large-scale learning competitions such as the Netflix Prize [4]
and the ImageNet Challenge [5]. In general, these methods train a large number of “base” classifiers
and then combine them using a (possibly weighted) majority vote. By aggregating over classifiers,
ensemble methods reduce the variance of the predictions, and sometimes also reduce the bias [6].
The ensemble methods above rely solely on a labeled training set of data. In this paper we propose
an ensemble method that uses a large unlabeled data set in addition to the labeled set. Our work is
therefore at the intersection of semi-supervised learning [7, 8] and ensemble learning.
This paper is based on recent theoretical results of the authors [9]. Our main contributions here are
to extend and apply those results with a new algorithm in the context of random forests [3] and to
perform experiments in which we show that, when the number of labeled examples is small, our
algorithm’s performance is at least that of random forests, and often significantly better.
For the sake of completeness, we provide an intuitive introduction to the analysis given in [9]. How
can unlabeled data help in the context of ensemble learning? Consider a simple example with six
equiprobable data points. The ensemble consists of six classifiers, partitioned into three “A” rules
and three “B” rules. Suppose that the “A” rules each have error 1/3 and the “B” rules each have error
1/6. 1 If given only this information, we might take the majority vote over the six rules, possibly
giving lower weights to the “A” rules because they have higher errors.
Suppose, however, that we are given the unlabeled information in Table 1. The columns of this table
correspond to the six classifiers and the rows to the six unlabeled examples. Each entry corresponds
to the prediction of the given classifier on the given example. As we see, the main difference between
the “A” rules and the “B” rules is that any two “A” rules disagree with probability 1/3, whereas the
“B” rules always agree. For this example, it can be seen (e.g. proved by contradiction) that the only
possible true labeling of the unlabeled data that is consistent with Table 1 and with the errors of the
classifiers is that all the examples are labeled ’+’.
Consequently, we conclude that the majority vote over the “A” rules has zero error, performing
significantly better than any of the base rules. In contrast, giving the “B” rules equal weight would
1
We assume that (bounds on) the errors are, with high probability, true on the actual distribution. Such
bounds can be derived using large deviation bounds or bootstrap-type methods.

1

