Pointer Networks
Oriol Vinyals∗
Google Brain

Meire Fortunato∗
Department of Mathematics, UC Berkeley

Navdeep Jaitly
Google Brain

Abstract
We introduce a new neural architecture to learn the conditional probability of an
output sequence with elements that are discrete tokens corresponding to positions
in an input sequence. Such problems cannot be trivially addressed by existent approaches such as sequence-to-sequence [1] and Neural Turing Machines [2], because the number of target classes in each step of the output depends on the length
of the input, which is variable. Problems such as sorting variable sized sequences,
and various combinatorial optimization problems belong to this class. Our model
solves the problem of variable size output dictionaries using a recently proposed
mechanism of neural attention. It differs from the previous attention attempts in
that, instead of using attention to blend hidden units of an encoder to a context
vector at each decoder step, it uses attention as a pointer to select a member of
the input sequence as the output. We call this architecture a Pointer Net (Ptr-Net).
We show Ptr-Nets can be used to learn approximate solutions to three challenging
geometric problems – finding planar convex hulls, computing Delaunay triangulations, and the planar Travelling Salesman Problem – using training examples
alone. Ptr-Nets not only improve over sequence-to-sequence with input attention,
but also allow us to generalize to variable size output dictionaries. We show that
the learnt models generalize beyond the maximum lengths they were trained on.
We hope our results on these tasks will encourage a broader exploration of neural
learning for discrete problems.

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been used for learning functions over sequences from
examples for more than three decades [3]. However, their architecture limited them to settings
where the inputs and outputs were available at a fixed frame rate (e.g. [4]). The recently introduced
sequence-to-sequence paradigm [1] removed these constraints by using one RNN to map an input
sequence to an embedding and another (possibly the same) RNN to map the embedding to an output
sequence. Bahdanau et. al. augmented the decoder by propagating extra contextual information
from the input using a content-based attentional mechanism [5, 2, 6, 7]. These developments have
made it possible to apply RNNs to new domains, achieving state-of-the-art results in core problems
in natural language processing such as translation [1, 5] and parsing [8], image and video captioning
[9, 10], and even learning to execute small programs [2, 11].
Nonetheless, these methods still require the size of the output dictionary to be fixed a priori. Because
of this constraint we cannot directly apply this framework to combinatorial problems where the size
of the output dictionary depends on the length of the input sequence. In this paper, we address this
limitation by repurposing the attention mechanism of [5] to create pointers to input elements. We
show that the resulting architecture, which we name Pointer Networks (Ptr-Nets), can be trained to
output satisfactory solutions to three combinatorial optimization problems – computing planar convex hulls, Delaunay triangulations and the symmetric planar Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP).
The resulting models produce approximate solutions to these problems in a purely data driven fash∗

Equal contribution

1

