Large-scale probabilistic predictors with and without
guarantees of validity

∗

Vladimir Vovk∗ , Ivan Petej∗ , and Valentina Fedorova†
Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
†
Yandex, Moscow, Russia
{volodya.vovk,ivan.petej,alushaf}@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper studies theoretically and empirically a method of turning machinelearning algorithms into probabilistic predictors that automatically enjoys a property of validity (perfect calibration) and is computationally efficient. The price to
pay for perfect calibration is that these probabilistic predictors produce imprecise
(in practice, almost precise for large data sets) probabilities. When these imprecise probabilities are merged into precise probabilities, the resulting predictors,
while losing the theoretical property of perfect calibration, are consistently more
accurate than the existing methods in empirical studies.

1

Introduction

Prediction algorithms studied in this paper belong to the class of Venn–Abers predictors, introduced
in [1]. They are based on the method of isotonic regression [2] and prompted by the observation that
when applied in machine learning the method of isotonic regression often produces miscalibrated
probability predictions (see, e.g., [3, 4]); it has also been reported ([5], Section 1) that isotonic
regression is more prone to overfitting than Platt’s scaling [6] when data is scarce. The advantage
of Venn–Abers predictors is that they are a special case of Venn predictors ([7], Chapter 6), and so
([7], Theorem 6.6) are always well-calibrated (cf. Proposition 1 below). They can be considered to
be a regularized version of the procedure used by [8], which helps them resist overfitting.
The main desiderata for Venn (and related conformal, [7], Chapter 2) predictors are validity, predictive efficiency, and computational efficiency. This paper introduces two computationally efficient
versions of Venn–Abers predictors, which we refer to as inductive Venn–Abers predictors (IVAPs)
and cross-Venn–Abers predictors (CVAPs). The ways in which they achieve the three desiderata
are:
• Validity (in the form of perfect calibration) is satisfied by IVAPs automatically, and the
experimental results reported in this paper suggest that it is inherited by CVAPs.
• Predictive efficiency is determined by the predictive efficiency of the underlying learning
algorithms (so that the full arsenal of methods of modern machine learning can be brought
to bear on the prediction problem at hand).
• Computational efficiency is, again, determined by the computational efficiency of the underlying algorithm; the computational overhead of extracting probabilistic predictions consists of sorting (which takes time O(n log n), where n is the number of observations) and
other computations taking time O(n).
An advantage of Venn prediction over conformal prediction, which also enjoys validity guarantees,
is that Venn predictors output probabilities rather than p-values, and probabilities, in the spirit of
Bayesian decision theory, can be easily combined with utilities to produce optimal decisions.
1

