Learnability of Influence in Networks

Harikrishna Narasimhan
David C. Parkes
Yaron Singer
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
hnarasimhan@seas.harvard.edu, {parkes, yaron}@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We show PAC learnability of influence functions for three common influence models, namely, the Linear Threshold (LT), Independent Cascade (IC) and Voter models, and present concrete sample complexity results in each case. Our results for
the LT model are based on interesting connections with neural networks; those for
the IC model are based an interpretation of the influence function as an expectation over random draw of a subgraph and use covering number arguments; and
those for the Voter model are based on a reduction to linear regression. We show
these results for the case in which the cascades are only partially observed and we
do not see the time steps in which a node has been influenced. We also provide
efficient polynomial time learning algorithms for a setting with full observation,
i.e. where the cascades also contain the time steps in which nodes are influenced.

1

Introduction

For several decades there has been much interest in understanding the manner in which ideas, language, and information cascades spread through society. With the advent of social networking
technologies in recent years, digital traces of human interactions are becoming available, and the
problem of predicting information cascades from these traces has gained enormous practical value.
For example, this is critical in applications like viral marketing, where one needs to maximize awareness about a product by selecting a small set of influential users [1].
To this end, the spread of information in networks is modeled as an influence function which maps
a set of seed nodes who initiate the cascade to (a distribution on) the set of individuals who will be
influenced as a result [2]. These models are parametrized by variables that are unknown and need
to be estimated from data. There has been much work on estimating the parameters of influence
models (or the structure of the underlying social graph) from observed cascades of influence spread,
and on using the estimated parameters to predict influence for a given seed set [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
These parameter estimation techniques make use of local influence information at each node, and
there has been a recent line of work devoted to providing sample complexity guarantees for these
local estimation techniques [9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
However, one cannot locally estimate the influence parameters when the cascades are not completely
observed (e.g. when the cascades do not contain the time at which the nodes are influenced). Moreover, influence functions can be sensitive to errors in model parameters, and existing results do not
tell us to what accuracy the individual parameters need to be estimated to obtain accurate influence
predictions. If the primary goal in an application is to predict influence accurately, it is natural to
ask for algorithms that have learnability guarantees on the influence function itself. A benchmark
for studying such questions is the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning framework [14]:
Are influence functions PAC learnable?
While many influence models have been popularized due to their approximation guarantees for
influence maximization [2, 15, 16], learnability of influence is an equally fundamental property.
Part of this work was done when HN was a PhD student at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

1

