Sample Efficient Path Integral Control under
Uncertainty

Yunpeng Pan, Evangelos A. Theodorou, and Michail Kontitsis
Autonomous Control and Decision Systems Laboratory
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines
School of Aerospace Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332
{ypan37,evangelos.theodorou,kontitsis}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present a data-driven optimal control framework that is derived using the path
integral (PI) control approach. We find iterative control laws analytically without a
priori policy parameterization based on probabilistic representation of the learned
dynamics model. The proposed algorithm operates in a forward-backward manner
which differentiate it from other PI-related methods that perform forward sampling to find optimal controls. Our method uses significantly less samples to find
analytic control laws compared to other approaches within the PI control family
that rely on extensive sampling from given dynamics models or trials on physical
systems in a model-free fashion. In addition, the learned controllers can be generalized to new tasks without re-sampling based on the compositionality theory for
the linearly-solvable optimal control framework. We provide experimental results
on three different tasks and comparisons with state-of-the-art model-based methods to demonstrate the efficiency and generalizability of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimal control (SOC) is a general and powerful framework with applications in many
areas of science and engineering. However, despite the broad applicability, solving SOC problems
remains challenging for systems in high-dimensional continuous state action spaces. Various function approximation approaches to optimal control are available [1, 2] but usually sensitive to model
uncertainty. Over the last decade, SOC based on exponential transformation of the value function has
demonstrated remarkable applicability in solving real world control and planning problems. In control theory the exponential transformation of the value function was introduced in [3, 4]. In the recent
decade it has been explored in terms of path integral interpretations and theoretical generalizations
[5, 6, 7, 8], discrete time formulations [9], and scalable RL/control algorithms [10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
The resulting stochastic optimal control frameworks are known as Path Integral (PI) control for continuous time, Kullback Leibler (KL) control for discrete time, or more generally Linearly Solvable
Optimal Control [9, 15].
One of the most attractive characteristics of PI control is that optimal control problems can be solved
with forward sampling of Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs). While the process of sampling
with SDEs is more scalable than numerically solving partial differential equations, it still suffers
from the curse of dimensionality when performed in a naive fashion. One way to circumvent this
problem is to parameterize policies [10, 11, 14] and then perform optimization with sampling. However, in this case one has to impose the structure of the policy a-priori, therefore restrict the possible
optimal control solutions within the assumed parameterization. In addition, the optimized policy
parameters can not be generalized to new tasks. In general, model-free PI policy search approaches
1

