On Top-k Selection in Multi-Armed Bandits and
Hidden Bipartite Graphs

Wei Cao1
Jian Li1
Yufei Tao2
Zhize Li1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Chinese University of Hong Kong
1
{cao-w13@mails, lijian83@mail, zz-li14@mails}.tsinghua.edu.cn 2 taoyf@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper discusses how to efficiently choose from n unknown distributions the k
ones whose means are the greatest by a certain metric, up to a small relative error.
We study the topic under two standard settings—multi-armed bandits and hidden
bipartite graphs—which differ in the nature of the input distributions. In the former setting, each distribution can be sampled (in the i.i.d. manner) an arbitrary
number of times, whereas in the latter, each distribution is defined on a population
of a finite size m (and hence, is fully revealed after m samples). For both settings, we prove lower bounds on the total number of samples needed, and propose
optimal algorithms whose sample complexities match those lower bounds.

1

Introduction

This paper studies a class of problems that share a common high-level objective: from a number n
of probabilistic distributions, find the k ones whose means are the greatest by a certain metric.
Crowdsourcing. A crowdsourcing algorithm (see recent works [1, 13] and the references therein)
summons a certain number, say k, of individuals, called workers, to collaboratively accomplish
a complex task. Typically, the algorithm breaks the task into a potentially very large number of
micro-tasks, each of which makes a binary decision (yes or no) by taking the majority vote from the
participating workers. Each worker is given an (often monetary) reward for every micro-task that
s/he participates in. It is therefore crucial to identify the most reliable workers that have the highest
rates of making correct decisions. Because of this, a crowdsourcing algorithm should ideally be
preceded by an exploration phase, which selects the best k workers from n candidates by a series of
“control questions”. Every control-question must be paid for in the same way as a micro-task. The
challenge is to find the best workers with the least amount of money.
Frequent Pattern Discovery. Let B and W be two relations. Given a join predicate Q(b, w), the
joining power of a tuple b ∈ B equals the number of tuples w ∈ W such that b and w satisfy Q. A
top-k semi-join [14, 17] returns the k tuples in B with the greatest joining power. This type of semijoins is notoriously difficult to process when the evaluation of Q is complicated, and thus unfriendly
to tailored-made optimization. A well-known example from graph databases is the discovery of
frequent patterns [14], where B is a set of graph patterns, W a set of data graphs, and Q(b, w)
decides if a pattern b is a subgraph of a data graph w. In this case, top-k semi-join essentially returns
the set of k graph patterns most frequently found in the data graphs. Given a black box for resolving
subgraph isomorphism Q(b, w), the challenge is to minimize the number of calls to the black box.
We refer to the reader to [14, 15] for more examples of difficult top-k semi-joins of this sort.
1.1

Problem Formulation

The paper studies four problems that capture the essence of the above applications.
Multi-Armed Bandit. We consider a standard setting of stochastic multi-armed bandit selection.
Specifically, there is a bandit with a set B of n arms, where the i-th arm is associated with a Bernoulli
1

