A Universal Primal-Dual Convex Optimization Framework

Alp Yurtsever:
:

Quoc Tran-Dinh;

Volkan Cevher:

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, EPFL, Switzerland
{alp.yurtsever, volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch
;
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, UNC, USA
quoctd@email.unc.edu

Abstract
We propose a new primal-dual algorithmic framework for a prototypical constrained convex optimization template. The algorithmic instances of our framework are universal since they can automatically adapt to the unknown Hölder
continuity degree and constant within the dual formulation. They are also guaranteed to have optimal convergence rates in the objective residual and the feasibility
gap for each Hölder smoothness degree. In contrast to existing primal-dual algorithms, our framework avoids the proximity operator of the objective function. We
instead leverage computationally cheaper, Fenchel-type operators, which are the
main workhorses of the generalized conditional gradient (GCG)-type methods. In
contrast to the GCG-type methods, our framework does not require the objective
function to be differentiable, and can also process additional general linear inclusion constraints, while guarantees the convergence rate on the primal problem.

1

Introduction

This paper constructs an algorithmic framework for the following convex optimization template:
f ‹ :“ min tf pxq : Ax ´ b P Ku ,
xPX

(1)

where f : Rp Ñ R Y t`8u is a convex function, A P Rnˆp , b P Rn , and X and K are nonempty,
closed and convex sets in Rp and Rn respectively. The constrained optimization formulation (1) is
quite flexible, capturing many important learning problems in a unified fashion, including matrix
completion, sparse regularization, support vector machines, and submodular optimization [1–3].
Processing the inclusion Ax ´ b P K in (1) requires a significant computational effort in the largescale setting [4]. Hence, the majority of the scalable numerical solution methods for (1) are of
the primal-dual-type, including decomposition, augmented Lagrangian, and alternating direction
methods: cf., [4–9]. The efficiency guarantees of these methods mainly depend on three properties
of f : Lipschitz gradient, strong convexity, and the tractability of its proximal operator.
For instance,
(
the proximal operator of f , i.e., proxf pxq :“ arg minz f pzq ` p1{2q}z ´ x}2 , is key in handling
non-smooth f while obtaining the convergence rates as if it had Lipschitz gradient.
When the set Ax´b P K is absent in (1), other methods can be preferable to primal-dual algorithms.
For instance, if f has Lipschitz gradient, then we can use the accelerated proximal gradient methods
by applying the proximal operator for the indicator function of the set X [10, 11]. However, as the
problem dimensions become increasingly larger, the proximal tractability assumption can be restrictive. This fact increased the popularity of the generalized conditional gradient (GCG) methods (or
Frank-Wolfe-type algorithms), which instead leverage the following Fenchel-type oracles [1, 12, 13]
rxs7X ,g :“ arg max txx, sy ´ gpsqu ,
sPX

(2)

where g is a convex function. When g “ 0, we obtain the so-called linear minimization oracle [12].
When X ” Rp , then the (sub)gradient of the Fenchel conjugate of g, ∇g ˚ , is in the set rxs7g .
1

