Minimax Time Series Prediction
Alan Malek
UC Berkeley
malek@berkeley.edu

Wouter M. Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
wmkoolen@cwi.nl
Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley & QUT
bartlett@cs.berkeley.edu

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
Queensland University of Technology
yasin.abbasiyadkori@qut.edu.au

Abstract
We consider an adversarial formulation of the problem of predicting a time series
with square loss. The aim is to predict an arbitrary sequence of vectors almost
as well as the best smooth comparator sequence in retrospect. Our approach allows natural measures of smoothness such as the squared norm of increments.
More generally, we consider a linear time series model and penalize the comparator sequence through the energy of the implied driving noise terms. We derive
the minimax strategy for all problems of this type and show that it can be implemented efficiently. The optimal predictions are linear in the previous observations.
We obtain an explicit expression for the regret in terms of the parameters defining
the problem. For typical, simple definitions of smoothness, the computation of the
optimal predictions involves only sparse matrices. In the case of norm-constrained
data, where the smoothness is defined in terms of the squared
√ norm of the comparator’s increments, we show that the regret grows as T / λT , where T is the
length of the game and λT is an increasing limit on comparator smoothness.

1

Introduction

In time series prediction, tracking, and filtering problems, a learner sees a stream of (possibly noisy,
vector-valued) data and needs to predict the future path. One may think of robot poses, meteorological measurements, stock prices, etc. Popular stochastic models for such tasks include the
auto-regressive moving average (ARMA) model in time series analysis, Brownian motion models in
finance, and state space models in signal processing.
In this paper, we study the time series prediction problem in the regret framework; instead of making assumptions on the data generating process, we ask: can we predict the data sequence online
almost as well as the best offline prediction method in some comparison class (in this case, offline
means that the comparator only needs to model the data sequence after seeing all of it)? Our main
contribution is computing the exact minimax strategy for a range of time series prediction problems.
As a concrete motivating example, let us pose the simplest nontrivial such minimax problem
( T
)
T
T
+1
X
X
X
2
2
2
min max · · · min max
kat − xt k − min
kât − xt k + λT
kât − ât−1 k .
a1 x1 ∈B

aT xT ∈B

â1 ,...,âT

t=1

|

{z

Loss of Learner

}

t=1

|

t=1

{z

}

Loss of Comparator

|

{z

Comparator Complexity

}

(1)
This notion of regret is standard in online learning, going back at least to [1] in 2001, which views it
as the natural generalization of L2 regularization to deal with non-stationarity comparators. We offer
two motivations for this regularization. First, one can interpret the complexity term as the magnitude
1

