SubmodBoxes: Near-Optimal Search for a Set of
Diverse Object Proposals

Qing Sun
Virginia Tech

Dhruv Batra
Virginia Tech

sunqing@vt.edu

https://mlp.ece.vt.edu/

Abstract
This paper formulates the search for a set of bounding boxes (as needed in object
proposal generation) as a monotone submodular maximization problem over the
space of all possible bounding boxes in an image. Since the number of possible
bounding boxes in an image is very large O(#pixels2 ), even a single linear scan
to perform the greedy augmentation for submodular maximization is intractable.
Thus, we formulate the greedy augmentation step as a Branch-and-Bound scheme.
In order to speed up repeated application of B&B, we propose a novel generalization of Minoux’s ‘lazy greedy’ algorithm to the B&B tree. Theoretically, our
proposed formulation provides a new understanding to the problem, and contains
classic heuristic approaches such as Sliding Window+Non-Maximal Suppression
(NMS) and and Efficient Subwindow Search (ESS) as special cases. Empirically,
we show that our approach leads to a state-of-art performance on object proposal
generation via a novel diversity measure.

1

Introduction

A number of problems in Computer Vision and Machine Learning involve searching for a set of
bounding boxes or rectangular windows. For instance, in object detection [9, 16, 17, 19, 34, 36, 37],
the goal is to output a set of bounding boxes localizing all instances of a particular object category.
In object proposal generation [2, 7, 39, 41], the goal is to output a set of candidate bounding boxes
that may potentially contain an object (of any category). Other scenarios include face detection,
multi-object tracking and weakly supervised learning [10].
Classical Approach: Enumeration + Diverse Subset Selection. In the context of object detection,
the classical paradigm for searching for a set of bounding boxes used to be:
• Sliding Window [9, 16, 40]: i.e., enumeration over all windows in an image with some
level of sub-sampling, followed by
• Non-Maximal Suppression (NMS): i.e., picking a spatially-diverse set of windows by
suppressing windows that are too close or overlapping.
As several previous works [3,26,40] have recognized, the problem with this approach is inefficiency
– the number of possible bounding boxes or rectangular subwindows in an image is O(#pixels2 ).
Even a low-resolution (320 x 240) image contains more than one billion rectangular windows [26]!
As a result, modern object detection pipelines [17, 19, 36] often rely on object proposals as a preprocessing step to reduce the number of candidate object locations to a few hundreds or thousands
(rather than billions).
Interestingly, this migration to object proposals has simply pushed the problem (of searching for a
set of bounding boxes) upstream. Specifically, a number of object proposal techniques [8, 32, 41]
involve the same enumeration + NMS approach – except they typically use cheaper features to be a
fast proposal generation step.
Goal. The goal of this paper is to formally study the search for a set of bounding boxes as an optimization problem. Clearly, enumeration + post-processing for diversity (via NMS) is one widelyused heuristic approach. Our goal is to formulate a formal optimization objective and propose an
efficient algorithm, ideally with guarantees on optimization performance.
Challenge. The key challenge is the exponentially-large search space – the number of possible
2 
)
M -sized sets of bounding boxes is O(#pixels
= O(#pixels2M ) (assuming M ≤ #pixels2 /2).
M
1

