Inferring Algorithmic Patterns with
Stack-Augmented Recurrent Nets

Tomas Mikolov
Facebook AI Research
770 Broadway, New York, USA.
tmikolov@fb.com

Armand Joulin
Facebook AI Research
770 Broadway, New York, USA.
ajoulin@fb.com

Abstract
Despite the recent achievements in machine learning, we are still very far from
achieving real artificial intelligence. In this paper, we discuss the limitations of
standard deep learning approaches and show that some of these limitations can be
overcome by learning how to grow the complexity of a model in a structured way.
Specifically, we study the simplest sequence prediction problems that are beyond
the scope of what is learnable with standard recurrent networks, algorithmically
generated sequences which can only be learned by models which have the capacity
to count and to memorize sequences. We show that some basic algorithms can be
learned from sequential data using a recurrent network associated with a trainable
memory.

1

Introduction

Machine learning aims to find regularities in data to perform various tasks. Historically there have
been two major sources of breakthroughs: scaling up the existing approaches to larger datasets, and
development of novel approaches [5, 14, 22, 30]. In the recent years, a lot of progress has been
made in scaling up learning algorithms, by either using alternative hardware such as GPUs [9] or by
taking advantage of large clusters [28]. While improving computational efficiency of the existing
methods is important to deploy the models in real world applications [4], it is crucial for the research
community to continue exploring novel approaches able to tackle new problems.
Recently, deep neural networks have become very successful at various tasks, leading to a shift in
the computer vision [21] and speech recognition communities [11]. This breakthrough is commonly
attributed to two aspects of deep networks: their similarity to the hierarchical, recurrent structure of
the neocortex and the theoretical justification that certain patterns are more efficiently represented
by functions employing multiple non-linearities instead of a single one [1, 25].
This paper investigates which patterns are difficult to represent and learn with the current state of the
art methods. This would hopefully give us hints about how to design new approaches which will advance machine learning research further. In the past, this approach has lead to crucial breakthrough
results: the well-known XOR problem is an example of a trivial classification problem that cannot
be solved using linear classifiers, but can be solved with a non-linear one. This popularized the use
of non-linear hidden layers [30] and kernels methods [2]. Another well-known example is the parity
problem described by Papert and Minsky [25]: it demonstrates that while a single non-linear hidden
layer is sufficient to represent any function, it is not guaranteed to represent it efficiently, and in
some cases can even require exponentially many more parameters (and thus, also training data) than
what is sufficient for a deeper model. This lead to use of architectures that have several layers of
non-linearities, currently known as deep learning models.
Following this line of work, we study basic patterns which are difficult to represent and learn for
standard deep models. In particular, we study learning regularities in sequences of symbols gen1

