Recovering Communities in the General Stochastic
Block Model Without Knowing the Parameters

Emmanuel Abbe
Department of Electrical Engineering and PACM
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
eabbe@princeton.edu

Colin Sandon
Department of Mathematics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
sandon@princeton.edu

Abstract
The stochastic block model (SBM) has recently gathered significant attention due
to new threshold phenomena. However, most developments rely on the knowledge of the model parameters, or at least on the number of communities. This
paper introduces efficient algorithms that do not require such knowledge and yet
achieve the optimal information-theoretic tradeoffs identified in Abbe-Sandon ’15.
In the constant degree regime, an algorithm is developed that requires only a
lower-bound on the relative sizes of the communities and achieves the optimal
accuracy scaling for large degrees. This lower-bound requirement is removed for
the regime of diverging degrees. For the logarithmic degree regime, this is further enhanced into a fully agnostic algorithm that simultaneously learns the model
parameters, achieves the optimal CH-limit for exact recovery, and runs in quasilinear time. These provide the first algorithms affording efficiency, universality
and information-theoretic optimality for strong and weak consistency in the SBM.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the problem of recovering communities in the general stochastic block model
with linear size communities, for constant and logarithmic degree regimes. In contrast to [1], this
paper does not require knowledge of the parameters. It shows how to learn these from the graph
toplogy. We next provide some motivations on the problem and further background on the model.
Detecting communities (or clusters) in graphs is a fundamental problem in networks, computer
science and machine learning. This applies to a large variety of complex networks (e.g., social and
biological networks) as well as to data sets engineered as networks via similarly graphs, where one
often attempts to get a first impression on the data by trying to identify groups with similar behavior.
In particular, finding communities allows one to find like-minded people in social networks, to
improve recommendation systems, to segment or classify images, to detect protein complexes, to
find genetically related sub-populations, or discover new tumor subclasses. See [1] for references.
While a large variety of community detection algorithms have been deployed in the past decades, the
understanding of the fundamental limits of community detection has only appeared more recently,
in particular for the SBM [1–7]. The SBM is a canonical model for community detection. We use
here the notation SBM(n, p, W ) to refer to a random graph ensemble on the vertex-set V = [n],
where each vertex v ∈ V is assigned independently a hidden (or planted) label σv in [k] under a
probability distribution p = (p1 , . . . , pk ) on [k], and each unordered pair of nodes (u, v) ∈ V × V
is connected independently with probability Wσu ,σv , where W is a symmetric k × k matrix with
entries in [0, 1]. Note that G ∼ SBM(n, p, W ) denotes a random graph drawn under this model,
without the hidden (or planted) clusters (i.e., the labels σv ) revealed. The goal is to recover these
labels by observing only the graph.
1

