Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Networks as
Generative Models
Mathias Berglund
Aalto University, Finland
Leo Kärkkäinen
Nokia Labs, Finland

Tapani Raiko
Aalto University, Finland
Akos Vetek
Nokia Labs, Finland

Mikko Honkala
Nokia Labs, Finland
Juha Karhunen
Aalto University, Finland

Abstract
Bidirectional recurrent neural networks (RNN) are trained to predict both in the
positive and negative time directions simultaneously. They have not been used
commonly in unsupervised tasks, because a probabilistic interpretation of the
model has been difficult. Recently, two different frameworks, GSN and NADE,
provide a connection between reconstruction and probabilistic modeling, which
makes the interpretation possible. As far as we know, neither GSN or NADE
have been studied in the context of time series before. As an example of an unsupervised task, we study the problem of filling in gaps in high-dimensional time
series with complex dynamics. Although unidirectional RNNs have recently been
trained successfully to model such time series, inference in the negative time direction is non-trivial. We propose two probabilistic interpretations of bidirectional
RNNs that can be used to reconstruct missing gaps efficiently. Our experiments on
text data show that both proposed methods are much more accurate than unidirectional reconstructions, although a bit less accurate than a computationally complex
bidirectional Bayesian inference on the unidirectional RNN. We also provide results on music data for which the Bayesian inference is computationally infeasible,
demonstrating the scalability of the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNN) have recently been trained successfully for time series modeling, and have been used to achieve state-of-the-art results in supervised tasks including handwriting
recognition [12] and speech recognition [13]. RNNs have also been used successfully in unsupervised learning of time series [26, 8].
Recently, RNNs have also been used to generate sequential data [1] in a machine translation context,
which further emphasizes the unsupervised setting. Bahdanau et al. [1] used a bidirectional RNN
to encode a phrase into a vector, but settled for a unidirectional RNN to decode it into a translated
phrase, perhaps because bidirectional RNNs have not been studied much as generative models. Even
more recently, Maas et al. [18] used a deep bidirectional RNN in speech recognition, generating text
as output.
Missing value reconstruction is interesting in at least three different senses. Firstly, it can be used to
cope with data that really has missing values. Secondly, reconstruction performance of artificially
missing values can be used as a measure of performance in unsupervised learning [21]. Thirdly,
reconstruction of artificially missing values can be used as a training criterion [9, 11, 27]. While
traditional RNN training criterions correspond to one-step prediction, training to reconstruct longer
gaps can push the model towards concentrating on longer-term predictions. Note that the one-step
1

