Lifelong Learning with Non-i.i.d. Tasks

Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
chl@ist.ac.at

Anastasia Pentina
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
apentina@ist.ac.at

Abstract
In this work we aim at extending the theoretical foundations of lifelong learning.
Previous work analyzing this scenario is based on the assumption that learning
tasks are sampled i.i.d. from a task environment or limited to strongly constrained
data distributions. Instead, we study two scenarios when lifelong learning is possible, even though the observed tasks do not form an i.i.d. sample: first, when they
are sampled from the same environment, but possibly with dependencies, and second, when the task environment is allowed to change over time in a consistent
way. In the first case we prove a PAC-Bayesian theorem that can be seen as a
direct generalization of the analogous previous result for the i.i.d. case. For the
second scenario we propose to learn an inductive bias in form of a transfer procedure. We present a generalization bound and show on a toy example how it can be
used to identify a beneficial transfer algorithm.

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous growth of available data over the past decade, the lack of fully annotated
data, which is an essential part of success of any traditional supervised learning algorithm, demands
methods that allow good generalization from limited amounts of training data. One way to approach
this is provided by the lifelong learning (or learning to learn [1]) paradigm, which is based on the
idea of accumulating knowledge over the course of learning multiple tasks in order to improve the
performance on future tasks.
In order for this scenario to make sense one has to define what kind of relations connect the observed
tasks with the future ones. The first formal model of lifelong learning was proposed by Baxter
in [2]. He introduced the notion of task environment – a set of all tasks that may need to be solved
together with a probability distribution over them. In Baxter’s model the lifelong learning system
observes tasks that are sampled i.i.d. from the task environment. This allows proving bounds in
the PAC framework [3, 4] that guarantee that a hypothesis set or inductive bias that works well on
the observed tasks will also work well on future tasks from the same environment. Baxter’s results
were later extended using algorithmic stability [5], task similarity measures [6], and PAC-Bayesian
analysis [7]. Specific cases that were studied include feature learning [8] and sparse coding [9].
All these works, however, assume that the observed tasks are independently and identically distributed, as the original work by Baxter did. This assumption allows making predictions about the
future of the learning process, but it limits the applicability of the results in practice. To our knowledge, only the recent [10] has studied lifelong learning without an i.i.d. assumption. However, the
considered framework is limited to binary classification with linearly separable classes and isotropic
log-concave data distributions.
In this work we use the PAC-Bayesian framework to study two possible relaxations of the i.i.d. assumption without restricting the class of possible data distributions. First, we study the case in which
tasks can have dependencies between them, but are still sampled from a fixed task environment. An
1

