A class of network models recoverable by spectral
clustering

Marina Meilă
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-4322, USA
mmp@stat.washington.edu

Yali Wan
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-4322, USA
yaliwan@washington.edu

Abstract
Finding communities in networks is a problem that remains difficult, in spite of the
amount of attention it has recently received. The Stochastic Block-Model (SBM)
is a generative model for graphs with “communities” for which, because of its
simplicity, the theoretical understanding has advanced fast in recent years. In particular, there have been various results showing that simple versions of spectral
clustering using the Normalized Laplacian of the graph can recover the communities almost perfectly with high probability. Here we show that essentially the
same algorithm used for the SBM and for its extension called Degree-Corrected
SBM, works on a wider class of Block-Models, which we call Preference Frame
Models, with essentially the same guarantees. Moreover, the parametrization we
introduce clearly exhibits the free parameters needed to specify this class of models, and results in bounds that expose with more clarity the parameters that control
the recovery error in this model class.

1

Introduction

There have been many recent advances in the recovery of communities in networks, under “blockmodel” assumptions [19, 18, 9]. In particular, advances in recovering communities by spectral
clustering algorithms. These have been extended to models including node-specific propensities.
In this paper, we argue that one can further expand the model class for which recovery by spectral
clustering is possible, and describe a model that subsumes a number of existing models, which we
call the PFM. We show that under the PFM model, the communities can be recovered with small
error, w.h.p. Our results correspond to what [6] termed the “weak recovery” regime, in which w.h.p.
the fraction of nodes that are mislabeled is o(1) when n → ∞.

2

The Preference Frame Model of graphs with communities

This model embodies the assumption that interactions at the community level (which we will also
call macro level) can be quantified by meaningful parameters. This general assumption underlies
the (p, q) and the related parameterizations of the SBM as well. We define a preference frame to
be a graph with K nodes, one for each community, that encodes the connectivity pattern at the
community level by a (non-symmetric) stochastic matrix R. Formally, given [K] = {1, . . . K}, a
K × K matrix R (det(R) 6= 0) representing the transition matrix of a reversible Markov chain on
[K], the weighted graph H = ([K], R), with edge set supp R (edges correspond to entries in R not
being 0) is called a K-preference frame. Requiring reversibility is equivalent to requiring that there
is a set of symmetric weights on the edges from which R can be derived ([17]). We note that without
the reversibility assumption, we would be modeling directed graphs, which we will leave for future
1

