Saliency, Scale and Information:
Towards a Unifying Theory

Neil D.B. Bruce
Department of Computer Science
University of Manitoba
bruce@cs.umanitoba.ca

Shafin Rahman
Department of Computer Science
University of Manitoba
shafin109@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper we present a definition for visual saliency grounded in information
theory. This proposal is shown to relate to a variety of classic research contributions in scale-space theory, interest point detection, bilateral filtering, and to existing models of visual saliency. Based on the proposed definition of visual saliency,
we demonstrate results competitive with the state-of-the art for both prediction of
human fixations, and segmentation of salient objects. We also characterize different properties of this model including robustness to image transformations, and
extension to a wide range of other data types with 3D mesh models serving as an
example. Finally, we relate this proposal more generally to the role of saliency
computation in visual information processing and draw connections to putative
mechanisms for saliency computation in human vision.

1

Introduction

Many models of visual saliency have been proposed in the last decade with differences in defining
principles and also divergent objectives. The motivation for these models is divided among several
distinct but related problems including human fixation prediction, salient object segmentation, and
more general measures of objectness. Models also vary in intent and range from hypotheses for
saliency computation in human visual cortex to those motivated exclusively by applications in computer vision. At a high level the notion of saliency seems relatively straightforward and characterized
by patterns that stand out from their context according to unique colors, striking patterns, discontinuities in structure, or more generally, figure against ground. While this is a seemingly simplistic
concept, the relative importance of defining principles of a model, and fine grained implementation
details in determining output remains obscured. Given similarities in the motivation for different
models, there is also value in considering how different definitions of saliency relate to each other
while also giving careful consideration to parallels to related concepts in biological and computer
vision.
The characterization sought by models of visual saliency is reminiscent ideas expressed throughout
seminal work in computer vision. For example, early work in scale-space theory includes emphasis
on the importance of extrema in structure expressed across scale-space as an indicator of potentially important image content [1, 2]. Related efforts grounded in information theory that venture
closer to modern notions of saliency include Kadir and Brady [3] and Jagersand’s [4] analysis of
interaction between scale and local entropy in defining relevant image content. These concepts have
played a significant role in techniques for affine invariant keypoint matching [5], but have received
less attention in the direct prediction of saliency. Information theoretic models are found in the
literature directly addressing saliency prediction for determining gaze points or proto-objects. A
prominent example of this is the AIM model wherein saliency is based directly on measuring the
self-information of image patterns [6]. Alternative information theoretic definitions have been pro1

