Copula variational inference

Dustin Tran
Harvard University

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Edoardo M. Airoldi
Harvard University

Abstract
We develop a general variational inference method that preserves dependency
among the latent variables. Our method uses copulas to augment the families of
distributions used in mean-field and structured approximations. Copulas model the
dependency that is not captured by the original variational distribution, and thus
the augmented variational family guarantees better approximations to the posterior.
With stochastic optimization, inference on the augmented distribution is scalable.
Furthermore, our strategy is generic: it can be applied to any inference procedure
that currently uses the mean-field or structured approach. Copula variational inference has many advantages: it reduces bias; it is less sensitive to local optima;
it is less sensitive to hyperparameters; and it helps characterize and interpret the
dependency among the latent variables.

1

Introduction

Variational inference is a computationally efficient approach for approximating posterior distributions. The idea is to specify a tractable family of distributions of the latent variables and then to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence from it to the posterior. Combined with stochastic optimization, variational inference can scale complex statistical models to massive data sets [9, 23, 24].
Both the computational complexity and accuracy of variational inference are controlled by the factorization of the variational family. To keep optimization tractable, most algorithms use the fullyfactorized family, also known as the mean-field family, where each latent variable is assumed independent. Less common, structured mean-field methods slightly relax this assumption by preserving
some of the original structure among the latent variables [19]. Factorized distributions enable efficient variational inference but they sacrifice accuracy. In the exact posterior, many latent variables
are dependent and mean-field methods, by construction, fail to capture this dependency.
To this end, we develop copula variational inference (copula vi). Copula vi augments the traditional
variational distribution with a copula, which is a flexible construction for learning dependencies in
factorized distributions [3]. This strategy has many advantages over traditional vi: it reduces bias;
it is less sensitive to local optima; it is less sensitive to hyperparameters; and it helps characterize
and interpret the dependency among the latent variables. Variational inference has previously been
restricted to either generic inference on simple models—where dependency does not make a significant difference—or writing model-specific variational updates. Copula vi widens its applicability,
providing generic inference that finds meaningful dependencies between latent variables.
In more detail, our contributions are the following.
A generalization of the original procedure in variational inference. Copula vi generalizes variational inference for mean-field and structured factorizations: traditional vi corresponds to running
only one step of our method. It uses coordinate descent, which monotonically decreases the KL
divergence to the posterior by alternating between fitting the mean-field parameters and the copula
parameters. Figure 1 illustrates copula vi on a toy example of fitting a bivariate Gaussian.
Improving generic inference. Copula vi can be applied to any inference procedure that currently
uses the mean-field or structured approach. Further, because it does not require specific knowledge
1

