The Return of the Gating Network:
Combining Generative Models and Discriminative
Training in Natural Image Priors

Yair Weiss
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Dan Rosenbaum
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract
In recent years, approaches based on machine learning have achieved state-of-theart performance on image restoration problems. Successful approaches include
both generative models of natural images as well as discriminative training of
deep neural networks. Discriminative training of feed forward architectures allows explicit control over the computational cost of performing restoration and
therefore often leads to better performance at the same cost at run time. In contrast, generative models have the advantage that they can be trained once and then
adapted to any image restoration task by a simple use of Bayes’ rule.
In this paper we show how to combine the strengths of both approaches by training
a discriminative, feed-forward architecture to predict the state of latent variables
in a generative model of natural images. We apply this idea to the very successful
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) of natural images. We show that it is possible
to achieve comparable performance as the original GMM but with two orders of
magnitude improvement in run time while maintaining the advantage of generative
models.

1

Introduction

Figure 1 shows an example of an image restoration problem. We are given a degraded image (in
this case degraded with Gaussian noise) and seek to estimate the clean image. Image restoration
is an extremely well studied problem and successful systems for specific scenarios have been built
without any explicit use of machine learning. For example, approaches based on “coring” can be
used to successfully remove noise from an image by transforming to a wavelet basis and zeroing
out coefficients that are close to zero [7]. More recently the very successful BM3D method removes
noise from patches by finding similar patches in the noisy image and combining all similar patches
in a nonlinear way [4].
In recent years, machine learning based approaches are starting to outperform the hand engineered
systems for image restoration. As in other areas of machine learning, these approaches can be
divided into generative approaches which seek to learn probabilistic models of clean images versus
discriminative approaches which seek to learn models that map noisy images to clean images while
minimizing the training loss between the predicted clean image and the true one.
Two influential generative approaches are the fields of experts (FOE) approach [16] and KSVD [5]
which assume that filter responses to natural images should be sparse and learn a set of filters under this assumption. While very good performance can be obtained using these methods, when
they are trained generatively they do not give performance that is as good as BM3D. Perhaps the
most successful generative approach to image restoration is based on Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs) [22]. In this approach 8x8 image patches are modeled as 64 dimensional vectors and a
1

