Fast Classification Rates for High-dimensional
Gaussian Generative Models
Tianyang Li

Adarsh Prasad
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin
{lty,adarsh,pradeepr}@cs.utexas.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar

Abstract
We consider the problem of binary classification when the covariates conditioned
on the each of the response values follow multivariate Gaussian distributions. We
focus on the setting where the covariance matrices for the two conditional distributions are the same. The corresponding generative model classifier, derived
via the Bayes rule, also called Linear Discriminant Analysis, has been shown to
behave poorly in high-dimensional settings. We present a novel analysis of the
classification error of any linear discriminant approach given conditional Gaussian
models. This allows us to compare the generative model classifier, other recently
proposed discriminative approaches that directly learn the discriminant function,
and then finally logistic regression which is another classical discriminative model
classifier. As we show, under a natural sparsity assumption, and letting s denote
the sparsity of the Bayes classifier, p the number of covariates, and n the number of samples, the simple (`1 -regularized)
 logistic
 regression classifier achieves
p
the fast misclassification error rates of O s log
, which is much better than the
n
other approaches, which are either
under high-dimensional settings,
q inconsistent

s log p
or achieve a slower rate of O
.
n

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of classification of a binary response given p covariates. A popular class of
approaches are statistical decision-theoretic: given a classification evaluation metric, they then optimize a surrogate evaluation metric that is computationally tractable, and yet have strong guarantees
on sample complexity, namely, number of observations required for some bound on the expected
classification evaluation metric. These guarantees and methods have been developed largely for the
zero-one evaluation metric, and extending these to general evaluation metrics is an area of active
research. Another class of classification methods are relatively evaluation metric agnostic, which
is an important desideratum in modern settings, where the evaluation metric for an application is
typically less clear: these are based on learning statistical models over the response and covariates,
and can be categorized into two classes. The first are so-called generative models, where we specify
conditional distributions of the covariates conditioned on the response, and then use the Bayes rule
to derive the conditional distribution of the response given the covariates. The second are the socalled discriminative models, where we directly specify the conditional distribution of the response
given the covariates.
In the classical fixed p setting, we have now have a good understanding of the performance of
the classification approaches above. For generative and discriminative modeling based approaches,
consider the specific case of Naive Bayes generative models and logistic regression discriminative
models (which form a so-called generative-discriminative pair1 ), Ng and Jordan [27] provided qual1
In such a so-called generative-discriminative pair, the discriminative model has the same form as that of
the conditional distribution of the response given the covariates specified by the Bayes rule given the generative
model

1

