Principal Differences Analysis: Interpretable
Characterization of Differences between Distributions
Jonas Mueller
CSAIL, MIT
jonasmueller@csail.mit.edu

Tommi Jaakkola
CSAIL, MIT
tommi@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce principal differences analysis (PDA) for analyzing differences between high-dimensional distributions. The method operates by finding the projection that maximizes the Wasserstein divergence between the resulting univariate populations. Relying on the Cramer-Wold device, it requires no assumptions
about the form of the underlying distributions, nor the nature of their inter-class
differences. A sparse variant of the method is introduced to identify features responsible for the differences. We provide algorithms for both the original minimax
formulation as well as its semidefinite relaxation. In addition to deriving some
convergence results, we illustrate how the approach may be applied to identify differences between cell populations in the somatosensory cortex and hippocampus
as manifested by single cell RNA-seq. Our broader framework extends beyond
the specific choice of Wasserstein divergence.

1

Introduction

Understanding differences between populations is a common task across disciplines, from biomedical data analysis to demographic or textual analysis. For example, in biomedical analysis, a set of
variables (features) such as genes may be profiled under different conditions (e.g. cell types, disease
variants), resulting in two or more populations to compare. The hope of this analysis is to answer
whether or not the populations differ and, if so, which variables or relationships contribute most to
this difference. In many cases of interest, the comparison may be challenging primarily for three
reasons: 1) the number of variables profiled may be large, 2) populations are represented by finite,
unpaired, high-dimensional sets of samples, and 3) information may be lacking about the nature of
possible differences (exploratory analysis).
We will focus on the comparison of two high dimensional populations. Therefore, given two unpaired i.i.d. sets of samples Xpnq “ xp1q , . . . , xpnq „ PX and Ypmq “ y p1q , . . . , y pmq „ PY , the
goal is to answer the following two questions about the underlying multivariate random variables
X, Y P Rd : (Q1) Is PX “ PY ? (Q2) If not, what is the minimal subset of features S Ñ t1, . . . , du
such that the marginal distributions differ PXS ‰ PYS while PXSC « PYSC for the complement? A
finer version of (Q2) may additionally be posed which asks how much each feature contributes to
the overall difference between the two probability distributions (with respect to the given scale on
which the variables are measured).
Many two-sample analyses have focused on characterizing limited differences such as mean shifts
[1, 2]. More general differences beyond the mean of each feature remain of interest, however, including variance/covariance of demographic statistics such as income. It is also undesirable to restrict
the analysis to specific parametric differences, especially in exploratory analysis where the nature
of the underlying distributions may be unknown. In the univariate case, a number of nonparametric
tests of equality of distributions are available with accompanying concentration results [3]. Popular examples of such divergences (also referred to as probability metrics) include: f -divergences
1

