Calibrated Structured Prediction
Percy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Volodymyr Kuleshov
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract
In user-facing applications, displaying calibrated confidence measures—
probabilities that correspond to true frequency—can be as important as obtaining
high accuracy. We are interested in calibration for structured prediction problems
such as speech recognition, optical character recognition, and medical diagnosis.
Structured prediction presents new challenges for calibration: the output space is
large, and users may issue many types of probability queries (e.g., marginals) on
the structured output. We extend the notion of calibration so as to handle various
subtleties pertaining to the structured setting, and then provide a simple recalibration method that trains a binary classifier to predict probabilities of interest. We
explore a range of features appropriate for structured recalibration, and demonstrate their efficacy on three real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Applications such as speech recognition [1], medical diagnosis [2], optical character recognition
[3], machine translation [4], and scene labeling [5] have two properties: (i) they are instances of
structured prediction, where the predicted output is a complex structured object; and (ii) they are
user-facing applications for which it is important to provide accurate estimates of confidence. This
paper explores confidence estimation for structured prediction.
Central to this paper is the idea of probability calibration [6, 7, 8, 9], which is prominent in the
meteorology [10] and econometrics [9] literature. Calibration requires that the probability that a
system outputs for an event reflects the true frequency of that event: of the times that a system says
that it will rain with probability 0.3, then 30% of the time, it should rain. In the context of structured
prediction, we do not have a single event or a fixed set of events, but rather a multitude of events
that depend on the input, corresponding to different conditional and marginal probabilities that one
could ask of a structured prediction model. We must therefore extend the definition of calibration in
a way that deals with the complexities that arise in the structured setting.
We also consider the practical question of building a system that outputs calibrated probabilities.
We introduce a new framework for calibration in structured prediction, which involves defining
probabilities of interest, and then training binary classifiers to predict these probabilities based on a
set of features. Our framework generalizes current methods for binary and multiclass classification
[11, 12, 13], which predict class probabilities based on a single feature, the uncalibrated prediction
score. In structured prediction, the space of interesting probabilities and useful features is considerably richer. This motivates us to introduce a new concept of events as well as a range of new
features—margin, pseudomargin—which have varying computational demands. We perform a thorough study of which features yield good calibration, and find that domain-general features are quite
good for calibrating MAP and marginal estimates over three tasks—object recognition, optical character recognition, and scene understanding. Interestingly, features based on MAP inference alone
can achieve good calibration on marginal probabilities (which can be more difficult to compute).
1

