Spherical Random Features for Polynomial Kernels

Jeffrey Pennington

Felix X. Yu

Sanjiv Kumar

Google Research
{jpennin, felixyu, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
Compact explicit feature maps provide a practical framework to scale kernel methods to large-scale learning, but deriving such maps for many types of kernels
remains a challenging open problem. Among the commonly used kernels for nonlinear classification are polynomial kernels, for which low approximation error
has thus far necessitated explicit feature maps of large dimensionality, especially
for higher-order polynomials. Meanwhile, because polynomial kernels are unbounded, they are frequently applied to data that has been normalized to unit `2
norm. The question we address in this work is: if we know a priori that data is
normalized, can we devise a more compact map? We show that a putative affirmative answer to this question based on Random Fourier Features is impossible
in this setting, and introduce a new approximation paradigm, Spherical Random
Fourier (SRF) features, which circumvents these issues and delivers a compact
approximation to polynomial kernels for data on the unit sphere. Compared to
prior work, SRF features are less rank-deficient, more compact, and achieve better kernel approximation, especially for higher-order polynomials. The resulting
predictions have lower variance and typically yield better classification accuracy.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods such as nonlinear support vector machines (SVMs) [1] provide a powerful framework for nonlinear learning, but they often come with significant computational cost. Their training
complexity varies from O(n2 ) to O(n3 ), which becomes prohibitive when the number of training
examples, n, grows to the millions. Testing also tends to be slow, with an O(nd) complexity for
d-dimensional vectors.
Explicit kernel maps provide a practical alternative for large-scale applications since they rely on
properties of linear methods, which can be trained in O(n) time [2, 3, 4] and applied in O(d) time,
independent of n. The idea is to determine an explicit nonlinear map Z(·) : Rd → RD such
that K(x, y) ≈ hZ(x), Z(y)i, and to perform linear learning in the resulting feature space. This
procedure can utilize the fast training and testing of linear methods while still preserving much of
the expressive power of the nonlinear methods.
Following this reasoning, Rahimi and Recht [5] proposed a procedure for generating such a nonlinear map, derived from the Monte Carlo integration of an inverse Fourier transform arising from
Bochner’s theorem [6]. Explicit nonlinear random feature maps have also been proposed for other
types of kernels, such as intersection kernels [7], generalized RBF kernels [8], skewed multiplicative
histogram kernels [9], additive kernels [10], and semigroup kernels [11].
Another type of kernel that is used widely in many application domains is the polynomial kernel
p
[12, 13], defined by K(x, y) = (hx, yi + q) , where q is the bias and p is the degree of the polynomial. Approximating polynomial kernels with explicit nonlinear maps is a challenging problem, but
substantial progress has been made in this area recently. Kar and Karnick [14] catalyzed this line of
1

