Max-Margin Majority Voting for
Learning from Crowds

Tian Tian, Jun Zhu
Department of Computer Science & Technology; Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research
Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science & Technology
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technology & Systems; Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
tiant13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning-from-crowds aims to design proper aggregation strategies to infer the
unknown true labels from the noisy labels provided by ordinary web workers.
This paper presents max-margin majority voting (M3 V) to improve the discriminative ability of majority voting and further presents a Bayesian generalization to
incorporate the flexibility of generative methods on modeling noisy observations
with worker confusion matrices. We formulate the joint learning as a regularized
Bayesian inference problem, where the posterior regularization is derived by maximizing the margin between the aggregated score of a potential true label and that
of any alternative label. Our Bayesian model naturally covers the Dawid-Skene
estimator and M3 V. Empirical results demonstrate that our methods are competitive, often achieving better results than state-of-the-art estimators.

1

Introduction

Many learning tasks require labeling large datasets. Though reliable, it is often too expensive and
time-consuming to collect labels from domain experts or well-trained workers. Recently, online
crowdsourcing platforms have dramatically decreased the labeling cost by dividing the workload
into small parts, then distributing micro-tasks to a crowd of ordinary web workers [17, 20]. However,
the labeling accuracy of web workers could be lower than expected due to their various backgrounds
or lack of knowledge. To improve the accuracy, it is usually suggested to label every task multiple
times by different workers, then the redundant labels can provide hints on resolving the true labels.
Much progress has been made in designing effective aggregation mechanisms to infer the true labels
from noisy observations. From a modeling perspective, existing work includes both generative approaches and discriminative approaches. A generative method builds a flexible probabilistic model
for generating the noisy observations conditioned on the unknown true labels and some behavior
assumptions, with examples of the Dawid-Skene (DS) estimator [5], the minimax entropy (Entropy)
estimator1 [24, 25], and their variants. In contrast, a discriminative approach does not model the observations; it directly identifies the true labels via some aggregation rules. Examples include majority voting and the weighted majority voting that takes worker reliability into consideration [10, 11].
In this paper, we present a max-margin formulation of the most popular majority voting estimator to
improve its discriminative ability, and further present a Bayesian generalization that conjoins the advantages of both generative and discriminative approaches. The max-margin majority voting (M3 V)
directly maximizes the margin between the aggregated score of a potential true label and that of any
alternative label, and the Bayesian model consists of a flexible probabilistic model to generate the
noisy observations by conditioning on the unknown true labels. We adopt the same approach as the
1

A maximum entropy estimator can be understood as a dual of the MLE of a probabilistic model [6].

1

