Adversarial Prediction Games for Multivariate Losses
Hong Wang

Wei Xing
Kaiser Asif
Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{hwang27, wxing3, kasif2, bziebart}@uic.edu

Abstract
Multivariate loss functions are used to assess performance in many modern prediction tasks, including information retrieval and ranking applications. Convex
approximations are typically optimized in their place to avoid NP-hard empirical risk minimization problems. We propose to approximate the training data
instead of the loss function by posing multivariate prediction as an adversarial
game between a loss-minimizing prediction player and a loss-maximizing evaluation player constrained to match specified properties of training data. This avoids
the non-convexity of empirical risk minimization, but game sizes are exponential
in the number of predicted variables. We overcome this intractability using the
double oracle constraint generation method. We demonstrate the efficiency and
predictive performance of our approach on tasks evaluated using the precision at
k, the F-score and the discounted cumulative gain.

1

Introduction

For many problems in information retrieval and learning to rank, the performance of a predictor is
evaluated based on the combination of predictions it makes for multiple variables. Examples include the precision when limited to k positive predictions (P@k), the harmonic mean of precision
and recall (F-score), and the discounted cumulative gain (DCG) for assessing ranking quality. These
stand in contrast to measures like the accuracy and (log) likelihood, which are additive over independently predicted variables. Many multivariate performance measures are not concave functions of
predictor parameters, so maximizing them over empirical training data (or, equivalently, empirical
risk minimization over a corresponding non-convex multivariate loss function) is computationally
intractable [11] and can only be accomplished approximately using local optimization methods [10].
Instead, convex surrogates for the empirical risk are optimized using either an additive [21, 12, 22]
or a multivariate approximation [14, 24] of the loss function. For both types of approximations,
the gap between the application performance measure and the surrogate loss measure can lead to
substantial sub-optimality of the resulting predictions [4].
Rather than optimizing an approximation of the multivariate loss for available training data, we take
an alternate approach [26, 9, 1] that robustly minimizes the exact multivariate loss function using
approximations of the training data. We formalize this using a zero-sum game between a predictor
player and an adversarial evaluator player. Learned weights parameterize this game’s payoffs and
enable generalization from training data to new predictive settings. The key computational challenge
this approach poses is that the size of multivariate prediction games grows exponentially in the
number of variables. We leverage constraint generation methods developed for solving large zerosum games [20] and efficient methods for computing best responses [6] to tame this complexity.
In many cases, the structure of the multivariate loss function enables the zero-sum game’s Nash
equilibrium to be efficiently computed. We formulate parameter estimation as a convex optimization
problem and solve it using standard convex optimization methods. We demonstrate the benefits of
this approach on prediction tasks with P@k, F-score and DCG multivariate evaluation measures.
1

