Scalable Adaptation of State Complexity for
Nonparametric Hidden Markov Models

Michael C. Hughes, William Stephenson, and Erik B. Sudderth
Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912
mhughes@cs.brown.edu, wtstephe@gmail.com, sudderth@cs.brown.edu

Abstract
Bayesian nonparametric hidden Markov models are typically learned via fixed
truncations of the infinite state space or local Monte Carlo proposals that make
small changes to the state space. We develop an inference algorithm for the sticky
hierarchical Dirichlet process hidden Markov model that scales to big datasets by
processing a few sequences at a time yet allows rapid adaptation of the state space
cardinality. Unlike previous point-estimate methods, our novel variational bound
penalizes redundant or irrelevant states and thus enables optimization of the state
space. Our birth proposals use observed data statistics to create useful new states
that escape local optima. Merge and delete proposals remove ineffective states to
yield simpler models with more affordable future computations. Experiments on
speaker diarization, motion capture, and epigenetic chromatin datasets discover
models that are more compact, more interpretable, and better aligned to ground
truth segmentations than competitors. We have released an open-source Python
implementation which can parallelize local inference steps across sequences.

1 Introduction
The hidden Markov model (HMM) [1, 2] is widely used to segment sequential data into interpretable
discrete states. Human activity streams might use walking or dancing states, while DNA transcription might be understood via promotor or repressor states [3]. The hierarchical Dirichlet process
HMM (HDP-HMM) [4, 5, 6] provides an elegant Bayesian nonparametric framework for reasoning
about possible data segmentations with different numbers of states.
Existing inference algorithms for HMMs and HDP-HMMs have numerous shortcomings: they cannot efficiently learn from large datasets, do not effectively explore segmentations with varying numbers of states, and are often trapped at local optima near their initialization. Stochastic optimization
methods [7, 8] are particularly vulnerable to these last two issues, since they cannot change the number of states instantiated during execution. The importance of removing irrelevant states has been
long recognized [9]. Samplers that add or remove states via split and merge moves have been developed for HDP topic models [10, 11] and beta process HMMs [12]. However, these Monte Carlo
proposals use the entire dataset and require all sequences to fit in memory, limiting scalability.
We propose an HDP-HMM learning algorithm that reliably transforms an uninformative, single-state
initialization into an accurate yet compact set of states. Generalizing previous work on memoized
variational inference for DP mixture models [13] and HDP topic models [14], we derive a variational
bound for the HDP-HMM that accounts for sticky state persistence and can be used for effective
Bayesian model selection. Our algorithm uses birth proposal moves to create new states and merge
and delete moves to remove states with poor predictive power. State space adaptations are validated
via a global variational bound, but by caching sufficient statistics our memoized algorithm efficiently
processes subsets of sequences at each step. Extensive experiments demonstrate the reliability and
scalability of our approach, which can be reproduced via Python code we have released online1 .
1

http://bitbucket.org/michaelchughes/x-hdphmm-nips2015/

1

