Market Scoring Rules Act As Opinion Pools For
Risk-Averse Agents

Mithun Chakraborty, Sanmay Das
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
{mithunchakraborty,sanmay}@wustl.edu

Abstract
A market scoring rule (MSR) – a popular tool for designing algorithmic prediction
markets – is an incentive-compatible mechanism for the aggregation of probabilistic beliefs from myopic risk-neutral agents. In this paper, we add to a growing
body of research aimed at understanding the precise manner in which the price
process induced by a MSR incorporates private information from agents who deviate from the assumption of risk-neutrality. We first establish that, for a myopic
trading agent with a risk-averse utility function, a MSR satisfying mild regularity conditions elicits the agent’s risk-neutral probability conditional on the latest
market state rather than her true subjective probability. Hence, we show that a
MSR under these conditions effectively behaves like a more traditional method of
belief aggregation, namely an opinion pool, for agents’ true probabilities. In particular, the logarithmic market scoring rule acts as a logarithmic pool for constant
absolute risk aversion utility agents, and as a linear pool for an atypical budgetconstrained agent utility with decreasing absolute risk aversion. We also point out
the interpretation of a market maker under these conditions as a Bayesian learner
even when agent beliefs are static.

1

Introduction

How should we combine opinions (or beliefs) about hidden truths (or uncertain future events) furnished by several individuals with potentially diverse information sets into a single group judgment
for decision or policy-making purposes? This has been a fundamental question across disciplines
for a long time (Surowiecki [2005]). One simple, principled approach towards achieving this end is
the opinion pool (OP) which directly solicits inputs from informants in the form of probabilities (or
distributions) and then maps this vector of inputs to a single probability (or distribution) based on
certain axioms (Genest and Zidek [1986]). However, this technique abstracts away from the issue
of providing proper incentives to a selfish-rational agent to reveal her private information honestly.
Financial markets approach the problem differently, offering financial incentives for traders to supply their information about valuations and aggregating this information into informative prices. A
prediction market is a relatively novel tool that builds upon this idea, offering trade in a financial security whose final monetary worth is tied to the future revelation of some currently unknown ground
truth. Hanson [2003] introduced a family of algorithms for designing automated prediction markets
called the market scoring rule (MSR) of which the Logarithmic Market Scoring Rule (LMSR) is
arguably the most widely used and well-studied. A MSR effectively acts as a cost function-based
market maker always willing to take the other side of a trade with any willing buyer or seller, and
re-adjusting its quoted price after every transaction.
One of the most attractive properties of a MSR is its incentive-compatibility for a myopic risk-neutral
trader. But this also means that, every time a MSR trades with such an agent, the updated market
1

