Cornering Stationary and Restless Mixing Bandits
with Remix-UCB
Liva Ralaivola
Q ARMA, LIF, CNRS
Aix Marseille University
F-13289 Marseille cedex 9, France
liva.ralaivola@lif.univ-mrs.fr

Julien Audiffren
CMLA
ENS Cachan, Paris Saclay University
94235 Cachan France
audiffren@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Abstract
We study the restless bandit problem where arms are associated with stationary
ϕ-mixing processes and where rewards are therefore dependent: the question that
arises from this setting is that of carefully recovering some independence by ‘ignoring’ the values of some rewards. As we shall see, the bandit problem we tackle
requires us to address the exploration/exploitation/independence trade-off, which
we do by considering the idea of a waiting arm in the new Remix-UCB algorithm, a generalization of Improved-UCB for the problem at hand, that we
introduce. We provide a regret analysis for this bandit strategy; two noticeable
features of Remix-UCB are that i) it reduces to the regular Improved-UCB
when the ϕ-mixing coefficients are all 0, i.e. when the i.i.d scenario is recovered,
−α
and ii) when ϕ(n) = O(n
), it is able to ensure a controlled regret of order

(α−2)/α
1/α
e
Θ ∆∗
log
T , where ∆∗ encodes the distance between the best arm
and the best suboptimal arm, even in the case when α < 1, i.e. the case when the
ϕ-mixing coefficients are not summable.

1

Introduction

Bandit with mixing arms. The bandit problem consists in an agent who has to choose at each step
between K arms. A stochastic process is associated to each arm, and pulling an arm produces a
reward which is the realization of the corresponding stochastic process. The objective of the agent
is to maximize its long term reward. In the abundant bandit literature, it is often assumed that the
stochastic process associated to each arm is a sequence of independently and identically distributed
(i.i.d) random variables (see, e.g. [12]). In that case, the challenge the agent has to address is the
well-known exploration/exploitation problem: she has to simultaneously make sure that she collects
information from all arms to try to identify the most rewarding ones—this is exploration—and to
maximize the rewards along the sequence of pulls she performs—this is exploitation. Many algorithms have been proposed to solve this trade-off between exploration and exploitation [2, 3, 6, 12].
We propose to go a step further than the i.i.d setting and to work in the situation where the process
associated with each arm is a stationary ϕ-mixing process: the rewards are thus dependent from one
another, with a strength of dependence that weakens over time. From an application point of view,
this is a reasonable dependence structure: if a user clicks on some ad (a typical use of bandit algorithms) at some point in time, it is very likely that her choice will have an influence on what she will
click in the close future, while it may have a (lot) weaker impact on what ad she will choose to view
in a more distant future. As it shall appear in the sequel, working with such dependent observations
poses the question of how informative are some of the rewards with respect to the value of an arm
since, because of the dependencies and the strong correlation between close-by (in time) rewards,
they might not reflect the true ‘value’ of the arms. However, as the dependencies weaken over time,
some kind of independence might be recovered if some rewards are ignored, in some sense. This
1

