On the Global Linear Convergence
of Frank-Wolfe Optimization Variants

Simon Lacoste-Julien
INRIA - SIERRA project-team
École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France

Martin Jaggi
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
The Frank-Wolfe (FW) optimization algorithm has lately re-gained popularity
thanks in particular to its ability to nicely handle the structured constraints appearing in machine learning applications. However, its convergence rate is known
to be slow (sublinear) when the solution lies at the boundary. A simple lessknown fix is to add the possibility to take ‘away steps’ during optimization, an
operation that importantly does not require a feasibility oracle. In this paper, we
highlight and clarify several variants of the Frank-Wolfe optimization algorithm
that have been successfully applied in practice: away-steps FW, pairwise FW,
fully-corrective FW and Wolfe’s minimum norm point algorithm, and prove for
the first time that they all enjoy global linear convergence, under a weaker condition than strong convexity of the objective. The constant in the convergence rate
has an elegant interpretation as the product of the (classical) condition number of
the function with a novel geometric quantity that plays the role of a ‘condition
number’ of the constraint set. We provide pointers to where these algorithms have
made a difference in practice, in particular with the flow polytope, the marginal
polytope and the base polytope for submodular optimization.
The Frank-Wolfe algorithm [9] (also known as conditional gradient) is one of the earliest existing
methods for constrained convex optimization, and has seen an impressive revival recently due to
its nice properties compared to projected or proximal gradient methods, in particular for sparse
optimization and machine learning applications.
On the other hand, the classical projected gradient and proximal methods have been known to exhibit
a very nice adaptive acceleration property, namely that the the convergence rate becomes linear for
strongly convex objective, i.e. that the optimization error of the same algorithm after t iterations will
decrease geometrically with O((1 − ρ)t ) instead of the usual O(1/t) for general convex objective
functions. It has become an active research topic recently whether such an acceleration is also
possible for Frank-Wolfe type methods.
Contributions. We clarify several variants of the Frank-Wolfe algorithm and show that they all
converge linearly for any strongly convex function optimized over a polytope domain, with a constant bounded away from zero that only depends on the geometry of the polytope. Our analysis does
not depend on the location of the true optimum with respect to the domain, which was a disadvantage of earlier existing results such as [34, 12, 5], and the newer work of [28], as well as the line of
work of [1, 19, 26] which rely on Robinson’s condition [30]. Our analysis yields a weaker sufficient
condition than Robinson’s condition; in particular we can have linear convergence even in some
cases when the function has more than one global minima, and is not globally strongly convex. The
constant also naturally separates as the product of the condition number of the function with a novel
notion of condition number of a polytope, which might have applications in complexity theory.
Related Work. For the classical Frank-Wolfe algorithm, [5] showed a linear rate for the special
case of quadratic objectives when the optimum is in the strict interior of the domain, a result already
subsumed by the more general [12]. The early work of [23] showed linear convergence for strongly
1

