Newton-Stein Method:
A Second Order Method for GLMs via Stein’s Lemma
Murat A. Erdogdu
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
erdogdu@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of efficiently computing the maximum likelihood estimator in Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) when the number of observations
is much larger than the number of coefficients (n p 1). In this regime, optimization algorithms can immensely benefit from approximate second order information. We propose an alternative way of constructing the curvature information by formulating it as an estimation problem and applying a Stein-type lemma,
which allows further improvements through sub-sampling and eigenvalue thresholding. Our algorithm enjoys fast convergence rates, resembling that of second
order methods, with modest per-iteration cost. We provide its convergence analysis for the case where the rows of the design matrix are i.i.d. samples with bounded
support. We show that the convergence has two phases, a quadratic phase followed
by a linear phase. Finally, we empirically demonstrate that our algorithm achieves
the highest performance compared to various algorithms on several datasets.

1

Introduction

Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) play a crucial role in numerous statistical and machine learning problems. GLMs formulate the natural parameter in exponential families as a linear model
and provide a miscellaneous framework for statistical methodology and supervised learning tasks.
Celebrated examples include linear, logistic, multinomial regressions and applications to graphical
models [MN89, KF09].
In this paper, we focus on how to solve the maximum likelihood problem efficiently in the GLM
setting when the number of observations n is much larger than the dimension of the coefficient
vector p, i.e., n
p. GLM optimization task is typically expressed as a minimization problem
where the objective function is the negative log-likelihood that is denoted by `( ) where 2 Rp is
the coefficient vector. Many optimization algorithms are available for such minimization problems
[Bis95, BV04, Nes04]. However, only a few uses the special structure of GLMs. In this paper, we
consider updates that are specifically designed for GLMs, which are of the from
Qr `( ) ,
where

(1.1)

is the step size and Q is a scaling matrix which provides curvature information.

For the updates of the form Eq. (1.1), the performance of the algorithm is mainly determined by the
scaling matrix Q. Classical Newton’s Method (NM) and Natural Gradient Descent (NG) are recovered by simply taking Q to be the inverse Hessian and the inverse Fisher’s information at the current
iterate, respectively [Ama98, Nes04]. Second order methods may achieve quadratic convergence
rate, yet they suffer from excessive cost of computing the scaling matrix at every iteration. On the
other hand, if we take Q to be the identity matrix, we recover the simple Gradient Descent (GD)
method which has a linear convergence rate. Although GD’s convergence rate is slow compared to
that of second order methods, modest per-iteration cost makes it practical for large-scale problems.
The trade-off between the convergence rate and per-iteration cost has been extensively studied
[BV04, Nes04]. In n
p regime, the main objective is to construct a scaling matrix Q that
1

