HONOR: Hybrid Optimization for NOn-convex
Regularized problems

Jieping Ye
Univeristy of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
jpye@umich.edu

Pinghua Gong
Univeristy of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
gongp@umich.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the superiority of non-convex sparse learning formulations over their convex counterparts in both theory and practice. However, due
to the non-convexity and non-smoothness of the regularizer, how to efficiently
solve the non-convex optimization problem for large-scale data is still quite challenging. In this paper, we propose an efficient Hybrid Optimization algorithm
for NOn-convex Regularized problems (HONOR). Specifically, we develop a hybrid scheme which effectively integrates a Quasi-Newton (QN) step and a Gradient Descent (GD) step. Our contributions are as follows: (1) HONOR incorporates the second-order information to greatly speed up the convergence, while
it avoids solving a regularized quadratic programming and only involves matrixvector multiplications without explicitly forming the inverse Hessian matrix. (2)
We establish a rigorous convergence analysis for HONOR, which shows that convergence is guaranteed even for non-convex problems, while it is typically challenging to analyze the convergence for non-convex problems. (3) We conduct
empirical studies on large-scale data sets and results demonstrate that HONOR
converges significantly faster than state-of-the-art algorithms.

1 Introduction
Sparse learning with convex regularization has been successfully applied to a wide range of applications including marker genes identification [19], face recognition [22], image restoration [2],
text corpora understanding [9] and radar imaging [20]. However, it has been shown recently that
many convex sparse learning formulations are inferior to their non-convex counterparts in both theory and practice [27, 12, 23, 25, 16, 26, 24, 11]. Popular non-convex sparsity-inducing penalties
include Smoothly Clipped Absolute Deviation (SCAD) [10], Log-Sum Penalty (LSP) [6] and Minimax Concave Penalty (MCP) [23]. Although non-convex sparse learning reveals its advantage over
the convex one, it remains a challenge to develop an efficient algorithm to solve the non-convex
optimization problem especially for large-scale data.
DC programming [21] is a popular approach to solve non-convex problems whose objective functions can be expressed as the difference of two convex functions. However, a potentially non-trivial
convex subproblem is required to solve at each iteration, which is not practical for large-scale problems. SparseNet [16] can solve a least squares problem with a non-convex penalty. At each step,
SparseNet solves a univariate subproblem with a non-convex penalty which admits a closed-form
solution. However, to establish the convergence analysis, the parameter of the non-convex penalty
is required to be restricted to some interval such that the univariate subproblem (with a non-convex
penalty) is convex. Moreover, it is quite challenging to extend SparseNet to non-convex problems
with a non-least-squares loss, as the univariate subproblem generally does not admit a closed-form
solution. The GIST algorithm [14] can solve a class of non-convex regularized problems by iteratively solving a possibly non-convex proximal operator problem, which in turn admits a closed-form
solution. However, GIST does not well exploit the second-order information. The DC-PN algorithm
1

