A Universal Catalyst for First-Order Optimization

Hongzhou Lin1 , Julien Mairal1 and Zaid Harchaoui1,2
1
2
Inria
NYU
{hongzhou.lin,julien.mairal}@inria.fr
zaid.harchaoui@nyu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a generic scheme for accelerating first-order optimization methods
in the sense of Nesterov, which builds upon a new analysis of the accelerated proximal point algorithm. Our approach consists of minimizing a convex objective
by approximately solving a sequence of well-chosen auxiliary problems, leading
to faster convergence. This strategy applies to a large class of algorithms, including gradient descent, block coordinate descent, SAG, SAGA, SDCA, SVRG,
Finito/MISO, and their proximal variants. For all of these methods, we provide
acceleration and explicit support for non-strongly convex objectives. In addition
to theoretical speed-up, we also show that acceleration is useful in practice, especially for ill-conditioned problems where we measure significant improvements.

1

Introduction

A large number of machine learning and signal processing problems are formulated as the minimization of a composite objective function F : Rp → R:
n
o
minp F (x) , f (x) + ψ(x) ,
(1)
x∈R

where f is convex and has Lipschitz continuous derivatives with constant L and ψ is convex but may
not be differentiable. The variable x represents model parameters and the role of f is to ensure that
the estimated parameters fit some observed data. Specifically, f is often a large sum of functions
n
1X
f (x) ,
fi (x),
(2)
n i=1

and each term fi (x) measures the fit between x and a data point indexed by i. The function ψ in (1)
acts as a regularizer; it is typically chosen to be the squared ℓ2 -norm, which is smooth, or to be a
non-differentiable penalty such as the ℓ1 -norm or another sparsity-inducing norm [2]. Composite
minimization also encompasses constrained minimization if we consider extended-valued indicator
functions ψ that may take the value +∞ outside of a convex set C and 0 inside (see [11]).

Our goal is to accelerate gradient-based or first-order methods that are designed to solve (1), with
a particular focus on large sums of functions (2). By “accelerating”, we mean generalizing a mechanism invented by Nesterov [17] that improves the convergence rate of the gradient descent algorithm. More precisely, when ψ = 0, gradient descent steps produce iterates (xk )k≥0 such that
F (xk ) − F ∗ = O(1/k), where F ∗ denotes the minimum value of F . Furthermore, when the objective F is strongly convex with constant µ, the rate of convergence becomes linear in O((1 − µ/L)k ).
These rates were shown by Nesterov [16] to be suboptimal for thepclass of first-order methods, and
instead optimal rates—O(1/k 2 ) for the convex case and O((1 − µ/L)k ) for the µ-strongly convex one—could be obtained by taking gradient steps at well-chosen points. Later, this acceleration
technique was extended to deal with non-differentiable regularization functions ψ [4, 19].
For modern machine learning problems involving a large sum of n functions, a recent effort has been
devoted to developing fast incremental algorithms [6, 7, 14, 24, 25, 27] that can exploit the particular
1

