Policy Evaluation Using the Ω-Return

Scott Niekum
University of Texas at Austin

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Carnegie Mellon University
Georgios Theocharous
Adobe Research

George Konidaris
Duke University

Abstract
We propose the Ω-return as an alternative to the λ-return currently used by the
TD(λ) family of algorithms. The benefit of the Ω-return is that it accounts for
the correlation of different length returns. Because it is difficult to compute exactly, we suggest one way of approximating the Ω-return. We provide empirical
studies that suggest that it is superior to the λ-return and γ-return for a variety of
problems.

1

Introduction

Most reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms learn a value function—a function that estimates the
expected return obtained by following a given policy from a given state. Efficient algorithms for estimating the value function have therefore been a primary focus of RL research. The most widely used
family of RL algorithms, the TD(λ) family [1], forms an estimate of return (called the λ-return) that
blends low-variance but biased temporal difference return estimates with high-variance but unbiased
Monte Carlo return estimates, using a parameter λ ∈ [0, 1]. While several different algorithms exist
within the TD(λ) family—the original linear-time algorithm [1], least-squares formulations [2], and
methods for adapting λ [3], among others—the λ-return formulation has remained unchanged since
its introduction in 1988 [1].
Recently Konidaris et al. [4] proposed the γ-return as an alternative to the λ-return, which uses a
more accurate model of how the variance of a return increases with its length. However, both the γ
and λ-returns fail to account for the correlation of returns of different lengths, instead treating them
as statistically independent. We propose the Ω-return, which uses well-studied statistical techniques
to directly account for the correlation of returns of different lengths. However, unlike the λ and
γ-returns, the Ω-return is not simple to compute, and often can only be approximated. We propose a
method for approximating the Ω-return, and show that it outperforms the λ and γ-returns on a range
of off-policy evaluation problems.

2

Complex Backups

Estimates of return lie at the heart of value-function based RL algorithms: an estimate, V̂ π , of the
value function, V π , estimates return from each state, and the learning process aims to reduce the
error between estimated and observed returns. For brevity we suppress the dependencies of V π and
V̂ π on π and write V and V̂ . Temporal difference (TD) algorithms use an estimate of the return
obtained by taking a single transition in the Markov decision process (MDP) [5] and then estimating
the remaining return using the estimate of the value function:
RsTD
= rt + γ V̂ (st+1 ),
t
1

