Robust Portfolio Optimization

Fang Han
Department of Biostatistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21205
fhan@jhu.edu

Huitong Qiu
Department of Biostatistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21205
hqiu7@jhu.edu
Han Liu
Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544 hanliu@princeton.edu

Brian Caffo
Department of Biostatistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21205
bcaffo@jhsph.edu

Abstract
We propose a robust portfolio optimization approach based on quantile statistics.
The proposed method is robust to extreme events in asset returns, and accommodates large portfolios under limited historical data. Specifically, we show that the
risk of the estimated portfolio converges to the oracle optimal risk with parametric
rate under weakly dependent asset returns. The theory does not rely on higher order moment assumptions, thus allowing for heavy-tailed asset returns. Moreover,
the rate of convergence quantifies that the size of the portfolio under management
is allowed to scale exponentially with the sample size of the historical data. The
empirical effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated under both synthetic and real stock data. Our work extends existing ones by achieving robustness
in high dimensions, and by allowing serial dependence.

1

Introduction

Markowitz’s mean-variance analysis sets the basis for modern portfolio optimization theory [1].
However, the mean-variance analysis has been criticized for being sensitive to estimation errors in
the mean and covariance matrix of the asset returns [2, 3]. Compared to the covariance matrix,
the mean of the asset returns is more influential and harder to estimate [4, 5]. Therefore, many
studies focus on the global minimum variance (GMV) formulation, which only involves estimating
the covariance matrix of the asset returns.
Estimating the covariance matrix of asset returns is challenging due to the high dimensionality and
heavy-tailedness of asset return data. Specifically, the number of assets under management is usually
much larger than the sample size of exploitable historical data. On the other hand, extreme events
are typical in financial asset prices, leading to heavy-tailed asset returns.
To overcome the curse of dimensionality, structured covariance matrix estimators are proposed for
asset return data. [6] considered estimators based on factor models with observable factors. [7,
8, 9] studied covariance matrix estimators based on latent factor models. [10, 11, 12] proposed to
shrink the sample covariance matrix towards highly structured covariance matrices, including the
identity matrix, order 1 autoregressive covariance matrices, and one-factor-based covariance matrix
estimators. These estimators are commonly based on the sample covariance matrix. (sub)Gaussian
tail assumptions are required to guarantee consistency.
For heavy-tailed data, robust estimators of covariance matrices are desired. Classic robust covariance
matrix estimators include M -estimators, minimum volume ellipsoid (MVE) and minimum covari1

