Learning Wake-Sleep Recurrent Attention Models

Jimmy Ba
University of Toronto

Roger Grosse
University of Toronto

jimmy@psi.toronto.edu

rgrosse@cs.toronto.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
University of Toronto

Brendan Frey
University of Toronto

rsalskhu@cs.toronto.edu

frey@psi.toronto.edu

Abstract
Despite their success, convolutional neural networks are computationally expensive because they must examine all image locations. Stochastic attention-based
models have been shown to improve computational efficiency at test time, but they
remain difficult to train because of intractable posterior inference and high variance in the stochastic gradient estimates. Borrowing techniques from the literature
on training deep generative models, we present the Wake-Sleep Recurrent Attention Model, a method for training stochastic attention networks which improves
posterior inference and which reduces the variability in the stochastic gradients.
We show that our method can greatly speed up the training time for stochastic
attention networks in the domains of image classification and caption generation.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks, trained end-to-end, have been shown to substantially outperform
previous approaches to various supervised learning tasks in computer vision (e.g. [1])). Despite their
wide success, convolutional nets are computationally expensive when processing high-resolution
input images, because they must examine all image locations at a fine scale. This has motivated
recent work on visual attention-based models [2, 3, 4], which reduce the number of parameters and
computational operations by selecting informative regions of an image to focus on. In addition to
computational speedups, attention-based models can also add a degree of interpretability, as one can
understand what signals the algorithm is using by seeing where it is looking. One such approach
was recently used by [5] to automatically generate image captions and highlight which image region
was relevant to each word in the caption.
There are two general approaches to attention-based image understanding: hard and soft attention.
Soft attention based models (e.g. [5]) obtain features from a weighted average of all image locations,
where locations are weighted based on a model’s saliency map. By contrast, a hard attention model
(e.g. [2, 3]) chooses, typically stochastically, a series of discrete glimpse locations. Soft attention
models are computationally expensive, as they have to examine every image location; we believe
that the computational gains of attention require a hard attention model. Unfortunately, this comes
at a cost: while soft attention models can be trained with standard backpropagation [6, 5], this does
not work for hard attention models, whose glimpse selections are typically discrete.
Training stochastic hard attention models is difficult because the loss gradient involves intractable
posterior expectations, and because the stochastic gradient estimates can have high variance. (The
latter problem was also observed by [7] in the context of memory networks.) In this work, we propose the Wake-Sleep Recurrent Attention Model (WS-RAM), a method for training stochastic recurrent attention models which deals with the problems of intractable inference and high-variance gradients by taking advantage of several advances from the literature on training deep generative models:
1

