Bandits with Unobserved Confounders:
A Causal Approach

Andrew Forney∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
forns@cs.ucla.edu

Elias Bareinboim∗
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
eb@purdue.edu

Judea Pearl
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
judea@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The Multi-Armed Bandit problem constitutes an archetypal setting for sequential
decision-making, permeating multiple domains including engineering, business,
and medicine. One of the hallmarks of a bandit setting is the agent’s capacity
to explore its environment through active intervention, which contrasts with the
ability to collect passive data by estimating associational relationships between
actions and payouts. The existence of unobserved confounders, namely unmeasured variables affecting both the action and the outcome variables, implies that
these two data-collection modes will in general not coincide. In this paper, we
show that formalizing this distinction has conceptual and algorithmic implications
to the bandit setting. The current generation of bandit algorithms implicitly try to
maximize rewards based on estimation of the experimental distribution, which
we show is not always the best strategy to pursue. Indeed, to achieve low regret
in certain realistic classes of bandit problems (namely, in the face of unobserved
confounders), both experimental and observational quantities are required by the
rational agent. After this realization, we propose an optimization metric (employing both experimental and observational distributions) that bandit agents should
pursue, and illustrate its benefits over traditional algorithms.

1

Introduction

The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem is one of the most popular settings encountered in the
sequential decision-making literature [Rob52, LR85, EDMM06, Sco10, BCB12] with applications
across multiple disciplines. The main challenge in a prototypical bandit instance is to determine
a sequence of actions that maximizes payouts given that each arm’s reward distribution is initially
unknown to the agent. Accordingly, the problem revolves around determining the best strategy for
learning this distribution (exploring) while, simultaneously, using the agent’s accumulated samples
to identify the current “best” arm so as to maximize profit (exploiting). Different algorithms employ
different strategies to balance exploration and exploitation, but a standard definition for the “best”
arm is the one that has the highest payout rate associated with it. We will show that, perhaps
surprisingly, the definition of “best” arm is more involved when unobserved confounders are present.
This paper complements the vast literature of MAB that encompasses many variants including adversarial bandits (in which an omnipotent adversary can dynamically shift the reward distributions
to thwart the player’s best strategies) [BFK10, AS95, BS12] contextual bandits (in which the payout,
∗

The authors contributed equally to this paper.

1

