Efficient Exact Gradient Update for training Deep
Networks with Very Large Sparse Targets
Pascal Vincent∗ , Alexandre de Brébisson, Xavier Bouthillier
Département d’Informatique et de Recherche Opérationnelle
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, CANADA
∗
and CIFAR

Abstract
An important class of problems involves training deep neural networks with sparse
prediction targets of very high dimension D. These occur naturally in e.g. neural
language models or the learning of word-embeddings, often posed as predicting
the probability of next words among a vocabulary of size D (e.g. 200 000). Computing the equally large, but typically non-sparse D-dimensional output vector
from a last hidden layer of reasonable dimension d (e.g. 500) incurs a prohibitive
O(Dd) computational cost for each example, as does updating the D × d output
weight matrix and computing the gradient needed for backpropagation to previous
layers. While efficient handling of large sparse network inputs is trivial, the case
of large sparse targets is not, and has thus so far been sidestepped with approximate alternatives such as hierarchical softmax or sampling-based approximations
during training. In this work we develop an original algorithmic approach which,
for a family of loss functions that includes squared error and spherical softmax,
can compute the exact loss, gradient update for the output weights, and gradient for backpropagation, all in O(d2 ) per example instead of O(Dd), remarkably
without ever computing the D-dimensional output. The proposed algorithm yields
D
a speedup of 4d
, i.e. two orders of magnitude for typical sizes, for that critical part
of the computations that often dominates the training time in this kind of network
architecture.

1

Introduction

Many modern applications of neural networks have to deal with data represented, or representable,
as very large sparse vectors. Such representations arise in natural language related tasks, where
the dimension D of that vector is typically (a multiple of) the size of the vocabulary, and also in
the sparse user-item matrices of collaborative-filtering applications. It is trivial to handle very large
sparse inputs to a neural network in a computationally efficient manner: the forward propagation
and update to the input weight matrix after backpropagation are correspondingly sparse. By contrast, training with very large sparse prediction targets is problematic: even if the target is sparse, the
computation of the equally large network output and the corresponding gradient update to the huge
output weight matrix are not sparse and thus computationally prohibitive. This has been a practical
problem ever since Bengio et al. [1] first proposed using a neural network for learning a language
model, in which case the computed output vector represents the probability of the next word and
is the size of the considered vocabulary, which is becoming increasingly large in modern applications [2]. Several approaches have been proposed to attempt to address this difficulty essentially by
sidestepping it. They fall in two categories:
• Sampling or selection based approximations consider and compute only a tiny fraction of the
output’s dimensions sampled at random or heuristically chosen. The reconstruction sampling of
Dauphin et al. [3], the efficient use of biased importance sampling in Jean et al. [4], the use of
1

