Beyond Convexity: Stochastic
Quasi-Convex Optimization

Elad Hazan
Princeton University

Kfir Y. Levy
Technion

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
The Hebrew University

ehazan@cs.princeton.edu

kfiryl@tx.technion.ac.il

shais@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Stochastic convex optimization is a basic and well studied primitive in machine
learning. It is well known that convex and Lipschitz functions can be minimized
efficiently using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD).
The Normalized Gradient Descent (NGD) algorithm, is an adaptation of Gradient
Descent, which updates according to the direction of the gradients, rather than the
gradients themselves. In this paper we analyze a stochastic version of NGD and
prove its convergence to a global minimum for a wider class of functions: we
require the functions to be quasi-convex and locally-Lipschitz. Quasi-convexity
broadens the concept of unimodality to multidimensions and allows for certain
types of saddle points, which are a known hurdle for first-order optimization methods such as gradient descent. Locally-Lipschitz functions are only required to be
Lipschitz in a small region around the optimum. This assumption circumvents
gradient explosion, which is another known hurdle for gradient descent variants.
Interestingly, unlike the vanilla SGD algorithm, the stochastic normalized gradient
descent algorithm provably requires a minimal minibatch size.

1

Introduction

The benefits of using the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) scheme for learning could not be
stressed enough. For convex and Lipschitz objectives, SGD is guaranteed to find an -optimal solution within O(1/2 ) iterations and requires only an unbiased estimator for the gradient, which
is obtained with only one (or a few) data samples. However, when applied to non-convex problems several drawbacks are revealed. In particular, SGD is widely used for deep learning [2], one
of the most interesting fields where stochastic non-convex optimization problems arise. Often, the
objective in these kind of problems demonstrates two extreme phenomena [3]: on the one hand
plateaus—regions with vanishing gradients; and on the other hand cliffs—exceedingly high gradients. As expected, applying SGD to such problems is often reported to yield unsatisfactory results.
In this paper we analyze a stochastic version of the Normalized Gradient Descent (NGD) algorithm,
which we denote by SNGD. Each iteration of SNGD is as simple and efficient as SGD, but is
much more appropriate for non-convex optimization problems, overcoming some of the pitfalls that
SGD may encounter. Particularly, we define a family of locally-quasi-convex and locally-Lipschitz
functions, and prove that SNGD is suitable for optimizing such objectives.
Local-Quasi-convexity is a generalization of unimodal functions to multidimensions, which includes
quasi-convex, and convex functions as a subclass. Locally-Quasi-convex functions allow for certain
types of plateaus and saddle points which are difficult for SGD and other gradient descent variants.
Local-Lipschitzness is a generalization of Lipschitz functions that only assumes Lipschitzness in a
small region around the minima, whereas farther away the gradients may be unbounded. Gradient
explosion is, thus, another difficulty that is successfully tackled by SNGD and poses difficulties for
other stochastic gradient descent variants.
1

