Closed-form Estimators for High-dimensional
Generalized Linear Models
Eunho Yang
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
eunhyang@us.ibm.com

Aurélie C. Lozano
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
aclozano@us.ibm.com

Pradeep Ravikumar
University of Texas at Austin
pradeepr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a class of closed-form estimators for GLMs under high-dimensional
sampling regimes. Our class of estimators is based on deriving closed-form variants of the vanilla unregularized MLE but which are (a) well-defined even under
high-dimensional settings, and (b) available in closed-form. We then perform
thresholding operations on this MLE variant to obtain our class of estimators. We
derive a unified statistical analysis of our class of estimators, and show that it enjoys strong statistical guarantees in both parameter error as well as variable selection, that surprisingly match those of the more complex regularized GLM MLEs,
even while our closed-form estimators are computationally much simpler. We derive instantiations of our class of closed-form estimators, as well as corollaries
of our general theorem, for the special cases of logistic, exponential and Poisson
regression models. We corroborate the surprising statistical and computational
performance of our class of estimators via extensive simulations.

1

Introduction

We consider the estimation of generalized linear models (GLMs) [1], under high-dimensional settings where the number of variables p may greatly exceed the number of observations n. GLMs are
a very general class of statistical models for the conditional distribution of a response variable given
a covariate vector, where the form of the conditional distribution is specified by any exponential
family distribution. Popular instances of GLMs include logistic regression, which is widely used
for binary classification, as well as Poisson regression, which together with logistic regression, is
widely used in key tasks in genomics, such as classifying the status of patients based on genotype
data [2] and identifying genes that are predictive of survival [3], among others. Recently, GLMs
have also been used as a key tool in the construction of graphical models [4]. Overall, GLMs have
proven very useful in many modern applications involving prediction with high-dimensional data.
Accordingly, an important problem is the estimation of such GLMs under high-dimensional sampling regimes. Under such sampling regimes, it is now well-known that consistent estimators cannot be obtained unless low-dimensional structural constraints are imposed upon the underlying regression model parameter vector. Popular structural constraints include that of sparsity, which encourages parameter vectors supported with very few non-zero entries, group-sparse constraints, and
low-rank structure with matrix-structured parameters, among others. Several lines of work have
focused on consistent estimators for such structurally constrained high-dimensional GLMs. A popular instance, for the case of sparsity-structured GLMs, is the `1 regularized maximum likelihood
estimator (MLE), which has been shown to have strong theoretical guarantees, ranging from risk
1

