Gradient-free Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
with Efficient Kernel Exponential Families

Heiko Strathmann∗ Dino Sejdinovic+ Samuel Livingstoneo Zoltan Szabo∗ Arthur Gretton∗

∗

Gatsby Unit
University College London

+

Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

o

School of Mathematics
University of Bristol

Abstract
We propose Kernel Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (KMC), a gradient-free adaptive
MCMC algorithm based on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC). On target densities
where classical HMC is not an option due to intractable gradients, KMC adaptively learns the target’s gradient structure by fitting an exponential family model
in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space. Computational costs are reduced by two
novel efficient approximations to this gradient. While being asymptotically exact,
KMC mimics HMC in terms of sampling efficiency, and offers substantial mixing
improvements over state-of-the-art gradient free samplers. We support our claims
with experimental studies on both toy and real-world applications, including Approximate Bayesian Computation and exact-approximate MCMC.

1

Introduction

Estimating expectations using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a fundamental approximate
inference technique in Bayesian statistics. MCMC itself can be computationally demanding, and
the expected estimation error depends directly on the correlation between successive points in the
Markov chain. Therefore, efficiency can be achieved by taking large steps with high probability.
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [1] is an MCMC algorithm that improves efficiency by exploiting gradient information. It simulates particle movement along the contour lines of a dynamical system
constructed from the target density. Projections of these trajectories cover wide parts of the target’s
support, and the probability of accepting a move along a trajectory is often close to one. Remarkably, this property is mostly invariant to growing dimensionality, and HMC here often is superior to
random walk methods, which need to decrease their step size at a much faster rate [1, Sec. 4.4].
Unfortunately, for a large class of problems, gradient information is not available. For example, in
Pseudo-Marginal MCMC (PM-MCMC) [2, 3], the posterior does not have an analytic expression,
but can only be estimated at any given point, e.g. in Bayesian Gaussian Process classification [4]. A
related setting is MCMC for Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC-MCMC), where the posterior is approximated through repeated simulation from a likelihood model [5, 6]. In both cases,
HMC cannot be applied, leaving random walk methods as the only mature alternative. There have
been efforts to mimic HMC’s behaviour using stochastic gradients from mini-batches in Big Data
[7], or stochastic finite differences in ABC [8]. Stochastic gradient based HMC methods, however,
often suffer from low acceptance rates or additional bias that is hard to quantify [9].
Random walk methods can be tuned by matching scaling of steps and target. For example, Adaptive
Metropolis-Hastings (AMH) [10, 11] is based on learning the global scaling of the target from the
history of the Markov chain. Yet, for densities with nonlinear support, this approach does not work
very well. Recently, [12] introduced a Kernel Adaptive Metropolis-Hastings (KAMH) algorithm
whose proposals are locally aligned to the target. By adaptively learning target covariance in a
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), KAMH achieves improved sampling efficiency.
1

