Unsupervised Learning by Program Synthesis

Kevin Ellis
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ellisk@mit.edu

Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT CSAIL
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
asolar@csail.mit.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce an unsupervised learning algorithm that combines probabilistic
modeling with solver-based techniques for program synthesis. We apply our techniques to both a visual learning domain and a language learning problem, showing
that our algorithm can learn many visual concepts from only a few examples and
that it can recover some English inflectional morphology. Taken together, these
results give both a new approach to unsupervised learning of symbolic compositional structures, and a technique for applying program synthesis tools to noisy
data.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning seeks to induce good latent representations of a data set. Nonparametric
statistical approaches such as deep autoencoder networks, mixture-model density estimators, or
nonlinear manifold learning algorithms have been very successful at learning representations of
high-dimensional perceptual input. However, it is unclear how they would represent more abstract
structures such as spatial relations in vision (e.g., inside of or all in a line) [2], or morphological rules
in language (e.g., the different inflections of verbs) [1, 13]. Here we give an unsupervised learning
algorithm that synthesizes programs from data, with the goal of learning such concepts. Our approach generalizes from small amounts of data, and produces interpretable symbolic representations
parameterized by a human-readable programming language.
Programs (deterministic or probabilistic) are a natural knowledge representation for many domains
[3], and the idea that inductive learning should be thought of as probabilistic inference over programs is at least 50 years old [6]. Recent work in learning programs has focused on supervised
learning from noiseless input/output pairs, or from formal specifications [4]. Our goal here is to
learn programs from noisy observations without explicit input/output examples. A central idea in
unsupervised learning is compression: finding data representations that require the fewest bits to
write down. We realize this by treating observed data as the output of an unknown program applied
to unknown inputs. By doing joint inference over the program and the inputs, we recover compressive encodings of the observed data. The induced program gives a generative model for the data,
and the induced inputs give an embedding for each data point.
Although a completely domain general method for program synthesis would be desirable, we believe this will remain intractable for the foreseeable future. Accordingly, our approach factors out
the domain-specific components of problems in the form of a grammar for program hypotheses, and
we show how this allows the same general-purpose tools to be used for unsupervised program synthesis in two very different domains. In a domain of visual concepts [5] designed to be natural for
1

