Analysis of Robust PCA via Local Incoherence
Huishuai Zhang
Department of EECS
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
hzhan23@syr.edu

Yi Zhou
Department of EECS
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
yzhou35@syr.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of EECS
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
yliang06@syr.edu

Abstract
We investigate the robust PCA problem of decomposing an observed matrix into
the sum of a low-rank and a sparse error matrices via convex programming Principal Component Pursuit (PCP). In contrast to previous studies that assume the
support of the error matrix is generated by uniform Bernoulli sampling, we allow
non-uniform sampling, i.e., entries of the low-rank matrix are corrupted by errors with unequal probabilities. We characterize conditions on error corruption of
each individual entry based on the local incoherence of the low-rank matrix, under
which correct matrix decomposition by PCP is guaranteed. Such a refined analysis of robust PCA captures how robust each entry of the low rank matrix combats
error corruption. In order to deal with non-uniform error corruption, our technical
proof introduces a new weighted norm and develops/exploits the concentration
properties that such a norm satisfies.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of robust Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Suppose a n-by-n1 data
matrix M can be decomposed into a low-rank matrix L and a sparse matrix S as
M = L + S.

(1)

Robust PCA aims to find L and S with M given. This problem has been extensively studied recently.
In [1, 2], Principal Component Pursuit (PCP) has been proposed to solve the robust PCA problem
via the following convex programming
PCP:

minimize kLk⇤ + kSk1
L,S

(2)

subject to M = L + S,
where k · k⇤ denotes the nuclear norm, i.e., the sum of singular values, and k · k1 denotes the l1
norm i.e., the sum of absolute values of all entries. It was shown in [1, 2] that PCP successfully
recovers L and S if the two matrices are distinguishable from each other in properties, i.e., L is not
sparse and S is not low-rank. One important quantity that determines similarity of L to a sparse
matrix is the incoherence of L, which measures how column and row spaces of L are aligned with
canonical basis and between themselves. Namely, suppose that L is a rank-r matrix with SVD
L = U ⌃V ⇤ , where ⌃ is a r ⇥ r diagonal matrix with singular values as its diagonal entries, U is a
n ⇥ r matrix with columns as the left singular vectors of L, V is a n ⇥ r matrix with columns as the
right singular vectors of L, and V ⇤ denotes the transpose of V . The incoherence of L is measured
1
In this paper, we focus on square matrices for simplicity. Our results can be extended to rectangular
matrices in a standard way.

1

