Non-convex Statistical Optimization for Sparse
Tensor Graphical Model
Wei Sun
Yahoo Labs
Sunnyvale, CA
sunweisurrey@yahoo-inc.com

Zhaoran Wang
Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
zhaoran@princeton.edu

Han Liu
Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
hanliu@princeton.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN
chengg@stat.purdue.edu

Abstract
We consider the estimation of sparse graphical models that characterize the dependency structure of high-dimensional tensor-valued data. To facilitate the estimation
of the precision matrix corresponding to each way of the tensor, we assume the
data follow a tensor normal distribution whose covariance has a Kronecker product
structure. The penalized maximum likelihood estimation of this model involves
minimizing a non-convex objective function. In spite of the non-convexity of this
estimation problem, we prove that an alternating minimization algorithm, which
iteratively estimates each sparse precision matrix while fixing the others, attains
an estimator with the optimal statistical rate of convergence as well as consistent
graph recovery. Notably, such an estimator achieves estimation consistency with
only one tensor sample, which is unobserved in previous work. Our theoretical
results are backed by thorough numerical studies.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional tensor-valued data are prevalent in many fields such as personalized recommendation systems and brain imaging research [1, 2]. Traditional recommendation systems are mainly
based on the user-item matrix, whose entry denotes each user’s preference for a particular item. To
incorporate additional information into the analysis, such as the temporal behavior of users, we need
to consider a user-item-time tensor. For another example, functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) data can be viewed as a three way (third-order) tensor since it contains the brain measurements
taken on different locations over time for various experimental conditions. Also, in the example of
microarray study for aging [3], thousands of gene expression measurements are recorded on 16 tissue
types on 40 mice with varying ages, which forms a four way gene-tissue-mouse-age tensor.
In this paper, we study the estimation of conditional independence structure within tensor data. For
example, in the microarray study for aging we are interested in the dependency structure across different genes, tissues, ages and even mice. Assuming data are drawn from a tensor normal distribution,
a straightforward way to estimate this structure is to vectorize the tensor and estimate the underlying
Gaussian graphical model associated with the vector. Such an approach ignores the tensor structure
1

