Semi-Proximal Mirror-Prox
for Nonsmooth Composite Minimization

Niao He
Georgia Institute of Technology
nhe6@gatech.edu

Zaid Harchaoui
NYU, Inria
firstname.lastname@nyu.edu

Abstract
We propose a new first-order optimization algorithm to solve high-dimensional
non-smooth composite minimization problems. Typical examples of such problems have an objective that decomposes into a non-smooth empirical risk part
and a non-smooth regularization penalty. The proposed algorithm, called SemiProximal Mirror-Prox, leverages the saddle point representation of one part of the
objective while handling the other part of the objective via linear minimization
over the domain. The algorithm stands in contrast with more classical proximal
gradient algorithms with smoothing, which require the computation of proximal
operators at each iteration and can therefore be impractical for high-dimensional
problems. We establish the theoretical convergence rate of Semi-Proximal MirrorProx, which exhibits the optimal complexity bounds, i.e. O(1/ǫ2 ), for the number
of calls to linear minimization oracle. We present promising experimental results
showing the interest of the approach in comparison to competing methods.

1

Introduction

A wide range of machine learning and signal processing problems can be formulated as the minimization of a composite objective:
min F (x) := f (x) + kBxk

x∈X

(1)

where X is closed and convex, f is convex and can be either smooth, or nonsmooth yet enjoys
a particular structure. The term kBxk defines a regularization penalty through a norm k · k, and
x 7→ Bx a linear mapping on a closed convex set X.
In many situations, the objective function F of interest enjoys a favorable structure, namely a socalled saddle point representation [6, 11, 13]:
f (x) = max {hx, Azi − ψ(z)}
z∈Z

(2)

where Z is convex compact subset of a Euclidean space, and ψ(·) is a convex function. Sec. 4 will
give several examples of such situations. Saddle point representations can then be leveraged to use
first-order optimization algorithms.
The simple first option to minimize F is using the so-called Nesterov smoothing technique [19]
along with a proximal gradient algorithm [23], assuming that the proximal operator associated with
X is computationally tractable and cheap to compute. However, this is certainly not the case when
considering problems with norms acting in the spectral domain of high-dimensional matrices, such
as the matrix nuclear-norm [12] and structured extensions thereof [5, 2]. In the latter situation,
another option is to use a smoothing technique now with a conditional gradient or Frank-Wolfe
algorithm to minimize F , assuming that a a linear minimization oracle associated with X is cheaper
to compute than the proximal operator [6, 14, 24]. Neither option takes advantage of the composite
structure of the objective (1) or handles the case when the linear mapping B is nontrivial.
1

