Unlocking neural population non-stationarity
using a hierarchical dynamics model

Mijung Park1 , Gergo Bohner1 , Jakob H. Macke2
1 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London
2
Research Center caesar, an associate of the Max Planck Society, Bonn
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics,
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Tübingen
{mijung, gbohner}@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk, jakob.macke@caesar.de

Abstract
Neural population activity often exhibits rich variability. This variability can arise
from single-neuron stochasticity, neural dynamics on short time-scales, as well as
from modulations of neural firing properties on long time-scales, often referred
to as neural non-stationarity. To better understand the nature of co-variability in
neural circuits and their impact on cortical information processing, we introduce
a hierarchical dynamics model that is able to capture both slow inter-trial modulations in firing rates as well as neural population dynamics. We derive a Bayesian
Laplace propagation algorithm for joint inference of parameters and population
states. On neural population recordings from primary visual cortex, we demonstrate that our model provides a better account of the structure of neural firing than
stationary dynamics models.

1

Introduction

Neural spiking activity recorded from populations of cortical neurons can exhibit substantial variability in response to repeated presentations of a sensory stimulus [1]. This variability is thought to
arise both from dynamics generated endogenously within the circuit [2] as well as from variations in
internal and behavioural states [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. An understanding of how the interplay between sensory
inputs and endogenous dynamics shapes neural activity patterns is essential for our understanding
of how information is processed by neuronal populations. Multiple statistical [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]
and mechanistic [14] models for characterising neuronal population dynamics have been developed.
In addition to these dynamics which take place on fast time-scales (milliseconds up to few seconds),
there are also processes modulating neural firing activity which take place on much slower timescales (seconds to hours). Slow drifts in rates across an experiment can be caused by fluctuations in
arousal, anaesthesia level or other physiological properties of the experimental preparation [15, 16,
17]. Furthermore, processes such as learning and short-term plasticity can lead to slow changes in
neural firing properties [18]. The statistical structure of these slow fluctuations has been modelled
using state-space models and related techniques [19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. Recent experimental findings
have shown that slow, multiplicative fluctuations in neural excitability are a dominant source of
neural covariability in extracellular multi-cell recordings from cortical circuits [5, 17, 24].
To accurately capture the the structure of neural dynamics and to disentangle the contributions of
slow and fast modulatory processes to neural variability and co-variability, it is therefore important
to develop models that can capture neural dynamics both on fast (i.e., within experimental trials) and
slow (i.e., across trials) time-scales. Few such models exist: Czanner et al. [25] presented a statistical
model of single-neuron firing in which within-trial dynamics are modelled by (generalised) linear
coupling from the recent spiking history of each neuron onto its instantaneous firing rate, and acrosstrial dynamics were modelled by defining a random walk model over parameters. More recently,
1

