Risk-Sensitive and Robust Decision-Making:
a CVaR Optimization Approach

Yinlam Chow
Stanford University
ychow@stanford.edu

Aviv Tamar
UC Berkeley
avivt@berkeley.edu

Shie Mannor
Technion
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Marco Pavone
Stanford University
pavone@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper we address the problem of decision making within a Markov decision process (MDP) framework where risk and modeling errors are taken into
account. Our approach is to minimize a risk-sensitive conditional-value-at-risk
(CVaR) objective, as opposed to a standard risk-neutral expectation. We refer to
such problem as CVaR MDP. Our first contribution is to show that a CVaR objective, besides capturing risk sensitivity, has an alternative interpretation as expected
cost under worst-case modeling errors, for a given error budget. This result, which
is of independent interest, motivates CVaR MDPs as a unifying framework for
risk-sensitive and robust decision making. Our second contribution is to present
an approximate value-iteration algorithm for CVaR MDPs and analyze its convergence rate. To our knowledge, this is the first solution algorithm for CVaR MDPs
that enjoys error guarantees. Finally, we present results from numerical experiments that corroborate our theoretical findings and show the practicality of our
approach.

1

Introduction

Decision making within the Markov decision process (MDP) framework typically involves the minimization of a risk-neutral performance objective, namely the expected total discounted cost [3].
This approach, while very popular, natural, and attractive from a computational standpoint, neither
takes into account the variability of the cost (i.e., fluctuations around the mean), nor its sensitivity
to modeling errors, which may significantly affect overall performance [12]. Risk-sensitive MDPs
[9] address the first aspect by replacing the risk-neutral expectation with a risk-measure of the total
discounted cost, such as variance, Value-at-Risk (VaR), or Conditional-VaR (CVaR). Robust MDPs
[15], on the other hand, address the second aspect by defining a set of plausible MDP parameters,
and optimize decision with respect to the expected cost under worst-case parameters.
In this work we consider risk-sensitive MDPs with a CVaR objective, referred to as CVaR MDPs.
CVaR [1, 20] is a risk-measure that is rapidly gaining popularity in various engineering applications, e.g., finance, due to its favorable computational properties [1] and superior ability to safeguard a decision maker from the “outcomes that hurt the most” [22]. In this paper, by relating risk
to robustness, we derive a novel result that further motivates the usage of a CVaR objective in a
decision-making context. Specifically, we show that the CVaR of a discounted cost in an MDP is
equivalent to the expected value of the same discounted cost in presence of worst-case perturbations
of the MDP parameters (specifically, transition probabilities), provided that such perturbations are
within a certain error budget. This result suggests CVaR MDP as a method for decision making
under both cost variability and model uncertainty, motivating it as unified framework for planning
under uncertainty.
Literature review: Risk-sensitive MDPs have been studied for over four decades, with earlier efforts
focusing on exponential utility [9], mean-variance [24], and percentile risk criteria [7] . Recently,
for the reasons explained above, several authors have investigated CVaR MDPs [20]. Specifically,
1

