Logarithmic Time Online Multiclass prediction

Anna Choromanska
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York, NY, USA
achoroma@cims.nyu.edu

John Langford
Microsoft Research
New York, NY, USA
jcl@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the problem of multiclass classification with an extremely large number
of classes (k), with the goal of obtaining train and test time complexity logarithmic in the number of classes. We develop top-down tree construction approaches
for constructing logarithmic depth trees. On the theoretical front, we formulate a
new objective function, which is optimized at each node of the tree and creates
dynamic partitions of the data which are both pure (in terms of class labels) and
balanced. We demonstrate that under favorable conditions, we can construct logarithmic depth trees that have leaves with low label entropy. However, the objective
function at the nodes is challenging to optimize computationally. We address the
empirical problem with a new online decision tree construction procedure. Experiments demonstrate that this online algorithm quickly achieves improvement in
test error compared to more common logarithmic training time approaches, which
makes it a plausible method in computationally constrained large-k applications.

1

Introduction

The central problem of this paper is computational complexity in a setting where the number of
classes k for multiclass prediction is very large. Such problems occur in natural language (Which
translation is best?), search (What result is best?), and detection (Who is that?) tasks. Almost all
machine learning algorithms (with the exception of decision trees) have running times for multiclass
classification which are O(k) with a canonical example being one-against-all classifiers [1].
In this setting, the most efficient possible accurate approach is given by information theory [2].
In essence, any multiclass classification algorithm must uniquely specify the bits of all labels that
it predicts correctly on. Consequently, Kraft’s inequality ([2] equation 5.6) implies that the expected computational complexity of predicting correctly is Ω(H(Y )) per example where H(Y ) is
the Shannon entropy of the label. For the worst case distribution on k classes, this implies Ω(log(k))
computation is required.
Hence, our goal is achieving O(log(k)) computational time per example1 for both training and
testing, while effectively using online learning algorithms to minimize passes over the data.
The goal of logarithmic (in k) complexity naturally motivates approaches that construct a logarithmic depth hierarchy over the labels, with one label per leaf. While this hierarchy is sometimes
available through prior knowledge, in many scenarios it needs to be learned as well. This naturally
leads to a partition problem which arises at each node in the hierarchy. The partition problem is
finding a classifier: c : X → {−1, 1} which divides examples into two subsets with a purer set of
labels than the original set. Definitions of purity vary, but canonical examples are the number of
labels remaining in each subset, or softer notions such as the average Shannon entropy of the class
labels. Despite resulting in a classifier, this problem is fundamentally different from standard binary
classification. To see this, note that replacing c(x) with −c(x) is very bad for binary classification,
but has no impact on the quality of a partition2 . The partition problem is fundamentally non-convex
1
2

Throughout the paper by logarithmic time we mean logarithmic time per example.
The problem bears parallels to clustering in this regard.

1

