Spectral Norm Regularization of Orthonormal
Representations for Graph Transduction

Rakesh Shivanna
Google Inc.
Mountain View, CA, USA
rakeshshivanna@google.com

Bibaswan Chatterjee
Dept. of Computer Science & Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
bibaswan.chatterjee@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Raman Sankaran, Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
Dept. of Computer Science & Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
ramans,chiru@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Francis Bach
INRIA - Sierra Project-team
École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France
francis.bach@ens.fr

Abstract
Recent literature [1] suggests that embedding a graph on an unit sphere leads to
better generalization for graph transduction. However, the choice of optimal embedding and an efficient algorithm to compute the same remains open. In this
paper, we show that orthonormal representations, a class of unit-sphere graph embeddings are PAC learnable. Existing PAC-based analysis do not apply as the VC
dimension of the function class is infinite. We propose an alternative PAC-based
bound, which do not depend on the VC dimension of the underlying function
class, but is related to the famous Lovász ϑ function. The main contribution of the
paper is SPORE, a SPectral regularized ORthonormal Embedding for graph transduction, derived from the PAC bound. SPORE is posed as a non-smooth convex
function over an elliptope. These problems are usually solved as semi-definite programs (SDPs) with time complexity O(n6 ). We present, Infeasible Inexact proximal (IIP): an Inexact proximal method which performs subgradient procedure
on an approximate projection, not necessarily feasible. IIP is more scalable than
SDP, has an O( √1T ) convergence, and is generally applicable whenever a suitable approximate projection is available. We use IIP to compute SPORE where
the approximate projection step is computed by FISTA, an accelerated gradient
descent procedure. We show that the method has a convergence rate of O( √1T ).
The proposed algorithm easily scales to 1000’s of vertices, while the standard
SDP computation does not scale beyond few hundred vertices. Furthermore, the
analysis presented here easily extends to the multiple graph setting.

1

Introduction

Learning problems on graph-structured data have received significant attention in recent years [11,
17, 20]. We study an instance of graph transduction, the problem of learning labels on vertices of
simple graphs1 . A typical example is webpage classification [20], where a very small part of the
entire web is manually classified. Even for simple graphs, predicting binary labels of the unlabeled
vertices is NP-complete [6].
More formally: let G = (V, E), V = [n] be a simple graph with unknown labels y ∈ {±1}n .
Without loss of generality, let the labels of first m ∈ [n] vertices be observable, let u := n − m.
1

A simple graph is an unweighted, undirected graph with no self loops or multiple edges.

1

