Fast Lifted MAP Inference via Partitioning

Somdeb Sarkhel
The University of Texas at Dallas

Parag Singla
I.I.T. Delhi

Vibhav Gogate
The University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract
Recently, there has been growing interest in lifting MAP inference algorithms for
Markov logic networks (MLNs). A key advantage of these lifted algorithms is that
they have much smaller computational complexity than propositional algorithms
when symmetries are present in the MLN and these symmetries can be detected
using lifted inference rules. Unfortunately, lifted inference rules are sound but
not complete and can often miss many symmetries. This is problematic because
when symmetries cannot be exploited, lifted inference algorithms ground the MLN,
and search for solutions in the much larger propositional space. In this paper, we
present a novel approach, which cleverly introduces new symmetries at the time of
grounding. Our main idea is to partition the ground atoms and force the inference
algorithm to treat all atoms in each part as indistinguishable. We show that by
systematically and carefully refining (and growing) the partitions, we can build
advanced any-time and any-space MAP inference algorithms. Our experiments
on several real-world datasets clearly show that our new algorithm is superior to
previous approaches and often finds useful symmetries in the search space that
existing lifted inference rules are unable to detect.
Markov logic networks (MLNs) [5] allow application designers to compactly represent and reason
about relational and probabilistic knowledge in a large number of application domains including
computer vision and natural language understanding using a few weighted first-order logic formulas.
These formulas act as templates for generating large Markov networks – the undirected probabilistic
graphical model. A key reasoning task over MLNs is maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference, which
is defined as the task of finding an assignment of values to all random variables in the Markov network
that has the maximum probability. This task can be solved using propositional (graphical model)
inference techniques. Unfortunately, these techniques are often impractical because the Markov
networks can be quite large, having millions of variables and features.
Recently, there has been growing interest in developing lifted inference algorithms [4, 6, 17, 22]
for solving the MAP inference task [1, 2, 3, 7, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19]. These algorithms work, as much
as possible, on the much smaller first-order specification, grounding or propositionalizing only as
necessary and can yield significant complexity reductions in practice. At a high level, lifted algorithms
can be understood as algorithms that identify symmetries in the first-order specification using lifted
inference rules [9, 13, 19], and then use these symmetries to simultaneously infer over multiple
symmetric objects. Unfortunately, in a vast majority of cases, the inference rules are unable to identify
several useful symmetries (the rules are sound but not complete), either because the symmetries are
approximate or because the symmetries are domain-specific and do not belong to a known type. In
such cases, lifted inference algorithms partially ground some atoms in the MLN and search for a
solution in this much larger partially propositionalized space.
In this paper, we propose the following straight-forward yet principled approach for solving this
partial grounding problem [21, 23]: partition the ground atoms into groups and force the inference
algorithm to treat all atoms in each group as indistinguishable (symmetric). For example, consider
a first-order atom R(x) and assume that x can be instantiated to the following set of constants:
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. If the atom possesses the so-called non-shared or single-occurrence symmetry [13, 19],
then the lifted inference algorithm will search over only two assignments: all five groundings of R(x)
are either all true or all false, in order to find the MAP solution. When no identifiable symmetries
exist, the lifted algorithm will inefficiently search over all possible 32 truth assignments to the 5
1

