Deep Visual Analogy-Making

Scott Reed Yi Zhang Yuting Zhang Honglak Lee
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
{reedscot,yeezhang,yutingzh,honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
In addition to identifying the content within a single image, relating images and
generating related images are critical tasks for image understanding. Recently,
deep convolutional networks have yielded breakthroughs in predicting image labels, annotations and captions, but have only just begun to be used for generating high-quality images. In this paper we develop a novel deep network trained
end-to-end to perform visual analogy making, which is the task of transforming a
query image according to an example pair of related images. Solving this problem
requires both accurately recognizing a visual relationship and generating a transformed query image accordingly. Inspired by recent advances in language modeling, we propose to solve visual analogies by learning to map images to a neural
embedding in which analogical reasoning is simple, such as by vector subtraction
and addition. In experiments, our model effectively models visual analogies on
several datasets: 2D shapes, animated video game sprites, and 3D car models.

1

Introduction

Humans are good at considering “what-if?” questions about objects in their environment. What if
this chair were rotated 30 degrees clockwise? What if I dyed my hair blue? We can easily imagine
roughly how objects would look according to various hypothetical questions. However, current
generative models of images struggle to perform this kind of task without encoding significant prior
knowledge about the environment and restricting the allowed transformations.
Infer Relationship
Transform query
Often, these visual hypothetical questions
can be effectively answered by analogical reasoning.1 Having observed many
similar objects rotating, one could learn
to mentally rotate new objects. Having
observed objects with different colors (or
textures), one could learn to mentally reFigure 1: Visual analogy making concept. We learn
color (or re-texture) new objects.
an encoder function f mapping images into a space
Solving the analogy problem requires the in which analogies can be performed, and a decoder
ability to identify relationships among im- g mapping back to the image space.
ages and transform query images accordingly. In this paper, we propose to solve the problem by directly training on visual analogy completion; that is, to generate the transformed image output. Note that we do not make any claim about
how humans solve the problem, but we show that in many cases thinking by analogy is enough to
solve it, without exhaustively encoding first principles into a complex model.

We denote a valid analogy as a 4-tuple A : B :: C : D, often spoken as “A is to B as C is to D”. Given
such an analogy, there are several questions one might ask:
• A ? B :: C ? D - What is the common relationship?
• A : B ? C : D - Are A and B related in the same way that C and D are related?
• A : B :: C : ? - What is the result of applying the transformation A : B to C?
1

See [2] for a deeper philosophical discussion of analogical reasoning.

1

