Maximum Likelihood Learning With Arbitrary
Treewidth via Fast-Mixing Parameter Sets

Justin Domke
NICTA, Australian National University
justin.domke@nicta.com.au

Abstract
Inference is typically intractable in high-treewidth undirected graphical models,
making maximum likelihood learning a challenge. One way to overcome this is to
restrict parameters to a tractable set, most typically the set of tree-structured parameters. This paper explores an alternative notion of a tractable set, namely a set
of “fast-mixing parameters” where Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) inference
can be guaranteed to quickly converge to the stationary distribution. While it is
common in practice to approximate the likelihood gradient using samples obtained
from MCMC, such procedures lack theoretical guarantees. This paper proves that
for any exponential family with bounded sufficient statistics, (not just graphical
models) when parameters are constrained to a fast-mixing set, gradient descent
with gradients approximated by sampling will approximate the maximum likelihood solution inside the set with high-probability. When unregularized, to find a
solution ϵ-accurate in log-likelihood requires a total amount of effort cubic in 1/ϵ,
disregarding logarithmic factors. When ridge-regularized, strong convexity allows
a solution ϵ-accurate in parameter distance with effort quadratic in 1/ϵ. Both of
these provide of a fully-polynomial time randomized approximation scheme.

1 Introduction
In undirected graphical models, maximum likelihood learning is intractable in general. For example, Jerrum and Sinclair [1993] show that evaluation of the partition function (which can easily be
computed from the likelihood) for an Ising model is #P-complete, and that even the existence of a
fully-polynomial time randomized approximation scheme (FPRAS) for the partition function would
imply that RP = NP.
If the model is well-specified (meaning that the target distribution falls in the assumed family) then
there exist several methods that can efficiently recover correct parameters, among them the pseudolikelihood [3], score matching [16, 22], composite likelihoods [20, 30], Mizrahi et al.’s [2014]
method based on parallel learning in local clusters of nodes and Abbeel et al.’s [2006] method based
on matching local probabilities. While often useful, these methods have some drawbacks. First,
these methods typically have inferior sample complexity to the likelihood. Second, these all assume
a well-specified model. If the target distribution is not in the assumed class, the maximum-likelihood
solution will converge to the M-projection (minimum of the KL-divergence), but these estimators
do not have similar guarantees. Third, even when these methods succeed, they typically yield a
distribution in which inference is still intractable, and so it may be infeasible to actually make use
of the learned distribution.
Given these issues, a natural approach is to restrict the graphical model parameters to a tractable set
Θ, in which learning and inference can be performed efficiently. The gradient of the likelihood is
determined by the marginal distributions, whose difficulty is typically determined by the treewidth of
the graph. Thus, probably the most natural tractable family is the set of tree-structured distributions,
1

