Automatic Variational Inference in Stan
Rajesh Ranganath
Princeton University
rajeshr@cs.princeton.edu

Alp Kucukelbir
Columbia University
alp@cs.columbia.edu

David M. Blei
Columbia University
david.blei@columbia.edu

Andrew Gelman
Columbia University
gelman@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
Variational inference is a scalable technique for approximate Bayesian inference.
Deriving variational inference algorithms requires tedious model-specific calculations; this makes it difficult for non-experts to use. We propose an automatic variational inference algorithm, automatic differentiation variational inference (advi);
we implement it in Stan (code available), a probabilistic programming system. In
advi the user provides a Bayesian model and a dataset, nothing else. We make
no conjugacy assumptions and support a broad class of models. The algorithm
automatically determines an appropriate variational family and optimizes the variational objective. We compare advi to mcmc sampling across hierarchical generalized linear models, nonconjugate matrix factorization, and a mixture model.
We train the mixture model on a quarter million images. With advi we can use
variational inference on any model we write in Stan.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference is a powerful framework for analyzing data. We design a model for data using
latent variables; we then analyze data by calculating the posterior density of the latent variables. For
machine learning models, calculating the posterior is often difficult; we resort to approximation.
Variational inference (vi) approximates the posterior with a simpler distribution [1, 2]. We search
over a family of simple distributions and find the member closest to the posterior. This turns approximate inference into optimization. vi has had a tremendous impact on machine learning; it is
typically faster than Markov chain Monte Carlo (mcmc) sampling (as we show here too) and has
recently scaled up to massive data [3].
Unfortunately, vi algorithms are difficult to derive. We must first define the family of approximating
distributions, and then calculate model-specific quantities relative to that family to solve the variational optimization problem. Both steps require expert knowledge. The resulting algorithm is tied to
both the model and the chosen approximation.
In this paper we develop a method for automating variational inference, automatic differentiation
variational inference (advi). Given any model from a wide class (specifically, probability models
differentiable with respect to their latent variables), advi determines an appropriate variational family and an algorithm for optimizing the corresponding variational objective. We implement advi in
Stan [4], a flexible probabilistic programming system. Stan describes a high-level language to define
probabilistic models (e.g., Figure 2) as well as a model compiler, a library of transformations, and an
efficient automatic differentiation toolbox. With advi we can now use variational inference on any
model we write in Stan.1 (See Appendices F to J.)
1 advi is available in Stan 2.8. See Appendix C.

1

