The Human Kernel
Andrew Gordon Wilson
CMU

Christoph Dann
CMU

Christopher G. Lucas
University of Edinburgh

Eric P. Xing
CMU

Abstract
Bayesian nonparametric models, such as Gaussian processes, provide a compelling framework for automatic statistical modelling: these models have a high
degree of flexibility, and automatically calibrated complexity. However, automating human expertise remains elusive; for example, Gaussian processes with standard kernels struggle on function extrapolation problems that are trivial for human
learners. In this paper, we create function extrapolation problems and acquire human responses, and then design a kernel learning framework to reverse engineer
the inductive biases of human learners across a set of behavioral experiments. We
use the learned kernels to gain psychological insights and to extrapolate in humanlike ways that go beyond traditional stationary and polynomial kernels. Finally, we
investigate Occam’s razor in human and Gaussian process based function learning.

1

Introduction

Truly intelligent systems can learn and make decisions without human intervention. Therefore it
is not surprising that early machine learning efforts, such as the perceptron, have been neurally
inspired [1]. In recent years, probabilistic modelling has become a cornerstone of machine learning
approaches [2, 3, 4], with applications in neural processing [5, 6, 3, 7] and human learning [8, 9].
From a probabilistic perspective, the ability for a model to automatically discover patterns and perform extrapolation is determined by its support (which solutions are a priori possible), and inductive
biases (which solutions are a priori likely). Ideally, we want a model to be able to represent many
possible solutions to a given problem, with inductive biases which can extract intricate structure
from limited data. For example, if we are performing character recognition, we would want our
support to contain a large collection of potential characters, accounting even for rare writing styles,
and our inductive biases to reasonably reflect the probability of encountering each character [10].
The support and inductive biases of a wide range of probabilistic models, and thus the ability for
these models to learn and generalise, is implicitly controlled by a covariance kernel, which determines the similarities between pairs of datapoints. For example, Bayesian basis function regression
(including, e.g., all polynomial models), splines, and infinite neural networks, can all exactly be represented as a Gaussian process with a particular kernel function [11, 10, 12]. Moreover, the Fisher
kernel provides a mechanism to reformulate probabilistic generative models as kernel methods [13].
In this paper, we wish to reverse engineer human-like support and inductive biases for function
learning, using a Gaussian process (GP) based kernel learning formalism. In particular:
• We create new human function learning datasets, including novel function extrapolation
problems and multiple-choice questions that explore human intuitions about simplicity and
explanatory power, available at http://functionlearning.com/.
• We develop a statistical framework for kernel learning from the predictions of a model,
conditioned on the (training) information that model is given. The ability to sample multiple
sets of posterior predictions from a model, at any input locations of our choice, given any
dataset of our choice, provides unprecedented statistical strength for kernel learning. By
contrast, standard kernel learning involves fitting a kernel to a fixed dataset that can only be
viewed as a single realisation from a stochastic process. Our framework leverages spectral
mixture kernels [14] and non-parametric estimates.
1

