Learning Stationary Time Series using Gaussian
Processes with Nonparametric Kernels

Felipe Tobar
ftobar@dim.uchile.cl
Center for Mathematical Modeling
Universidad de Chile

Thang D. Bui
tdb40@cam.ac.uk
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge

Richard E. Turner
ret26@cam.ac.uk
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge

Abstract
We introduce the Gaussian Process Convolution Model (GPCM), a two-stage nonparametric generative procedure to model stationary signals as the convolution
between a continuous-time white-noise process and a continuous-time linear filter
drawn from Gaussian process. The GPCM is a continuous-time nonparametricwindow moving average process and, conditionally, is itself a Gaussian process with a nonparametric kernel defined in a probabilistic fashion. The generative model can be equivalently considered in the frequency domain, where
the power spectral density of the signal is specified using a Gaussian process.
One of the main contributions of the paper is to develop a novel variational freeenergy approach based on inter-domain inducing variables that efficiently learns
the continuous-time linear filter and infers the driving white-noise process. In
turn, this scheme provides closed-form probabilistic estimates of the covariance
kernel and the noise-free signal both in denoising and prediction scenarios. Additionally, the variational inference procedure provides closed-form expressions for
the approximate posterior of the spectral density given the observed data, leading
to new Bayesian nonparametric approaches to spectrum estimation. The proposed
GPCM is validated using synthetic and real-world signals.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process (GP) regression models have become a standard tool in Bayesian signal estimation
due to their expressiveness, robustness to overfitting and tractability [1]. GP regression begins with
a prior distribution over functions that encapsulates a priori assumptions, such as smoothness, stationarity or periodicity. The prior is then updated by incorporating information from observed data
points via their likelihood functions. The result is a posterior distribution over functions that can be
used for prediction. Critically for this work, the posterior and therefore the resultant predictions, is
sensitive to the choice of prior distribution. The form of the prior covariance function (or kernel) of
the GP is arguably the central modelling choice. Employing a simple form of covariance will limit
the GP’s capacity to generalise. The ubiquitous radial basis function or squared exponential kernel,
for example, implies prediction is just a local smoothing operation [2, 3]. Expressive kernels are
needed [4, 5], but although kernel design is widely acknowledged as pivotal, it typically proceeds
via a “black art” in which a particular functional form is hand-crafted using intuitions about the
application domain to build a kernel using simpler primitive kernels as building blocks (e.g. [6]).
Recently, some sophisticated automated approaches to kernel design have been developed that construct kernel mixtures on the basis of incorporating different measures of similarity [7, 8], or more
generally by both adding and multiplying kernels, thus mimicking the way in which a human would
search for the best kernel [5]. Alternatively, a flexible parametric kernel can be used as in the case
of the spectral mixture kernels, where the power spectral density (PSD) of the GP is parametrised
by a mixture of Gaussians [4].
1

