Deep Convolutional Inverse Graphics Network

Tejas D. Kulkarni*1 , William F. Whitney*2 ,
Pushmeet Kohli3 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum4
1,2,4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
3
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
1
2
tejask@mit.edu wwhitney@mit.edu 3 pkohli@microsoft.com 4 jbt@mit.edu
* First two authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.

Abstract
This paper presents the Deep Convolution Inverse Graphics Network (DCIGN), a model that aims to learn an interpretable representation of images,
disentangled with respect to three-dimensional scene structure and viewing
transformations such as depth rotations and lighting variations. The DCIGN model is composed of multiple layers of convolution and de-convolution
operators and is trained using the Stochastic Gradient Variational Bayes
(SGVB) algorithm [10]. We propose a training procedure to encourage
neurons in the graphics code layer to represent a specific transformation
(e.g. pose or light). Given a single input image, our model can generate
new images of the same object with variations in pose and lighting. We
present qualitative and quantitative tests of the model’s efficacy at learning
a 3D rendering engine for varied object classes including faces and chairs.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has led to remarkable breakthroughs in learning hierarchical representations
from images. Models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [13], Restricted Boltzmann Machines, [8, 19], and Auto-encoders [2, 23] have been successfully applied to produce
multiple layers of increasingly abstract visual representations. However, there is relatively
little work on characterizing the optimal representation of the data. While Cohen et al.
[4] have considered this problem by proposing a theoretical framework to learn irreducible
representations with both invariances and equivariances, coming up with the best representation for any given task is an open question.
Various work [3, 4, 7] has been done on the theory and practice of representation learning,
and from this work a consistent set of desiderata for representations has emerged: invariance,
interpretability, abstraction, and disentanglement. In particular, Bengio et al. [3] propose
that a disentangled representation is one for which changes in the encoded data are sparse
over real-world transformations; that is, changes in only a few latents at a time should be
able to represent sequences which are likely to happen in the real world.
The “vision as inverse graphics” paradigm suggests a representation for images which provides these features. Computer graphics consists of a function to go from compact descriptions of scenes (the graphics code) to images, and this graphics code is typically disentangled
to allow for rendering scenes with fine-grained control over transformations such as object
location, pose, lighting, texture, and shape. This encoding is designed to easily and interpretably represent sequences of real data so that common transformations may be compactly
represented in software code; this criterion is conceptually identical to that of Bengio et al.,
and graphics codes conveniently align with the properties of an ideal representation.
1

