On the consistency theory of high dimensional
variable screening

Xiangyu Wang
Dept. of Statistical Science
Duke University, USA
xw56@stat.duke.edu

Chenlei Leng
Dept. of Statistics
University of Warwick, UK
C.Leng@warwick.ac.uk

David B. Dunson
Dept. of Statistical Science
Duke University, USA
dunson@stat.duke.edu

Abstract
Variable screening is a fast dimension reduction technique for assisting high dimensional feature selection. As a preselection method, it selects a moderate size
subset of candidate variables for further refining via feature selection to produce
the final model. The performance of variable screening depends on both computational efficiency and the ability to dramatically reduce the number of variables
without discarding the important ones. When the data dimension p is substantially
larger than the sample size n, variable screening becomes crucial as 1) Faster feature selection algorithms are needed; 2) Conditions guaranteeing selection consistency might fail to hold. This article studies a class of linear screening methods
and establishes consistency theory for this special class. In particular, we prove
the restricted diagonally dominant (RDD) condition is a necessary and sufficient
condition for strong screening consistency. As concrete examples, we show two
screening methods SIS and HOLP are both strong screening consistent (subject
to additional constraints) with large probability if n > O((ρs+σ/τ )2 log p) under
random designs. In addition, we relate the RDD condition to the irrepresentable
condition, and highlight limitations of SIS.

1

Introduction

The rapidly growing data dimension has brought new challenges to statistical variable selection, a
crucial technique for identifying important variables to facilitate interpretation and improve prediction accuracy. Recent decades have witnessed an explosion of research in variable selection and
related fields such as compressed sensing [1, 2], with a core focus on regularized methods [3–7].
Regularized methods can consistently recover the support of coefficients, i.e., the non-zero signals,
via optimizing regularized loss functions under certain conditions [8–10]. However, in the big data
era when p far exceeds n, such regularized methods might fail due to two reasons. First, the conditions that guarantee variable selection consistency for convex regularized methods such as lasso
might fail to hold when p >> n; Second, the computational expense of both convex and non-convex
regularized methods increases dramatically with large p.
Bearing these concerns in mind, [11] propose the concept of “variable screening”, a fast technique
that reduces data dimensionality from p to a size comparable to n, with all predictors having nonzero coefficients preserved. They propose a marginal correlation based fast screening technique
“Sure Independence Screening” (SIS) that can preserve signals with large probability. However,
this method relies on a strong assumption that the marginal correlations between the response and
the important predictors are high [11], which is easily violated in the practice. [12] extends the
marginal correlation to the Spearman’s rank correlation, which is shown to gain certain robustness
but is still limited by the same strong assumption. [13] and [14] take a different approach to attack
the screening problem. They both adopt variants of a forward selection type algorithm that includes
one variable at a time for constructing a candidate variable set for further refining. These methods
1

