Embedding Inference
for Structured Multilabel Prediction
Farzaneh Mirzazadeh Siamak Ravanbakhsh
University of Alberta

Nan Ding
Google

Dale Schuurmans
University of Alberta

{mirzazad,mravanba}@ualberta.ca

dingnan@google.com

daes@ualberta.ca

Abstract
A key bottleneck in structured output prediction is the need for inference during training and testing, usually requiring some form of dynamic programming.
Rather than using approximate inference or tailoring a specialized inference
method for a particular structure—standard responses to the scaling challenge—
we propose to embed prediction constraints directly into the learned representation. By eliminating the need for explicit inference a more scalable approach to
structured output prediction can be achieved, particularly at test time. We demonstrate the idea for multi-label prediction under subsumption and mutual exclusion
constraints, where a relationship to maximum margin structured output prediction
can be established. Experiments demonstrate that the benefits of structured output
training can still be realized even after inference has been eliminated.

1

Introduction

Structured output prediction has been an important topic in machine learning. Many prediction
problems involve complex structures, such as predicting parse trees for sentences [28], predicting
sequence labellings for language and genomic data [1], or predicting multilabel taggings for documents and images [7, 8, 13, 20]. Initial breakthroughs in this area arose from tractable discriminative training methods—conditional random fields [19, 27] and structured large margin training
[26, 29]—that compare complete output configurations against given target structures, rather than
simply learning to predict each component in isolation. More recently, search based approaches that
exploit sequential prediction methods have also proved effective for structured prediction [4, 21].
Despite these improvements, the need to conduct inference or search over complex outputs both
during the training and testing phase proves to be a significant bottleneck in practice.
In this paper we investigate an alternative approach that eliminates the need for inference or search
at test time. The idea is to shift the burden of coordinating predictions to the training phase, by
embedding constraints in the learned representation that ensure prediction relationships are satisfied.
The primary benefit of this approach is that prediction cost can be significantly reduced without
sacrificing the desired coordination of structured output components.
We demonstrate the proposed approach for the problem of multilabel classification with hierarchical and mutual exclusion constraints on output labels [8]. Multilabel classification is an important
subfield of structured output prediction where multiple labels must be assigned that respect semantic
relationships such as subsumption, mutual exclusion or weak forms of correlation. The problem is of
growing importance as larger tag sets are being used to annotate images and documents on the Web.
Research in this area can be distinguished by whether the relationships between labels are assumed
to be known beforehand or whether such relationships need to be inferred during training. In the latter case, many works have developed tailored training losses for multilabel prediction that penalize
joint prediction behavior [6, 9, 30] without assuming any specific form of prior knowledge. More
recently, several works have focused on coping with large label spaces by using low dimensional
1

