Probabilistic Curve Learning: Coulomb Repulsion
and the Electrostatic Gaussian Process
David Dunson
Department of Statistics
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA, 27705
dunson@stat.duke.edu

Ye Wang
Department of Statistics
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA, 27705
eric.ye.wang@duke.edu

Abstract
Learning of low dimensional structure in multidimensional data is a canonical
problem in machine learning. One common approach is to suppose that the observed data are close to a lower-dimensional smooth manifold. There are a rich
variety of manifold learning methods available, which allow mapping of data
points to the manifold. However, there is a clear lack of probabilistic methods
that allow learning of the manifold along with the generative distribution of the
observed data. The best attempt is the Gaussian process latent variable model
(GP-LVM), but identifiability issues lead to poor performance. We solve these
issues by proposing a novel Coulomb repulsive process (Corp) for locations of
points on the manifold, inspired by physical models of electrostatic interactions
among particles. Combining this process with a GP prior for the mapping function
yields a novel electrostatic GP (electroGP) process. Focusing on the simple case
of a one-dimensional manifold, we develop efficient inference algorithms, and illustrate substantially improved performance in a variety of experiments including
filling in missing frames in video.

1

Introduction

There is broad interest in learning and exploiting lower-dimensional structure in high-dimensional
data. A canonical case is when the low dimensional structure corresponds to a p-dimensional smooth
Riemannian manifold M embedded in the d-dimensional ambient space Y of the observed data y .
Assuming that the observed data are close to M, it becomes of substantial interest to learn M along
with the mapping µ from M Ñ Y. This allows better data visualization and for one to exploit the
lower-dimensional structure to combat the curse of dimensionality in developing efficient machine
learning algorithms for a variety of tasks.
The current literature on manifold learning focuses on estimating the coordinates x P M corresponding to y by optimization, finding x ’s on the manifold M that preserve distances between the
corresponding y ’s in Y. There are many such methods, including Isomap [1], locally-linear embedding [2] and Laplacian eigenmaps [3]. Such methods have seen broad use, but have some clear
limitations relative to probabilistic manifold learning approaches, which allow explicit learning of
M, the mapping µ and the distribution of y .
There has been some considerable focus on probabilistic models, which would seem to allow learning of M and µ. Two notable examples are mixtures of factor analyzers (MFA) [4, 5] and Gaussian
process latent variable models (GP-LVM) [6]. Bayesian GP-LVM [7] is a Bayesian formulation
of GP-LVM which automatically learns the intrinsic dimension p and handles missing data. Such
approaches are useful in exploiting lower-dimensional structure in estimating the distribution of y ,
but unfortunately have critical problems in terms of reliable estimation of the manifold and mapping
1

