Scale Up Nonlinear Component Analysis with
Doubly Stochastic Gradients

Bo Xie1 , Yingyu Liang2 , Le Song1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology
bo.xie@gatech.edu, lsong@cc.gatech.edu
2
Princeton University
yingyul@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Nonlinear component analysis such as kernel Principle Component Analysis
(KPCA) and kernel Canonical Correlation Analysis (KCCA) are widely used in
machine learning, statistics and data analysis, but they cannot scale up to big
datasets. Recent attempts have employed random feature approximations to convert the problem to the primal form for linear computational complexity. However, to obtain high quality solutions, the number of random features should be
the same order of magnitude as the number of data points, making such approach
not directly applicable to the regime with millions of data points.
We propose a simple, computationally efficient, and memory friendly algorithm
based on the “doubly stochastic gradients” to scale up a range of kernel nonlinear
component analysis, such as kernel PCA, CCA and SVD. Despite the non-convex
nature of these problems, our method enjoys theoretical guarantees that it converges at the rate Õ(1/t) to the global optimum, even for the top k eigen subspace.
Unlike many alternatives, our algorithm does not require explicit orthogonalization, which is infeasible on big datasets. We demonstrate the effectiveness and
scalability of our algorithm on large scale synthetic and real world datasets.

1

Introduction

Scaling up nonlinear component analysis has been challenging due to prohibitive computation and
memory requirements. Recently, methods such as Randomized Component Analysis (RCA) [12]
are able to scale to larger datasets by leveraging random feature approximation. Such methods approximate the kernel function by using explicit random feature mappings, then perform subsequent
steps in the primal form, resulting in linear computational complexity. Nonetheless, theoretical analysis [18, 12] shows that in order to get high quality results, the number of random features should
grow linearly with the number of data points. Experimentally, one often sees that the statistical
performance of the algorithm improves as one increases the number of random features.
Another approach to scale up the kernel component analysis is to use stochastic gradient descent and
online updates [15, 16]. These stochastic methods have also been extended to the kernel case [9, 5,
8]. They require much less computation than their batch counterpart, converge in O(1/t) rate, and
are naturally applicable to streaming data setting. Despite that, they share a severe drawback: all
data points used in the updates need to be saved, rendering them impractical for large datasets.
In this paper, we propose to use the “doubly stochastic gradients” for nonlinear component analysis.
This technique is a general framework for scaling up kernel methods [6] for convex problems and
has been successfully applied to many popular kernel machines such as kernel SVM, kernel ridge
regressions, and Gaussian process. It uses two types of stochastic approximation simultaneously:
random data points instead of the whole dataset (as in stochastic update rules), and random features
instead of the true kernel functions (as in RCA). These two approximations lead to the following
1

