A Pseudo-Euclidean Iteration for Optimal Recovery
in Noisy ICA

James Voss
The Ohio State University
vossj@cse.ohio-state.edu

Mikhail Belkin
The Ohio State University
mbelkin@cse.ohio-state.edu

Luis Rademacher
The Ohio State University
lrademac@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) is a popular model for blind signal separation. The ICA model assumes that a number of independent source signals are
linearly mixed to form the observed signals. We propose a new algorithm, PEGI
(for pseudo-Euclidean Gradient Iteration), for provable model recovery for ICA
with Gaussian noise. The main technical innovation of the algorithm is to use a
fixed point iteration in a pseudo-Euclidean (indefinite “inner product”) space. The
use of this indefinite “inner product” resolves technical issues common to several
existing algorithms for noisy ICA. This leads to an algorithm which is conceptually
simple, efficient and accurate in testing.
Our second contribution is combining PEGI with the analysis of objectives for
optimal recovery in the noisy ICA model. It has been observed that the direct
approach of demixing with the inverse of the mixing matrix is suboptimal for signal
recovery in terms of the natural Signal to Interference plus Noise Ratio (SINR)
criterion. There have been several partial solutions proposed in the ICA literature.
It turns out that any solution to the mixing matrix reconstruction problem can be
used to construct an SINR-optimal ICA demixing, despite the fact that SINR itself
cannot be computed from data. That allows us to obtain a practical and provably
SINR-optimal recovery method for ICA with arbitrary Gaussian noise.

1

Introduction

Independent Component Analysis refers to a class of methods aiming at recovering statistically
independent signals by observing their unknown linear combination. There is an extensive literature
on this and a number of related problems [7].
In the P
ICA model, we observe n-dimensional realizations x(1), . . . , x(N ) of a latent variable model
m
X = k=1 Sk Ak = AS where Ak denotes the k th column of the n × m mixing matrix A and
S = (S1 , . . . , Sm )T is the unseen latent random vector of “signals”. It is assumed that S1 , . . . , Sm
are independent and non-Gaussian. The source signals and entries of A may be either real- or
complex-valued. For simplicity, we will assume throughout that S has zero mean, as this may be
achieved in practice by centering the observed data.
Many ICA algorithms use the preprocessing “whitening” step whose goal is to orthogonalize the
independent components. In the noiseless, case this is commonly done by computing the square
root of the covariance matrix of X. Consider now the noisy ICA model X = AS + η with additive
0-mean noise η independent of S. It turns out that the introduction of noise makes accurate recovery
of the signals significantly more involved. Specifically, whitening using the covariance matrix does
not work in the noisy ICA model as the covariance matrix combines both signal and noise. For
the case when the noise is Gaussian, matrices constructed from higher order statistics (specifically,
cumulants) can be used instead of the covariance matrix. However, these matrices are not in general
positive definite and thus the square root cannot always be extracted. This limits the applicability of
1

