Variational Information Maximisation for
Intrinsically Motivated Reinforcement Learning
Shakir Mohamed and Danilo J. Rezende
Google DeepMind, London
{shakir, danilor}@google.com

Abstract
The mutual information is a core statistical quantity that has applications in all areas of machine learning, whether this is in training of density models over multiple
data modalities, in maximising the efficiency of noisy transmission channels, or
when learning behaviour policies for exploration by artificial agents. Most learning algorithms that involve optimisation of the mutual information rely on the
Blahut-Arimoto algorithm — an enumerative algorithm with exponential complexity that is not suitable for modern machine learning applications. This paper
provides a new approach for scalable optimisation of the mutual information by
merging techniques from variational inference and deep learning. We develop our
approach by focusing on the problem of intrinsically-motivated learning, where
the mutual information forms the definition of a well-known internal drive known
as empowerment. Using a variational lower bound on the mutual information,
combined with convolutional networks for handling visual input streams, we develop a stochastic optimisation algorithm that allows for scalable information
maximisation and empowerment-based reasoning directly from pixels to actions.

1 Introduction
The problem of measuring and harnessing dependence between random variables is an inescapable
statistical problem that forms the basis of a large number of applications in machine learning, including rate distortion theory [4], information bottleneck methods [28], population coding [1], curiositydriven exploration [26, 21], model selection [3], and intrinsically-motivated reinforcement learning
[22]. In all these problems the core quantity that must be reasoned about is the mutual information.
In general, the mutual information (MI) is intractable to compute and few existing algorithms are
useful for realistic applications. The received algorithm for estimating mutual information is the
Blahut-Arimoto algorithm [31] that effectively solves for the MI by enumeration — an approach
with exponential complexity that is not suitable for modern machine learning applications. By combining the best current practice from variational inference with that of deep learning, we bring the
generality and scalability seen in other problem domains to information maximisation problems.
We provide a new approach for maximisation of the mutual information that has significantly lower
complexity, allows for computation with high-dimensional sensory inputs, and that allows us to
exploit modern computational resources.
The technique we derive is generally applicable, but we shall describe and develop our approach
by focussing on one popular and increasingly topical application of the mutual information: as a
measure of ‘empowerment’ in intrinsically-motivated reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen a number of successes in recent years that has now established it as a practical,
scalable solution for realistic agent-based planning and decision making [16, 13]. A limitation of
the standard RL approach is that an agent is only able to learn using external rewards obtained from
its environment; truly autonomous agents will often exist in environments that lack such external
rewards or in environments where rewards are sparsely distributed. Intrinsically-motivated reinforcement learning [25] attempts to address this shortcoming by equipping an agent with a number
of internal drives or intrinsic reward signals, such as hunger, boredom or curiosity that allows the
agent to continue to explore, learn and act meaningfully in a reward-sparse world. There are many
1

