Evaluating the statistical significance of biclusters

Jason D. Lee, Yuekai Sun, and Jonathan Taylor
Institute of Computational and Mathematical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{jdl17,yuekai,jonathan.taylor}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Biclustering (also known as submatrix localization) is a problem of high practical relevance in exploratory analysis of high-dimensional data. We develop a
framework for performing statistical inference on biclusters found by score-based
algorithms. Since the bicluster was selected in a data dependent manner by a
biclustering or localization algorithm, this is a form of selective inference. Our
framework gives exact (non-asymptotic) confidence intervals and p-values for the
significance of the selected biclusters.

1

Introduction

Given a matrix X ∈ Rm×n , biclustering or submatrix localization is the problem of identifying a
subset of the rows and columns of X such that the bicluster or submatrix consisting of the selected
rows and columns are “significant” compared to the rest of X. An important application of biclustering is the identification of significant genotype-phenotype associations in the (unsupervised)
analysis of gene expression data. The data is usually represented by an expression matrix X whose
rows correspond to genes and columns correspond to samples. Thus genotype-phenotype associations correspond to salient submatrices of X. The location and significance of such biclusters, in
conjunction with relevant clinical information, give preliminary results on the genetic underpinnings
of the phenotypes being studied.
More generally, given a matrix X ∈ Rm×n whose rows correspond to variables and columns correspond to samples, biclustering seeks sample-variable associations in the form of salient submatrices.
Without loss of generality, we consider square matrices X ∈ Rn×n of the form
X = M + Z,

Zij ∼ N (0, σ 2 )

M = µeI0 eTJ0 ,

µ ≥ 0, I0 , J0 ⊂ [n].

(1.1)

The components of eI , I ⊂ [n] are given by

(eI )i =

i∈I
.
otherwise

1
0

For our theoretical results, we assume the size of the embedded submatrix |I0 | = |J0 | = k and the
noise variance σ 2 is known.
The biclustering problem, due to its practical relevance, has attracted considerable attention. Most
previous work focuses on finding significant submatrices. A large class of algorithms for biclustering
are score-based, i.e. they search for submatrices that maximize some score function that measures
the “significance” of a submatrix. In this paper, we focus on evaluating the significance of submatrices found by score-based algorithms for biclustering. More precisely, let I(X), J(X) ⊂ [n] be a
(random) pair output by a biclustering algorithm. We seek to test whether the localized submatrix
1

