Texture Synthesis Using Convolutional Neural
Networks
Leon A. Gatys
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
Graduate School of Neural Information Processing, University of Tübingen, Germany
leon.gatys@bethgelab.org
Alexander S. Ecker
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Matthias Bethge
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Here we introduce a new model of natural textures based on the feature spaces
of convolutional neural networks optimised for object recognition. Samples from
the model are of high perceptual quality demonstrating the generative power of
neural networks trained in a purely discriminative fashion. Within the model, textures are represented by the correlations between feature maps in several layers of
the network. We show that across layers the texture representations increasingly
capture the statistical properties of natural images while making object information more and more explicit. The model provides a new tool to generate stimuli
for neuroscience and might offer insights into the deep representations learned by
convolutional neural networks.

1

Introduction

The goal of visual texture synthesis is to infer a generating process from an example texture, which
then allows to produce arbitrarily many new samples of that texture. The evaluation criterion for the
quality of the synthesised texture is usually human inspection and textures are successfully synthesised if a human observer cannot tell the original texture from a synthesised one.
In general, there are two main approaches to find a texture generating process. The first approach is
to generate a new texture by resampling either pixels [5, 28] or whole patches [6, 16] of the original
texture. These non-parametric resampling techniques and their numerous extensions and improvements (see [27] for review) are capable of producing high quality natural textures very efficiently.
However, they do not define an actual model for natural textures but rather give a mechanistic procedure for how one can randomise a source texture without changing its perceptual properties.
In contrast, the second approach to texture synthesis is to explicitly define a parametric texture
model. The model usually consists of a set of statistical measurements that are taken over the
1

