Linear Multi-Resource Allocation with Semi-Bandit
Feedback
Koby Crammer
Department of Electrical Engineering
The Technion, Israel
koby@ee.technion.ac.il

Tor Lattimore
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta, Canada
tor.lattimore@gmail.com

Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta, Canada
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We study an idealised sequential resource allocation problem. In each time step
the learner chooses an allocation of several resource types between a number of
tasks. Assigning more resources to a task increases the probability that it is completed. The problem is challenging because the alignment of the tasks to the resource types is unknown and the feedback is noisy. Our main contribution is the
new setting and an algorithm with nearly-optimal regret analysis. Along the way
we draw connections to the problem of minimising regret for stochastic linear
bandits with heteroscedastic noise. We also present some new results for stochastic linear bandits on the hypercube that significantly improve on existing work,
especially in the sparse case.

1

Introduction

Economist Thomas Sowell remarked that “The first lesson of economics is scarcity: There is never
enough of anything to fully satisfy all those who want it.”1 The optimal allocation of resources is
an enduring problem in economics, operations research and daily life. The problem is challenging
not only because you are compelled to make difficult trade-offs, but also because the (expected)
outcome of a particular allocation may be unknown and the feedback noisy.
We focus on an idealised resource allocation problem where the economist plays a repeated resource
allocation game with multiple resource types and multiple tasks to which these resources can be
assigned. Specifically, we consider a (nearly) linear model with D resources and K tasks. In each
time step t the economist chooses an allocation of resources Mt ∈ RD×K where Mtk ∈ RD is the
kth column and represents the amount of each resource type assigned to the kth task. We assume
that the kth task is completed successfully with probability min {1, hMtk , νk i} and νk ∈ RD is an
unknown non-negative vector that determines how the success rate of a given task depends on the
quantity and type of resources assigned to it. Naturally we will limit the availability of resources
PK
by demanding that Mt satisfies k=1 Mtdk ≤ 1 for all resource types d. At the end of each time
step the economist observes which tasks were successful. The objective is to maximise the number
of successful tasks up to some time horizon n that is known in advance. This model is a natural
generalisation of the one used by Lattimore et al. [2014], where it was assumed that there was a
single resource type only.
1
He went on to add that “The first lesson of politics is to disregard the first lesson of economics.” Sowell
[1993]

1

