Parallel Multi-Dimensional LSTM, With Application
to Fast Biomedical Volumetric Image Segmentation
Marijn F. Stollenga*123 , Wonmin Byeon*1245 , Marcus Liwicki4 , and Juergen Schmidhuber123
*

Shared first authors, both Authors contribruted equally to this work. Corresponding authors:
marijn@idsia.ch, wonmin.byeon@dfki.de
1
Istituto Dalle Molle di Studi sull’Intelligenza Artificiale (The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA)
2
Scuola universitaria professionale della Svizzera italiana (SUPSI), Switzerland
3
Universitá della Svizzera italiana (USI), Switzerland
4
University of Kaiserslautern, Germany
5
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) can be shifted across 2D images or 3D
videos to segment them. They have a fixed input size and typically perceive only
small local contexts of the pixels to be classified as foreground or background. In
contrast, Multi-Dimensional Recurrent NNs (MD-RNNs) can perceive the entire
spatio-temporal context of each pixel in a few sweeps through all pixels, especially
when the RNN is a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). Despite these theoretical
advantages, however, unlike CNNs, previous MD-LSTM variants were hard to parallelise on GPUs. Here we re-arrange the traditional cuboid order of computations
in MD-LSTM in pyramidal fashion. The resulting PyraMiD-LSTM is easy to parallelise, especially for 3D data such as stacks of brain slice images. PyraMiD-LSTM
achieved best known pixel-wise brain image segmentation results on MRBrainS13
(and competitive results on EM-ISBI12).

1

Introduction

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [1, 2] are recurrent neural networks (RNNs) initially
designed for sequence processing. They achieved state-of-the-art results on challenging tasks such
as handwriting recognition [3], large vocabulary speech recognition [4] and machine translation [5].
Their architecture contains gates to store and read out information from linear units called error
carousels that retain information over long time intervals, which is hard for traditional RNNs.
Multi-Dimensional LSTM networks (MD-LSTM [6]) connect hidden LSTM units in grid-like
fashion1 . Two dimensional MD-LSTM is applicable to image segmentation [6, 7, 8] where each pixel
is assigned to a class such as background or foreground. Each LSTM unit sees a pixel and receives
input from predecessing LSTM units, thus recursively gathering information about all other pixels in
the image.
There are many biomedical 3D volumetric data sources, such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance (MR), and electron microscopy (EM). Most previous approaches process each 2D
slice separately, using image segmentation algorithms such as snakes [9], random forests [10] and
Convolutional Neural Networks [11]. 3D-LSTM, however, can process the full context of each pixel
in such a volume through 8 sweeps over all pixels by 8 different LSTMs, each sweep in the general
direction of one of the 8 directed volume diagonals.
1

For example, in two dimensions this yields 4 directions; up, down, left and right.

1

