A Normative Theory of Adaptive Dimensionality
Reduction in Neural Networks
Cengiz Pehlevan
Simons Center for Data Analysis
Simons Foundation
New York, NY 10010
cpehlevan@simonsfoundation.org

Dmitri B. Chklovskii
Simons Center for Data Analysis
Simons Foundation
New York, NY 10010
dchklovskii@simonsfoundation.org

Abstract
To make sense of the world our brains must analyze high-dimensional datasets
streamed by our sensory organs. Because such analysis begins with dimensionality reduction, modeling early sensory processing requires biologically plausible
online dimensionality reduction algorithms. Recently, we derived such an algorithm, termed similarity matching, from a Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) objective function. However, in the existing algorithm, the number of output dimensions is set a priori by the number of output neurons and cannot be changed. Because the number of informative dimensions in sensory inputs is variable there is a
need for adaptive dimensionality reduction. Here, we derive biologically plausible
dimensionality reduction algorithms which adapt the number of output dimensions
to the eigenspectrum of the input covariance matrix. We formulate three objective
functions which, in the offline setting, are optimized by the projections of the input
dataset onto its principal subspace scaled by the eigenvalues of the output covariance matrix. In turn, the output eigenvalues are computed as i) soft-thresholded,
ii) hard-thresholded, iii) equalized thresholded eigenvalues of the input covariance matrix. In the online setting, we derive the three corresponding adaptive
algorithms and map them onto the dynamics of neuronal activity in networks with
biologically plausible local learning rules. Remarkably, in the last two networks,
neurons are divided into two classes which we identify with principal neurons and
interneurons in biological circuits.

1

Introduction

Our brains analyze high-dimensional datasets streamed by our sensory organs with efficiency and
speed rivaling modern computers. At the early stage of such analysis, the dimensionality of sensory
inputs is drastically reduced as evidenced by anatomical measurements. Human retina, for example,
conveys signals from ≈125 million photoreceptors to the rest of the brain via ≈1 million ganglion
cells [1] suggesting a hundred-fold dimensionality reduction. Therefore, biologically plausible dimensionality reduction algorithms may offer a model of early sensory processing.
In a seminal work [2] Oja proposed that a single neuron may compute the first principal component
of activity in upstream neurons. At each time point, Oja’s neuron projects a vector composed of firing rates of upstream neurons onto the vector of synaptic weights by summing up currents generated
by its synapses. In turn, synaptic weights are adjusted according to a Hebbian rule depending on the
activities of only the postsynaptic and corresponding presynaptic neurons [2].
Following Oja’s work, many multineuron circuits were proposed to extract multiple principal components of the input, for a review see [3]. However, most multineuron algorithms did not meet the
same level of rigor and biological plausibility as the single-neuron algorithm [2, 4] which can be
derived using a normative approach, from a principled objective function [5], and contains only lo1

