The Population Posterior
and Bayesian Modeling on Streams

James McInerney
Columbia University
james@cs.columbia.edu

Rajesh Ranganath
Princeton University
rajeshr@cs.princeton.edu

David Blei
Columbia University
david.blei@columbia.edu

Abstract
Many modern data analysis problems involve inferences from streaming data. However, streaming data is not easily amenable to the standard probabilistic modeling
approaches, which require conditioning on finite data. We develop population
variational Bayes, a new approach for using Bayesian modeling to analyze streams
of data. It approximates a new type of distribution, the population posterior, which
combines the notion of a population distribution of the data with Bayesian inference in a probabilistic model. We develop the population posterior for latent
Dirichlet allocation and Dirichlet process mixtures. We study our method with
several large-scale data sets.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modeling has emerged as a powerful tool for data analysis. It is an intuitive language
for describing assumptions about data and provides efficient algorithms for analyzing real data under
those assumptions. The main idea comes from Bayesian statistics. We encode our assumptions about
the data in a structured probability model of hidden and observed variables; we condition on a data
set to reveal the posterior distribution of the hidden variables; and we use the resulting posterior as
needed, for example to form predictions through the posterior predictive distribution or to explore the
data through the posterior expectations of the hidden variables.
Many modern data analysis problems involve inferences from streaming data. Examples include
exploring the content of massive social media streams (e.g., Twitter, Facebook), analyzing live video
streams, estimating the preferences of users on an online platform for recommending new items, and
predicting human mobility patterns for anticipatory computing. Such problems, however, cannot
easily take advantage of the standard approach to probabilistic modeling, which requires that we
condition on a finite data set.
This might be surprising to some readers; after all, one of the tenets of the Bayesian paradigm is that
we can update our posterior when given new information. (“Yesterday’s posterior is today’s prior.”)
But there are two problems with using Bayesian updating on data streams. The first problem is that
Bayesian inference computes posterior uncertainty under the assumption that the model is correct.
In theory this is sensible, but only in the impossible scenario where the data truly came from the
proposed model. In practice, all models provide approximations to the data-generating distribution,
and when the model is incorrect, the uncertainty that maximizes predictive likelihood may be larger or
smaller than the Bayesian posterior variance. This problem is exacerbated in potentially never-ending
streams; after seeing only a few data points, uncertainty is high, but eventually the model becomes
overconfident.
The second problem is that the data stream might change over time. This is an issue because,
frequently, our goal in applying probabilistic models to streams is not to characterize how they
change, but rather to accommodate it. That is, we would like for our current estimate of the latent
variables to be accurate to the current state of the stream and to adapt to how the stream might slowly
1

