GP Kernels for Cross-Spectrum Analysis

1

Kyle Ulrich, 3 David E. Carlson, 2 Kafui Dzirasa, 1 Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University
3
Department of Statistics, Columbia University
{kyle.ulrich, kafui.dzirasa, lcarin}@duke.edu
david.edwin.carlson@gmail.com

1

Abstract
Multi-output Gaussian processes provide a convenient framework for multi-task
problems. An illustrative and motivating example of a multi-task problem is
multi-region electrophysiological time-series data, where experimentalists are interested in both power and phase coherence between channels. Recently, Wilson
and Adams (2013) proposed the spectral mixture (SM) kernel to model the spectral density of a single task in a Gaussian process framework. In this paper, we
develop a novel covariance kernel for multiple outputs, called the cross-spectral
mixture (CSM) kernel. This new, flexible kernel represents both the power and
phase relationship between multiple observation channels. We demonstrate the
expressive capabilities of the CSM kernel through implementation of a Bayesian
hidden Markov model, where the emission distribution is a multi-output Gaussian process with a CSM covariance kernel. Results are presented for measured
multi-region electrophysiological data.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process (GP) models have become an important component of the machine learning literature. They have provided a basis for non-linear multivariate regression and classification tasks, and
have enjoyed much success in a wide variety of applications [16].
A GP places a prior distribution over latent functions, rather than model parameters. In the sense
that these functions are defined for any number of sample points and sample positions, as well
as any general functional form, GPs are nonparametric. The properties of the latent functions are
defined by a positive definite covariance kernel that controls the covariance between the function
at any two sample points. Recently, the spectral mixture (SM) kernel was proposed by Wilson and
Adams [24] to model a spectral density with a scale-location mixture of Gaussians. This flexible
and interpretable class of kernels is capable of recovering any composition of stationary kernels
[27, 9, 13]. The SM kernel has been used for GP regression of a scalar output (i.e., single function, or
observation “task”), achieving impressive results in extrapolating atmospheric CO2 concentrations
[24]; image inpainting [25]; and feature extraction from electrophysiological signals [21].
However, the SM kernel is not defined for multiple outputs (multiple correlated functions). Multioutput GPs intersect with the field of multi-task learning [4], where solving similar problems jointly
allows for the transfer of statistical strength between problems, improving learning performance
when compared to learning all tasks individually. In this paper, we consider neuroscience applications where low-frequency (< 200 Hz) extracellular potentials are simultaneously recorded from
implanted electrodes in multiple brain regions of a mouse [6]. These signals are known as local field
potentials (LFPs) and are often highly correlated between channels. Inferring and understanding
that interdependence is biologically significant.
1

