Adaptive Low-Complexity Sequential Inference for
Dirichlet Process Mixture Models
Theodoros Tsiligkaridis, Keith W. Forsythe
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA 02421 USA
ttsili@ll.mit.edu, forsythe@ll.mit.edu

Abstract
We develop a sequential low-complexity inference procedure for Dirichlet process mixtures of Gaussians for online clustering and parameter estimation when
the number of clusters are unknown a-priori. We present an easily computable,
closed form parametric expression for the conditional likelihood, in which hyperparameters are recursively updated as a function of the streaming data assuming
conjugate priors. Motivated by large-sample asymptotics, we propose a novel
adaptive low-complexity design for the Dirichlet process concentration parameter and show that the number of classes grow at most at a logarithmic rate. We
further prove that in the large-sample limit, the conditional likelihood and data
predictive distribution become asymptotically Gaussian. We demonstrate through
experiments on synthetic and real data sets that our approach is superior to other
online state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Dirichlet process mixture models (DPMM) have been widely used for clustering data Neal (1992);
Rasmussen (2000). Traditional finite mixture models often suffer from overfitting or underfitting
of data due to possible mismatch between the model complexity and amount of data. Thus, model
selection or model averaging is required to find the correct number of clusters or the model with
the appropriate complexity. This requires significant computation for high-dimensional data sets or
large samples. Bayesian nonparametric modeling are alternative approaches to parametric modeling,
an example being DPMM’s which can automatically infer the number of clusters from the data via
Bayesian inference techniques.
The use of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods for Dirichlet process mixtures has made
inference tractable Neal (2000). However, these methods can exhibit slow convergence and their
convergence can be tough to detect. Alternatives include variational methods Blei & Jordan (2006),
which are deterministic algorithms that convert inference to optimization. These approaches can
take a significant computational effort even for moderate sized data sets. For large-scale data sets
and low-latency applications with streaming data, there is a need for inference algorithms that are
much faster and do not require multiple passes through the data. In this work, we focus on lowcomplexity algorithms that adapt to each sample as they arrive, making them highly scalable. An
online algorithm for learning DPMM’s based on a sequential variational approximation (SVA) was
proposed in Lin (2013), and the authors in Wang & Dunson (2011) recently proposed a sequential
maximum a-posterior (MAP) estimator for the class labels given streaming data. The algorithm is
called sequential updating and greedy search (SUGS) and each iteration is composed of a greedy
selection step and a posterior update step.
The choice of concentration parameter α is critical for DPMM’s as it controls the number of clusters Antoniak (1974). While most fast DPMM algorithms use a fixed α Fearnhead (2004); Daume
1

