Variational Consensus Monte Carlo
Maxim Rabinovich, Elaine Angelino, and Michael I. Jordan
Computer Science Division
University of California, Berkeley
{rabinovich, elaine, jordan}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Practitioners of Bayesian statistics have long depended on Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) to obtain samples from intractable posterior distributions. Unfortunately, MCMC algorithms are typically serial, and do not scale to the large
datasets typical of modern machine learning. The recently proposed consensus
Monte Carlo algorithm removes this limitation by partitioning the data and drawing samples conditional on each partition in parallel [22]. A fixed aggregation
function then combines these samples, yielding approximate posterior samples.
We introduce variational consensus Monte Carlo (VCMC), a variational Bayes
algorithm that optimizes over aggregation functions to obtain samples from a distribution that better approximates the target. The resulting objective contains an
intractable entropy term; we therefore derive a relaxation of the objective and
show that the relaxed problem is blockwise concave under mild conditions. We
illustrate the advantages of our algorithm on three inference tasks from the literature, demonstrating both the superior quality of the posterior approximation
and the moderate overhead of the optimization step. Our algorithm achieves a
relative error reduction (measured against serial MCMC) of up to 39% compared
to consensus Monte Carlo on the task of estimating 300-dimensional probit regression parameter expectations; similarly, it achieves an error reduction of 92%
on the task of estimating cluster comembership probabilities in a Gaussian mixture model with 8 components in 8 dimensions. Furthermore, these gains come
at moderate cost compared to the runtime of serial MCMC—achieving near-ideal
speedup in some instances.

1

Introduction

Modern statistical inference demands scalability to massive datasets and high-dimensional models.
Innovation in distributed and stochastic optimization has enabled parameter estimation in this setting, e.g. via stochastic [3] and asynchronous [20] variants of gradient descent. Achieving similar
success in Bayesian inference – where the target is a posterior distribution over parameter values,
rather than a point estimate – remains computationally challenging.
Two dominant approaches to Bayesian computation are variational Bayes and Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC). Within the former, scalable algorithms like stochastic variational inference [11]
and streaming variational Bayes [4] have successfully imported ideas from optimization. Within
MCMC, adaptive subsampling procedures [2, 14], stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics [25], and
Firefly Monte Carlo [16] have applied similar ideas, achieving computational gains by operating
only on data subsets. These algorithms are serial, however, and thus cannot take advantage of
multicore and multi-machine architectures. This motivates data-parallel MCMC algorithms such as
asynchronous variants of Gibbs sampling [1, 8, 12].
Our work belongs to a class of communication-avoiding data-parallel MCMC algorithms. These
algorithms partition the full dataset X1:N into K disjoint subsets XI1:K where XIk denotes the data
1

