Testing Closeness With Unequal Sized Samples

Gregory Valiant∗
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
California, CA 94305
valiant@stanford.edu

Bhaswar B. Bhattacharya
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
California, CA 94305
bhaswar@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of testing whether two unequal-sized samples were
drawn from identical distributions, versus distributions that differ significantly.
Specifically, given a target error parameter ε > 0, m1 independent draws from
an unknown distribution p with discrete support, and m2 draws from an unknown
distribution q of discrete support, we describe a test for distinguishing the case that
p = q from the case that ||p − q||1 ≥ ε. If p and q are supported on at most n elements, then our
with high probability provided m1 ≥ n2/3 /ε4/3
 test is successful 
√

and m2 = Ω max{ √mn ε2 , ε2n } . We show that this tradeoff is information the1
oretically optimal throughout this range in the dependencies on all parameters,
n, m1 , and ε, to constant factors for worst-case distributions. As a consequence,
we obtain an algorithm for estimating the mixing time of a Markov chain on n
states up to a log n factor that uses Õ(n3/2 τmix ) queries to a “next node” oracle. The core of our testing algorithm is a relatively simple statistic that seems to
perform well in practice, both on synthetic and on natural language data. We believe that this statistic might prove to be a useful primitive within larger machine
learning and natural language processing systems.

1

Introduction

One of the most basic problems in statistical hypothesis testing is the question of distinguishing
whether two unknown distributions are very similar, or significantly different. Classical tests, like
the Chi-squared test or the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic, are optimal in the asymptotic regime,
for fixed distributions as the sample sizes tend towards infinity. Nevertheless, in many modern
settings—such as the analysis of customer, web logs, natural language processing, and genomics,
despite the quantity of available data—the support sizes and complexity of the underlying distributions are far larger than the datasets, as evidenced by the fact that many phenomena are observed
only a single time in the datasets, and the empirical distributions of the samples are poor representations of the true underlying distributions.1 In such settings, we must understand these statistical
tasks not only in the asymptotic regime (in which the amount of available data goes to infinity), but
in the “undersampled” regime in which the dataset is significantly smaller than the size or complexity of the distribution in question. Surprisingly, despite an intense history of study by the statistics,
information theory, and computer science communities, aspects of basic hypothesis testing and estimation questions–especially in the undersampled regime—remain unresolved, and require both new
algorithms, and new analysis techniques.
∗

Supported in part by NSF CAREER Award CCF-1351108
To give some specific examples, two recent independent studies [19, 26] each considered the genetic sequences of over 14,000 individuals, and found that rare variants are extremely abundant, with over 80% of
mutations observed just once in the sample. A separate recent paper [16] found that the discrepancy in rare mutation abundance cited in different demographic modeling studies can largely be explained by discrepancies in
the sample sizes of the respective studies, as opposed to differences in the actual distributions of rare mutations
across demographics, highlighting the importance of improved statistical tests in this “undersampled” regime.
1

1

