Efficient Non-greedy Optimization of Decision Trees

Mohammad Norouzi1∗
Maxwell D. Collins2 ∗
Matthew Johnson3
4
5
David J. Fleet
Pushmeet Kohli
1,4
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison
3,5
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Decision trees and randomized forests are widely used in computer vision and machine learning. Standard algorithms for decision tree induction optimize the split
functions one node at a time according to some splitting criteria. This greedy procedure often leads to suboptimal trees. In this paper, we present an algorithm for
optimizing the split functions at all levels of the tree jointly with the leaf parameters, based on a global objective. We show that the problem of finding optimal
linear-combination (oblique) splits for decision trees is related to structured prediction with latent variables, and we formulate a convex-concave upper bound on
the tree’s empirical loss. Computing the gradient of the proposed surrogate objective with respect to each training exemplar is O(d2 ), where d is the tree depth,
and thus training deep trees is feasible. The use of stochastic gradient descent for
optimization enables effective training with large datasets. Experiments on several classification benchmarks demonstrate that the resulting non-greedy decision
trees outperform greedy decision tree baselines.

1

Introduction

Decision trees and forests [5, 21, 4] have a long and rich history in machine learning [10, 7]. Recent
years have seen an increase in their popularity, owing to their computational efficiency and applicability to large-scale classification and regression tasks. A case in point is Microsoft Kinect where
decision trees are trained on millions of exemplars to enable real-time human pose estimation from
depth images [22].
Conventional algorithms for decision tree induction are greedy. They grow a tree one node at a
time following procedures laid out decades ago by frameworks such as ID3 [21] and CART [5].
While recent work has proposed new objective functions to guide greedy algorithms [20, 12], it
continues to be the case that decision tree applications (e.g., [9, 14]) utilize the same dated methods
of tree induction. Greedy decision tree induction builds a binary tree via a recursive procedure as
follows: beginning with a single node, indexed by i, a split function si is optimized based on a
corresponding subset of the training data Di such that Di is split into two subsets, which in turn
define the training data for the two children of the node i. The intrinsic limitation of this procedure
is that the optimization of si is solely conditioned on Di , i.e., there is no ability to fine-tune the split
function si based on the results of training at lower levels of the tree. This paper proposes a general
framework for non-greedy learning of the split parameters for tree-based methods that addresses this
limitation. We focus on binary trees, while extension to N -ary trees is possible. We show that our
joint optimization of the split functions at different levels of the tree under a global objective not
only promotes cooperation between the split nodes to create more compact trees, but also leads to
better generalization performance.
∗

Part of this work was done while M. Norouzi and M. D. Collins were at Microsoft Research, Cambridge.

1

