Frank-Wolfe Bayesian Quadrature: Probabilistic
Integration with Theoretical Guarantees

Chris J. Oates
School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences
University of Technology, Sydney
christopher.oates@uts.edu.au

François-Xavier Briol
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
f-x.briol@warwick.ac.uk
Mark Girolami
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
m.girolami@warwick.ac.uk

Michael A. Osborne
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
mosb@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
There is renewed interest in formulating integration as a statistical inference problem, motivated by obtaining a full distribution over numerical error that can be
propagated through subsequent computation. Current methods, such as Bayesian
Quadrature, demonstrate impressive empirical performance but lack theoretical
analysis. An important challenge is therefore to reconcile these probabilistic integrators with rigorous convergence guarantees. In this paper, we present the first
probabilistic integrator that admits such theoretical treatment, called Frank-Wolfe
Bayesian Quadrature (FWBQ). Under FWBQ, convergence to the true value of
the integral is shown to be up to exponential and posterior contraction rates are
proven to be up to super-exponential. In simulations, FWBQ is competitive with
state-of-the-art methods and out-performs alternatives based on Frank-Wolfe optimisation. Our approach is applied to successfully quantify numerical error in the
solution to a challenging Bayesian model choice problem in cellular biology.

1

Introduction

Computing integrals is a core challenge in machine learning and numerical methods play a central
role in this area. This can be problematic when a numerical integration routine is repeatedly called,
maybe millions of times, within a larger computational pipeline. In such situations, the cumulative
impact of numerical errors can be unclear, especially in cases where the error has a non-trivial
structural component. One solution is to model the numerical error statistically and to propagate
this source of uncertainty through subsequent computations. Conversely, an understanding of how
errors arise and propagate can enable the efficient focusing of computational resources upon the
most challenging numerical integrals in a pipeline.
Classical numerical integration schemes do not account for prior information on the integrand and,
as a consequence, can require an excessive number of function evaluations to obtain a prescribed
level of accuracy [21]. Alternatives such as Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) can exploit knowledge on
the smoothness of the integrand to obtain optimal convergence rates [7]. However these optimal
rates can only hold on sub-sequences of sample sizes n, a consequence of the fact that all function
evaluations are weighted equally in the estimator [24]. A modern approach that avoids this problem
is to consider arbitrarily weighted combinations of function values; the so-called quadrature rules
(also called cubature rules). Whilst quadrature rules with non-equal weights have received comparatively little theoretical attention, it is known that the extra flexibility given by arbitrary weights can
1

