Efficient Thompson Sampling for Online
Matrix-Factorization Recommendation
Jaya Kawale, Hung Bui, Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA
{kawale, hubui, kveton}@adobe.com

Long Tran Thanh
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
ltt08r@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Sanjay Chawla
Qatar Computing Research Institute, Qatar
University of Sydney, Australia
sanjay.chawla@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Matrix factorization (MF) collaborative filtering is an effective and widely used
method in recommendation systems. However, the problem of finding an optimal
trade-off between exploration and exploitation (otherwise known as the bandit
problem), a crucial problem in collaborative filtering from cold-start, has not been
previously addressed. In this paper, we present a novel algorithm for online MF
recommendation that automatically combines finding the most relevant items with
exploring new or less-recommended items. Our approach, called Particle Thompson sampling for MF (PTS), is based on the general Thompson sampling framework, but augmented with a novel efficient online Bayesian probabilistic matrix
factorization method based on the Rao-Blackwellized particle filter. Extensive experiments in collaborative filtering using several real-world datasets demonstrate
that PTS significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Matrix factorization (MF) techniques have emerged as a powerful tool to perform collaborative
filtering in large datasets [1]. These algorithms decompose a partially-observed matrix R ∈ RN ×M
into a product of two smaller matrices, U ∈ RN ×K and V ∈ RM ×K , such that R ≈ U V T .
A variety of MF-based methods have been proposed in the literature and have been successfully
applied to various domains. Despite their promise, one of the challenges faced by these methods
is recommending when a new user/item arrives in the system, also known as the problem of coldstart. Another challenge is recommending items in an online setting and quickly adapting to the
user feedback as required by many real world applications including online advertising, serving
personalized content, link prediction and product recommendations.
In this paper, we address these two challenges in the problem of online low-rank matrix completion
by combining matrix completion with bandit algorithms. This setting was introduced in the previous
work [2] but our work is the first satisfactory solution to this problem. In a bandit setting, we
can model the problem as a repeated game where the environment chooses row i of R and the
learning agent chooses column j. The Rij value is revealed and the goal (of the learning agent) is
to minimize the cumulative regret with respect to the optimal solution, the highest entry in each row
of R. The key design principle in a bandit setting is to balance between exploration and exploitation
which solves the problem of cold start naturally. For example, in online advertising, exploration
implies presenting new ads, about which little is known and observing subsequent feedback, while
exploitation entails serving ads which are known to attract high click through rate.
1

