Copeland Dueling Bandits
Masrour Zoghi
Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
m.zoghi@uva.nl

Zohar Karnin
Yahoo Labs
New York, NY
zkarnin@yahoo-inc.com

Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Maarten de Rijke
Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam
derijke@uva.nl

Abstract
A version of the dueling bandit problem is addressed in which a Condorcet winner
may not exist. Two algorithms are proposed that instead seek to minimize regret
with respect to the Copeland winner, which, unlike the Condorcet winner, is guaranteed to exist. The first, Copeland Confidence Bound (CCB), is designed for
small numbers of arms, while the second, Scalable Copeland Bandits (SCB),
works better for large-scale problems. We provide theoretical results bounding
the regret accumulated by CCB and SCB, both substantially improving existing
results. Such existing results either offer bounds of the form O(K log T ) but
require restrictive assumptions, or offer bounds of the form O(K 2 log T ) without
requiring such assumptions. Our results offer the best of both worlds: O(K log T )
bounds without restrictive assumptions.

1

Introduction

The dueling bandit problem [1] arises naturally in domains where feedback is more reliable when
given as a pairwise preference (e.g., when it is provided by a human) and specifying real-valued
feedback instead would be arbitrary or inefficient. Examples include ranker evaluation [2, 3, 4] in
information retrieval, ad placement and recommender systems. As with other preference learning
problems [5], feedback consists of a pairwise preference between a selected pair of arms, instead of
scalar reward for a single selected arm, as in the K-armed bandit problem.
Most existing algorithms for the dueling bandit problem require the existence of a Condorcet winner, which is an arm that beats every other arm with probability greater than 0.5. If such algorithms
are applied when no Condorcet winner exists, no decision may be reached even after many comparisons. This is a key weakness limiting their practical applicability. For example, in industrial ranker
evaluation [6], when many rankers must be compared, each comparison corresponds to a costly live
experiment and thus the potential for failure if no Condorcet winner exists is unacceptable [7].
This risk is not merely theoretical. On the contrary, recent experiments on K-armed dueling bandit
problems based on information retrieval datasets show that dueling bandit problems without Condorcet winners arise regularly in practice [8, Figure 1]. In addition, we show in Appendix C.1 in the
supplementary material that there are realistic situations in ranker evaluation in information retrieval
in which the probability that the Condorcet assumption holds, decreases rapidly as the number of
arms grows. Since the K-armed dueling bandit methods mentioned above do not provide regret
bounds in the absence of a Condorcet winner, applying them remains risky in practice. Indeed, we
demonstrate empirically the danger of applying such algorithms to dueling bandit problems that do
not have a Condorcet winner (cf. Appendix A in the supplementary material).
The non-existence of the Condorcet winner has been investigated extensively in social choice theory,
where numerous definitions have been proposed, without a clear contender for the most suitable
resolution [9]. In the dueling bandit context, a few methods have been proposed to address this
issue, e.g., SAVAGE [10], PBR [11] and RankEl [12], which use some of the notions proposed by
1

