The Brain Uses Reliability of Stimulus Information
when Making Perceptual Decisions

Sebastian Bitzer1
sebastian.bitzer@tu-dresden.de
1

Stefan J. Kiebel1
stefan.kiebel@tu-dresden.de

Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany

Abstract
In simple perceptual decisions the brain has to identify a stimulus based on noisy
sensory samples from the stimulus. Basic statistical considerations state that the
reliability of the stimulus information, i.e., the amount of noise in the samples,
should be taken into account when the decision is made. However, for perceptual
decision making experiments it has been questioned whether the brain indeed uses
the reliability for making decisions when confronted with unpredictable changes
in stimulus reliability. We here show that even the basic drift diffusion model,
which has frequently been used to explain experimental findings in perceptual
decision making, implicitly relies on estimates of stimulus reliability. We then
show that only those variants of the drift diffusion model which allow stimulusspecific reliabilities are consistent with neurophysiological findings. Our analysis
suggests that the brain estimates the reliability of the stimulus on a short time scale
of at most a few hundred milliseconds.

1

Introduction

In perceptual decision making participants have to identify a noisy stimulus. In typical experiments,
only two possibilities are considered [1]. The amount of noise on the stimulus is usually varied to
manipulate task difficulty. With higher noise, participants’ decisions are slower and less accurate.
Early psychology research established that biased random walk models explain the response distributions (choice and reaction time) of perceptual decision making experiments [2]. These models
describe decision making as an accumulation of noisy evidence until a bound is reached and correspond, in discrete time, to sequential analysis [3] as developed in statistics [4]. More recently,
electrophysiological experiments provided additional support for such bounded accumulation models, see [1] for a review.
There appears to be a general consensus that the brain implements the mechanisms required for
bounded accumulation, although different models were proposed for how exactly this accumulation
is employed by the brain [5, 6, 1, 7, 8]. An important assumption of all these models is that the
brain provides the input to the accumulation, the so-called evidence, but the most established models
actually do not define how this evidence is computed by the brain [3, 5, 9, 1]. In this contribution, we
will show that addressing this question offers a new perspective on how exactly perceptual decision
making may be performed by the brain.
Probabilistic models provide a precise definition of evidence: Evidence is the likelihood of a decision alternative under a noisy measurement where the likelihood is defined through a generative
model of the measurements under the hypothesis that the considered decision alternative is true. In
particular, this generative model implements assumptions about the expected distribution of measurements. Therefore, the likelihood of a measurement is large when measurements are assumed,
1

