Stop Wasting My Gradients: Practical SVRG

Reza Babanezhad1 , Mohamed Osama Ahmed1 , Alim Virani2 , Mark Schmidt1
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
1
{rezababa, moahmed, schmidtm}@cs.ubc.ca,2 alim.virani@gmail.com
Jakub Konečný
School of Mathematics
University of Edinburgh
kubo.konecny@gmail.com

Scott Sallinen
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia
scotts@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
We present and analyze several strategies for improving the performance of
stochastic variance-reduced gradient (SVRG) methods. We first show that the
convergence rate of these methods can be preserved under a decreasing sequence
of errors in the control variate, and use this to derive variants of SVRG that use
growing-batch strategies to reduce the number of gradient calculations required
in the early iterations. We further (i) show how to exploit support vectors to reduce the number of gradient computations in the later iterations, (ii) prove that the
commonly–used regularized SVRG iteration is justified and improves the convergence rate, (iii) consider alternate mini-batch selection strategies, and (iv) consider
the generalization error of the method.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of optimizing the average of a finite but large sum of smooth functions,
n

min f (x) =

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x).
n i=1

(1)

A huge proportion of the model-fitting procedures in machine learning can be mapped to this problem. This includes classic models like least squares and logistic regression but also includes more
advanced methods like conditional random fields and deep neural network models. In the highdimensional setting (large d), the traditional approaches for solving (1) are: full gradient (FG) methods which have linear convergence rates but need to evaluate the gradient fi for all n examples on
every iteration, and stochastic gradient (SG) methods which make rapid initial progress as they only
use a single gradient on each iteration but ultimately have slower sublinear convergence rates.
Le Roux et al. [1] proposed the first general method, stochastic average gradient (SAG), that only
considers one training example on each iteration but still achieves a linear convergence rate. Other
methods have subsequently been shown to have this property [2, 3, 4], but these all require storing a
previous evaluation of the gradient fi0 or the dual variables for each i. For many objectives this only
requires O(n) space, but for general problems this requires O(np) space making them impractical.
Recently, several methods have been proposed with similar convergence rates to SAG but without the
memory requirements [5, 6, 7, 8]. They are known as mixed gradient, stochastic variance-reduced
gradient (SVRG), and semi-stochastic gradient methods (we will use SVRG). We give a canonical
SVRG algorithm in the next section, but the salient features of these methods are that they evaluate
two gradients on each iteration and occasionally must compute the gradient on all examples. SVRG
1

