A hybrid sampler for Poisson-Kingman mixture
models
Marı́a Lomelı́
Gatsby Unit
University College London
mlomeli@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Stefano Favaro
Department of Economics and Statistics
University of Torino and Collegio Carlo Alberto
stefano.favaro@unito.it

Yee Whye Teh
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
y.w.teh@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper concerns the introduction of a new Markov Chain Monte Carlo scheme
for posterior sampling in Bayesian nonparametric mixture models with priors that
belong to the general Poisson-Kingman class. We present a novel compact way
of representing the infinite dimensional component of the model such that while
explicitly representing this infinite component it has less memory and storage requirements than previous MCMC schemes. We describe comparative simulation
results demonstrating the efficacy of the proposed MCMC algorithm against existing marginal and conditional MCMC samplers.

1

Introduction

According to Ghahramani [9], models that have a nonparametric component give us more flexiblity
that could lead to better predictive performance. This is because their capacity to learn does not saturate hence their predictions should continue to improve as we get more and more data. Furthermore,
we are able to fully consider our uncertainty about predictions thanks to the Bayesian paradigm.
However, a major impediment to the widespread use of Bayesian nonparametric models is the problem of inference. Over the years, many MCMC methods have been proposed to perform inference
which usually rely on a tailored representation of the underlying process [5, 4, 18, 20, 28, 6]. This
is an active research area since dealing with this infinite dimensional component forbids the direct
use of standard simulation-based methods for posterior inference. These methods usually require a
finite-dimensional representation. There are two main sampling approaches to facilitate simulation
in the case of Bayesian nonparametric models: random truncation and marginalization. These two
schemes are known in the literature as conditional and marginal samplers.
In conditional samplers, the infinite-dimensional prior is replaced by a finite-dimensional representation chosen according to a truncation level. In marginal samplers, the need to represent the
infinite-dimensional component can be bypassed by marginalising it out. Marginal samplers have
less storage requirements than conditional samplers but could potentially have worst mixing properties. However, not integrating out the infinite dimensional compnent leads to a more comprehensive
representation of the random probability measure, useful to compute expectations of interest with
respect to the posterior.
In this paper, we propose a novel MCMC sampler for Poisson-Kingman mixture models, a very
large class of Bayesian nonparametric mixture models that encompass all previously explored ones
in the literature. Our approach is based on a hybrid scheme that combines the main strengths of
1

