Approximating Sparse PCA from Incomplete Data

Abhisek Kundu ∗

Petros Drineas †

Malik Magdon-Ismail ‡

Abstract
We study how well one can recover sparse principal components of a data matrix using a sketch formed from a few of its elements. We show that for a wide
class of optimization problems, if the sketch is close (in the spectral norm) to the
original data matrix, then one can recover a near optimal solution to the optimization problem by using the sketch. In particular, we use this approach to obtain
sparse principal components and show that for m data points in n dimensions,
O(−2 k̃ max{m, n}) elements gives an -additive approximation to the sparse
PCA problem (k̃ is the stable rank of the data matrix). We demonstrate our algorithms extensively on image, text, biological and financial data. The results show
that not only are we able to recover the sparse PCAs from the incomplete data, but
by using our sparse sketch, the running time drops by a factor of five or more.

1

Introduction

Principal components analysis constructs a low dimensional subspace of the data such that projection
of the data onto this subspace preserves as much information as possible (or equivalently maximizes
the variance of the projected data). The earliest reference to principal components analysis (PCA)
is in [15]. Since then, PCA has evolved into a classic tool for data analysis. A challenge for the
interpretation of the principal components (or factors) is that they can be linear combinations of all
the original variables. When the original variables have direct physical significance (e.g. genes in
biological applications or assets in financial applications) it is desirable to have factors which have
loadings on only a small number of the original variables. These interpretable factors are sparse
principal components (SPCA).
The question we address is not how to better perform sparse PCA; rather, it is whether one can perform sparse PCA on incomplete data and be assured some degree of success. (i.e., can we do sparse
PCA when we have a small sample of data points and those data points have missing features?).
Incomplete data is a situation that one is confronted with all too often in machine learning. For
example, with user-recommendation data, one does not have all the ratings of any given user. Or in
a privacy preserving setting, a client may not want to give us all entries in the data matrix. In such a
setting, our goal is to show that if the samples that we do get are chosen carefully, the sparse PCA
features of the data can be recovered within some provable error bounds. A significant part of this
work is to demonstrate our algorithms on a variety of data sets.
More formally, The data matrix is A ∈ Rm×n (m data points in n dimensions). Data matrices
often have low effective rank. Let Ak be the best rank-k approximation to A; in practice, it is often
possible to choose a small value of k for which kA − Ak k2 is small. The best rank-k approximation
Ak is obtained by projecting A onto the subspace spanned by its top-k principal components Vk ,
which is the n × k matrix containing the top-k right singular vectors of A. These top-k principal
∗

Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, kundua2@rpi.edu.
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, drinep@cs.rpi.edu.
‡
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, magdon@cs.rpi.edu.
†

1

