Recursive Training of 2D-3D Convolutional Networks
for Neuronal Boundary Detection

Kisuk Lee, Aleksandar Zlateski
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{kisuklee,zlateski}@mit.edu

Ashwin Vishwanathan, H. Sebastian Seung
Princeton University
{ashwinv,sseung}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Efforts to automate the reconstruction of neural circuits from 3D electron microscopic (EM) brain images are critical for the field of connectomics. An important
computation for reconstruction is the detection of neuronal boundaries. Images acquired by serial section EM, a leading 3D EM technique, are highly anisotropic,
with inferior quality along the third dimension. For such images, the 2D maxpooling convolutional network has set the standard for performance at boundary
detection. Here we achieve a substantial gain in accuracy through three innovations. Following the trend towards deeper networks for object recognition, we use
a much deeper network than previously employed for boundary detection. Second, we incorporate 3D as well as 2D filters, to enable computations that use 3D
context. Finally, we adopt a recursively trained architecture in which a first network generates a preliminary boundary map that is provided as input along with
the original image to a second network that generates a final boundary map. Backpropagation training is accelerated by ZNN, a new implementation of 3D convolutional networks that uses multicore CPU parallelism for speed. Our hybrid 2D3D architecture could be more generally applicable to other types of anisotropic
3D images, including video, and our recursive framework for any image labeling
problem.

1

Introduction

Neural circuits can be reconstructed by analyzing 3D brain images from electron microscopy (EM).
Image analysis has been accelerated by semiautomated systems that use computer vision to reduce
the amount of human labor required [1, 2, 3]. However, analysis of large image datasets is still
laborious [4], so it is critical to increase automation by improving the accuracy of computer vision
algorithms.
A variety of machine learning approaches have been explored for the 3D reconstruction of neurons,
a problem that can be formulated as image segmentation or boundary detection [5, 6]. This paper
focuses on neuronal boundary detection in images from serial section EM, the most widespread kind
of 3D EM [7]. The technique starts by cutting and collecting ultrathin (30 to 100 nm) sections of
brain tissue. A 2D image is acquired from each section, and then the 2D images are aligned. The
spatial resolution of the resulting 3D image stack along the z direction (perpendicular to the cutting
plane) is set by the thickness of the sections. This is generally much worse than the resolution that
EM yields in the xy plane. In addition, alignment errors may corrupt the image along the z direction.
Due to these issues with the z direction of the image stack [6, 8], most existing analysis pipelines
begin with 2D processing and only later transition to 3D. The stages are: (1) neuronal boundary
detection within each 2D image, (2) segmentation of neuron cross sections within each 2D image,
and (3) 3D reconstruction of individual neurons by linking across multiple 2D images [1, 9].
1

