Deep Generative Image Models using a
Laplacian Pyramid of Adversarial Networks

Emily Denton∗
Dept. of Computer Science
Courant Institute
New York University

Soumith Chintala∗
Arthur Szlam
Facebook AI Research
New York

Rob Fergus

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a generative parametric model capable of producing
high quality samples of natural images. Our approach uses a cascade of convolutional networks within a Laplacian pyramid framework to generate images in
a coarse-to-fine fashion. At each level of the pyramid, a separate generative convnet model is trained using the Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) approach [11].
Samples drawn from our model are of significantly higher quality than alternate
approaches. In a quantitative assessment by human evaluators, our CIFAR10 samples were mistaken for real images around 40% of the time, compared to 10% for
samples drawn from a GAN baseline model. We also show samples from models
trained on the higher resolution images of the LSUN scene dataset.

1

Introduction

Building a good generative model of natural images has been a fundamental problem within computer vision. However, images are complex and high dimensional, making them hard to model well,
despite extensive efforts. Given the difficulties of modeling entire scene at high-resolution, most
existing approaches instead generate image patches. In contrast, we propose an approach that is
able to generate plausible looking scenes at 32 × 32 and 64 × 64. To do this, we exploit the multiscale structure of natural images, building a series of generative models, each of which captures
image structure at a particular scale of a Laplacian pyramid [1]. This strategy breaks the original
problem into a sequence of more manageable stages. At each scale we train a convolutional networkbased generative model using the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) approach of Goodfellow
et al. [11]. Samples are drawn in a coarse-to-fine fashion, commencing with a low-frequency residual image. The second stage samples the band-pass structure at the next level, conditioned on the
sampled residual. Subsequent levels continue this process, always conditioning on the output from
the previous scale, until the final level is reached. Thus drawing samples is an efficient and straightforward procedure: taking random vectors as input and running forward through a cascade of deep
convolutional networks (convnets) to produce an image.
Deep learning approaches have proven highly effective at discriminative tasks in vision, such as
object classification [4]. However, the same level of success has not been obtained for generative
tasks, despite numerous efforts [14, 26, 30]. Against this background, our proposed approach makes
a significant advance in that it is straightforward to train and sample from, with the resulting samples
showing a surprising level of visual fidelity.
1.1

Related Work

Generative image models are well studied, falling into two main approaches: non-parametric and
parametric. The former copy patches from training images to perform, for example, texture synthesis
[7] or super-resolution [9]. More ambitiously, entire portions of an image can be in-painted, given a
sufficiently large training dataset [13]. Early parametric models addressed the easier problem of tex∗

denotes equal contribution.

1

