Taming the Wild: A Unified Analysis of
H OGWILD !-Style Algorithms

Christopher De Sa, Ce Zhang, Kunle Olukotun, and Christopher Ré
cdesa@stanford.edu, czhang@cs.wisc.edu,
kunle@stanford.edu, chrismre@stanford.edu
Departments of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a ubiquitous algorithm for a variety of machine learning problems. Researchers and industry have developed several techniques to optimize SGD’s runtime performance, including asynchronous execution and reduced precision. Our main result is a martingale-based analysis that
enables us to capture the rich noise models that may arise from such techniques.
Specifically, we use our new analysis in three ways: (1) we derive convergence
rates for the convex case (H OGWILD !) with relaxed assumptions on the sparsity
of the problem; (2) we analyze asynchronous SGD algorithms for non-convex
matrix problems including matrix completion; and (3) we design and analyze
an asynchronous SGD algorithm, called B UCKWILD !, that uses lower-precision
arithmetic. We show experimentally that our algorithms run efficiently for a variety of problems on modern hardware.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning can be written as a stochastic optimization problem
minimize E[f˜(x)] over x ∈ Rn ,
where f˜ is a random objective function. One popular method to solve this is with stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), an iterative method which, at each timestep t, chooses a random objective sample f˜t
and updates
xt+1 = xt − α∇f˜t (xt ),
(1)
where α is the step size. For most problems, this update step is easy to compute, and perhaps
because of this SGD is a ubiquitous algorithm with a wide range of applications in machine learning [1], including neural network backpropagation [2, 3, 13], recommendation systems [8, 19], and
optimization [20]. For non-convex problems, SGD is popular—in particular, it is widely used in
deep learning—but its success is poorly understood theoretically.
Given SGD’s success in industry, practitioners have developed methods to speed up its computation.
One popular method to speed up SGD and related algorithms is using asynchronous execution.
In an asynchronous algorithm, such as H OGWILD ! [17], multiple threads run an update rule such
as Equation 1 in parallel without locks. H OGWILD ! and other lock-free algorithms have been
applied to a variety of uses, including PageRank approximations (FrogWild! [16]), deep learning
(Dogwild! [18]) and recommender systems [24]. Many asynchronous versions of other stochastic
algorithms have been individually analyzed, such as stochastic coordinate descent (SGD) [14, 15]
and accelerated parallel proximal coordinate descent (APPROX) [6], producing rate results that are
similar to those of H OGWILD ! Recently, Gupta et al. [9] gave an empirical analysis of the effects of
a low-precision variant of SGD on neural network training. Other variants of stochastic algorithms
1

