Learning to Transduce with Unbounded Memory
Edward Grefenstette
Google DeepMind
etg@google.com

Karl Moritz Hermann
Google DeepMind
kmh@google.com

Mustafa Suleyman
Google DeepMind
mustafasul@google.com

Phil Blunsom
Google DeepMind and Oxford University
pblunsom@google.com

Abstract
Recently, strong results have been demonstrated by Deep Recurrent Neural Networks on natural language transduction problems. In this paper we explore the
representational power of these models using synthetic grammars designed to exhibit phenomena similar to those found in real transduction problems such as machine translation. These experiments lead us to propose new memory-based recurrent networks that implement continuously differentiable analogues of traditional
data structures such as Stacks, Queues, and DeQues. We show that these architectures exhibit superior generalisation performance to Deep RNNs and are often able
to learn the underlying generating algorithms in our transduction experiments.

1 Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) offer a compelling tool for processing natural language input in
a straightforward sequential manner. Many natural language processing (NLP) tasks can be viewed
as transduction problems, that is learning to convert one string into another. Machine translation is
a prototypical example of transduction and recent results indicate that Deep RNNs have the ability
to encode long source strings and produce coherent translations [1, 2]. While elegant, the application of RNNs to transduction tasks requires hidden layers large enough to store representations
of the longest strings likely to be encountered, implying wastage on shorter strings and a strong
dependency between the number of parameters in the model and its memory.
In this paper we use a number of linguistically-inspired synthetic transduction tasks to explore the
ability of RNNs to learn long-range reorderings and substitutions. Further, inspired by prior work on
neural network implementations of stack data structures [3], we propose and evaluate transduction
models based on Neural Stacks, Queues, and DeQues (double ended queues). Stack algorithms are
well-suited to processing the hierarchical structures observed in natural language and we hypothesise
that their neural analogues will provide an effective and learnable transduction tool. Our models
provide a middle ground between simple RNNs and the recently proposed Neural Turing Machine
(NTM) [4] which implements a powerful random access memory with read and write operations.
Neural Stacks, Queues, and DeQues also provide a logically unbounded memory while permitting
efficient constant time push and pop operations.
Our results indicate that the models proposed in this work, and in particular the Neural DeQue, are
able to consistently learn a range of challenging transductions. While Deep RNNs based on long
short-term memory (LSTM) cells [1, 5] can learn some transductions when tested on inputs of the
same length as seen in training, they fail to consistently generalise to longer strings. In contrast,
our sequential memory-based algorithms are able to learn to reproduce the generating transduction
algorithms, often generalising perfectly to inputs well beyond those encountered in training.
1

