Matrix Completion with Noisy Side Information

∗

Kai-Yang Chiang∗ Cho-Jui Hsieh † Inderjit S. Dhillon ∗
†
University of Texas at Austin
University of California at Davis
∗
{kychiang,inderjit}@cs.utexas.edu
†
chohsieh@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
We study the matrix completion problem with side information. Side information
has been considered in several matrix completion applications, and has been empirically shown to be useful in many cases. Recently, researchers studied the effect
of side information for matrix completion from a theoretical viewpoint, showing
that sample complexity can be significantly reduced given completely clean features. However, since in reality most given features are noisy or only weakly informative, the development of a model to handle a general feature set, and investigation of how much noisy features can help matrix recovery, remains an important
issue. In this paper, we propose a novel model that balances between features and
observations simultaneously in order to leverage feature information yet be robust
to feature noise. Moreover, we study the effect of general features in theory and
show that by using our model, the sample complexity can be lower than matrix
completion as long as features are sufficiently informative. This result provides
a theoretical insight into the usefulness of general side information. Finally, we
consider synthetic data and two applications — relationship prediction and semisupervised clustering — and show that our model outperforms other methods for
matrix completion that use features both in theory and practice.

1

Introduction

Low rank matrix completion is an important topic in machine learning and has been successfully
applied to many practical applications [22, 12, 11]. One promising direction in this area is to exploit
the side information, or features, to help matrix completion tasks. For example, in the famous Netflix
problem, besides rating history, profile of users and/or genre of movies might also be given, and one
could possibly leverage such side information for better prediction. Observing the fact that such
additional features are usually available in real applications, how to better incorporate features into
matrix completion becomes an important problem with both theoretical and practical aspects.
Several approaches have been proposed for matrix completion with side information, and most of
them empirically show that features are useful for certain applications [1, 28, 9, 29, 33]. However,
there is surprisingly little analysis on the effect of features for general matrix completion. More recently, Jain and Dhillon [18] and Xu et al. [35] provided non-trivial guarantees on matrix completion
with side information. They showed that if “perfect” features are given, under certain conditions,
one can substantially reduce the sample complexity by solving a feature-embedded objective. This
result suggests that completely informative features are extremely powerful for matrix completion,
and the algorithm has been successfully applied in many applications [29, 37]. However, this model
is still quite restrictive since if features are not perfect, it fails to guarantee recoverability and could
even suffer poor performance in practice. A more general model with recovery analysis to handle
noisy features is thus desired.
In this paper, we study the matrix completion problem with general side information. We propose a
dirty statistical model which balances between feature and observation information simultaneously
to complete a matrix. As a result, our model can leverage feature information, yet is robust to noisy
features. Furthermore, we provide a theoretical foundation to show the effectiveness of our model.
We formally quantify the quality of features and show that the sample complexity of our model
1

