Nearly-Optimal Private LASSO∗

Kunal Talwar
Google Research
kunal@google.com

Abhradeep Thakurta
(Previously) Yahoo! Labs
guhathakurta.abhradeep@gmail.com
Li Zhang
Google Research
liqzhang@google.com

Abstract
We present a nearly optimal differentially private version of the well known
LASSO estimator. Our algorithm provides privacy protection with respect to each
training example. The excess risk of our algorithm, compared to the non-private
version, is e
O(1/n2/3 ), assuming all the input data has bounded `∞ norm. This
is the first differentially private algorithm that achieves such a bound without the
polynomial dependence on p under no additional assumptions on the design matrix. In addition, we show that this error bound is nearly optimal amongst all
differentially private algorithms.

1

Introduction

A common task in supervised learning is to select the model that best fits the data. This is frequently
achieved by selecting a loss function that associates a real-valued loss with each datapoint d and
model θ and then selecting from a class of admissible models, the model θ that minimizes the
average loss over all data points in the training set. This procedure is commonly referred to as
Empirical Risk Minimization(ERM).
The availability of large datasets containing sensitive information from individuals has motivated the
study of learning algorithms that guarantee the privacy of individuals contributing to the database. A
rigorous and by-now standard privacy guarantee is via the notion of differential privacy. In this work,
we study the design of differentially private algorithms for Empirical Risk Minimization, continuing
a long line of work. (See [2] for a survey.)
In particular, we study adding privacy protection to the classical LASSO estimator, which has been
widely used and analyzed. We first present a differentially private optimization algorithm for the
LASSO estimator. The algorithm is the combination of the classical Frank-Wolfe algorithm [15]
and the exponential mechanism for guaranteeing the privacy [21]. We then show that our algorithm
achieves nearly optimal risk among all the differentially private algorithms. This lower bound proof
relies on recently developed techniques with roots in Cryptography [4, 14],
Consider the training dataset D consisting of n pairs of data di = (xi , yi ) where xi ∈ Rp , usually
called the feature vector, and yi ∈ R, the prediction.
P The LASSO estimator, or the sparse linear
regression, solves for θ∗ = argminθ L(θ; di ) = n1 i |xi · θ − yi |2 subject to kθk1 ≤ c. To simplify
presentation, we assume c = 1, but our results directly extend to general c. The `1 constraint tends to
induce sparse θ∗ so is widely used in the high dimensional setting when p  n. Here, we will study
approximating the LASSO estimation with minimum possible error while protecting the privacy of
each individual di . Below we define the setting more formally.
∗

Part of this work was done at Microsoft Research Silicon Valley Campus.

1

