A Generalization of Submodular Cover via the
Diminishing Return Property on the Integer Lattice

Tasuku Soma
The University of Tokyo
tasuku soma@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yuichi Yoshida
National Institute of Informatics, and
Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
We consider a generalization of the submodular cover problem based on the concept of diminishing return property on the integer lattice. We are motivated by
real scenarios in machine learning that cannot be captured by (traditional) submodular set functions. We show that the generalized submodular cover problem
can be applied to various problems and devise a bicriteria approximation algorithm. Our algorithm is guaranteed to output a log-factor approximate solution
that satisfies the constraints with the desired accuracy. The running time of our
algorithm is roughly O(n log(nr) log r), where n is the size of the ground set and
r is the maximum value of a coordinate. The dependency on r is exponentially
better than the naive reduction algorithms. Several experiments on real and artificial datasets demonstrate that the solution quality of our algorithm is comparable
to naive algorithms, while the running time is several orders of magnitude faster.

1

Introduction

A function f : 2S → R+ is called submodular if f (X) + f (Y ) ≥ f (X ∪ Y ) + f (X ∩ Y ) for
all X, Y ⊆ S, where S is a finite ground set. An equivalent and more intuitive definition is by
the diminishing return property: f (X ∪ {s}) − f (X) ≥ f (Y ∪ {s}) − f (Y ) for all X ⊆ Y and
s ∈ S \ Y . In the last decade, the optimization of a submodular function has attracted particular
interest in the machine learning community. One reason of this is that many real-world models
naturally admit the diminishing return property. For example, document summarization [12, 13],
influence maximization in viral marketing [7], and sensor placement [10] can be described with the
concept of submodularity, and efficient algorithms have been devised by exploiting submodularity
(for further details, refer to [8]).
A variety of proposed models in machine learning [4, 13, 18] boil down to the submodular cover
problem [21]; for given monotone and nonnegative submodular functions f, c : 2S → R+ , and
α > 0, we are to
minimize c(X)
subject to f (X) ≥ α.
(1)
Intuitively, c(X) and f (X) represent the cost and the quality of a solution, respectively. The objective of this problem is to find X of minimum cost with the worst quality guarantee α. Although this
problem is NP-hard since it generalizes the set cover problem, a simple greedy algorithm achieves
tight log-factor approximation and it practically performs very well.
The aforementioned submodular models are based on the submodularity of a set function, a function
defined on 2S . However, we often encounter problems that cannot be captured by a set function. Let
us give two examples:
Sensor Placement: Let us consider the following sensor placement scenario. Suppose that we
have several types of sensors with various energy levels. We assume a simple trade-off between
1

