Learning to Segment Object Candidates

Pedro O. Pinheiro∗

Ronan Collobert

Piotr Dollár

pedro@opinheiro.com

locronan@fb.com

pdollar@fb.com

Facebook AI Research
Abstract
Recent object detection systems rely on two critical steps: (1) a set of object proposals is predicted as efficiently as possible, and (2) this set of candidate proposals
is then passed to an object classifier. Such approaches have been shown they can
be fast, while achieving the state of the art in detection performance. In this paper, we propose a new way to generate object proposals, introducing an approach
based on a discriminative convolutional network. Our model is trained jointly
with two objectives: given an image patch, the first part of the system outputs a
class-agnostic segmentation mask, while the second part of the system outputs the
likelihood of the patch being centered on a full object. At test time, the model
is efficiently applied on the whole test image and generates a set of segmentation masks, each of them being assigned with a corresponding object likelihood
score. We show that our model yields significant improvements over state-of-theart object proposal algorithms. In particular, compared to previous approaches,
our model obtains substantially higher object recall using fewer proposals. We
also show that our model is able to generalize to unseen categories it has not seen
during training. Unlike all previous approaches for generating object masks, we
do not rely on edges, superpixels, or any other form of low-level segmentation.

1

Introduction

Object detection is one of the most foundational tasks in computer vision [21]. Until recently, the
dominant paradigm in object detection was the sliding window framework: a classifier is applied at
every object location and scale [4, 8, 32]. More recently, Girshick et al. [10] proposed a two-phase
approach. First, a rich set of object proposals (i.e., a set of image regions which are likely to contain
an object) is generated using a fast (but possibly imprecise) algorithm. Second, a convolutional
neural network classifier is applied on each of the proposals. This approach provides a notable gain
in object detection accuracy compared to classic sliding window approaches. Since then, most stateof-the-art object detectors for both the PASCAL VOC [7] and ImageNet [5] datasets rely on object
proposals as a first preprocessing step [10, 15, 33].
Object proposal algorithms aim to find diverse regions in an image which are likely to contain
objects. For efficiency and detection performance reasons, an ideal proposal method should possess
three key characteristics: (i) high recall (i.e., the proposed regions should contain the maximum
number of possible objects), (ii) the high recall should be achieved with the minimum number of
regions possible, and (iii) the proposed regions should match the objects as accurately as possible.
In this paper, we present an object proposal algorithm based on Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) [20] that satisfies these constraints better than existing approaches. ConvNets are an important class of algorithms which have been shown to be state of the art in many large scale object
recognition tasks. They can be seen as a hierarchy of trainable filters, interleaved with non-linearities
∗
Pedro O. Pinheiro is with the Idiap Research Institute in Martigny, Switzerland and Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) in Lausanne, Switzerland. This work was done during an internship at FAIR.

1

