Efficient Output Kernel Learning for Multiple Tasks

Pratik Jawanpuria1 , Maksim Lapin2 , Matthias Hein1 and Bernt Schiele2
1
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
The paradigm of multi-task learning is that one can achieve better generalization
by learning tasks jointly and thus exploiting the similarity between the tasks rather
than learning them independently of each other. While previously the relationship
between tasks had to be user-defined in the form of an output kernel, recent approaches jointly learn the tasks and the output kernel. As the output kernel is a
positive semidefinite matrix, the resulting optimization problems are not scalable
in the number of tasks as an eigendecomposition is required in each step. Using
the theory of positive semidefinite kernels we show in this paper that for a certain
class of regularizers on the output kernel, the constraint of being positive semidefinite can be dropped as it is automatically satisfied for the relaxed problem. This
leads to an unconstrained dual problem which can be solved efficiently. Experiments on several multi-task and multi-class data sets illustrate the efficacy of our
approach in terms of computational efficiency as well as generalization performance.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning (MTL) advocates sharing relevant information among several related tasks during the training stage. The advantage of MTL over learning tasks independently has been shown
theoretically as well as empirically [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
The focus of this paper is the question how the task relationships can be inferred from the data.
It has been noted that naively grouping all the tasks together may be detrimental [8, 9, 10, 11].
In particular, outlier tasks may lead to worse performance. Hence, clustered multi-task learning
algorithms [10, 12] aim to learn groups of closely related tasks. The information is then shared only
within these clusters of tasks. This corresponds to learning the task covariance matrix, which we
denote as the output kernel in this paper. Most of these approaches lead to non-convex problems.
In this work, we focus on the problem of directly learning the output kernel in the multi-task learning
framework. The multi-task kernel on input and output is assumed to be decoupled as the product
of a scalar kernel and the output kernel, which is a positive semidefinite matrix [1, 13, 14, 15]. In
classical multi-task learning algorithms [1, 16], the degree of relatedness between distinct tasks is
set to a constant and is optimized as a hyperparameter. However, constant similarity between tasks
is a strong assumption and is unlikely to hold in practice. Thus recent approaches have tackled the
problem of directly learning the output kernel. [17] solves a multi-task formulation in the framework
of vector-valued reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces involving squared loss where they penalize the
Frobenius norm of the output kernel as a regularizer. They formulate an invex optimization problem that they solve optimally. In comparison, [18] recently proposed an efficient barrier method
to optimize a generic convex output kernel learning formulation. On the other hand, [9] proposes a
convex formulation to learn low rank output kernel matrix by enforcing a trace constraint. The above
approaches [9, 17, 18] solve the resulting optimization problem via alternate minimization between
task parameters and the output kernel. Each step of the alternate minimization requires an eigen1

