Convolutional Spike-triggered Covariance Analysis
for Neural Subunit Models
Anqi Wu1

Il Memming Park2

Jonathan W. Pillow1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
{anqiw, pillow}@princeton.edu
2
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Stony Brook University
memming.park@stonybrook.edu
1

Abstract
Subunit models provide a powerful yet parsimonious description of neural responses to complex stimuli. They are defined by a cascade of two linear-nonlinear
(LN) stages, with the first stage defined by a linear convolution with one or more
filters and common point nonlinearity, and the second by pooling weights and an
output nonlinearity. Recent interest in such models has surged due to their biological plausibility and accuracy for characterizing early sensory responses. However,
fitting poses a difficult computational challenge due to the expense of evaluating
the log-likelihood and the ubiquity of local optima. Here we address this problem
by providing a theoretical connection between spike-triggered covariance analysis and nonlinear subunit models. Specifically, we show that a “convolutional”
decomposition of a spike-triggered average (STA) and covariance (STC) matrix
provides an asymptotically efficient estimator for class of quadratic subunit models. We establish theoretical conditions for identifiability of the subunit and pooling weights, and show that our estimator performs well even in cases of model
mismatch. Finally, we analyze neural data from macaque primary visual cortex
and show that our moment-based estimator outperforms a highly regularized generalized quadratic model (GQM), and achieves nearly the same prediction performance as the full maximum-likelihood estimator, yet at substantially lower cost.

1

Introduction

A central problem in systems neuroscience is to build flexible and accurate models of the sensory
encoding process. Neurons are often characterized as responding to a small number of features in the
high-dimensional space of natural stimuli. This motivates the idea of using dimensionality reduction
methods to identify the features that affect the neural response [1–9]. However, many neurons in
the early visual pathway pool signals from a small population of upstream neurons, each of which
integrates and nolinearly transforms the light from a small region of visual space. For such neurons,
stimulus selectivity is often not accurately described with a small number of filters [10]. A more
accurate description can be obtained by assuming that such neurons pool inputs from an earlier stage
of shifted, identical nonlinear “subunits” [11–13].
Recent interest in subunit models has surged due to their biological plausibility and accuracy for
characterizing early sensory responses. In the visual system, linear pooling of shifted rectified linear
filters was first proposed to describe sensory processing in the cat retina [14, 15], and more recent
work has proposed similar models for responses in other early sensory areas [16–18]. Moreover,
recent research in machine learning and computer vision has focused on hierarchical stacks of such
subunit models, often referred to as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [19–21].
The subunit models we consider here describe neural responses in terms of an LN-LN cascade, that
is, a cascade of two linear-nonlinear (LN) processing stages, each of which involves linear projection
and a nonlinear transformation. The first LN stage is convolutional, meaning it is formed from one or
1

