Where are they looking?

Adrià Recasens∗

Aditya Khosla∗
Carl Vondrick
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Antonio Torralba

{recasens, khosla, vondrick, torralba}@csail.mit.edu
(* - indicates equal contribution)

Abstract
Humans have the remarkable ability to follow the gaze of other people to identify
what they are looking at. Following eye gaze, or gaze-following, is an important
ability that allows us to understand what other people are thinking, the actions they
are performing, and even predict what they might do next. Despite the importance
of this topic, this problem has only been studied in limited scenarios within the
computer vision community. In this paper, we propose a deep neural networkbased approach for gaze-following and a new benchmark dataset, GazeFollow, for
thorough evaluation. Given an image and the location of a head, our approach
follows the gaze of the person and identifies the object being looked at. Our deep
network is able to discover how to extract head pose and gaze orientation, and to
select objects in the scene that are in the predicted line of sight and likely to be
looked at (such as televisions, balls and food). The quantitative evaluation shows
that our approach produces reliable results, even when viewing only the back of
the head. While our method outperforms several baseline approaches, we are still
far from reaching human performance on this task. Overall, we believe that gazefollowing is a challenging and important problem that deserves more attention
from the community.

1

Introduction

You step out of your house and notice a group of people looking up. You look up and realize they are
looking at an aeroplane in the sky. Despite the object being far away, humans have the remarkable
ability to precisely follow the gaze direction of another person, a task commonly referred to as gazefollowing (see [3] for a review). Such an ability is a key element to understanding what people are
doing in a scene and their intentions. Similarly, it is crucial for a computer vision system to have
this ability to better understand and interpret people. For instance, a person might be holding a book
but looking at the television, or a group of people might be looking at the same object which can
indicate that they are collaborating at some task, or they might be looking at different places which
can indicate that they are not familiar with each other or that they are performing unrelated tasks

Figure 1: Gaze-following: We present a model that learns to predict where people in images are
looking. We also introduce GazeFollow, a new large-scale annotated dataset for gaze-following.
1

