Efficient and Robust Automated Machine Learning

Matthias Feurer
Aaron Klein
Katharina Eggensperger
Jost Tobias Springenberg
Manuel Blum
Frank Hutter
Department of Computer Science
University of Freiburg, Germany
{feurerm,kleinaa,eggenspk,springj,mblum,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
The success of machine learning in a broad range of applications has led to an
ever-growing demand for machine learning systems that can be used off the shelf
by non-experts. To be effective in practice, such systems need to automatically
choose a good algorithm and feature preprocessing steps for a new dataset at hand,
and also set their respective hyperparameters. Recent work has started to tackle this
automated machine learning (AutoML) problem with the help of efficient Bayesian
optimization methods. Building on this, we introduce a robust new AutoML system
based on scikit-learn (using 15 classifiers, 14 feature preprocessing methods, and
4 data preprocessing methods, giving rise to a structured hypothesis space with
110 hyperparameters). This system, which we dub AUTO - SKLEARN, improves on
existing AutoML methods by automatically taking into account past performance
on similar datasets, and by constructing ensembles from the models evaluated
during the optimization. Our system won the first phase of the ongoing ChaLearn
AutoML challenge, and our comprehensive analysis on over 100 diverse datasets
shows that it substantially outperforms the previous state of the art in AutoML. We
also demonstrate the performance gains due to each of our contributions and derive
insights into the effectiveness of the individual components of AUTO - SKLEARN.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has recently made great strides in many application areas, fueling a growing
demand for machine learning systems that can be used effectively by novices in machine learning.
Correspondingly, a growing number of commercial enterprises aim to satisfy this demand (e.g.,
BigML.com, Wise.io, SkyTree.com, RapidMiner.com, Dato.com, Prediction.io, DataRobot.com, Microsoft’s Azure Machine
Learning, Google’s Prediction API, and Amazon Machine Learning). At its core, every effective machine learning
service needs to solve the fundamental problems of deciding which machine learning algorithm to
use on a given dataset, whether and how to preprocess its features, and how to set all hyperparameters.
This is the problem we address in this work.
More specifically, we investigate automated machine learning (AutoML), the problem of automatically
(without human input) producing test set predictions for a new dataset within a fixed computational
budget. Formally, this AutoML problem can be stated as follows:
Definition 1 (AutoML problem). For i = 1, . . . , n+m, let xi ∈ Rd denote a feature vector and yi ∈
Y the corresponding target value. Given a training dataset Dtrain = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )} and
the feature vectors xn+1 , . . . , xn+m of a test dataset Dtest = {(xn+1 , yn+1 ), . . . , (xn+m , yn+m )}
drawn from the same underlying data distribution, as well as a resource budget b and a loss metric
L(·, ·), the AutoML problem is to (automatically) produce test set predictions
Pm ŷn+1 , . . . , ŷn+m . The
1
loss of a solution ŷn+1 , . . . , ŷn+m to the AutoML problem is given by m
j=1 L(ŷn+j , yn+j ).
1

