A Structural Smoothing Framework For Robust
Graph-Comparison

S.V.N. Vishwanathan
Department of Computer Science
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA, 95064, USA
vishy@ucsc.edu

Pinar Yanardag
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47906, USA
ypinar@purdue.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a general smoothing framework for graph kernels by
taking structural similarity into account, and apply it to derive smoothed variants
of popular graph kernels. Our framework is inspired by state-of-the-art smoothing
techniques used in natural language processing (NLP). However, unlike NLP applications that primarily deal with strings, we show how one can apply smoothing
to a richer class of inter-dependent sub-structures that naturally arise in graphs.
Moreover, we discuss extensions of the Pitman-Yor process that can be adapted
to smooth structured objects, thereby leading to novel graph kernels. Our kernels
are able to tackle the diagonal dominance problem while respecting the structural
similarity between features. Experimental evaluation shows that not only our kernels achieve statistically significant improvements over the unsmoothed variants,
but also outperform several other graph kernels in the literature. Our kernels are
competitive in terms of runtime, and offer a viable option for practitioners.

1

Introduction

In many applications we are interested in computing similarities between structured objects such
as graphs. For instance, one might aim to classify chemical compounds by predicting whether a
compound is active in an anti-cancer screen or not. A kernel function which corresponds to a dot
product in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space offers a flexible way to solve this problem [19]. Rconvolution [10] is a framework for computing kernels between discrete objects where the key idea
is to recursively decompose structured objects into sub-structures. Let h·, ·iH denote a dot product in
a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, G represent a graph and φ (G) represent a vector of sub-structure
frequencies. The kernel between two graphs G and G 0 is computed by K (G, G 0 ) = hφ (G) , φ (G 0 )iH .
Many existing graph kernels can be viewed as instances of R-convolution kernels. For instance, the
graphlet kernel [22] decomposes a graph into graphlets, Weisfeiler-Lehman Subtree kernel (referred
as Weisfeiler-Lehman for the rest of the paper) [23] decomposes a graph into subtrees, and the
shortest-path kernel [1] decomposes a graph into shortest-paths. However, R-convolution based
graph kernels suffer from a few drawbacks. First, the size of the feature space often grows exponentially. As size of the space grows, the probability that two graphs will contain similar sub-structures
becomes very small. Therefore, a graph becomes similar to itself but not to any other graph in the
training data. This is well known as the diagonal dominance problem [11] where the resulting kernel
matrix is close to the identity matrix. Second, lower order sub-structures tend to be more numerous
while a vast majority of the sub-structures occurs rarely. In other words, a few sub-structures dominate the distribution. This exhibits a strong power-law behavior and results in underestimation of
the true distribution. Third, the sub-structures used to define a graph kernel are often related to each
other. However, an R-convolution kernel only respects exact matchings. This problem is particu1

