Beyond Sub-Gaussian Measurements:
High-Dimensional Structured Estimation with
Sub-Exponential Designs

Vidyashankar Sivakumar
Arindam Banerjee
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
{sivakuma,banerjee}@cs.umn.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas, Austin
pradeepr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of high-dimensional structured estimation with normregularized estimators, such as Lasso, when the design matrix and noise are drawn
from sub-exponential distributions. Existing results only consider sub-Gaussian
designs and noise, and both the sample complexity and non-asymptotic estimation
error have been shown to depend on the Gaussian width of suitable sets. In contrast, for the sub-exponential setting, we show that the sample complexity and the
estimation error will depend on the exponential width of the corresponding sets,
and the analysis holds for any norm. Further, using
√generic chaining, we show that
the exponential width for any set will be at most log p times the Gaussian width
of the set, yielding Gaussian width based results even for the sub-exponential case.
Further, for certain popular estimators, viz Lasso and Group Lasso, using a VCdimension based analysis, we show that the sample complexity will in fact be the
same order as Gaussian designs. Our general analysis and results are the first in
the sub-exponential setting, and are readily applicable to special sub-exponential
families such as log-concave and extreme-value distributions.

1

Introduction

We consider the following problem of high dimensional linear regression:
y = Xθ∗ + ω ,

(1)

where y ∈ Rn is the response vector, X ∈ Rn×p has independent isotropic sub-exponential random rows, ω ∈ Rn has i.i.d sub-exponential entries and the number of covariates p is much larger
compared to the number of samples n. Given y, X and assuming that θ∗ is ‘structured’, usually characterized as having a small value according to some norm R(·), the problem is to recover θ̂ close
to θ∗ . Considerable progress has been made over the past decade on high-dimensional structured
estimation using suitable M-estimators or norm-regularized regression [16, 2] of the form:
1
ky − Xθk22 + λn R(θ) ,
(2)
θ̂λn = argmin
θ∈Rp 2n
where R(θ) is a suitable norm, and λn > 0 is the regularization parameter. Early work focused
on high-dimensional estimation of sparse vectors using the Lasso and related estimators, where
R(θ) = kθk1 [13, 22, 23]. Sample complexity of such estimators have been rigorously established
based on the RIP(restricted isometry property) [4, 5] and the more general RE(restricted eigenvalue)
conditions [3, 16, 2]. Several subsequent advances have considered structures beyond `1 , using more
general norms such as (overlapping) group sparse norms, k-support norm, nuclear norm, and so on
[16, 8, 7]. In recent years, much of the literature has been unified and nonasymptotic estimation
error bound analysis techniques have been developed for regularized estimation with any norm [2].
1

