Matrix Manifold Optimization for Gaussian Mixtures

Reshad Hosseini
School of ECE
College of Engineering
University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran
reshad.hosseini@ut.ac.ir

Suvrit Sra
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA.
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
We take a new look at parameter estimation for Gaussian Mixture Model (GMMs).
Specifically, we advance Riemannian manifold optimization (on the manifold of
positive definite matrices) as a potential replacement for Expectation Maximization (EM), which has been the de facto standard for decades. An out-of-the-box
invocation of Riemannian optimization, however, fails spectacularly: it obtains
the same solution as EM, but vastly slower. Building on intuition from geometric
convexity, we propose a simple reformulation that has remarkable consequences:
it makes Riemannian optimization not only match EM (a nontrivial result on its
own, given the poor record nonlinear programming has had against EM), but also
outperform it in many settings. To bring our ideas to fruition, we develop a welltuned Riemannian LBFGS method that proves superior to known competing methods (e.g., Riemannian conjugate gradient). We hope that our results encourage a
wider consideration of manifold optimization in machine learning and statistics.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) are a mainstay in a variety of areas, including machine learning
and signal processing [4, 10, 16, 19, 21]. A quick literature search reveals that for estimating parameters of a GMM the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm [9] is still the de facto choice.
Over the decades, other numerical approaches have also been considered [24], but methods such as
conjugate gradients, quasi-Newton, Newton, have been noted to be usually inferior to EM [34].
The key difficulty of applying standard nonlinear programming methods to GMMs is the positive
definiteness (PD) constraint on covariances. Although an open subset of Euclidean space, this constraint can be difficult to impose, especially in higher-dimensions. When approaching the boundary
of the constraint set, convergence speed of iterative methods can also get adversely affected. A partial remedy is to remove the PD constraint by using Cholesky decompositions, e.g., as exploited in
semidefinite programming [7]. It is believed [30] that in general, the nonconvexity of this decomposition adds more stationary points and possibly spurious local minima.1 Another possibility is
to formulate the PD constraint via a set of smooth convex inequalities [30] and apply interior-point
methods. But such sophisticated methods can be extremely slower (on several statistical problems)
than simpler EM-like iterations, especially for higher dimensions [27].
Since the key difficulty arises from the PD constraint, an appealing idea is to note that PD matrices
form a Riemannian manifold [3, Ch.6] and to invoke Riemannian manifold optimization [1, 6].
Indeed, if we operate on the manifold2 , we implicitly satisfy the PD constraint, and may have a
better chance at focusing on likelihood maximization. While attractive, this line of thinking also
fails: an out-of-the-box invocation of manifold optimization is also vastly inferior to EM. Thus, we
need to think harder before challenging the hegemony of EM. We outline a new approach below.
1

Remarkably, using Cholesky with the reformulation in §2.2 does not add spurious local minima to GMMs.
Equivalently, on the interior of the constraint set, as is done by interior point methods (their nonconvex
versions); though these turn out to be slow too as they are second order methods.
2

1

