SGD Algorithms based on Incomplete U -statistics:
Large-Scale Minimization of Empirical Risk

Guillaume Papa, Stéphan Clémençon
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris-Saclay, 75013 Paris, France
first.last@telecom-paristech.fr

Aurélien Bellet
Magnet Team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe
59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
aurelien.bellet@inria.fr

Abstract
In many learning problems, ranging from clustering to ranking through metric
learning, empirical estimates of the risk functional consist of an average over tuples (e.g., pairs or triplets) of observations, rather than over individual observations. In this paper, we focus on how to best implement a stochastic approximation
approach to solve such risk minimization problems. We argue that in the largescale setting, gradient estimates should be obtained by sampling tuples of data
points with replacement (incomplete U -statistics) instead of sampling data points
without replacement (complete U -statistics based on subsamples). We develop a
theoretical framework accounting for the substantial impact of this strategy on the
generalization ability of the prediction model returned by the Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) algorithm. It reveals that the method we promote achieves a much
better trade-off between statistical accuracy and computational cost. Beyond the
rate bound analysis, experiments on AUC maximization and metric learning provide strong empirical evidence of the superiority of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning problems, the statistical risk functional is an expectation over d-tuples
(d ≥ 2) of observations, rather than over individual points. This is the case in supervised metric
learning [3], where one seeks to optimize a distance function such that it assigns smaller values
to pairs of points with the same label than to those with different labels. Other popular examples
include bipartite ranking (see [27] for instance), where the goal is to maximize the number of concordant pairs (i.e. AUC maximization), and more generally multi-partite ranking (cf [12]), as well
as pairwise clustering (see [7]). Given a data sample, the most natural empirical risk estimate (which
is known to have minimal variance among all unbiased estimates) is obtained by averaging over all
tuples of observations and thus takes the form of a U -statistic (an average of dependent variables
generalizing the means, see [19]). The Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) principle, one of the
main paradigms of statistical learning theory, has been extended to the case where the empirical risk
of a prediction rule is a U -statistic [5], using concentration properties of U -processes (i.e. collections of U -statistics). The computation of the empirical risk is however numerically unfeasible in
large and even moderate scale situations due to the exploding number of possible tuples.
In practice, the minimization of such empirical risk functionals is generally performed by means
of stochastic optimization techniques such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), where at each
iteration only a small number of randomly selected terms are used to compute an estimate of the
gradient (see [27, 24, 16, 26] for instance). A drawback of the original SGD learning method,
introduced in the case where empirical risk functionals are computed by summing over independent
observations (sample mean statistics), is its slow convergence due to the variance of the gradient
estimates, see [15]. This has recently motivated the development of a wide variety of SGD variants
implementing a variance reduction method in order to improve convergence. Variance reduction is
1

