Lifted Symmetry Detection and
Breaking for MAP Inference

Tim Kopp
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

Parag Singla
I.I.T. Delhi
Hauz Khas, New Delhi

Henry Kautz
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

tkopp@cs.rochester.edu

parags@cse.iitd.ac.in

kautz@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Symmetry breaking is a technique for speeding up propositional satisfiability testing by adding constraints to the theory that restrict the search space while preserving satisfiability. In this work, we extend symmetry breaking to the problem of
model finding in weighted and unweighted relational theories, a class of problems
that includes MAP inference in Markov Logic and similar statistical-relational
languages. We introduce term symmetries, which are induced by an evidence
set and extend to symmetries over a relational theory. We provide the important
special case of term equivalent symmetries, showing that such symmetries can
be found in low-degree polynomial time. We show how to break an exponential
number of these symmetries with added constraints whose number is linear in the
size of the domain. We demonstrate the effectiveness of these techniques through
experiments in two relational domains. We also discuss the connections between
relational symmetry breaking and work on lifted inference in statistical-relational
reasoning.

1

Introduction

Symmetry-breaking is an approach to speeding up satisfiability testing by adding constraints, called
symmetry-breaking predicates (SBPs), to a theory [7, 1, 16]. Symmetries in the theory define a
partitioning over the space of truth assignments, where the assignments in a partition either all satisfy
or all fail to satisfy the theory. The added SBPs rule out some but not all of the truth assignments in
the partitions, thus reducing the size of the search space while preserving satisfiability.
We extend the notion of symmetry-breaking to model-finding in relational theories. A relational
theory is specified by a set of first-order axioms over finite domains, optional weights on the axioms
or predicates of the theory, and a set of ground literals representing evidence. By model finding
we mean satisfiability testing (unweighted theories), weighted MaxSAT (weights on axioms), or
maximum weighted model finding (weights on predicates). The weighted versions of model finding
encompass MAP inference in Markov Logic and similar statistical-relational languages.
We introduce methods for finding symmetries in a relational theory that do not depend upon solving
graph isomorphism over its full propositional grounding. We show how graph isomorphism can be
applied to just the evidence portion of a relational theory in order to find the set of what we call term
symmetries. We go on to define the important subclass of term equivalent symmetries, and show that
they can be found in O(nM log M ) time where n is the number of constants and M is the size of
the evidence.
Next we provide the formulation for breaking term and term equivalent symmetries. An inherent
problem in symmetry-breaking is that a propositional theory may have an exponential number of
symmetries, so breaking them individually would increase the size of the theory exponentially. This
is typically handled by breaking only a portion of the symmetries. We show that term equivalent
symmetries provide a compact representation of exponentially many symmetries, and an exponen1

