Explore no more: Improved high-probability regret
bounds for non-stochastic bandits
Gergely Neu∗
SequeL team
INRIA Lille – Nord Europe
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of regret minimization in non-stochastic multiarmed bandit problems, focusing on performance guarantees that hold with high
probability. Such results are rather scarce in the literature since proving them requires a large deal of technical effort and significant modifications to the standard,
more intuitive algorithms that come only with guarantees that hold on expectation.
One of these modifications
√ is forcing the learner to sample arms from the uniform
distribution at least Ω( T ) times over T rounds, which can adversely affect performance if many of the arms are suboptimal. While it is widely conjectured that
this property is essential for proving high-probability regret bounds, we show in
this paper that it is possible to achieve such strong results without this undesirable
exploration component. Our result relies on a simple and intuitive loss-estimation
strategy called Implicit eXploration (IX) that allows a remarkably clean analysis. To demonstrate the flexibility of our technique, we derive several improved
high-probability bounds for various extensions of the standard multi-armed bandit
framework. Finally, we conduct a simple experiment that illustrates the robustness
of our implicit exploration technique.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of regret minimization in non-stochastic multi-armed bandits, as defined in
the classic paper of Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, Freund, and Schapire [5]. This sequential decision-making
problem can be formalized as a repeated game between a learner and an environment (sometimes
called the adversary). In each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T , the two players interact as follows: The
learner picks an arm (also called an action) It ∈ [K] = {1, 2, . . . , K} and the environment selects
a loss function `t : [K] → [0, 1], where the loss associated with arm i ∈ [K] is denoted as `t,i .
Subsequently, the learner incurs and observes the loss `t,It . Based solely on these observations, the
goal of the learner is to choose its actions so as to accumulate as little loss as possible during the
course of the game. As traditional in the online learning literature [10], we measure the performance
of the learner in terms of the regret defined as
RT =

T
X

`t,It − min

i∈[K]

t=1

T
X

`t,i .

t=1

We say that the environment is oblivious if it selects the sequence of loss vectors irrespective of
the past actions taken by the learner, and adaptive (or non-oblivious) if it is allowed to choose `t
as a function of the past actions It−1 , . . . , I1 . An equivalent formulation of the multi-armed bandit
game uses the concept of rewards (also called gains or payoffs) instead of losses: in this version,
∗
The author is currently with the Department of Information and Communication Technologies, Pompeu
Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain.

1

