Learning both Weights and Connections for Efficient
Neural Networks
Song Han
Stanford University
songhan@stanford.edu

Jeff Pool
NVIDIA
jpool@nvidia.com

John Tran
NVIDIA
johntran@nvidia.com

William J. Dally
Stanford University
NVIDIA
dally@stanford.edu

Abstract
Neural networks are both computationally intensive and memory intensive, making
them difficult to deploy on embedded systems. Also, conventional networks fix
the architecture before training starts; as a result, training cannot improve the
architecture. To address these limitations, we describe a method to reduce the
storage and computation required by neural networks by an order of magnitude
without affecting their accuracy by learning only the important connections. Our
method prunes redundant connections using a three-step method. First, we train
the network to learn which connections are important. Next, we prune the unimportant connections. Finally, we retrain the network to fine tune the weights of the
remaining connections. On the ImageNet dataset, our method reduced the number
of parameters of AlexNet by a factor of 9×, from 61 million to 6.7 million, without
incurring accuracy loss. Similar experiments with VGG-16 found that the total
number of parameters can be reduced by 13×, from 138 million to 10.3 million,
again with no loss of accuracy.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have become ubiquitous in applications ranging from computer vision [1] to speech
recognition [2] and natural language processing [3]. We consider convolutional neural networks used
for computer vision tasks which have grown over time. In 1998 Lecun et al. designed a CNN model
LeNet-5 with less than 1M parameters to classify handwritten digits [4], while in 2012, Krizhevsky
et al. [1] won the ImageNet competition with 60M parameters. Deepface classified human faces with
120M parameters [5], and Coates et al. [6] scaled up a network to 10B parameters.
While these large neural networks are very powerful, their size consumes considerable storage,
memory bandwidth, and computational resources. For embedded mobile applications, these resource
demands become prohibitive. Figure 1 shows the energy cost of basic arithmetic and memory
operations in a 45nm CMOS process. From this data we see the energy per connection is dominated
by memory access and ranges from 5pJ for 32 bit coefficients in on-chip SRAM to 640pJ for 32bit
coefficients in off-chip DRAM [7]. Large networks do not fit in on-chip storage and hence require
the more costly DRAM accesses. Running a 1 billion connection neural network, for example, at
20Hz would require (20Hz)(1G)(640pJ) = 12.8W just for DRAM access - well beyond the power
envelope of a typical mobile device. Our goal in pruning networks is to reduce the energy required to
run such large networks so they can run in real time on mobile devices. The model size reduction
from pruning also facilitates storage and transmission of mobile applications incorporating DNNs.
1

