Efficient Learning by Directed Acyclic Graph For
Resource Constrained Prediction
Joseph Wang
Department of Electrical
& Computer Engineering
Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215
joewang@bu.edu

Kirill Trapeznikov
Systems & Technology Research
Woburn, MA 01801
kirill.trapeznikov@
stresearch.com

Venkatesh Saligrama
Department of Electrical
& Computer Engineering
Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of reducing test-time acquisition costs in classification systems. Our goal is to learn decision rules that adaptively select sensors for each
example as necessary to make a confident prediction. We model our system as a
directed acyclic graph (DAG) where internal nodes correspond to sensor subsets
and decision functions at each node choose whether to acquire a new sensor or
classify using the available measurements. This problem can be posed as an empirical risk minimization over training data. Rather than jointly optimizing such
a highly coupled and non-convex problem over all decision nodes, we propose an
efficient algorithm motivated by dynamic programming. We learn node policies
in the DAG by reducing the global objective to a series of cost sensitive learning
problems. Our approach is computationally efficient and has proven guarantees of
convergence to the optimal system for a fixed architecture. In addition, we present
an extension to map other budgeted learning problems with large number of sensors to our DAG architecture and demonstrate empirical performance exceeding
state-of-the-art algorithms for data composed of both few and many sensors.

1

Introduction

Many scenarios involve classification systems constrained by measurement acquisition budget. In
this setting, a collection of sensor modalities with varying costs are available to the decision system.
Our goal is to learn adaptive decision rules from labeled training data that, when presented with an
unseen example, would select the most informative and cost-effective acquisition strategy for this
example. In contrast, non-adaptive methods [24] attempt to identify a common sparse subset of
sensors that can work well for all data. Our goal is an adaptive method that can classify typical cases
using inexpensive sensors while using expensive sensors only for atypical cases.
We propose an adaptive sensor acquisition system learned using labeled training examples. The
system, modeled as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), is composed of internal nodes, which contain
decision functions, and a single sink node (the only node with no outgoing edges), representing
the terminal action of stopping and classifying (SC). At each internal node, a decision function
routes an example along one of the outgoing edges. Sending an example to another internal node
represents acquisition of a previously unacquired sensor, whereas sending an example to the sink
node indicates that the example should be classified using the currently acquired set of sensors. The
goal is to learn these decision functions such that the expected error of the system is minimized
subject to an expected budget constraint.
First, we consider the case where the number of sensors available is small (as in [19, 23, 20]), though
the dimensionality of data acquired by each sensor may be large (such as an image taken in different
1

