MCMC for Variationally Sparse Gaussian Processes

James Hensman
CHICAS, Lancaster University
james.hensman@lancaster.ac.uk
Maurizio Filippone
EURECOM
maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr

Alexander G. de G. Matthews
University of Cambridge
am554@cam.ac.uk
Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge
zoubin@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Gaussian process (GP) models form a core part of probabilistic machine learning.
Considerable research effort has been made into attacking three issues with GP
models: how to compute efficiently when the number of data is large; how to approximate the posterior when the likelihood is not Gaussian and how to estimate
covariance function parameter posteriors. This paper simultaneously addresses
these, using a variational approximation to the posterior which is sparse in support of the function but otherwise free-form. The result is a Hybrid Monte-Carlo
sampling scheme which allows for a non-Gaussian approximation over the function values and covariance parameters simultaneously, with efficient computations
based on inducing-point sparse GPs. Code to replicate each experiment in this paper is available at github.com/sparseMCMC.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process models are attractive for machine learning because of their flexible nonparametric
nature. By combining a GP prior with different likelihoods, a multitude of machine learning tasks
can be tackled in a probabilistic fashion [1]. There are three things to consider when using a GP
model: approximation of the posterior function (especially if the likelihood is non-Gaussian), computation, storage and inversion of the covariance matrix, which scales poorly in the number of data;
and estimation (or marginalization) of the covariance function parameters. A multitude of approximation schemes have been proposed for efficient computation when the number of data is large.
Early strategies were based on retaining a sub-set of the data [2]. Snelson and Ghahramani [3] introduced an inducing point approach, where the model is augmented with additional variables, and
Titsias [4] used these ideas in a variational approach. Other authors have introduced approximations
based on the spectrum of the GP [5, 6], or which exploit specific structures within the covariance
matrix [7, 8], or by making unbiased stochastic estimates of key computations [9]. In this work, we
extend the variational inducing point framework, which we prefer for general applicability (no specific requirements are made of the data or covariance function), and because the variational inducing
point approach can be shown to minimize the KL divergence to the posterior process [10].
To approximate the posterior function and covariance parameters, Markov chain Monte-Carlo
(MCMC) approaches provide asymptotically exact approximations. Murray and Adams [11] and
Filippone et al. [12] examine schemes which iteratively sample the function values and covariance
parameters. Such sampling schemes require computation and inversion of the full covariance matrix at each iteration, making them unsuitable for large problems. Computation may be reduced
somewhat by considering variational methods, approximating the posterior using some fixed family of distributions [13, 14, 15, 16, 1, 17], though many covariance matrix inversions are generally
required. Recent works [18, 19, 20] have proposed inducing point schemes which can reduce the
1

