On the Convergence of Stochastic Gradient MCMC
Algorithms with High-Order Integrators

Changyou Chen†
Nan Ding‡
Lawrence Carin†
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
‡
Google Inc., Venice, CA, USA
cchangyou@gmail.com; dingnan@google.com; lcarin@duke.edu

†

Abstract
Recent advances in Bayesian learning with large-scale data have witnessed emergence of stochastic gradient MCMC algorithms (SG-MCMC), such as stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD), stochastic gradient Hamiltonian MCMC
(SGHMC), and the stochastic gradient thermostat. While finite-time convergence
properties of the SGLD with a 1st-order Euler integrator have recently been studied, corresponding theory for general SG-MCMCs has not been explored. In this
paper we consider general SG-MCMCs with high-order integrators, and develop
theory to analyze finite-time convergence properties and their asymptotic invariant
measures. Our theoretical results show faster convergence rates and more accurate invariant measures for SG-MCMCs with higher-order integrators. For example, with the proposed efficient 2nd-order symmetric splitting integrator, the mean
square error (MSE) of the posterior average for the SGHMC achieves an optimal
convergence rate of L−4/5 at L iterations, compared to L−2/3 for the SGHMC
and SGLD with 1st-order Euler integrators. Furthermore, convergence results of
decreasing-step-size SG-MCMCs are also developed, with the same convergence
rates as their fixed-step-size counterparts for a specific decreasing sequence. Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets verify our theory, and show advantages of the proposed method in two large-scale real applications.

1

Introduction

In large-scale Bayesian learning, diffusion based sampling methods have become increasingly popular. Most of these methods are based on Itô diffusions, defined as:
d Xt = F (Xt )dt + σ(Xt )dWt .

(1)

n

Here Xt ∈ R represents model states, t the time index, Wt is Brownian motion, functions F :
Rn → Rn and σ : Rn → Rn×m (m not necessarily equal to n) are assumed to satisfy the usual
Lipschitz continuity condition.
In a Bayesian setting, the goal is to design appropriate functions F and σ, so that the stationary
distribution, ρ(X), of the Itô diffusion has a marginal distribution that is equal to the posterior
distribution of interest.√ For example, 1st-order Langevin dynamics (LD) correspond to X = θ,
F = −∇θ U and σ = 2 In , with In being the n × n identity matrix; 2nd-order Langevin dynamics


√  0 0 
p
correspond to X = (θ, p), F =
, and σ = 2D
for some D > 0.
−D p −∇θ U
0 In
Here U is the unnormalized negative log-posterior, and p is known as the momentum [1, 2]. Based
on the Fokker-Planck equation [3], the stationary distributions of these dynamics exist and their
marginals over θ are equal to ρ(θ) ∝ exp(−U (θ)), the posterior distribution we are interested in.
Since Itô diffusions are continuous-time Markov processes, exact sampling is in general infeasible.
As a result, the following two approximations have been introduced in the machine learning liter1

