A Fast, Universal Algorithm
to Learn Parametric Nonlinear Embeddings

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
EECS, University of California, Merced

Max Vladymyrov
UC Merced and Yahoo Labs

http://eecs.ucmerced.edu

maxv@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
Nonlinear embedding algorithms such as stochastic neighbor embedding do dimensionality reduction by optimizing an objective function involving similarities
between pairs of input patterns. The result is a low-dimensional projection of each
input pattern. A common way to define an out-of-sample mapping is to optimize
the objective directly over a parametric mapping of the inputs, such as a neural
net. This can be done using the chain rule and a nonlinear optimizer, but is very
slow, because the objective involves a quadratic number of terms each dependent
on the entire mapping’s parameters. Using the method of auxiliary coordinates,
we derive a training algorithm that works by alternating steps that train an auxiliary embedding with steps that train the mapping. This has two advantages: 1)
The algorithm is universal in that a specific learning algorithm for any choice of
embedding and mapping can be constructed by simply reusing existing algorithms
for the embedding and for the mapping. A user can then try possible mappings
and embeddings with less effort. 2) The algorithm is fast, and it can reuse N -body
methods developed for nonlinear embeddings, yielding linear-time iterations.

1 Introduction
Given a high-dimensional dataset YD×N = (y1 , . . . , yN ) of N points in RD , nonlinear embedding
algorithms seek to find low-dimensional projections XL×N = (x1 , . . . , xN ) with L < D by optimizing an objective function E(X) constructed using an N × N matrix of similarities W = (wnm )
between pairs of input patterns (yn , ym ). For example, the elastic embedding (EE) [5] optimizes:
P
PN
2
2
E(X) = N
λ > 0.
(1)
n,m=1 wnm kxn − xm k + λ
n,m=1 exp (− kxn − xm k )
Here, the first term encourages projecting similar patterns near each other, while the second term
repels all pairs of projections. Other algorithms of this type are stochastic neighbor embedding
(SNE) [15], t-SNE [27], neighbor retrieval visualizer (NeRV) [28] or the Sammon mapping [23],
as well as spectral methods such as metric multidimensional scaling and Laplacian eigenmaps [2]
(though our focus is on nonlinear objectives). Nonlinear embeddings can produce visualizations of
high-dimensional data that display structure such as manifolds or clustering, and have been used for
exploratory purposes and other applications in machine learning and beyond.
Optimizing nonlinear embeddings is difficult for three reasons: there are many parameters (N L);
the objective is very nonconvex, so gradient descent and other methods require many iterations; and
it involves O(N 2 ) terms, so evaluating the gradient is very slow. Major progress in these problems
has been achieved in recent years. For the second problem, the spectral direction [29] is constructed
by “bending” the gradient using the curvature of the quadratic part of the objective (for EE, this is the
graph Laplacian L of W). This significantly reduces the number of iterations, while evaluating the
direction itself is about as costly as evaluating the gradient. For the third problem, N -body methods
such as tree methods [1] and fast multipole methods [11] approximate the gradient in O(N log N )
1

