Data Generation as Sequential Decision Making

Philip Bachman

Doina Precup

McGill University, School of Computer Science
phil.bachman@gmail.com

McGill University, School of Computer Science
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We connect a broad class of generative models through their shared reliance on
sequential decision making. Motivated by this view, we develop extensions to an
existing model, and then explore the idea further in the context of data imputation
– perhaps the simplest setting in which to investigate the relation between unconditional and conditional generative modelling. We formulate data imputation as
an MDP and develop models capable of representing effective policies for it. We
construct the models using neural networks and train them using a form of guided
policy search [9]. Our models generate predictions through an iterative process of
feedback and refinement. We show that this approach can learn effective policies
for imputation problems of varying difficulty and across multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Directed generative models are naturally interpreted as specifying sequential procedures for generating data. We traditionally think of this process as sampling, but one could also view it as making
sequences of decisions for how to set the variables at each node in a model, conditioned on the
settings of its parents, thereby generating data from the model. The large body of existing work
on reinforcement learning provides powerful tools for addressing such sequential decision making
problems. We encourage the use of these tools to understand and improve the extended processes
currently driving advances in generative modelling. We show how sequential decision making can be
applied to general prediction tasks by developing models which construct predictions by iteratively
refining a working hypothesis under guidance from exogenous input and endogenous feedback.
We begin this paper by reinterpreting several recent generative models as sequential decision making
processes, and then show how changes inspired by this point of view can improve the performance
of the LSTM-based model introduced in [3]. Next, we explore the connections between directed
generative models and reinforcement learning more fully by developing an approach to training
policies for sequential data imputation. We base our approach on formulating imputation as a finitehorizon Markov Decision Process which one can also interpret as a deep, directed graphical model.
We propose two policy representations for the imputation MDP. One extends the model in [3] by
inserting an explicit feedback loop into the generative process, and the other addresses the MDP
more directly. We train our models/policies using techniques motivated by guided policy pearch
[9, 10, 11, 8]. We examine their qualitative and quantitative performance across imputation problems
covering a range of difficulties (i.e. different amounts of data to impute and different “missingness
mechanisms”), and across multiple datasets. Given the relative paucity of existing approaches to the
general imputation problem, we compare our models to each other and to two simple baselines. We
also test how our policies perform when they use fewer/more steps to refine their predictions.
As imputation encompasses both classification and standard (i.e. unconditional) generative modelling, our work suggests that further study of models for the general imputation problem is worthwhile. The performance of our models suggests that sequential stochastic construction of predictions, guided by both input and feedback, should prove useful for a wide range of problems. Training
these models can be challenging, but lessons from reinforcement learning may bring some relief.
1

