Super-Resolution Off the Grid
Qingqing Huang
MIT,
EECS,
LIDS,
qqh@mit.edu

Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington,
Department of Statistics,
Computer Science & Engineering,
sham@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Super-resolution is the problem of recovering a superposition of point sources using bandlimited measurements, which may be corrupted with noise. This signal
processing problem arises in numerous imaging problems, ranging from astronomy to biology to spectroscopy, where it is common to take (coarse) Fourier measurements of an object. Of particular interest is in obtaining estimation procedures
which are robust to noise, with the following desirable statistical and computational properties: we seek to use coarse Fourier measurements (bounded by some
cutoff frequency); we hope to take a (quantifiably) small number of measurements;
we desire our algorithm to run quickly.
Suppose we have k point sources in d dimensions, where the points are separated
by at least
from each other (in Euclidean distance). This work provides an
algorithm with the following favorable guarantees:
• The algorithm uses Fourier measurements, whose frequencies are bounded
by O(1/ ) (up to log factors).
p Previous algorithms require a cutoff frequency
which may be as large as ⌦( d/ ).
• The number of measurements taken by and the computational complexity of
our algorithm are bounded by a polynomial in both the number of points k
and the dimension d, with no dependence on the separation . In contrast,
previous algorithms depended inverse polynomially on the minimal separation and exponentially on the dimension for both of these quantities.
Our estimation procedure itself is simple: we take random bandlimited measurements (as opposed to taking an exponential number of measurements on the hypergrid). Furthermore, our analysis and algorithm are elementary (based on concentration bounds for sampling and the singular value decomposition).

1

Introduction

We follow the standard mathematical abstraction of this problem (Candes & Fernandez-Granda
[4, 3]): consider a d-dimensional signal x(t) modeled as a weighted sum of k Dirac measures in Rd :
x(t) =

k
X

wj µ(j) ,

(1)

j=1

where the point sources, the µ(j) ’s, are in Rd . Assume that the weights wj are complex valued,
whose absolute values are lower and upper bounded by some positive constant. Assume that we are
given k, the number of point sources1 .
1

An upper bound of the number of point sources suffices.

1

