Practical and Optimal LSH for Angular Distance

Alexandr Andoni∗
Columbia University

Piotr Indyk
MIT

Ilya Razenshteyn
MIT

Thijs Laarhoven
TU Eindhoven
Ludwig Schmidt
MIT

Abstract
We show the existence of a Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) family for the angular distance that yields an approximate Near Neighbor Search algorithm with the
asymptotically optimal running time exponent. Unlike earlier algorithms with this
property (e.g., Spherical LSH [1, 2]), our algorithm is also practical, improving
upon the well-studied hyperplane LSH [3] in practice. We also introduce a multiprobe version of this algorithm and conduct an experimental evaluation on real
and synthetic data sets.
We complement the above positive results with a fine-grained lower bound for the
quality of any LSH family for angular distance. Our lower bound implies that the
above LSH family exhibits a trade-off between evaluation time and quality that is
close to optimal for a natural class of LSH functions.

1

Introduction

Nearest neighbor search is a key algorithmic problem with applications in several fields including
computer vision, information retrieval, and machine learning [4]. Given a set of n points P ⊂ Rd ,
the goal is to build a data structure that answers nearest neighbor queries efficiently: for a given query
point q ∈ Rd , find the point p ∈ P that is closest to q under an appropriately chosen distance metric.
The main algorithmic design goals are usually a fast query time, a small memory footprint, and—in
the approximate setting—a good quality of the returned solution.
There is a wide range of algorithms for nearest neighbor search based on techniques such as space
partitioning with indexing, as well as dimension reduction or sketching [5]. A popular method for
point sets in high-dimensional spaces is Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [6, 3], an approach that
offers a provably sub-linear query time and sub-quadratic space complexity, and has been shown
to achieve good empirical performance in a variety of applications [4]. The method relies on the
notion of locality-sensitive hash functions. Intuitively, a hash function is locality-sensitive if its
probability of collision is higher for “nearby” points than for points that are “far apart”. More formally,
two points are nearby if their distance is at most r1 , and they are far apart if their distance is at
least r2 = c · r1 , where c > 1 quantifies the gap between “near” and “far”. The quality of a
hash function is characterized by two key parameters: p1 is the collision probability for nearby
points, and p2 is the collision probability for points that are far apart. The gap between p1 and p2
determines how “sensitive” the hash function is to changes in distance, and this property is captured
1/p1
by the parameter ρ = log
log 1/p2 , which can usually be expressed as a function of the distance gap c.
The problem of designing good locality-sensitive hash functions and LSH-based efficient nearest
neighbor search algorithms has attracted significant attention over the last few years.
∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

1

