Robust Regression via Hard Thresholding

Kush Bhatia† , Prateek Jain† , and Purushottam Kar‡∗
†
Microsoft Research, India
‡
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
{t-kushb,prajain}@microsoft.com, purushot@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
We study the problem of Robust Least Squares Regression (RLSR) where several
response variables can be adversarially corrupted. More specifically, for a data
matrix X ∈ Rp×n and an underlying model w∗ , the response vector is generated
as y = X T w∗ + b where b ∈ Rn is the corruption vector supported over at most
C · n coordinates. Existing exact recovery results for RLSR focus solely on L1 penalty based convex formulations and impose relatively strict model assumptions
such as requiring the corruptions b to be selected independently of X.
In this work, we study a simple hard-thresholding algorithm called T ORRENT
which, under mild conditions on X, can recover w∗ exactly even if b corrupts the
response variables in an adversarial manner, i.e. both the support and entries of b
are selected adversarially after observing X and w∗ . Our results hold under deterministic assumptions which are satisfied if X is sampled from any sub-Gaussian
distribution. Finally unlike existing results that apply only to a fixed w∗ , generated
independently of X, our results are universal and hold for any w∗ ∈ Rp .
Next, we propose gradient descent-based extensions of T ORRENT that can scale
efficiently to large scale problems, such as high dimensional sparse recovery. and
prove similar recovery guarantees for these extensions. Empirically we find T OR RENT , and more so its extensions, offering significantly faster recovery than the
state-of-the-art L1 solvers. For instance, even on moderate-sized datasets (with
p = 50K) with around 40% corrupted responses, a variant of our proposed
method called T ORRENT-HYB is more than 20× faster than the best L1 solver.
“If among these errors are some which appear too large to be admissible,
then those equations which produced these errors will be rejected, as coming from too faulty experiments, and the unknowns will be determined by
means of the other equations, which will then give much smaller errors.”
A. M. Legendre, On the Method of Least Squares. 1805.

1

Introduction

Robust Least Squares Regression (RLSR) addresses the problem of learning a reliable set of regression coefficients in the presence of several arbitrary corruptions in the response vector. Owing to the
wide-applicability of regression, RLSR features as a critical component of several important realworld applications in a variety of domains such as signal processing [1], economics [2], computer
vision [3, 4], and astronomy [2].
Given a data matrix X = [x1 , . . . , xn ] with n data points in Rp and the corresponding response
vector y ∈ Rn , the goal of RLSR is to learn a ŵ such that,
X
(ŵ, Ŝ) =
arg min
(yi − xTi w)2 ,
(1)
w∈Rp
i∈S
S⊂[n]:|S|≥(1−β)·n

∗

This work was done while P.K. was a postdoctoral researcher at Microsoft Research India.

1

