Parallel Correlation Clustering on Big Graphs
Xinghao Pan↵,✏ , Dimitris Papailiopoulos↵,✏ , Samet Oymak↵,✏ ,
Benjamin Recht↵,✏, , Kannan Ramchandran✏ , and Michael I. Jordan↵,✏,
↵
AMPLab, ✏ EECS at UC Berkeley, Statistics at UC Berkeley

Abstract
Given a similarity graph between items, correlation clustering (CC) groups similar
items together and dissimilar ones apart. One of the most popular CC algorithms
is KwikCluster: an algorithm that serially clusters neighborhoods of vertices, and
obtains a 3-approximation ratio. Unfortunately, in practice KwikCluster requires
a large number of clustering rounds, a potential bottleneck for large graphs.
We present C4 and ClusterWild!, two algorithms for parallel correlation clustering that run in a polylogarithmic number of rounds, and provably achieve nearly
linear speedups. C4 uses concurrency control to enforce serializability of a parallel clustering process, and guarantees a 3-approximation ratio. ClusterWild! is
a coordination free algorithm that abandons consistency for the benefit of better
scaling; this leads to a provably small loss in the 3 approximation ratio.
We demonstrate experimentally that both algorithms outperform the state of the
art, both in terms of clustering accuracy and running time. We show that our
algorithms can cluster billion-edge graphs in under 5 seconds on 32 cores, while
achieving a 15⇥ speedup.

1

Introduction

Clustering items according to some notion of similarity is a major primitive in machine learning.
Correlation clustering serves as a basic means to achieve this goal: given a similarity measure
between items, the goal is to group similar items together and dissimilar items apart. In contrast to
other clustering approaches, the number of clusters is not determined a priori, and good solutions
aim to balance the tension between grouping all items together versus isolating them.
The simplest CC variant can be described on a
complete signed graph. Our input is a graph
G on n vertices, with +1 weights on edges between similar items, and 1 edges between dissimilar ones. Our goal is to generate a partition
of vertices into disjoint sets that minimizes the
number of disagreeing edges: this equals the
number of “+” edges cut by the clusters plus
the number of “ ” edges inside the clusters.
This metric is commonly called the number of
disagreements. In Figure 1, we give a toy example of a CC instance.

cluster 1

cluster 2

cost = (#“ ” edges inside clusters) + (#“+” edges across clusters) = 2

Figure 1: In the above graph, solid edges denote similarity and dashed dissimilarity. The number of disagreeing edges in the above clustering clustering is 2; we
color the bad edges with red.

Entity deduplication is the archetypal motivating example for correlation clustering, with applications in chat disentanglement, co-reference resolution, and spam detection [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. The
input is a set of entities (say, results of a keyword search), and a pairwise classifier that indicates—
with some error—similarities between entities. Two results of a keyword search might refer to the
same item, but might look different if they come from different sources. By building a similarity
1

