Decoupled Deep Neural Network for
Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation

Seunghoon Hong∗ Hyeonwoo Noh∗ Bohyung Han
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
{maga33,hyeonwoonoh ,bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel deep neural network architecture for semi-supervised semantic segmentation using heterogeneous annotations. Contrary to existing approaches posing semantic segmentation as a single task of region-based classification, our algorithm decouples classification and segmentation, and learns a separate network for each task. In this architecture, labels associated with an image
are identified by classification network, and binary segmentation is subsequently
performed for each identified label in segmentation network. The decoupled architecture enables us to learn classification and segmentation networks separately
based on the training data with image-level and pixel-wise class labels, respectively. It facilitates to reduce search space for segmentation effectively by exploiting class-specific activation maps obtained from bridging layers. Our algorithm
shows outstanding performance compared to other semi-supervised approaches
with much less training images with strong annotations in PASCAL VOC dataset.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a technique to assign structured semantic labels—typically, object class
labels—to individual pixels in images. This problem has been studied extensively over decades,
yet remains challenging since object appearances involve significant variations that are potentially
originated from pose variations, scale changes, occlusion, background clutter, etc. However, in spite
of such challenges, the techniques based on Deep Neural Network (DNN) demonstrate impressive
performance in the standard benchmark datasets such as PASCAL VOC [1].
Most DNN-based approaches pose semantic segmentation as pixel-wise classification problem [2,
3, 4, 5, 6]. Although these approaches have achieved good performance compared to previous
methods, training DNN requires a large number of segmentation ground-truths, which result from
tremendous annotation efforts and costs. For this reason, reliable pixel-wise segmentation annotations are typically available only for a small number of classes and images, which makes supervised
DNNs difficult to be applied to semantic segmentation tasks involving various kinds of objects.
Semi- or weakly-supervised learning approaches [7, 8, 9, 10] alleviate the problem in lack of training
data by exploiting weak label annotations per bounding box [10, 8] or image [7, 8, 9]. They often
assume that a large set of weak annotations is available during training while training examples with
strong annotations are missing or limited. This is a reasonable assumption because weak annotations
such as class labels for bounding boxes and images require only a fraction of efforts compared to
strong annotations, i.e., pixel-wise segmentations. The standard approach in this setting is to update
the model of a supervised DNN by iteratively inferring and refining hypothetical segmentation labels using weakly annotated images. Such iterative techniques often work well in practice [8, 10],
but training methods rely on ad-hoc procedures and there is no guarantee of convergence; implementation may be tricky and the algorithm may not be straightforward to reproduce.
∗

Both authors have equal contribution on this paper.

1

