Secure Multi-party Differential Privacy
Peter Kairouz1
Sewoong Oh2
Pramod Viswanath1
1
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
2
Department of Industrial & Enterprise Systems Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
{kairouz2,swoh,pramodv}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of interactive function computation by multiple parties,
each possessing a bit, in a differential privacy setting (i.e., there remains an uncertainty in any party’s bit even when given the transcript of interactions and all the
other parties’ bits). Each party wants to compute a function, which could differ
from party to party, and there could be a central observer interested in computing
a separate function. Performance at each party is measured via the accuracy of
the function to be computed. We allow for an arbitrary cost metric to measure
the distortion between the true and the computed function values. Our main result is the optimality of a simple non-interactive protocol: each party randomizes
its bit (sufficiently) and shares the privatized version with the other parties. This
optimality result is very general: it holds for all types of functions, heterogeneous
privacy conditions on the parties, all types of cost metrics, and both average and
worst-case (over the inputs) measures of accuracy.

1

Introduction

Multi-party computation (MPC) is a generic framework where multiple parties share their information in an interactive fashion towards the goal of computing some functions, potentially different at
each of the parties. In many situations of common interest, the key challenge is in computing the
functions as privately as possible, i.e., without revealing much about one’s information to the other
(potentially colluding) parties. For instance, an interactive voting system aims to compute the majority of (say, binary) opinions of each of the parties, with each party being averse to declaring their
opinion publicly. Another example involves banks sharing financial risk exposures – the banks need
to agree on quantities such as the overnight lending rate which depends on each bank’s exposure,
which is a quantity the banks are naturally loath to truthfully disclose [1]. A central learning theory
question involves characterizing the fundamental limits of interactive information exchange such
that a strong (and suitably defined) adversary only learns as little as possible while still ensuring that
the desired functions can be computed as accurately as possible.
One way to formulate the privacy requirement is to ensure that each party learns nothing more
about the others’ information than can be learned from the output of the function computed. This
topic is studied under the rubric of secure function evaluation (SFE); the SFE formulation has
been extensively studied with the goal of characterizing which functions can be securely evaluated [39, 3, 21, 11]. One drawback of SFE is that depending on what auxiliary information the
adversary might have, disclosing the exact function output might reveal each party’s data. For example, consider computing the average of the data owned by all the parties. Even if we use SFE, a
party’s data can be recovered if all the other parties collaborate. To ensure protection of the private
data under such a strong adversary, we want to impose a stronger privacy guarantee of differential
privacy. Recent breaches of sensitive information about individuals due to linkage attacks prove
1

