Estimating Mixture Models via Mixtures of
Polynomials
Sida I. Wang Arun Tejasvi Chaganty Percy Liang
Computer Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305
{sidaw,chaganty,pliang}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Mixture modeling is a general technique for making any simple model more expressive through weighted combination. This generality and simplicity in part
explains the success of the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm, in which
updates are easy to derive for a wide class of mixture models. However, the likelihood of a mixture model is non-convex, so EM has no known global convergence
guarantees. Recently, method of moments approaches offer global guarantees for
some mixture models, but they do not extend easily to the range of mixture models that exist. In this work, we present Polymom, an unifying framework based on
method of moments in which estimation procedures are easily derivable, just as
in EM. Polymom is applicable when the moments of a single mixture component
are polynomials of the parameters. Our key observation is that the moments of
the mixture model are a mixture of these polynomials, which allows us to cast
estimation as a Generalized Moment Problem. We solve its relaxations using
semidefinite optimization, and then extract parameters using ideas from computer
algebra. This framework allows us to draw insights and apply tools from convex
optimization, computer algebra and the theory of moments to study problems in
statistical estimation. Simulations show good empirical performance on several
models.

1

Introduction

Mixture models play a central role in machine learning and statistics, with diverse applications
including bioinformatics, speech, natural language, and computer vision. The idea of mixture
modeling is to explain data through a weighted combination of simple parametrized distributions
[1, 2]. In practice, maximum likelihood estimation via Expectation Maximization (EM) has been
the workhorse for these models, as the parameter updates are often easily derivable. However, EM
is well-known to suffer from local optima. The method of moments, dating back to Pearson [3] in
1894, is enjoying a recent revival [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] due to its strong global theoretical guarantees. However, current methods depend strongly on the specific distributions and are not
easily extensible to new ones.
In this paper, we present a method of moments approach, which we call Polymom, for estimating
a wider class of mixture models in which the moment equations are polynomial equations (Section
2). Solving general polynomial equations is NP-hard, but our key insight is that for mixture models,
the moments equations are mixtures of polynomials equations and we can hope to solve them if the
moment equations for each mixture component are simple polynomials equations that we can solve.
Polymom proceeds as follows: First, we recover mixtures of monomials of the parameters from the
data moments by solving an instance of the Generalized Moment Problem (GMP) [14, 15] (Section
3). We show that for many mixture models, the GMP can be solved with basic linear algebra and
in the general case, can be approximated by an SDP in which the moment equations are linear
constraints. Second, we extend multiplication matrix ideas from the computer algebra literature [16,
1

