Efficient Compressive Phase Retrieval
with Constrained Sensing Vectors

Sohail Bahmani, Justin Romberg
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering.
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
{sohail.bahmani,jrom}@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract
We propose a robust and efficient approach to the problem of compressive phase
retrieval in which the goal is to reconstruct a sparse vector from the magnitude
of a number of its linear measurements. The proposed framework relies on constrained sensing vectors and a two-stage reconstruction method that consists of
two standard convex programs that are solved sequentially.
In recent years, various methods are proposed for compressive phase retrieval, but
they have suboptimal sample complexity or lack robustness guarantees. The main
obstacle has been that there is no straightforward convex relaxations for the type
of structure in the target. Given a set of underdetermined measurements, there is a
standard framework for recovering a sparse matrix, and a standard framework for
recovering a low-rank matrix. However, a general, efficient method for recovering
a jointly sparse and low-rank matrix has remained elusive.
Deviating from the models with generic measurements, in this paper we show that
if the sensing vectors are chosen at random from an incoherent subspace, then the
low-rank and sparse structures of the target signal can be effectively decoupled.
We show that a recovery algorithm that consists of a low-rank recovery stage followed by a sparse recovery stage will produce an accurate estimate of the target
when the number of measurements is O(k log kd ), where k and d denote the sparsity level and the dimension of the input signal. We also evaluate the algorithm
through numerical simulation.

1

Introduction

1.1

Problem setting

The problem of Compressive Phase Retrieval (CPR) is generally stated as the problem of estimating
a k-sparse vector x? ∈ Rd from noisy measurements of the form
2

yi = |hai , x? i| + zi

(1)

for i = 1, 2, . . . , n, where ai is the sensing vector and zi denotes the additive noise. In this paper,
we study the CPR problem with specific sensing vectors ai of the form
ai = Ψ T wi ,

(2)

where Ψ ∈ Rm×d and wi ∈ Rm are known. In words, the measurement vectors live in a fixed
low-dimensional subspace (i.e, the row space of Ψ ). These types of measurements can be applied in
imaging systems that have control over how the scene is illuminated; examples include systems that
use structured illumination with a spatial light modulator or a scattering medium [1, 2].
1

