Reflection, Refraction, and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo

Justin Domke
National ICT Australia (NICTA) &
Australian National University
Canberra, ACT 0200
Justin.Domke@nicta.com.au

Hadi Mohasel Afshar
Research School of Computer Science
Australian National University
Canberra, ACT 0200
hadi.afshar@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a successful approach for sampling from continuous densities. However, it has difficulty simulating Hamiltonian dynamics
with non-smooth functions, leading to poor performance. This paper is motivated
by the behavior of Hamiltonian dynamics in physical systems like optics. We introduce a modification of the Leapfrog discretization of Hamiltonian dynamics on
piecewise continuous energies, where intersections of the trajectory with discontinuities are detected, and the momentum is reflected or refracted to compensate for
the change in energy. We prove that this method preserves the correct stationary
distribution when boundaries are affine. Experiments show that by reducing the
number of rejected samples, this method improves on traditional HMC.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling is among the most general methods for probabilistic inference.
When the probability distribution is smooth, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (originally called
hybrid Monte Carlo [4]) uses the gradient to simulate Hamiltonian dynamics and reduce random
walk behavior. This often leads to a rapid exploration of the distribution [7, 2]. HMC has recently
become popular in Bayesian statistical inference [13], and is often the algorithm of choice.
Some problems display piecewise smoothness, where the density is differentiable except at certain
boundaries. Probabilistic models may intrinsically have finite support, being constrained to some
region. In Bayesian inference, it might be convenient to state a piecewise prior. More complex and
highly piecewise distributions emerge in applications where the distributions are derived from other
distributions (e.g. the distribution of the product of two continuous random variables [5]) as well as
applications such as preference learning [1], or probabilistic programming [8].
While HMC is motivated by smooth distributions, the inclusion of an acceptance probability means
HMC does asymptotically sample correctly from piecewise distributions1 . However, since leapfrog
numerical integration of Hamiltonian dynamics (see [9]) relies on the assumption that the corresponding potential energy is smooth, such cases lead to high rejection probabilities, and poor performance. Hence, traditional HMC is rarely used for piecewise distributions.
In physical systems that follow Hamiltonian dynamics [6], a discontinuity in the energy can result
in two possible behaviors. If the energy decreases across a discontinuity, or the momentum is large
enough to overcome an increase, the system will cross the boundary with an instantaneous change
in momentum, known as refraction in the context of optics [3]. If the change in energy is too large to
be overcome by the momentum, the system will reflect off the boundary, again with an instantaneous
change in momentum.
1
Technically, here we assume the total measure of the non-differentiable points is zero so that, with probability one, none is ever encountered

1

