Embed to Control: A Locally Linear Latent
Dynamics Model for Control from Raw Images

Manuel Watter∗
Jost Tobias Springenberg∗
Joschka Boedecker
University of Freiburg, Germany

Martin Riedmiller
Google DeepMind
London, UK

{watterm,springj,jboedeck}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

riedmiller@google.com

Abstract
We introduce Embed to Control (E2C), a method for model learning and control
of non-linear dynamical systems from raw pixel images. E2C consists of a deep
generative model, belonging to the family of variational autoencoders, that learns
to generate image trajectories from a latent space in which the dynamics is constrained to be locally linear. Our model is derived directly from an optimal control
formulation in latent space, supports long-term prediction of image sequences and
exhibits strong performance on a variety of complex control problems.

1

Introduction

Control of non-linear dynamical systems with continuous state and action spaces is one of the key
problems in robotics and, in a broader context, in reinforcement learning for autonomous agents.
A prominent class of algorithms that aim to solve this problem are model-based locally optimal
(stochastic) control algorithms such as iLQG control [1, 2], which approximate the general nonlinear control problem via local linearization. When combined with receding horizon control [3], and
machine learning methods for learning approximate system models, such algorithms are powerful
tools for solving complicated control problems [3, 4, 5]; however, they either rely on a known system
model or require the design of relatively low-dimensional state representations. For real autonomous
agents to succeed, we ultimately need algorithms that are capable of controlling complex dynamical
systems from raw sensory input (e.g. images) only. In this paper we tackle this difficult problem.
If stochastic optimal control (SOC) methods were applied directly to control from raw image data,
they would face two major obstacles. First, sensory data is usually high-dimensional – i.e. images
with thousands of pixels – rendering a naive SOC solution computationally infeasible. Second,
the image content is typically a highly non-linear function of the system dynamics underlying the
observations; thus model identification and control of this dynamics are non-trivial.
While both problems could, in principle, be addressed by designing more advanced SOC algorithms we approach the “optimal control from raw images” problem differently: turning the problem of locally optimal control in high-dimensional non-linear systems into one of identifying a
low-dimensional latent state space, in which locally optimal control can be performed robustly and
easily. To learn such a latent space we propose a new deep generative model belonging to the class
of variational autoencoders [6, 7] that is derived from an iLQG formulation in latent space. The
resulting Embed to Control (E2C) system is a probabilistic generative model that holds a belief over
viable trajectories in sensory space, allows for accurate long-term planning in latent space, and is
trained fully unsupervised. We demonstrate the success of our approach on four challenging tasks
for control from raw images and compare it to a range of methods for unsupervised representation
learning. As an aside, we also validate that deep up-convolutional networks [8, 9] are powerful
generative models for large images.
∗

Authors contributed equally.

1

