Fast Rates for Exp-concave
Empirical Risk Minimization

Kfir Y. Levy
Technion
Haifa 32000, Israel
kfiryl@tx.technion.ac.il

Tomer Koren
Technion
Haifa 32000, Israel
tomerk@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We consider Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) in the context of stochastic optimization with exp-concave and smooth losses—a general optimization framework that captures several important learning problems including linear and logistic regression, learning SVMs with the squared hinge-loss, portfolio selection
and more. In this setting, we establish the first evidence that ERM is able to attain fast generalization rates, and show that the expected loss of the ERM solution
in d dimensions converges to the optimal expected loss in a rate of d/n. This
rate matches existing lower bounds up to constants and improves by a log n factor
upon the state-of-the-art, which is only known to be attained by an online-to-batch
conversion of computationally expensive online algorithms.

1

Introduction

Statistical learning and stochastic optimization with exp-concave loss functions captures several
fundamental problems in statistical machine learning, which include linear regression, logistic regression, learning support-vector machines (SVMs) with the squared hinge loss, and portfolio selection, amongst others. Exp-concave functions constitute a rich class of convex functions, which is
substantially richer than its more familiar subclass of strongly convex functions.
Similarly to their strongly-convex counterparts, it is well-known that exp-concave loss functions
are amenable to fast generalization rates. Specifically, a standard online-to-batch conversion [6]
of either the Online Newton Step algorithm [8] or exponential weighting schemes
√ [5, 8] in d dimensions gives rise to convergence rate of d/n, as opposed to the standard 1/ n rate of generic
(Lipschitz) stochastic convex optimization. Unfortunately, the latter online methods are highly inefficient computationally-wise; e.g., the runtime complexity of the Online Newton Step algorithm
scales as d4 with the dimension of the problem, even in very simple optimization scenarios [13].
An alternative and widely-used learning paradigm is that of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM),
which is often regarded as the strategy of choice due to its generality and its statistical efficiency. In
this scheme, a sample of training instances is drawn from the underlying data distribution, and the
minimizer of the sample average (or the regularized sample average) is computed. As opposed to
methods based on online-to-batch conversions, the ERM approach enables the use of any optimization procedure of choice and does not restrict one to use a specific online algorithm. Furthermore,
the ERM solution often enjoys several distribution-dependent generalization bounds in conjunction,
and thus is able to obliviously adapt to the properties of the underlying data distribution.
In the context of exp-concave functions,
however, nothing is known about the generalization abilities
√
of ERM besides the standard 1/ n convergence rate that applies to any convex losses. Surprisingly,
it appears that even in the specific and extensively-studied case of linear regression with the squared
loss, the state of affairs remains unsettled: this important case was recently addressed by Shamir
1

