Quartz: Randomized Dual Coordinate Ascent
with Arbitrary Sampling

Peter Richtárik
School of Mathematics
The University of Edinburgh
EH9 3FD, United Kingdom
peter.richtarik@ed.ac.uk

Zheng Qu
Department of Mathematics
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
zhengqu@maths.hku.hk

Tong Zhang
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ, 08854
tzhang@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of minimizing the average of a large number of smooth
convex functions penalized with a strongly convex regularizer. We propose and
analyze a novel primal-dual method (Quartz) which at every iteration samples and
updates a random subset of the dual variables, chosen according to an arbitrary
distribution. In contrast to typical analysis, we directly bound the decrease of
the primal-dual error (in expectation), without the need to first analyze the dual
error. Depending on the choice of the sampling, we obtain efficient serial and
mini-batch variants of the method. In the serial case, our bounds match the best
known bounds for SDCA (both with uniform and importance sampling). With
standard mini-batching, our bounds predict initial data-independent speedup as
well as additional data-driven speedup which depends on spectral and sparsity
properties of the data.
Keywords: empirical risk minimization, dual coordinate ascent, arbitrary sampling, data-driven
speedup.

1

Introduction

In this paper we consider a primal-dual pair of structured convex optimization problems which has
in several variants of varying degrees of generality attracted a lot of attention in the past few years
in the machine learning and optimization communities [4, 22, 20, 23, 21, 27].
Let A1 , . . . , An be a collection of d-by-m real matrices and φ1 , . . . , φn be 1/γ-smooth convex
functions from Rm to R, where γ > 0. Further, let g : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} be a 1-strongly convex
function and λ > 0 a regularization parameter. We are interested in solving the following primal
problem:
i
h
Pn
def
minw=(w1 ,...,wd )∈Rd P (w) = n1 i=1 φi (A>
w)
+
λg(w)
.
(1)
i
In the machine learning context, matrices {Ai } are interpreted as examples/samples, w is a (linear)
predictor, function φi is the loss incurred by the predictor on example Ai , g is a regularizer, λ
is a regularization parameter and (1) is the regularized empirical risk minimization problem. In
1

