Deep learning with Elastic Averaging SGD

Anna Choromanska
Courant Institute, NYU
achoroma@cims.nyu.edu

Sixin Zhang
Courant Institute, NYU
zsx@cims.nyu.edu

Yann LeCun
Center for Data Science, NYU & Facebook AI Research
yann@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of stochastic optimization for deep learning in the parallel computing environment under communication constraints. A new algorithm
is proposed in this setting where the communication and coordination of work
among concurrent processes (local workers), is based on an elastic force which
links the parameters they compute with a center variable stored by the parameter
server (master). The algorithm enables the local workers to perform more exploration, i.e. the algorithm allows the local variables to fluctuate further from the
center variable by reducing the amount of communication between local workers
and the master. We empirically demonstrate that in the deep learning setting, due
to the existence of many local optima, allowing more exploration can lead to the
improved performance. We propose synchronous and asynchronous variants of
the new algorithm. We provide the stability analysis of the asynchronous variant in the round-robin scheme and compare it with the more common parallelized
method ADMM. We show that the stability of EASGD is guaranteed when a simple
stability condition is satisfied, which is not the case for ADMM. We additionally
propose the momentum-based version of our algorithm that can be applied in both
synchronous and asynchronous settings. Asynchronous variant of the algorithm
is applied to train convolutional neural networks for image classification on the
CIFAR and ImageNet datasets. Experiments demonstrate that the new algorithm
accelerates the training of deep architectures compared to DOWNPOUR and other
common baseline approaches and furthermore is very communication efficient.

1

Introduction

One of the most challenging problems in large-scale machine learning is how to parallelize the
training of large models that use a form of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [1]. There have been
attempts to parallelize SGD-based training for large-scale deep learning models on large number
of CPUs, including the Google’s Distbelief system [2]. But practical image recognition systems
consist of large-scale convolutional neural networks trained on few GPU cards sitting in a single
computer [3, 4]. The main challenge is to devise parallel SGD algorithms to train large-scale deep
learning models that yield a significant speedup when run on multiple GPU cards.
In this paper we introduce the Elastic Averaging SGD method (EASGD) and its variants. EASGD
is motivated by quadratic penalty method [5], but is re-interpreted as a parallelized extension of the
averaging SGD algorithm [6]. The basic idea is to let each worker maintain its own local parameter,
and the communication and coordination of work among the local workers is based on an elastic
force which links the parameters they compute with a center variable stored by the master. The center
variable is updated as a moving average where the average is taken in time and also in space over
the parameters computed by local workers. The main contribution of this paper is a new algorithm
that provides fast convergent minimization while outperforming DOWNPOUR method [2] and other
1

