Combinatorial Bandits Revisited
Richard Combes∗

M. Sadegh Talebi†
Alexandre Proutiere†
Marc Lelarge‡
Centrale-Supelec, L2S, Gif-sur-Yvette, FRANCE
† Department of Automatic Control, KTH, Stockholm, SWEDEN
‡ INRIA & ENS, Paris, FRANCE
richard.combes@supelec.fr,{mstms,alepro}@kth.se,marc.lelarge@ens.fr
∗

Abstract
This paper investigates stochastic and adversarial combinatorial multi-armed bandit problems. In the stochastic setting under semi-bandit feedback, we derive
a problem-specific regret lower bound, and discuss its scaling with the dimension of the decision space. We propose ESCB, an algorithm that efficiently exploits the structure of the problem and provide a finite-time analysis of its regret.
ESCB has better performance guarantees than existing algorithms, and significantly outperforms these algorithms in practice. In the adversarial setting under
bandit feedback, we propose C OMB EXP, an algorithm with the same regret scaling as state-of-the-art algorithms, but with lower computational complexity for
some combinatorial problems.

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problems [1] constitute the most fundamental sequential decision problems with an exploration vs. exploitation trade-off. In such problems, the decision maker selects
an arm in each round, and observes a realization of the corresponding unknown reward distribution.
Each decision is based on past decisions and observed rewards. The objective is to maximize the
expected cumulative reward over some time horizon by balancing exploitation (arms with higher
observed rewards should be selected often) and exploration (all arms should be explored to learn
their average rewards). Equivalently, the performance of a decision rule or algorithm can be measured through its expected regret, defined as the gap between the expected reward achieved by the
algorithm and that achieved by an oracle algorithm always selecting the best arm. MAB problems
have found applications in many fields, including sequential clinical trials, communication systems,
economics, see e.g. [2, 3].
In this paper, we investigate generic combinatorial MAB problems with linear rewards, as introduced
in [4]. In each round n ≥ 1, a decision maker selects an arm M from a finite set M ⊂ {0, 1}d and
Pd
d
receives a reward M > X(n) =
i=1 Mi Xi (n). The reward vector X(n) ∈ R+ is unknown.
We focus here on the case where all arms consist of the same number m of basic actions in the
sense that kM k1 = m, ∀M ∈ M. After selecting an arm M in round n, the decision maker
receives some feedback. We consider both (i) semi-bandit feedback under which after round n, for
all i ∈ {1, . . . , d}, the component Xi (n) of the reward vector is revealed if and only if Mi = 1; (ii)
bandit feedback under which only the reward M > X(n) is revealed. Based on the feedback received
up to round n − 1, the decision maker selects an arm for the next round n, and her objective is to
maximize her cumulative reward over a given time horizon consisting of T rounds. The challenge in
these problems resides in the very large number of arms, i.e., in its combinatorial structure: the size
of M could well grow as dm . Fortunately, one may hope to exploit the problem structure to speed
up the exploration of sub-optimal arms.
We consider two instances of combinatorial bandit problems, depending on how the sequence
of reward vectors is generated. We first analyze the case of stochastic rewards, where for all
1

