Bayesian Active Model Selection
with an Application to Automated Audiometry

Jacob R. Gardner
CS, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
jrg365@cornell.edu
Kilian Q. Weinberger
CS, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
kqw4@cornell.edu

Gustavo Malkomes
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
luizgustavo@wustl.edu
Dennis Barbour
BME, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
dbarbour@wustl.edu

Roman Garnett
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
garnett@wustl.edu

John P. Cunningham
Statistics, Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel information-theoretic approach for active model selection
and demonstrate its effectiveness in a real-world application. Although our method
can work with arbitrary models, we focus on actively learning the appropriate
structure for Gaussian process (GP) models with arbitrary observation likelihoods.
We then apply this framework to rapid screening for noise-induced hearing loss
(NIHL), a widespread and preventible disability, if diagnosed early. We construct a
GP model for pure-tone audiometric responses of patients with NIHL . Using this
and a previously published model for healthy responses, the proposed method is
shown to be capable of diagnosing the presence or absence of NIHL with drastically
fewer samples than existing approaches. Further, the method is extremely fast and
enables the diagnosis to be performed in real time.

1

Introduction

Personalized medicine has long been a critical application area for machine learning [1–3], in which
automated decision making and diagnosis are key components. Beyond improving quality of life,
machine learning in diagnostic settings is particularly important because collecting additional medical
data often incurs significant financial burden, time cost, and patient discomfort. In machine learning
one often considers this problem to be one of active feature selection: acquiring each new feature
(e.g., a blood test) incurs some cost, but will, with hope, better inform diagnosis, treatment, and
prognosis. By careful analysis, we may optimize this trade off.
However, many diagnostic settings in medicine do not involve feature selection, but rather involve
querying a sample space to discriminate different models describing patient attributes. A particular,
clarifying example that motivates this work is noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL), a prevalent disorder
affecting 26 million working-age adults in the United States alone [4] and affecting over half of
workers in particular occupations such as mining and construction. Most tragically, NIHL is entirely
preventable with simple, low-cost solutions (e.g., earplugs). The critical requirement for prevention
is effective early diagnosis.
To be tested for NIHL, patients must complete a time-consuming audiometric exam that presents a
series of tones at various frequencies and intensities; at each tone the patient indicates whether he/she
hears the tone [5–7]. From the responses, the clinician infers the patient’s audible threshold on a
set of discrete frequencies (the audiogram); this process requires the delivery of up to hundreds of
tones. Audiologists scan the audiogram for a hearing deficit with a characteristic notch shape—a
1

