Parallel Recursive Best-First AND/OR Search for
Exact MAP Inference in Graphical Models

Akihiro Kishimoto
IBM Research, Ireland

Radu Marinescu
IBM Research, Ireland

Adi Botea
IBM Research, Ireland

akihirok@ie.ibm.com

radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com

adibotea@ie.ibm.com

Abstract
The paper presents and evaluates the power of parallel search for exact MAP
inference in graphical models. We introduce a new parallel shared-memory recursive best-first AND/OR search algorithm, called SPRBFAOO, that explores the
search space in a best-first manner while operating with restricted memory. Our
experiments show that SPRBFAOO is often superior to the current state-of-the-art
sequential AND/OR search approaches, leading to considerable speed-ups (up to
7-fold with 12 threads), especially on hard problem instances.

1

Introduction

Graphical models provide a powerful framework for reasoning with probabilistic information. These
models use graphs to capture conditional independencies between variables, allowing a concise
knowledge representation and efficient graph-based query processing algorithms. Combinatorial
maximization, or maximum a posteriori (MAP) tasks arise in many applications and often can be
efficiently solved by search schemes, especially in the context of AND/OR search spaces that are
sensitive to the underlying problem structure [1].
Recursive best-first AND/OR search (RBFAOO) is a recent yet very powerful scheme for exact MAP
inference that was shown to outperform current state-of-the-art depth-first and best-first methods by
several orders of magnitude on a variety of benchmarks [2]. RBFAOO explores the context minimal
AND/OR search graph associated with a graphical model in a best-first manner (even with nonmonotonic heuristics) while running within restricted memory. RBFAOO extends Recursive BestFirst Search (RBFS) [3] to graphical models and thus uses a threshold controlling technique to drive
the search in a depth-first like manner while using the available memory for caching.
Up to now, search-based MAP solvers were developed primarily as sequential search algorithms.
However, parallel, multi-core processing can be a powerful approach to boosting the performance
of a problem solver. Now that multi-core computing systems are ubiquitous, one way to extract
substantial speed-ups from the hardware is to resort to parallel processing. Parallel search has been
successfully employed in a variety of AI areas, including planning [4], satisfiability [5], and game
playing [6, 7]. However, little research has been devoted to solving graphical models in parallel.
The only parallel search scheme for MAP inference in graphical models that we are aware of is
the distributed AND/OR Branch and Bound algorithm (daoopt) [8]. This assumes however a large
and distributed computational grid environment with hundreds of independent and loosely connected
computing systems, without access to a shared memory space for caching and reusing partial results.
Contribution In this paper, we take a radically different approach and explore the potential of
parallel search for MAP tasks in a shared-memory environment which, to our knowledge, has not
been attempted before. We introduce SPRBFAOO, a new parallelization of RBFAOO in sharedmemory environments. SPRBFAOO maintains a single cache table shared among the threads. In
this way, each thread can effectively reuse the search effort performed by others. Since all threads
start from the root of the search graph using the same search strategy, an effective load balancing is
1

