Stochastic Expectation Propagation

Yingzhen Li
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
yl494@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
jmh@seas.harvard.edu

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Expectation propagation (EP) is a deterministic approximation algorithm that is
often used to perform approximate Bayesian parameter learning. EP approximates
the full intractable posterior distribution through a set of local approximations that
are iteratively refined for each datapoint. EP can offer analytic and computational
advantages over other approximations, such as Variational Inference (VI), and is
the method of choice for a number of models. The local nature of EP appears to
make it an ideal candidate for performing Bayesian learning on large models in
large-scale dataset settings. However, EP has a crucial limitation in this context:
the number of approximating factors needs to increase with the number of datapoints, N , which often entails a prohibitively large memory overhead. This paper
presents an extension to EP, called stochastic expectation propagation (SEP), that
maintains a global posterior approximation (like VI) but updates it in a local way
(like EP). Experiments on a number of canonical learning problems using synthetic and real-world datasets indicate that SEP performs almost as well as full
EP, but reduces the memory consumption by a factor of N . SEP is therefore ideally suited to performing approximate Bayesian learning in the large model, large
dataset setting.

1

Introduction

Recently a number of methods have been developed for applying Bayesian learning to large datasets.
Examples include sampling approximations [1, 2], distributional approximations including stochastic variational inference (SVI) [3] and assumed density filtering (ADF) [4], and approaches that mix
distributional and sampling approximations [5, 6]. One family of approximation method has garnered less attention in this regard: Expectation Propagation (EP) [7, 8]. EP constructs a posterior
approximation by iterating simple local computations that refine factors which approximate the posterior contribution from each datapoint. At first sight, it therefore appears well suited to large-data
problems: the locality of computation make the algorithm simple to parallelise and distribute, and
good practical performance on a range of small data applications suggest that it will be accurate
[9, 10, 11]. However the elegance of local computation has been bought at the price of prohibitive
memory overhead that grows with the number of datapoints N , since local approximating factors
need to be maintained for every datapoint, which typically incur the same memory overhead as the
global approximation. The same pathology exists for the broader class of power EP (PEP) algorithms [12] that includes variational message passing [13]. In contrast, variational inference (VI)
methods [14, 15] utilise global approximations that are refined directly, which prevents memory
overheads from scaling with N .
Is there ever a case for preferring EP (or PEP) to VI methods for large data? We believe that there
certainly is. First, EP can provide significantly more accurate approximations. It is well known
that variational free-energy approaches are biased and often severely so [16] and for particular models the variational free-energy objective is pathologically ill-suited such as those with non-smooth
likelihood functions [11, 17]. Second, the fact that EP is truly local (to factors in the posterior distri1

