Consistent Multilabel Classification
Oluwasanmi Koyejo⇤
Department of Psychology,
Stanford University
sanmi@stanford.edu

Nagarajan Natarajan⇤
Department of Computer Science,
University of Texas at Austin
naga86@cs.utexas.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Department of Computer Science,
University of Texas at Austin
pradeepr@cs.utexas.edu

Inderjit S. Dhillon
Department of Computer Science,
University of Texas at Austin
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Multilabel classification is rapidly developing as an important aspect of modern
predictive modeling, motivating study of its theoretical aspects. To this end, we
propose a framework for constructing and analyzing multilabel classification metrics which reveals novel results on a parametric form for population optimal classifiers, and additional insight into the role of label correlations. In particular,
we show that for multilabel metrics constructed as instance-, micro- and macroaverages, the population optimal classifier can be decomposed into binary classifiers based on the marginal instance-conditional distribution of each label, with a
weak association between labels via the threshold. Thus, our analysis extends the
state of the art from a few known multilabel classification metrics such as Hamming loss, to a general framework applicable to many of the classification metrics
in common use. Based on the population-optimal classifier, we propose a computationally efficient and general-purpose plug-in classification algorithm, and prove
its consistency with respect to the metric of interest. Empirical results on synthetic
and benchmark datasets are supportive of our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Modern classification problems often involve the prediction of multiple labels simultaneously associated with a single instance e.g. image tagging by predicting multiple objects in an image. The
growing importance of multilabel classification has motivated the development of several scalable
algorithms [8, 12, 18] and has led to the recent surge in theoretical analysis [1, 3, 7, 16] which helps
guide and understand practical advances. While recent results have advanced our knowledge of
optimal population classifiers and consistent learning algorithms for particular metrics such as the
Hamming loss and multilabel F -measure [3, 4, 5], a general understanding of learning with respect
to multilabel classification metrics has remained an open problem. This is in contrast to the more
traditional settings of binary and multiclass classification where several recently established results
have led to a rich understanding of optimal and consistent classification [9, 10, 11]. This manuscript
constitutes a step towards establishing results for multilabel classification at the level of generality
currently enjoyed only in these traditional settings.
Towards a generalized analysis, we propose a framework for multilabel sample performance metrics
and their corresponding population extensions. A classification metric is constructed to measure the
utility1 of a classifier, as defined by the practitioner or end-user. The utility may be measured using
⇤

1

Equal contribution.
Equivalently, we may define the loss as the negative utility.

1

