An Active Learning Framework using Sparse-Graph
Codes for Sparse Polynomials and Graph Sketching

Kannan Ramchandran∗
UC Berkeley
kannanr@berkeley.edu

Xiao Li
UC Berkeley
xiaoli@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Let f : {−1, 1}n → R be an n-variate polynomial consisting of 2n monomials,
in which only s  2n coefficients are non-zero. The goal is to learn the polynomial by querying the values of f . We introduce an active learning framework
that is associated with a low query cost and computational runtime. The significant savings are enabled by leveraging sampling strategies based on modern
coding theory, specifically, the design and analysis of sparse-graph codes, such
as Low-Density-Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, which represent the state-of-the-art
of modern packet communications. More significantly, we show how this design
perspective leads to exciting, and to the best of our knowledge, largely unexplored
intellectual connections between learning and coding.
The key is to relax the worst-case assumption with an ensemble-average setting,
where the polynomial is assumed to be drawn uniformly at random from the ensemble of all polynomials (of a given size n and sparsity s). Our framework succeeds with high probability with respect to the polynomial ensemble with sparsity
up to s = O(2δn ) for any δ ∈ (0, 1), where f is exactly learned using O(ns)
queries in time O(ns log s), even if the queries are perturbed by Gaussian noise.
We further apply the proposed framework to graph sketching, which is the problem of inferring sparse graphs by querying graph cuts. By writing the cut function
as a polynomial and exploiting the graph structure, we propose a sketching algorithm to learn the an arbitrary n-node unknown graph using only few cut queries,
which scales almost linearly in the number of edges and sub-linearly in the graph
size n. Experiments on real datasets show significant reductions in the runtime
and query complexity compared with competitive schemes.

1

Introduction

One of the central problems in computational learning theory is the efficient learning of polynomials
f (x) : x ∈ {−1, 1}n → R. The task of learning an s-sparse polynomial f has been studied
extensively in the literature, often in the context of Fourier analysis for pseudo-boolean functions (a
real-valued function defined on a set of binary variables). Many concept classes, such as ω(1)-juntas,
polynomial-sized circuits, decision trees and disjunctive normative form (DNF) formulas, have been
proven very difficult [1] to learn in the worst-case with random examples. Almost all existing
efficient algorithms are based on the membership query model [1, 6–8, 10, 11, 17], which provides
arbitrary access to the value of f (x) given any x ∈ {−1, 1}n . This makes a richer set of concept
classes learnable in polynomial time poly(s, n). This is a form of what is now popularly referred to
as active learning, which makes queries using different sampling strategies. For instance, [3,10] use
regular subsampling and [9, 14, 18] use random sampling based on compressed sensing. However,
they remain difficult to scale computationally, especially for large s and n.
∗

This work was supported by grant NSF CCF EAGER 1439725.

1

