Anytime Influence Bounds and the Explosive
Behavior of Continuous-Time Diffusion Networks

1

Kevin Scaman1
Rémi Lemonnier1,2
Nicolas Vayatis1
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS, Université Paris- Saclay, France, 2 1000mercis, Paris, France
{scaman, lemonnier, vayatis}@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Abstract
The paper studies transition phenomena in information cascades observed along
a diffusion process over some graph. We introduce the Laplace Hazard matrix
and show that its spectral radius fully characterizes the dynamics of the contagion both in terms of influence and of explosion time. Using this concept, we
prove tight non-asymptotic bounds for the influence of a set of nodes, and we
also provide an in-depth analysis of the critical time after which the contagion becomes super-critical. Our contributions include formal definitions and tight lower
bounds of critical explosion time. We illustrate the relevance of our theoretical results through several examples of information cascades used in epidemiology and
viral marketing models. Finally, we provide a series of numerical experiments for
various types of networks which confirm the tightness of the theoretical bounds.

1

Introduction

Diffusion networks capture the underlying mechanism of how events propagate throughout a complex network. In marketing, social graph dynamics have caused large transformations in business
models, forcing companies to re-imagine their customers not as a mass of isolated economic agents,
but as customer networks [1]. In epidemiology, a precise understanding of spreading phenomena
is heavily needed when trying to break the chain of infection in populations during outbreaks of
viral diseases. But whether the subject is a virus spreading across a computer network, an innovative product among early adopters, or a rumor propagating on a network of people, the questions
of interest are the same: how many people will it infect? How fast will it spread? And, even more
critically for decision makers: how can we modify its course in order to meet specific goals? Several papers tackled these issues by studying the influence maximization problem. Given a known
diffusion process on a graph, it consists in finding the top-k subset of initial seeds with the highest expected number of infected nodes at a certain time distance T . This problem being NP-hard
[2], various heuristics have been proposed in order to obtain scalable suboptimal approximations.
While the first algorithms focused on discrete-time models and the special case T = +∞ [3, 4],
subsequent papers [5, 6] brought empirical evidences of the key role played by temporal behavior.
Existing models of continuous-time stochastic processes include multivariate Hawkes processes [7]
where recent progress in inference methods [8, 9] made available the tools for the study of activity
shaping [10], which is closely related to influence maximization. However, in the most studied case
in which each node of the network can only be infected once, the most widely used model remains
the Continuous-Time Information Cascade (CTIC) model [5]. Under this framework, successful
inference [5] as well as influence maximization algorithms have been developed [11, 12].
However, if recent works [13, 14] provided theoretical foundations for the inference problem, assessing the quality of influence maximization remains a challenging task, as few theoretical results
exist for general graphs. In the infinite-time setting, studies of the SIR diffusion process in epidemiology [15] or percolation for specific graphs [16] provided a more accurate understanding of these
processes. More recently, it was shown in [17] that the spectral radius of a given Hazard matrix
1

