Deep Poisson Factor Modeling

Ricardo Henao, Zhe Gan, James Lu and Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
{r.henao,zhe.gan,james.lu,lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
We propose a new deep architecture for topic modeling, based on Poisson Factor Analysis (PFA) modules. The model is composed of a Poisson distribution to
model observed vectors of counts, as well as a deep hierarchy of hidden binary
units. Rather than using logistic functions to characterize the probability that a
latent binary unit is on, we employ a Bernoulli-Poisson link, which allows PFA
modules to be used repeatedly in the deep architecture. We also describe an approach to build discriminative topic models, by adapting PFA modules. We derive
efficient inference via MCMC and stochastic variational methods, that scale with
the number of non-zeros in the data and binary units, yielding significant efficiency, relative to models based on logistic links. Experiments on several corpora
demonstrate the advantages of our model when compared to related deep models.

1

Introduction

Deep models, understood as multilayer modular networks, have been gaining significant interest
from the machine learning community, in part because of their ability to obtain state-of-the-art performance in a wide variety of tasks. Their modular nature is another reason for their popularity.
Commonly used modules include, but are not limited to, Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs)
[10], Sigmoid Belief Networks (SBNs) [22], convolutional networks [18], feedforward neural networks, and Dirichlet Processes1 (DPs). Perhaps the two most well-known deep model architectures
are the Deep Belief Network (DBN) [11] and the Deep Boltzmann Machine (DBM) [25], the former
composed of RBM and SBN modules, whereas the latter is purely built using RBMs.
Deep models are often employed in topic modeling. Specifically, hierarchical tree-structured models
have been widely studied over the last decade, often composed of DP modules. Examples of these
include the nested Chinese Restaurant Process (nCRP) [1], the hierarchical DP (HDP) [27], and
the nested HDP (nHDP) [23]. Alternatively, topic models built using modules other than DPs have
been proposed recently, for instance the Replicated Softmax Model (RSM) [12] based on RBMs,
the Neural Autoregressive Density Estimator (NADE) [17] based on neural networks, the Overreplicated Softmax Model (OSM) [26] based on DBMs, and Deep Poisson Factor Analysis (DPFA)
[6] based on SBNs.
DP-based models have attractive characteristics from the standpoint of interpretability, in the sense
that their generative mechanism is parameterized in terms of distributions over topics, with each
topic characterized by a distribution over words. Alternatively, non-DP-based models, in which
modules are parameterized by a deep hierarchy of binary units [12, 17, 26], do not have parameters
that are as readily interpretable in terms of topics of this type, although model performance is often
excellent. The DPFA model in [6] is one of the first representations that characterizes documents
based on distributions over topics and words, while simultaneously employing a deep architecture
based on binary units. Specifically, [6] integrates the capabilities of Poisson Factor Analysis (PFA)
1

Deep models based on DP priors are usually called hierarchical models.

1

