Less is More: Nyström Computational Regularization

Alessandro Rudi†
Raffaello Camoriano†‡
Lorenzo Rosasco†◦
†
Università degli Studi di Genova - DIBRIS, Via Dodecaneso 35, Genova, Italy
‡
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia - iCub Facility, Via Morego 30, Genova, Italy
◦
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Laboratory for Computational and Statistical Learning, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
raffaello.camoriano@iit.it
{ale rudi, lrosasco}@mit.edu

Abstract
We study Nyström type subsampling approaches to large scale kernel methods,
and prove learning bounds in the statistical learning setting, where random sampling and high probability estimates are considered. In particular, we prove that
these approaches can achieve optimal learning bounds, provided the subsampling
level is suitably chosen. These results suggest a simple incremental variant of
Nyström Kernel Regularized Least Squares, where the subsampling level implements a form of computational regularization, in the sense that it controls at
the same time regularization and computations. Extensive experimental analysis shows that the considered approach achieves state of the art performances on
benchmark large scale datasets.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods provide an elegant and effective framework to develop nonparametric statistical
approaches to learning [1]. However, memory requirements make these methods unfeasible when
dealing with large datasets. Indeed, this observation has motivated a variety of computational strategies to develop large scale kernel methods [2–8].
In this paper we study subsampling methods, that we broadly refer to as Nyström approaches. These
methods replace the empirical kernel matrix, needed by standard kernel methods, with a smaller
matrix obtained by (column) subsampling [2, 3]. Such procedures are shown to often dramatically
reduce memory/time requirements while preserving good practical performances [9–12]. The goal
of our study is two-fold. First, and foremost, we aim at providing a theoretical characterization of the
generalization properties of such learning schemes in a statistical learning setting. Second, we wish
to understand the role played by the subsampling level both from a statistical and a computational
point of view. As discussed in the following, this latter question leads to a natural variant of Kernel
Regularized Least Squares (KRLS), where the subsampling level controls both regularization and
computations.
From a theoretical perspective, the effect of Nyström approaches has been primarily characterized considering the discrepancy between a given empirical kernel matrix and its subsampled version [13–19]. While interesting in their own right, these latter results do not directly yield information on the generalization properties of the obtained algorithm. Results in this direction, albeit
suboptimal, were first derived in [20] (see also [21,22]), and more recently in [23,24]. In these latter
papers, sharp error analyses in expectation are derived in a fixed design regression setting for a form
of Kernel Regularized Least Squares. In particular, in [23] a basic uniform sampling approach is
studied, while in [24] a subsampling scheme based on the notion of leverage score is considered.
The main technical contribution of our study is an extension of these latter results to the statistical
learning setting, where the design is random and high probability estimates are considered. The
1

