Convergence rates of sub-sampled Newton methods
Murat A. Erdogdu
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
erdogdu@stanford.edu

Andrea Montanari
Department of Statistics
and Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
montanari@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of minimizing a sum of n functions via projected iterations onto a convex parameter set C ⇢ Rp , where n
p
1. In this regime,
algorithms which utilize sub-sampling techniques are known to be effective. In
this paper, we use sub-sampling techniques together with low-rank approximation
to design a new randomized batch algorithm which possesses comparable convergence rate to Newton’s method, yet has much smaller per-iteration cost. The
proposed algorithm is robust in terms of starting point and step size, and enjoys
a composite convergence rate, namely, quadratic convergence at start and linear
convergence when the iterate is close to the minimizer. We develop its theoretical
analysis which also allows us to select near-optimal algorithm parameters. Our
theoretical results can be used to obtain convergence rates of previously proposed
sub-sampling based algorithms as well. We demonstrate how our results apply to
well-known machine learning problems. Lastly, we evaluate the performance of
our algorithm on several datasets under various scenarios.

1

Introduction

We focus on the following minimization problem,
n

minimize f (✓) :=

1X
fi (✓),
n i=1

(1.1)

where fi : Rp ! R. Most machine learning models can be expressed as above, where each function
fi corresponds to an observation. Examples include logistic regression, support vector machines,
neural networks and graphical models.
Many optimization algorithms have been developed to solve the above minimization problem
[Bis95, BV04, Nes04]. For a given convex set C ⇢ Rp , we denote the Euclidean projection onto this
set by PC . We consider the updates of the form
⇣
⌘
✓ˆt+1 = PC ✓ˆt ⌘t Qt r✓ f (✓ˆt ) ,
(1.2)

where ⌘t is the step size and Qt is a suitable scaling matrix that provides curvature information.
Updates of the form Eq. (1.2) have been extensively studied in the optimization literature (for simplicity, we assume C = Rp throughout the introduction). The case where Qt is equal to identity
matrix corresponds to Gradient Descent (GD) which, under smoothness assumptions, achieves linear convergence rate with O(np) per-iteration cost. More precisely, GD with ideal step size yields
t
ˆt ✓⇤ k2 , where, as limt!1 ⇠ t = 1 ( ⇤ / ⇤ ), and ⇤ is the i-th largest
k✓ˆt+1 ✓⇤ k2  ⇠1,
p
GD k✓
1,GD
1
i
eigenvalue of the Hessian of f (✓) at minimizer ✓⇤ .
Second order methods such as Newton’s Method (NM) and Natural Gradient Descent (NGD)
[Ama98] can be recovered by taking Qt to be the inverse Hessian and the Fisher information evaluated at the current iterate, respectively. Such methods may achieve quadratic convergence rates with
1

