Extending Gossip Algorithms to
Distributed Estimation of U -Statistics
Igor Colin, Joseph Salmon, Stéphan Clémençon
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris-Saclay
75013 Paris, France
first.last@telecom-paristech.fr

Aurélien Bellet
Magnet Team
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe
59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
aurelien.bellet@inria.fr

Abstract
Efficient and robust algorithms for decentralized estimation in networks are essential to many distributed systems. Whereas distributed estimation of sample
mean statistics has been the subject of a good deal of attention, computation of U statistics, relying on more expensive averaging over pairs of observations, is a less
investigated area. Yet, such data functionals are essential to describe global properties of a statistical population, with important examples including Area Under
the Curve, empirical variance, Gini mean difference and within-cluster point scatter. This paper proposes new synchronous and asynchronous randomized gossip
algorithms which simultaneously propagate data across the network and maintain local estimates of the U -statistic of interest. We establish convergence rate
bounds of O(1/t) and O(log t/t) for the synchronous and asynchronous cases
respectively, where t is the number of iterations, with explicit data and network
dependent terms. Beyond favorable comparisons in terms of rate analysis, numerical experiments provide empirical evidence the proposed algorithms surpasses
the previously introduced approach.

1

Introduction

Decentralized computation and estimation have many applications in sensor and peer-to-peer networks as well as for extracting knowledge from massive information graphs such as interlinked Web
documents and on-line social media. Algorithms running on such networks must often operate under
tight constraints: the nodes forming the network cannot rely on a centralized entity for communication and synchronization, without being aware of the global network topology and/or have limited
resources (computational power, memory, energy). Gossip algorithms [19, 18, 5], where each node
exchanges information with at most one of its neighbors at a time, have emerged as a simple yet powerful technique for distributed computation in such settings. Given a data observation on each node,
gossip algorithms can be used to compute averages or sums of functions of the data that are separable across observations (see for example [10, 2, 15, 11, 9] and references therein). Unfortunately,
these algorithms cannot be used to efficiently compute quantities that take the form of an average
over pairs of observations, also known as U -statistics [12]. Among classical U -statistics used in
machine learning and data mining, one can mention, among others: the sample variance, the Area
Under the Curve (AUC) of a classifier on distributed data, the Gini mean difference, the Kendall
tau rank correlation coefficient, the within-cluster point scatter and several statistical hypothesis test
statistics such as Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney [14].
In this paper, we propose randomized synchronous and asynchronous gossip algorithms to efficiently
compute a U -statistic, in which each node maintains a local estimate of the quantity of interest
throughout the execution of the algorithm. Our methods rely on two types of iterative information
exchange in the network: propagation of local observations across the network, and averaging of lo1

