Convergence Analysis of Prediction Markets via
Randomized Subspace Descent

Rafael Frongillo
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder
raf@colorado.edu

Mark D. Reid
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University & NICTA
mark.reid@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Prediction markets are economic mechanisms for aggregating information about
future events through sequential interactions with traders. The pricing mechanisms in these markets are known to be related to optimization algorithms in machine learning and through these connections we have some understanding of how
equilibrium market prices relate to the beliefs of the traders in a market. However,
little is known about rates and guarantees for the convergence of these sequential
mechanisms, and two recent papers cite this as an important open question.
In this paper we show how some previously studied prediction market trading
models can be understood as a natural generalization of randomized coordinate
descent which we call randomized subspace descent (RSD). We establish convergence rates for RSD and leverage them to prove rates for the two prediction
market models above, answering the open questions. Our results extend beyond
standard centralized markets to arbitrary trade networks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been an increasing appreciation of the shared mathematical foundations
between prediction markets and a variety of techniques in machine learning. Prediction markets
consist of agents who trade securities that pay out depending on the outcome of some uncertain,
future event. As trading takes place, the prices of these securities reflect an aggregation of the
beliefs the traders have about the future event. A popular class of mechanisms for updating these
prices as trading occurs has been shown to be closely related to techniques from online learning [7,
1, 21], convex optimization [10, 19, 13], probabilistic aggregation [24, 14], and crowdsourcing [3].
Building these connections serve several purposes, however one important line of research has been
to use insights from machine learning to better understand how to interpret prices in a prediction
market as aggregations of trader beliefs, and moreover, how the market together with the traders can
be viewed as something akin to a distributed machine learning algorithm [24].
The analysis in this paper was motivated in part by two pieces of work that considered the equilibria of prediction markets with specific models of trader behavior: traders as risk minimizers [13];
and traders who maximize expected exponential utility using beliefs from exponential families [2].
In both cases, the focus was on understanding the properties of the market at convergence, and
questions concerning whether and how convergence happened were left as future work. In [2], the
authors note that “we have not considered the dynamics by which such an equilibrium would be
reached, nor the rate of convergence etc., yet we think such questions provide fruitful directions
for future research.” In [13], “One area of future work would be conducting a detailed analysis of
this framework using the tools of convex optimisation. A particularly interesting topic is to find the
conditions under which the market will converge.”
1

