Learning with Symmetric Label Noise: The
Importance of Being Unhinged

Brendan van Rooyen∗,†
∗

Aditya Krishna Menon†,∗

The Australian National University

†

Robert C. Williamson∗,†

National ICT Australia

{ brendan.vanrooyen, aditya.menon, bob.williamson }@nicta.com.au

Abstract
Convex potential minimisation is the de facto approach to binary classification.
However, Long and Servedio [2010] proved that under symmetric label noise
(SLN), minimisation of any convex potential over a linear function class can result in classification performance equivalent to random guessing. This ostensibly
shows that convex losses are not SLN-robust. In this paper, we propose a convex,
classification-calibrated loss and prove that it is SLN-robust. The loss avoids the
Long and Servedio [2010] result by virtue of being negatively unbounded. The
loss is a modification of the hinge loss, where one does not clamp at zero; hence,
we call it the unhinged loss. We show that the optimal unhinged solution is equivalent to that of a strongly regularised SVM, and is the limiting solution for any
convex potential; this implies that strong `2 regularisation makes most standard
learners SLN-robust. Experiments confirm the unhinged loss’ SLN-robustness is
borne out in practice. So, with apologies to Wilde [1895], while the truth is rarely
pure, it can be simple.

1

Learning with symmetric label noise

Binary classification is the canonical supervised learning problem. Given an instance space X, and
samples from some distribution D over X × {±1}, the goal is to learn a scorer s : X → R with low
misclassification error on future samples drawn from D. Our interest is in the more realistic scenario
where the learner observes samples from some corruption D of D, where labels have some constant
probability of being flipped, and the goal is still to perform well with respect to D. This problem is
known as learning from symmetric label noise (SLN learning) [Angluin and Laird, 1988].
Long and Servedio [2010] showed that there exist linearly separable D where, when the learner
observes some corruption D with symmetric label noise of any nonzero rate, minimisation of any
convex potential over a linear function class results in classification performance on D that is equivalent to random guessing. Ostensibly, this establishes that convex losses are not “SLN-robust” and
motivates the use of non-convex losses [Stempfel and Ralaivola, 2009, Masnadi-Shirazi et al., 2010,
Ding and Vishwanathan, 2010, Denchev et al., 2012, Manwani and Sastry, 2013].
In this paper, we propose a convex loss and prove that it is SLN-robust. The loss avoids the result
of Long and Servedio [2010] by virtue of being negatively unbounded. The loss is a modification of the hinge loss where one does not clamp at zero; thus, we call it the unhinged loss. This
loss has several appealing properties, such as being the unique convex loss satisfying a notion of
“strong” SLN-robustness (Proposition 5), being classification-calibrated (Proposition 6), consistent
when minimised on D (Proposition 7), and having an simple optimal solution that is the difference
of two kernel means (Equation 8). Finally, we show that this optimal solution is equivalent to that of
a strongly regularised SVM (Proposition 8), and any twice-differentiable convex potential (Proposition 9), implying that strong `2 regularisation endows most standard learners with SLN-robustness.
1

