Mind the Gap: A Generative Approach to
Interpretable Feature Selection and Extraction

Been Kim
Julie Shah
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
{beenkim, julie a shah}@csail.mit.edu

Finale Doshi-Velez
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
finale@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We present the Mind the Gap Model (MGM), an approach for interpretable feature extraction and selection. By placing interpretability criteria directly into the
model, we allow for the model to both optimize parameters related to interpretability and to directly report a global set of distinguishable dimensions to assist with
further data exploration and hypothesis generation. MGM extracts distinguishing
features on real-world datasets of animal features, recipes ingredients, and disease co-occurrence. It also maintains or improves performance when compared
to related approaches. We perform a user study with domain experts to show the
MGM’s ability to help with dataset exploration.

1

Introduction

Not only are our data growing in volume and dimensionality, but the understanding that we wish to
gain from them is increasingly sophisticated. For example, an educator might wish to know what
features characterize different clusters of assignments to provide in-class feedback tailored to each
student’s needs. A clinical researcher might apply a clustering algorithm to his patient cohort, and
then wish to understand what sets of symptoms distinguish clusters to assist in performing a differential diagnosis. More broadly, researchers often perform clustering as a tool for data exploration and
hypothesis generation. In these situations, the domain expert’s goal is to understand what features
characterize a cluster, and what features distinguish between clusters.
Objectives such as data exploration present unique challenges and opportunities for problems in
unsupervised learning. While in more typical scenarios, the discovered latent structures are simply
required for some downstream task—such as features for a supervised prediction problem—in data
exploration, the model must provide information to a domain expert in a form that they can readily
interpret. It is not sufficient to simply list what observations are part of which cluster; one must also
be able to explain why the data partition in that particular way. These explanations must necessarily
be succinct, as people are limited in the number of cognitive entities that they can process at one
time [1].
The de-facto standard for summarizing clusters (and other latent factor representations) is to list the
most probable features of each factor. For example, top-N word lists are the de-facto standard for
presenting topics from topic models [2]; principle component vectors in PCA are usually described
by a list of dimensions with the largest magnitude values for the components with the largest magnitude eigenvalues. Sparsity-inducing versions of these models [3, 4, 5, 6] make this goal more
explicit by trying to limit the number of non-zero values in each factor. Other works make these
descriptions more intuitive by deriving disjunctive normal form (DNF) expressions for each cluster [7] or learning a set of important features and examples that characterizes each cluster [8]. While
these approaches might effectively characterize each cluster, they do not provide information about
1

