Top-k Multiclass SVM

1

Maksim Lapin,1 Matthias Hein2 and Bernt Schiele1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
Class ambiguity is typical in image classification problems with a large number
of classes. When classes are difficult to discriminate, it makes sense to allow k
guesses and evaluate classifiers based on the top-k error instead of the standard
zero-one loss. We propose top-k multiclass SVM as a direct method to optimize
for top-k performance. Our generalization of the well-known multiclass SVM is
based on a tight convex upper bound of the top-k error. We propose a fast optimization scheme based on an efficient projection onto the top-k simplex, which is
of its own interest. Experiments on five datasets show consistent improvements in
top-k accuracy compared to various baselines.

1

Introduction

As the number of classes increases, two important issues emerge: class overlap and multilabel nature of examples [9]. This phenomenon
asks for adjustments of both the evaluation metrics as well as the loss functions employed.
When a predictor is allowed k guesses and is
not penalized for k − 1 mistakes, such an evaluation measure is known as top-k error. We argue that this is an important metric that will in- Figure 1: Images from SUN 397 [29] illustrating
evitably receive more attention in the future as class ambiguity. Top: (left to right) Park, River,
Pond. Bottom: Park, Campus, Picnic area.
the illustration in Figure 1 indicates.
How obvious is it that each row of Figure 1 shows examples of different classes? Can we imagine
a human to predict correctly on the first attempt? Does it even make sense to penalize a learning
system for such “mistakes”? While the problem of class ambiguity is apparent in computer vision,
similar problems arise in other domains when the number of classes becomes large.
We propose top-k multiclass SVM as a generalization of the well-known multiclass SVM [5]. It
is based on a tight convex upper bound of the top-k zero-one loss which we call top-k hinge loss.
While it turns out to be similar to a top-k version of the ranking based loss proposed by [27], we
show that the top-k hinge loss is a lower bound on their version and is thus a tighter bound on the
top-k zero-one loss. We propose an efficient implementation based on stochastic dual coordinate
ascent (SDCA) [24]. A key ingredient in the optimization is the (biased) projection onto the top-k
simplex. This projection turns out to be a tricky generalization of the continuous quadratic knapsack
problem, respectively the projection onto the standard simplex. The proposed algorithm for solving
it has complexity O(m log m) for x ∈ Rm . Our implementation of the top-k multiclass SVM scales
to large datasets like Places 205 with about 2.5 million examples and 205 classes [30]. Finally,
extensive experiments on several challenging computer vision problems show that top-k multiclass
SVM consistently improves in top-k error over the multiclass SVM (equivalent to our top-1 multiclass SVM), one-vs-all SVM and other methods based on different ranking losses [11, 16].
1

