Adaptive Primal-Dual Splitting Methods for
Statistical Learning and Image Processing
Thomas Goldstein⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD

Min Li†
School of Economics and Management
Southeast University
Nanjing, China

Xiaoming Yuan‡
Department of Mathematics
Hong Kong Baptist University
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

Abstract
The alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) is an important tool for
solving complex optimization problems, but it involves minimization sub-steps
that are often difficult to solve efficiently. The Primal-Dual Hybrid Gradient
(PDHG) method is a powerful alternative that often has simpler sub-steps than
ADMM, thus producing lower complexity solvers. Despite the flexibility of this
method, PDHG is often impractical because it requires the careful choice of multiple stepsize parameters. There is often no intuitive way to choose these parameters
to maximize efficiency, or even achieve convergence. We propose self-adaptive
stepsize rules that automatically tune PDHG parameters for optimal convergence.
We rigorously analyze our methods, and identify convergence rates. Numerical
experiments show that adaptive PDHG has strong advantages over non-adaptive
methods in terms of both efficiency and simplicity for the user.

1

Introduction

Splitting methods such as ADMM [1, 2, 3] have recently become popular for solving problems
in distributed computing, statistical regression, and image processing. ADMM allows complex
problems to be broken down into sequences of simpler sub-steps, usually involving large-scale least
squares minimizations. However, in many cases these least squares minimizations are difficult to
directly compute. In such situations, the Primal-Dual Hybrid Gradient method (PDHG) [4, 5],
also called the linearized ADMM [4, 6], enables the solution of complex problems with a simpler
sequence of sub-steps that can often be computed in closed form. This flexibility comes at a cost
– the PDHG method requires the user to choose multiple stepsize parameters that jointly determine
the convergence of the method. Without having extensive analytical knowledge about the problem
being solved (such as eigenvalues of linear operators), there is no intuitive way to select stepsize
parameters to obtain fast convergence, or even guarantee convergence at all.
In this article we introduce and analyze self-adaptive variants of PDHG – variants that automatically
tune stepsize parameters to attain (and guarantee) fast convergence without user input. Applying
adaptivity to splitting methods is a difficult problem. It is known that naive adaptive variants of
⇤

tomg@cs.umd.edu
limin@seu.edu.cn
‡
xmyuan@hkbu.edu.hk
†

1

