High Dimensional EM Algorithm:
Statistical Optimization and Asymptotic Normality⇤
Zhaoran Wang
Princeton University

Quanquan Gu
University of Virginia

Yang Ning
Princeton University

Han Liu
Princeton University

Abstract
We provide a general theory of the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm for
inferring high dimensional latent variable models. In particular, we make two contributions: (i) For parameter estimation, we propose a novel high dimensional EM
algorithm which naturally incorporates sparsity structure into parameter estimation.
With an appropriate initialization, this algorithm converges at a geometric rate
and attains an estimator with the (near-)optimal statistical rate of convergence. (ii)
Based on the obtained estimator, we propose a new inferential procedure for testing
hypotheses for low dimensional components of high dimensional parameters. For
a broad family of statistical models, our framework establishes the first computationally feasible approach for optimal estimation and asymptotic inference in high
dimensions.

1

Introduction

The expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm [12] is the most popular approach for calculating the
maximum likelihood estimator of latent variable models. Nevertheless, due to the nonconcavity of
the likelihood function of latent variable models, the EM algorithm generally only converges to a
local maximum rather than the global one [30]. On the other hand, existing statistical guarantees
for latent variable models are only established for global optima [3]. Therefore, there exists a gap
between computation and statistics.
Significant progress has been made toward closing the gap between the local maximum attained
by the EM algorithm and the maximum likelihood estimator [2, 18, 25, 30]. In particular, [30] first
establish general sufficient conditions for the convergence of the EM algorithm. [25] further improve
this result by viewing the EM algorithm as a proximal point method applied to the Kullback-Leibler
divergence. See [18] for a detailed survey. More recently, [2] establish the first result that characterizes
explicit statistical and computational rates of convergence for the EM algorithm. They prove that,
given a suitable initialization, the EM algorithm converges at a geometric rate to a local maximum
close to the maximum likelihood estimator. All these results are established in the low dimensional
regime where the dimension d is much smaller than the sample size n.
In high dimensional regimes where the dimension d is much larger than the sample size n, there
exists no theoretical guarantee for the EM algorithm. In fact, when d
n, the maximum likelihood
estimator is in general not well defined, unless the models are carefully regularized by sparsity-type
assumptions. Furthermore, even if a regularized maximum likelihood estimator can be obtained in a
computationally tractable manner, establishing the corresponding statistical properties, especially
asymptotic normality, can still be challenging because of the existence of high dimensional nuisance
parameters. To address such a challenge, we develop a general inferential theory of the EM algorithm
for parameter estimation and uncertainty assessment of high dimensional latent variable models. In
particular, we make two contributions in this paper:
• For high dimensional parameter estimation, we propose a novel high dimensional EM algorithm by
attaching a truncation step to the expectation step (E-step) and maximization step (M-step). Such a
⇤
Research supported by NSF IIS1116730, NSF IIS1332109, NSF IIS1408910, NSF IIS1546482-BIGDATA,
NSF DMS1454377-CAREER, NIH R01GM083084, NIH R01HG06841, NIH R01MH102339, and FDA
HHSF223201000072C.

1

