Fast Convergence of Regularized Learning in Games
Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
New York, NY
vasy@microsoft.com

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research
New York, NY
alekha@microsoft.com

Haipeng Luo
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
haipengl@cs.princeton.edu

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research
New York, NY
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
We show that natural classes of regularized learning algorithms with a form of
recency bias achieve faster convergence rates to approximate efficiency and to
coarse correlated equilibria in multiplayer normal form games. When each player
in a game uses an algorithm from our class, their individual regret decays at
O(T 3/4 ), while the sum of utilities converges to an approximate optimum at
O(T 1 )–an improvement upon the worst case O(T 1/2 ) rates. We show a blackbox reduction for any algorithm in the class to achieve Õ(T 1/2 ) rates against an
adversary, while maintaining the faster rates against algorithms in the class. Our
results extend those of Rakhlin and Shridharan [17] and Daskalakis et al. [4], who
only analyzed two-player zero-sum games for specific algorithms.

1

Introduction

What happens when players in a game interact with one another, all of them acting independently
and selfishly to maximize their own utilities? If they are smart, we intuitively expect their utilities
— both individually and as a group — to grow, perhaps even to approach the best possible. We
also expect the dynamics of their behavior to eventually reach some kind of equilibrium. Understanding these dynamics is central to game theory as well as its various application areas, including
economics, network routing, auction design, and evolutionary biology.
It is natural in this setting for the players to each make use of a no-regret learning algorithm for making their decisions, an approach known as decentralized no-regret dynamics. No-regret algorithms
are a strong match for playing games because their regret bounds hold even in adversarial environments. As a benefit, these bounds ensure that each player’s utility approaches optimality. When
played against one another, it can also be shown that the sum of utilities approaches an approximate
optimum [2, 18], and the player strategies converge to an equilibrium under appropriate conditions [6, 1, 8], at rates governed by the regret bounds. Well-known families of no-regret algorithms
include multiplicative-weights [13, 7], Mirror Descent [14], and Follow the Regularized/Perturbed
Leader [12]. (See [3, 19] for
p excellent overviews.) For all of these, the average regret vanishes at
the worst-case rate of O(1/ T ), which is unimprovable in fully adversarial scenarios.
However, the players in our setting are facing other similar, predictable no-regret learning algorithms, a chink that hints at the possibility of improved convergence rates for such dynamics. This
was first observed and exploited by Daskalakis et al. [4]. For two-player zero-sum games, they developed a decentralized variant of Nesterov’s accelerated saddle point algorithm [15] and showed
that each player’s average regret converges at the remarkable rate of O(1/T ). Although the resulting
1

