Accelerated Proximal Gradient Methods for
Nonconvex Programming

Huan Li
Zhouchen Lin B
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, P. R. China
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University, P. R. China
lihuanss@pku.edu.cn
zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Nonconvex and nonsmooth problems have recently received considerable attention in signal/image processing, statistics and machine learning. However, solving the nonconvex and nonsmooth optimization problems remains a big challenge.
Accelerated proximal gradient (APG) is an excellent method for convex programming. However, it is still unknown whether the usual APG can ensure the convergence to a critical point in nonconvex programming. In this paper, we extend
APG for general nonconvex and nonsmooth programs by introducing a monitor
that satisfies the sufficient descent property. Accordingly, we propose a monotone
APG and a nonmonotone APG. The latter waives the requirement on monotonic
reduction of the objective function and needs less computation in each iteration.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide APG-type algorithms
for general nonconvex and nonsmooth problems ensuring that every
 accumulation
point is a critical point, and the convergence rates remain O k12 when the problems are convex, in which k is the number of iterations. Numerical results testify
to the advantage of our algorithms in speed.

1

Introduction

In recent years, sparse and low rank learning has been a hot research topic and leads to a wide
variety of applications in signal/image processing, statistics and machine learning. l1 -norm and
nuclear norm, as the continuous and convex surrogates of l0 -norm and rank, respectively, have been
used extensively in the literature. See e.g., the recent collections [1]. Although l1 -norm and nuclear
norm have achieved great success, in many cases they are suboptimal as they can promote sparsity
and low-rankness only under very limited conditions [2, 3]. To address this issue, many nonconvex
regularizers have been proposed, such as lp -norm [4], Capped-l1 penalty [3], Log-Sum Penalty [2],
Minimax Concave Penalty [5], Geman Penalty [6], Smoothly Clipped Absolute Deviation [7] and
Schatten-p norm [8]. This trend motivates a revived interest in the analysis and design of algorithms
for solving nonconvex and nonsmooth problems, which can be formulated as
min F (x) = f (x) + g(x),

x∈Rn

(1)

where f is differentiable (it can be nonconvex) and g can be both nonconvex and nonsmooth.
Accelerated gradient methods have been at the heart of convex optimization research. In a series of
celebrated works [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], several accelerated gradient methods are proposed for problem (1) with convex f and g. In these methods, k iterations are sufficient to find a solution within
O k12 error from the optimal objective value. Recently, Ghadimi and Lan [15] presented a unified
treatment of accelerated gradient method (UAG) for convex, nonconvex and stochastic optimiza1

