Associative Memory via a Sparse Recovery Model
Arya Mazumdar
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota Twin Cities
arya@umn.edu

Ankit Singh Rawat⇤
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
asrawat@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
An associative memory is a structure learned from a dataset M of vectors (signals)
in a way such that, given a noisy version of one of the vectors as input, the nearest
valid vector from M (nearest neighbor) is provided as output, preferably via a fast
iterative algorithm. Traditionally, binary (or q-ary) Hopfield neural networks are
used to model the above structure. In this paper, for the first time, we propose
a model of associative memory based on sparse recovery of signals. Our basic
premise is simple. For a dataset, we learn a set of linear constraints that every
vector in the dataset must satisfy. Provided these linear constraints possess some
special properties, it is possible to cast the task of finding nearest neighbor as
a sparse recovery problem. Assuming generic random models for the dataset,
we show that it is possible to store super-polynomial or exponential number of
n-length vectors in a neural network of size O(n). Furthermore, given a noisy
version of one of the stored vectors corrupted in near-linear number of coordinates,
the vector can be correctly recalled using a neurally feasible algorithm.

1

Introduction

Neural associative memories with exponential storage capacity and large (potentially linear) fraction
of error-correction guarantee have been the topic of extensive research for the past three decades.
A networked associative memory model must have the ability to learn and remember an arbitrary
but specific set of n-length messages. At the same time, when presented with a noisy query, i.e., an
n-length vector close to one of the messages, the system must be able to recall the correct message.
While the first task is called the learning phase, the second one is referred to as the recall phase.
Associative memories are traditionally modeled by what is called binary Hopfield networks [15],
where a weighted graph of size n is considered with each vertex representing a binary state neuron.
The edge-weights of the network are learned from the set of binary vectors to be stored by the
Hebbian learning rule [13]. It has been shown in [22] that, to recover the correct vector in the
presence of a linear (in n) number of errors, it is not possible to store more than O( logn n ) arbitrary
binary vectors in the above model of learning. In the pursuit of networks that can store exponential
(in n) number of messages, some works [26, 12, 21] do show the existence of Hopfield networks that
can store ⇠ 1.22n messages. However, for such Hopfield networks, only a small number of errors
in the query render the recall phase unsuccessful. The Hopfield networks that store non-binary
message vectors are studied in [17, 23], where the storage capacity of such networks against large
fraction of errors is again shown to be linear in n. There have been multiple efforts to increase the
storage capacity of the associative memories to exponential by moving away from the framework
of the Hopfield networks (in term of both the learning and the recall phases)[14, 11, 19, 25, 18].
These efforts also involve relaxing the requirement of storing the collections of arbitrary messages.
In [11], Gripon and Berrou stored O(n2 ) number of sparse message vectors in the form of neural
cliques. Another setting where neurons have been assumed to have a large (albeit constant) number
⇤

This work was done when the author was with the Dept. of ECE, University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA.

1

