Online Gradient Boosting

Alina Beygelzimer
Yahoo Labs
New York, NY 10036
beygel@yahoo-inc.com

Elad Hazan
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu

Satyen Kale
Yahoo Labs
New York, NY 10036
satyen@yahoo-inc.com

Haipeng Luo
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
haipengl@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We extend the theory of boosting for regression problems to the online
learning setting. Generalizing from the batch setting for boosting, the notion of a weak learning algorithm is modeled as an online learning algorithm
with linear loss functions that competes with a base class of regression functions, while a strong learning algorithm is an online learning algorithm with
smooth convex loss functions that competes with a larger class of regression functions. Our main result is an online gradient boosting algorithm
that converts a weak online learning algorithm into a strong one where the
larger class of functions is the linear span of the base class. We also give a
simpler boosting algorithm that converts a weak online learning algorithm
into a strong one where the larger class of functions is the convex hull of
the base class, and prove its optimality.

1

Introduction

Boosting algorithms [21] are ensemble methods that convert a learning algorithm for a base
class of models with weak predictive power, such as decision trees, into a learning algorithm
for a class of models with stronger predictive power, such as a weighted majority vote over
base models in the case of classification, or a linear combination of base models in the case
of regression.
Boosting methods such as AdaBoost [9] and Gradient Boosting [10] have found tremendous
practical application, especially using decision trees as the base class of models. These
algorithms were developed in the batch setting, where training is done over a fixed batch of
sample data. However, with the recent explosion of huge data sets which do not fit in main
memory, training in the batch setting is infeasible, and online learning techniques which
train a model in one pass over the data have proven extremely useful.
A natural goal therefore is to extend boosting algorithms to the online learning setting.
Indeed, there has already been some work on online boosting for classification problems [20,
11, 17, 12, 4, 5, 2]. Of these, the work by Chen et al. [4] provided the first theoretical study
of online boosting for classification, which was later generalized by Beygelzimer et al. [2] to
obtain optimal and adaptive online boosting algorithms.
However, extending boosting algorithms for regression to the online setting has been elusive
and escaped theoretical guarantees thus far. In this paper, we rigorously formalize the
setting of online boosting for regression and then extend the very commonly used gradient
1

