Bayesian Manifold Learning:
The Locally Linear Latent Variable Model

Mijung Park, Wittawat Jitkrittum, Ahmad Qamar∗,
Zoltán Szabó, Lars Buesing†, Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
{mijung, wittawat, zoltan.szabo}@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk
atqamar@gmail.com, lbuesing@google.com, maneesh@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce the Locally Linear Latent Variable Model (LL-LVM), a probabilistic
model for non-linear manifold discovery that describes a joint distribution over observations, their manifold coordinates and locally linear maps conditioned on a set
of neighbourhood relationships. The model allows straightforward variational optimisation of the posterior distribution on coordinates and locally linear maps from
the latent space to the observation space given the data. Thus, the LL-LVM encapsulates the local-geometry preserving intuitions that underlie non-probabilistic
methods such as locally linear embedding (LLE). Its probabilistic semantics make
it easy to evaluate the quality of hypothesised neighbourhood relationships, select
the intrinsic dimensionality of the manifold, construct out-of-sample extensions
and to combine the manifold model with additional probabilistic models that capture the structure of coordinates within the manifold.

1

Introduction

Many high-dimensional datasets comprise points derived from a smooth, lower-dimensional manifold embedded within the high-dimensional space of measurements and possibly corrupted by noise.
For instance, biological or medical imaging data might reflect the interplay of a small number of latent processes that all affect measurements non-linearly. Linear multivariate analyses such as principal component analysis (PCA) or multidimensional scaling (MDS) have long been used to estimate
such underlying processes, but cannot always reveal low-dimensional structure when the mapping is
non-linear (or, equivalently, the manifold is curved). Thus, there has been substantial recent interest
in algorithms to identify non-linear manifolds in data.
Many more-or-less heuristic methods for non-linear manifold discovery are based on the idea of
preserving the geometric properties of local neighbourhoods within the data, while embedding, unfolding or otherwise transforming the data to occupy fewer dimensions. Thus, algorithms such as
locally-linear embedding (LLE) and Laplacian eigenmap attempt to preserve local linear relationships or to minimise the distortion of local derivatives [1, 2]. Others, like Isometric feature mapping
(Isomap) or maximum variance unfolding (MVU) preserve local distances, estimating global manifold properties by continuation across neighbourhoods before embedding to lower dimensions by
classical methods such as PCA or MDS [3]. While generally hewing to this same intuitive path, the
range of available algorithms has grown very substantially in recent years [4, 5].
∗
†

Current affiliation: Thread Genius
Current affiliation: Google DeepMind

1

