Fast and Guaranteed Tensor Decomposition via
Sketching
Yining Wang, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Alex Smola
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{yiningwa,htung}@cs.cmu.edu
alex@smola.org

Anima Anandkumar
Department of EECS
University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
a.anandkumar@uci.edu

Abstract
Tensor CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition has wide applications in
statistical learning of latent variable models and in data mining. In this paper,
we propose fast and randomized tensor CP decomposition algorithms based on
sketching. We build on the idea of count sketches, but introduce many novel ideas
which are unique to tensors. We develop novel methods for randomized computation of tensor contractions via FFTs, without explicitly forming the tensors.
Such tensor contractions are encountered in decomposition methods such as tensor power iterations and alternating least squares. We also design novel colliding
hashes for symmetric tensors to further save time in computing the sketches. We
then combine these sketching ideas with existing whitening and tensor power iterative techniques to obtain the fastest algorithm on both sparse and dense tensors.
The quality of approximation under our method does not depend on properties
such as sparsity, uniformity of elements, etc. We apply the method for topic modeling and obtain competitive results.
Keywords: Tensor CP decomposition, count sketch, randomized methods, spectral methods, topic modeling

1

Introduction

In many data-rich domains such as computer vision, neuroscience and social networks consisting
of multi-modal and multi-relational data, tensors have emerged as a powerful paradigm for handling the data deluge. An important operation with tensor data is its decomposition, where the
input tensor is decomposed into a succinct form. One of the popular decomposition methods is the
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition, also known as canonical polyadic decomposition
[12, 5], where the input tensor is decomposed into a succinct sum of rank-1 components. The CP
decomposition has found numerous applications in data mining [4, 18, 20], computational neuroscience [10, 21], and recently, in statistical learning for latent variable models [1, 30, 28, 6]. For
latent variable modeling, these methods yield consistent estimates under mild conditions such as
non-degeneracy and require only polynomial sample and computational complexity [1, 30, 28, 6].
Given the importance of tensor methods for large-scale machine learning, there has been an increasing interest in scaling up tensor decomposition algorithms to handle gigantic real-world data
tensors [27, 24, 8, 16, 14, 2, 29]. However, the previous works fall short in many ways, as described
subsequently. In this paper, we design and analyze efficient randomized tensor methods using ideas
from sketching [23]. The idea is to maintain a low-dimensional sketch of an input tensor and then
perform implicit tensor decomposition using existing methods such as tensor power updates, alternating least squares or online tensor updates. We obtain the fastest decomposition methods for both
sparse and dense tensors. Our framework can easily handle modern machine learning applications
with billions of training instances, and at the same time, comes with attractive theoretical guarantees.
1

