Predtron: A Family of Online Algorithms for General
Prediction Problems
Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, INDIA
prajain@microsoft.com

Nagarajan Natarajan
University of Texas at Austin, USA
naga86@cs.utexas.edu

Ambuj Tewari
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
Modern prediction problems arising in multilabel learning and learning to rank
pose unique challenges to the classical theory of supervised learning. These problems have large prediction and label spaces of a combinatorial nature and involve
sophisticated loss functions. We offer a general framework to derive mistake
driven online algorithms and associated loss bounds. The key ingredients in our
framework are a general loss function, a general vector space representation of
predictions, and a notion of margin with respect to a general norm. Our general
algorithm, Predtron, yields the perceptron algorithm and its variants when instantiated on classic problems such as binary classification, multiclass classification,
ordinal regression, and multilabel classification. For multilabel ranking and subset ranking, we derive novel algorithms, notions of margins, and loss bounds. A
simulation study confirms the behavior predicted by our bounds and demonstrates
the flexibility of the design choices in our framework.

1

Introduction

Classical supervised learning problems, such as binary and multiclass classification, share a number
of characteristics. The prediction space (the space in which the learner makes predictions) is often
the same as the label space (the space from which the learner receives supervision). Because directly learning discrete valued prediction functions is hard, one learns real-valued or vector-valued
functions. These functions generate continuous predictions that are converted into discrete ones
via simple mappings, e.g., via the ‘sign’ function (binary classification) or the ‘argmax’ function
(multiclass classification). Also, the most commonly used loss function is simple, viz. the 0-1 loss.
In contrast, modern prediction problems, such as multilabel learning, multilabel ranking, and subset
ranking do not share these characteristics. In order to handle these problems, we need a more general
framework that offers more flexibility. First, it should allow for the possibility of having different
label space and prediction space. Second, it should allow practitioners to use creative, new ways
to map continuous, vector-valued predictions to discrete ones. Third, it should permit the use of
general loss functions.
Extensions of the theory of classical supervised learning to modern predictions problems have begun. For example, the work on calibration dimension [1] can be viewed as extending one aspect of
the theory, viz. that of calibrated surrogates and consistent algorithms based on convex optimization. This paper deals with the extension of another interesting part of classical supervised learning:
mistake driven algorithms such as perceptron (resp. winnow) and their analyses in terms of `2 (resp.
`1 ) margins [2, Section 7.3].
1

