Distributed Submodular Cover:
Succinctly Summarizing Massive Data

Baharan Mirzasoleiman
ETH Zurich

Amin Karbasi
Yale University

Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru
Google

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich

Abstract
How can one find a subset, ideally as small as possible, that well represents a
massive dataset? I.e., its corresponding utility, measured according to a suitable
utility function, should be comparable to that of the whole dataset. In this paper,
we formalize this challenge as a submodular cover problem. Here, the utility is
assumed to exhibit submodularity, a natural diminishing returns condition prevalent in many data summarization applications. The classical greedy algorithm is
known to provide solutions with logarithmic approximation guarantees compared
to the optimum solution. However, this sequential, centralized approach is impractical for truly large-scale problems. In this work, we develop the first distributed
algorithm – D IS C OVER – for submodular set cover that is easily implementable
using MapReduce-style computations. We theoretically analyze our approach,
and present approximation guarantees for the solutions returned by D IS C OVER.
We also study a natural trade-off between the communication cost and the number of rounds required to obtain such a solution. In our extensive experiments,
we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on several applications, including active set selection, exemplar based clustering, and vertex cover on tens of
millions of data points using Spark.

1

Introduction

A central challenge in machine learning is to extract useful information from massive data. Concretely, we are often interested in selecting a small subset of data points such that they maximize a
particular quality criterion. For example, in nonparametric learning, we often seek to select a small
subset of points along with associated basis functions that well approximate the hypothesis space
[1]. More abstractly, in data summarization problems, we often seek a small subset of images [2],
news articles [3], scientific papers [4], etc., that are representative w.r.t. an entire corpus. In many
such applications, the utility function that measures the quality of the selected data points satisfies
submodularity, i.e., adding an element from the dataset helps more in the context of few selected
elements than if we have already selected many elements (c.f., [5]).
Our focus in this paper is to find a succinct summary of the data, i.e., a subset, ideally as small as
possible, which achieves a desired (large) fraction of the utility provided by the full dataset. Hereby,
utility is measured according to an appropriate submodular function. We formalize this problem as a
submodular cover problem, and seek efficient algorithms for solving it in face of massive data. The
celebrated result of Wolsey [6] shows that a greedy approach that selects elements sequentially in
order to maximize the gain over the items selected so far, yields a logarithmic factor approximation.
It is also known that improving upon this approximation ratio is hard under natural complexity
theoretic assumptions [7]. Even though such a greedy algorithm produces near-optimal solutions,
1

