A Convergent Gradient Descent Algorithm for
Rank Minimization and Semidefinite Programming
from Random Linear Measurements
John Lafferty
University of Chicago
lafferty@galton.uchicago.edu

Qinqing Zheng
University of Chicago
qinqing@cs.uchicago.edu

Abstract
We propose a simple, scalable, and fast gradient descent algorithm to optimize
a nonconvex objective for the rank minimization problem and a closely related
family of semidefinite programs. With O(r3 κ2 n log n) random measurements of
a positive semidefinite n×n matrix of rank r and condition number κ, our method
is guaranteed to converge linearly to the global optimum.

1

Introduction

Semidefinite programming has become a key optimization tool in many areas of applied mathematics, signal processing and machine learning. SDPs often arise naturally from the problem structure,
or are derived as surrogate optimizations that are relaxations of difficult combinatorial problems
[7, 1, 8]. In spite of the importance of SDPs in principle—promising efficient algorithms with polynomial runtime guarantees—it is widely recognized that current optimization algorithms based on
interior point methods can handle only relatively small problems. Thus, a considerable gap exists
between the theory and applicability of SDP formulations. Scalable algorithms for semidefinite programming, and closely related families of nonconvex programs more generally, are greatly needed.
A parallel development is the surprising effectiveness of simple classical procedures such as gradient
descent for large scale problems, as explored in the recent machine learning literature. In many areas
of machine learning and signal processing such as classification, deep learning, and phase retrieval,
gradient descent methods, in particular first order stochastic optimization, have led to remarkably
efficient algorithms that can attack very large scale problems [3, 2, 10, 6]. In this paper we build on
this work to develop first-order algorithms for solving the rank minimization problem under random
measurements and a closely related family of semidefinite programs. Our algorithms are efficient
and scalable, and we prove that they attain linear convergence to the global optimum under natural
assumptions.
The affine rank minimization problem is to find a matrix X ? ∈ Rn×p of minimum rank satisfying
constraints A(X ? ) = b, where A : Rn×p −→ Rm is an affine transformation. The underdetermined
case where m  np is of particular interest, and can be formulated as the optimization
min

rank(X)

X∈Rn×p

(1)

subject to A(X) = b.
This problem is a direct generalization of compressed sensing, and subsumes many machine learning problems such as image compression, low rank matrix completion and low-dimensional metric
embedding [18, 12]. While the problem is natural and has many applications, the optimization is
nonconvex and challenging to solve. Without conditions on the transformation A or the minimum
rank solution X ? , it is generally NP hard [15].
1

