Variance Reduced Stochastic Gradient Descent
with Neighbors

Aurelien Lucchi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Thomas Hofmann
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Simon Lacoste-Julien
INRIA - Sierra Project-Team
École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France

Brian McWilliams
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a workhorse in machine learning, yet its
slow convergence can be a computational bottleneck. Variance reduction techniques such as SAG, SVRG and SAGA have been proposed to overcome this
weakness, achieving linear convergence. However, these methods are either based
on computations of full gradients at pivot points, or on keeping per data point corrections in memory. Therefore speed-ups relative to SGD may need a minimal
number of epochs in order to materialize. This paper investigates algorithms that
can exploit neighborhood structure in the training data to share and re-use information about past stochastic gradients across data points, which offers advantages
in the transient optimization phase. As a side-product we provide a unified convergence analysis for a family of variance reduction algorithms, which we call
memorization algorithms. We provide experimental results supporting our theory.

1

Introduction

We consider a general problem that is pervasive in machine learning, namely optimization of an empirical or regularized convex risk function. Given a convex loss l and a µ-strongly convex regularizer
Ω, one aims at finding a parameter vector w which minimizes the (empirical) expectation:
n

∗

w = argmin f (w),
w

1X
f (w) =
fi (w),
n i=1

fi (w) := l(w, (xi , yi )) + Ω(w) .

(1)

We assume throughout that each fi has L-Lipschitz-continuous gradients. Steepest descent can
find the minimizer w∗ , but requires repeated computations of full gradients f 0 (w), which becomes
prohibitive for massive data sets. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a popular alternative, in
particular in the context of large-scale learning [2, 10]. SGD updates only involve fi0 (w) for an index
i chosen uniformly at random, providing an unbiased gradient estimate, since Efi0 (w) = f 0 (w).
It is a surprising recent finding [11, 5, 9, 6] that the finite sum structure of f allows for significantly
faster convergence in expectation. Instead of the standard O(1/t) rate of SGD for strongly-convex
functions, it is possible to obtain linear convergence with geometric rates. While SGD requires
asymptotically vanishing learning rates, often chosen to be O(1/t) [7], these more recent methods
introduce corrections that ensure convergence for constant learning rates.
Based on the work mentioned above, the contributions of our paper are as follows: First, we define a family of variance reducing SGD algorithms, called memorization algorithms, which includes
SAGA and SVRG as special cases, and develop a unifying analysis technique for it. Second, we
1

