Spectral Representations for
Convolutional Neural Networks
Oren Rippel
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Jasper Snoek
Twitter and Harvard SEAS
jsnoek@seas.harvard.edu

rippel@math.mit.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Twitter and Harvard SEAS
rpa@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Discrete Fourier transforms provide a significant speedup in the computation of
convolutions in deep learning. In this work, we demonstrate that, beyond its advantages for efficient computation, the spectral domain also provides a powerful
representation in which to model and train convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
We employ spectral representations to introduce a number of innovations to CNN
design. First, we propose spectral pooling, which performs dimensionality reduction by truncating the representation in the frequency domain. This approach
preserves considerably more information per parameter than other pooling strategies and enables flexibility in the choice of pooling output dimensionality. This
representation also enables a new form of stochastic regularization by randomized modification of resolution. We show that these methods achieve competitive
results on classification and approximation tasks, without using any dropout or
max-pooling.
Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of complex-coefficient spectral parameterization of convolutional filters. While this leaves the underlying model unchanged, it results in a representation that greatly facilitates optimization. We
observe on a variety of popular CNN configurations that this leads to significantly
faster convergence during training.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1989) have been used to achieve unparalleled results across a variety of benchmark machine learning problems, and have been applied
successfully throughout science and industry for tasks such as large scale image and video classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Karpathy et al., 2014). One of the primary challenges of CNNs,
however, is the computational expense necessary to train them. In particular, the efficient implementation of convolutional kernels has been a key ingredient of any successful use of CNNs at scale.
Due to its efficiency and the potential for amortization of cost, the discrete Fourier transform has long
been considered by the deep learning community to be a natural approach to fast convolution (Bengio & LeCun, 2007). More recently, Mathieu et al. (2013); Vasilache et al. (2014) have demonstrated
that convolution can be computed significantly faster using discrete Fourier transforms than directly
in the spatial domain, even for tiny filters. This computational gain arises from the convenient property of operator duality between convolution in the spatial domain and element-wise multiplication
in the frequency domain.
In this work, we argue that the frequency domain offers more than a computational trick for convolution: it also provides a powerful representation for modeling and training CNNs. Frequency
decomposition allows studying an input across its various length-scales of variation, and as such
provides a natural framework for the analysis of data with spatial coherence. We introduce two
1

