Are You Talking to a Machine?
Dataset and Methods for Multilingual Image Question Answering

Haoyuan Gao1
1

Junhua Mao2
Baidu Research

Jie Zhou1 Zhiheng Huang1 Lei Wang1
2
University of California, Los Angeles

Wei Xu1

gaohaoyuan@baidu.com, mjhustc@ucla.edu, {zhoujie01,huangzhiheng,wanglei22,wei.xu}@baidu.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present the mQA model, which is able to answer questions about
the content of an image. The answer can be a sentence, a phrase or a single word.
Our model contains four components: a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to
extract the question representation, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to
extract the visual representation, an LSTM for storing the linguistic context in an
answer, and a fusing component to combine the information from the first three
components and generate the answer. We construct a Freestyle Multilingual Image Question Answering (FM-IQA) dataset to train and evaluate our mQA model.
It contains over 150,000 images and 310,000 freestyle Chinese question-answer
pairs and their English translations. The quality of the generated answers of our
mQA model on this dataset is evaluated by human judges through a Turing Test.
Specifically, we mix the answers provided by humans and our model. The human
judges need to distinguish our model from the human. They will also provide
a score (i.e. 0, 1, 2, the larger the better) indicating the quality of the answer.
We propose strategies to monitor the quality of this evaluation process. The experiments show that in 64.7% of cases, the human judges cannot distinguish our
model from humans. The average score is 1.454 (1.918 for human). The details
of this work, including the FM-IQA dataset, can be found on the project page:
http://idl.baidu.com/FM-IQA.html.

1

Introduction

Recently, there is increasing interest in the field of multimodal learning for both natural language
and vision. In particular, many studies have made rapid progress on the task of image captioning
[26, 15, 14, 40, 6, 8, 4, 19, 16, 42]. Most of them are built based on deep neural networks (e.g.
deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN [17]), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN [7]) or Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM [12])). The large-scale image datasets with sentence annotations (e.g.,
[21, 43, 11]) play a crucial role in this progress. Despite the success of these methods, there are still
many issues to be discussed and explored. In particular, the task of image captioning only requires
generic sentence descriptions of an image. But in many cases, we only care about a particular part
or object of an image. The image captioning task lacks the interaction between the computer and
the user (as we cannot input our preference and interest).
In this paper, we focus on the task of visual question answering. In this task, the method needs
to provide an answer to a freestyle question about the content of an image. We propose the mQA
model to address this task. The inputs of the model are an image and a question. This model has four
components (see Figure 2). The first component is an LSTM network that encodes a natural language
sentence into a dense vector representation. The second component is a deep Convolutional Neural
Network [36] that extracted the image representation. This component was pre-trained on ImageNet
Classification Task [33] and is fixed during the training. The third component is another LSTM
network that encodes the information of the current word and previous words in the answer into
dense representations. The fourth component fuses the information from the first three components
to predict the next word in the answer. We jointly train the first, third and fourth components by
maximizing the probability of the groundtruth answers in the training set using a log-likelihood loss
1

