Communication Complexity of Distributed
Convex Learning and Optimization

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 7610001, Israel
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Yossi Arjevani
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 7610001, Israel
yossi.arjevani@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We study the fundamental limits to communication-efficient distributed methods
for convex learning and optimization, under different assumptions on the information available to individual machines, and the types of functions considered. We
identify cases where existing algorithms are already worst-case optimal, as well as
cases where room for further improvement is still possible. Among other things,
our results indicate that without similarity between the local objective functions
(due to statistical data similarity or otherwise) many communication rounds may
be required, even if the machines have unbounded computational power.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of distributed convex learning and optimization, where a set of m machines, each with access to a different local convex function Fi : Rd 7→ R and a convex domain
W ⊆ Rd , attempt to solve the optimization problem
m

min F (w) where F (w) =

w∈W

1 X
Fi (w).
m i=1

(1)

A prominent application is empirical risk minimization, where the goal is to minimize the average
loss over some dataset, where each machine has access to a different subset of the data. Letting
{z1 , . . . , zN } be the dataset composed of N examples, and assuming the loss function `(w, z)
PN
is convex in w, then the empirical risk minimization problem minw∈W N1 i=1 `(w, zi ) can be
written as in Eq. (1), where Fi (w) is the average loss over machine i’s examples.
The main challenge in solving such problems is that communication between the different machines
is usually slow and constrained, at least compared to the speed of local processing. On the other
hand, the datasets involved in distributed learning are usually large and high-dimensional. Therefore,
machines cannot simply communicate their entire data to each other, and the question is how well
can we solve problems such as Eq. (1) using as little communication as possible.
As datasets continue to increase in size, and parallel computing platforms becoming more and more
common (from multiple cores on a single CPU to large-scale and geographically distributed computing grids), distributed learning and optimization methods have been the focus of much research
in recent years, with just a few examples including [25, 4, 2, 27, 1, 5, 13, 23, 16, 17, 8, 7, 9, 11, 20,
19, 3, 26]. Most of this work studied algorithms for this problem, which provide upper bounds on
the required time and communication complexity.
In this paper, we take the opposite direction, and study what are the fundamental performance limitations in solving Eq. (1), under several different sets of assumptions. We identify cases where
existing algorithms are already optimal (at least in the worst-case), as well as cases where room for
further improvement is still possible.
1

