Fast Distributed k-Center Clustering with Outliers on
Massive Data
Gustavo Malkomes, Matt J. Kusner, Wenlin Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
{luizgustavo,mkusner,wenlinchen}@wustl.edu
Kilian Q. Weinberger
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
kqw4@cornell.edu

Benjamin Moseley
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
bmoseley@wustl.edu

Abstract
Clustering large data is a fundamental problem with a vast number of applications.
Due to the increasing size of data, practitioners interested in clustering have turned
to distributed computation methods. In this work, we consider the widely used kcenter clustering problem and its variant used to handle noisy data, k-center with
outliers. In the noise-free setting we demonstrate how a previously-proposed distributed method is actually an O(1)-approximation algorithm, which accurately
explains its strong empirical performance. Additionally, in the noisy setting, we
develop a novel distributed algorithm that is also an O(1)-approximation. These
algorithms are highly parallel and lend themselves to virtually any distributed
computing framework. We compare each empirically against the best known sequential clustering methods and show that both distributed algorithms are consistently close to their sequential versions. The algorithms are all one can hope
for in distributed settings: they are fast, memory efficient and they match their
sequential counterparts.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental machine learning problem with widespread applications. Example applications include grouping documents or webpages by their similarity for search engines [30] or
grouping web users by their demographics for targeted advertising [2]. In a clustering problem one
is given as input a set U of n data points, characterized by a set of features, and is asked to cluster
(partition) points so that points in a cluster are similar by some measure. Clustering is a well understood task on modestly sized data sets; however, today practitioners seek to cluster datasets of
massive size. Once data becomes too voluminous, sequential algorithms become ineffective due to
their running time and insufficient memory to store the data. Practitioners have turned to distributed
methods, in particular MapReduce [13], to efficiently process massive data sets.
One of the most fundamental clustering problems is the k-center problem. Here, it is assumed
that for any two input points a pair-wise distance can be computed that reflects their dissimilarity
(typically these arise from a metric space). The objective is to choose a subset of k points (called
centers) that give rise to a clustering of the input set into k clusters. Each input point is assigned to
the cluster defined by its closest center (out of the k center points). The k-center objective selects
these centers to minimize the farthest distance of any point to its cluster center.
1

