Convergence Rates of Active Learning
for Maximum Likelihood Estimation
Kamalika Chaudhuri ⇤

Sham M. Kakade †

Praneeth Netrapalli ‡

Sujay Sanghavi §

Abstract
An active learner is given a class of models, a large set of unlabeled examples, and
the ability to interactively query labels of a subset of these examples; the goal of
the learner is to learn a model in the class that fits the data well.
Previous theoretical work has rigorously characterized label complexity of active
learning, but most of this work has focused on the PAC or the agnostic PAC model.
In this paper, we shift our attention to a more general setting – maximum likelihood estimation. Provided certain conditions hold on the model class, we provide
a two-stage active learning algorithm for this problem. The conditions we require are fairly general, and cover the widely popular class of Generalized Linear
Models, which in turn, include models for binary and multi-class classification,
regression, and conditional random fields.
We provide an upper bound on the label requirement of our algorithm, and a lower
bound that matches it up to lower order terms. Our analysis shows that unlike
binary classification in the realizable case, just a single extra round of interaction is
sufficient to achieve near-optimal performance in maximum likelihood estimation.
On the empirical side, the recent work in [12] and [13] (on active linear and
logistic regression) shows the promise of this approach.

1

Introduction

In active learning, we are given a sample space X , a label space Y, a class of models that map X to
Y, and a large set U of unlabelled samples. The goal of the learner is to learn a model in the class
with small target error while interactively querying the labels of as few of the unlabelled samples as
possible.
Most theoretical work on active learning has focussed on the PAC or the agnostic PAC model, where
the goal is to learn binary classifiers that belong to a particular hypothesis class [2, 14, 10, 7, 3, 4, 22],
and there has been only a handful of exceptions [19, 9, 20]. In this paper, we shift our attention to
a more general setting – maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), where Pr(Y |X) is described by a
model ✓ belonging to a model class ⇥. We show that when data is generated by a model in this class,
we can do active learning provided the model class ⇥ has the following simple property: the Fisher
information matrix for any model ✓ 2 ⇥ at any (x, y) depends only on x and ✓. This condition is
satisfied in a number of widely applicable model classes, such as Linear Regression and Generalized
Linear Models (GLMs), which in turn includes models for Multiclass Classification and Conditional
Random Fields. Consequently, we can provide active learning algorithms for maximum likelihood
estimation in all these model classes.
The standard solution to active MLE estimation in the statistics literature is to select samples for
label query by optimizing a class of summary statistics of the asymptotic covariance matrix of the
⇤

Dept. of CS, University of California at San Diego. Email: kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu
Dept. of CS and of Statistics, University of Washington. Email: sham@cs.washington.edu
‡
Microsoft Research New England. Email:praneeth@microsoft.com
§
Dept. of ECE, The University of Texas at Austin. Email:sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu
†

1

