Recognizing retinal ganglion cells in the dark

Emile Richard
Stanford University
emileric@stanford.edu

Georges Goetz
Stanford University
ggoetz@stanford.edu

E.J. Chichilnisky
Stanford University
ej@stanford.edu

Abstract
Many neural circuits are composed of numerous distinct cell types that perform
different operations on their inputs, and send their outputs to distinct targets.
Therefore, a key step in understanding neural systems is to reliably distinguish
cell types. An important example is the retina, for which present-day techniques
for identifying cell types are accurate, but very labor-intensive. Here, we develop
automated classifiers for functional identification of retinal ganglion cells, the output neurons of the retina, based solely on recorded voltage patterns on a large
scale array. We use per-cell classifiers based on features extracted from electrophysiological images (spatiotemporal voltage waveforms) and interspike intervals
(autocorrelations). These classifiers achieve high performance in distinguishing
between the major ganglion cell classes of the primate retina, but fail in achieving the same accuracy in predicting cell polarities (ON vs. OFF). We then show
how to use indicators of functional coupling within populations of ganglion cells
(cross-correlation) to infer cell polarities with a matrix completion algorithm. This
can result in accurate, fully automated methods for cell type classification.

1

Introduction

In the primate and human retina, roughly 20 distinct classes of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) send
distinct visual information to diverse targets in the brain [18, 7, 6]. Two complementary methods for identification of these RGC types have been pursued extensively. Anatomical studies have
relied on indicators such as dendritic field size and shape, and stratification patterns in synaptic connections [8] to distinguish between cell classes. Functional studies have leveraged differences in
responses to stimulation with a variety of visual stimuli [9, 3] for the same purpose. Although successful, these methods are difficult, time-consuming and require significant expertise. Thus, they are
not suitable for large-scale, automated analysis of existing large-scale physiological recording data.
Furthermore, in some clinical settings, they are entirely inapplicable. At least two specific scientific
and engineering goals demand the development of efficient methods for cell type identification:
• Discovery of new cell types. While ∼20 morphologically distinct RGC types exist, only 7
have been characterized functionally. Automated means of detecting unknown cell types
in electrophysiological recordings would make it possible to process massive amounts of
existing large-scale physiological data that would take too long to analyze manually, in
order to search for the poorly understood RGC types.
• Developing brain-machine interfaces of the future. In blind patients suffering from retinal
degeneration, RGCs no longer respond to light. Advanced retinal prostheses previously
demonstrated ex-vivo aim at electrically restoring the correct neural code in each RGC type
in a diseased retina [11], which requires cell type identification without information about
the light response properties of RGCs.
In the present paper, we introduce two novel and efficient computational methods for cell type
identification in a neural circuit, using spatiotemporal voltage signals produced by spiking cells
1

