CoastalBench: A Decade-Long High-Resolution Dataset to Emulate Complex
Coastal Processes
Zelin Xu 1 Yupu Zhang 1 Tingsong Xiao 1 Maitane Olabarrieta 2 Jose M. Gonzalez-Ondina 2 Zibo Liu 1
Shigang Chen 1 Zhe Jiang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Over 40% of the global population lives within
100 kilometers of the coast, which contributes
more than $8 trillion annually to the global
economy. Unfortunately, coastal ecosystems are
increasingly vulnerable to more frequent and
intense extreme weather events and rising sea
levels. Coastal scientists use numerical models to
simulate complex physical processes, but these
models are often slow and expensive. In recent
years, deep learning has become a promising
alternative to reduce the cost of numerical models.
However, progress has been hindered by the
lack of a large-scale, high-resolution coastal
simulation dataset to train and validate deep
learning models. Existing studies often focus on
relatively small datasets and simple processes. To
fill this gap, we introduce a decade-long, highresolution (<100m) coastal circulation modeling
dataset on a real-world 3D mesh in southwest
Florida with around 6 million cells. The dataset
contains key oceanography variables (e.g.,
current velocities, free surface level, temperature,
salinity) alongside external atmospheric and river
forcings. We evaluated a customized Vision
Transformer model that takes initial and boundary
conditions and external forcings and predicts
ocean variables at varying lead times. The dataset
provides an opportunity to benchmark novel
deep learning models for high-resolution coastal
simulations (e.g., physics-informed machine
learning, neural operator learning). The code and
dataset can be accessed at https://github.
com/spatialdatasciencegroup/
CoastalBench.

Over 40% of the global population lives within 100 kilometers of the coast, with these coastal regions contributing more than $8 trillion annually to the global economy (Martı́nez et al., 2007; Nicholls, 2004). Coastal ecosystems provide a multitude of services that support human populations and natural habitats, such as regulating the global
climate, protecting against natural disasters, and sustaining food security through fisheries (Barbier et al., 2011).
Unfortunately, these ecosystems are increasingly vulnerable to more frequent and intense extreme weather events,
rising sea levels, and additional stressors such as habitat
degradation, invasive species, and pollution (He & Silliman, 2019). Coastal scientists develop numeric models to
simulate complex coastal processes such as wave propagation, tidal dynamics, wind-driven circulation, temperature
dynamics, and salinity dynamics in estuaries (Neumann
et al., 2017). Unfortunately, such numerical models are
computationally expensive. Recently, deep learning has provided a promising alternative to emulate complex coastal
processes with neural networks, significantly reducing the
computational costs (James et al., 2018; Wei & Davison,
2022).
However, progress has been hindered by the lack of a largescale, high-resolution coastal dataset to train and validate
deep learning models. Effectively modeling coastal processes requires a high spatial (e.g., 100m) and temporal
(e.g., 30 minutes) resolution. The spatial resolution often
needs to reach even a few meters near inlets in estuaries to
capture complex land-water interactions.
As summarized in Table 1, existing studies on deep learning
for coastal processes primarily focus on relatively small
datasets for specific coastal processes, such as wave propagation (James et al., 2018; Wei & Davison, 2022; Xu et al.,
2025), sea level rise (Nieves et al., 2021; Ishida et al., 2020),
and sea surface temperature (Chen et al., 2024; Song et al.,
2024; Nieves et al., 2021). There are also works on training
physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al.,
2019) for coastal flood and storm surge modeling (Feng
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022). However, training a PINN
in real-world complex topography is very challenging, if

1
Department of Computer & Information Science & Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA 2 Department of
Civil & Coastal Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA. Correspondence to: Zhe Jiang <zhe.jiang@ufl.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

