TLLC: Transfer Learning-based Label Completion for Crowdsourcing

Wenjun Zhang 1 Liangxiao Jiang 1 Chaoqun Li 2

Abstract

domain experts is often expensive and time-consuming (Lu
et al., 2023). Fortunately, crowdsourcing offers a faster and
more cost-effective alternative by employing crowd workers
for annotation (Li et al., 2021). Due to varying expertise
among workers, the labels collected from crowd workers
contain a lot of noise (Xia et al., 2024). To address this,
repeated annotation has been widely adopted, where each
instance is annotated by multiple workers to obtain a multiple noisy label set (Sheng et al., 2008). Thus, simultaneously
for multiple instances, a label matrix will be obtained. Subsequently, label aggregation is applied to infer the unknown
true label of each instance based on this matrix.

Label completion serves as a preprocessing approach to handling the sparse crowdsourced label matrix problem, significantly boosting the
effectiveness of the downstream label aggregation. In recent advances, worker modeling has
been proved to be a powerful strategy to further improve the performance of label completion. However, in real-world scenarios, workers
typically annotate only a few instances, leading
to insufficient worker modeling and thus limiting the improvement of label completion. To
address this issue, we propose a novel transfer
learning-based label completion (TLLC) method.
Specifically, we first identify all high-confidence
instances from the whole crowdsourced data as
a source domain and use it to pretrain a Siamese
network. The abundant annotated instances in the
source domain provide essential knowledge for
worker modeling. Then, we transfer the pretrained
network to the target domain with the instances
annotated by each worker separately, ensuring
worker modeling captures unique characteristics
of each worker. Finally, we leverage the new
embeddings learned by the transferred network
to complete each worker’s missing labels. Extensive experiments on several widely used realworld datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
TLLC. Our codes and datasets are available at
https://github.com/jiangliangxiao/TLLC.

To improve the performance of label aggregation, numerous
methods have been proposed over the past decades (Dawid
& Skene, 1979; Sheng et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2016; Rodrigues & Pereira, 2018; Jiang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023;
Ying et al., 2024). These methods have gradually reached a
consensus: when worker annotation is more accurate than
random annotation, the more noisy labels an instance receives, the easier it becomes to infer its unknown true label (Chen et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023b). However, in
real-world scenarios, each worker typically annotates only
a small number of instances, and few labels are typically
collected per instance to reduce cost, resulting in a highly
sparse crowdsourced label matrix (Jung & Lease, 2012).
This fact leads to label aggregation failing to achieve the
expected performance relying solely on the existing labels
in label matrix. To address this issue, label completion has
been proposed to fill in more missing labels for the sparse
label matrix, which is gaining increasing attention.
Although only a few methods have been proposed so far,
they have already demonstrated that label completion can
serve as a preprocessing approach to boost the effectiveness
of the downstream label aggregation. Among them, recent
advances further highlight the strength of worker modeling
in improving the performance of label completion. Specifically, Yang et al. (2024) filter out potential noisy labels
through worker modeling, and Wu et al. (2024) estimate
worker similarity through worker modeling, both achieving notable improvements. However, to the best of our
knowledge, despite its effectiveness, worker modeling is
still constrained by the limited number of instances annotated by each worker. Insufficient annotated instances fail
to accurately reflect the annotation ability of each worker,

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has achieved remarkable performance
across diverse tasks, and its success relies on large-scale
annotated data (Jiang et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2023a). However, acquiring large-scale accurately annotated data from
1
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan 430074, China 2 School of Mathematics and Physics, China
University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China. Correspondence to: Liangxiao Jiang <ljiang@cug.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

