Provable In-Context Vector Arithmetic via Retrieving Task Concepts

Dake Bu† 1 2 Wei Huang 2 Andi Han 2 3 Atsushi Nitanda 4 5 6 Qingfu Zhang 1 Hau-San Wong 1 Taiji Suzuki 7 2

Abstract

dation models. A growing academic perspective highlights that the core strength of LLMs lies in their remarkable In-Context Learning (ICL) capability (Lu et al.,
2024), enabling them to infer underlying tasks or functions from input demonstration pairs (Minegishi et al.,
2025b)—akin to the concept of function references in programming (Bernays, 1936). For example, given the prompt
Japan Tokyo France Paris China, the expected
output “Beijing” reflects the underlying function “Country’s Capital” applied to the final query.

In-context learning (ICL) has garnered significant attention for its ability to grasp functions/tasks from demonstrations. Recent studies
suggest the presence of a latent task/function
vector in LLMs during ICL. Merullo et al.
(2024) showed that LLMs leverage this vector alongside the residual stream for Word2Veclike vector arithmetic, solving factual-recall ICL
tasks. Additionally, recent work empirically
highlighted the key role of Question-Answer data
in enhancing factual-recall capabilities. Despite
these insights, a theoretical explanation remains
elusive. To move one step forward, we propose
a theoretical framework building on empirically
grounded hierarchical concept modeling. We develop an optimization theory, showing how nonlinear residual transformers trained via gradient
descent on cross-entropy loss perform factualrecall ICL tasks via vector arithmetic. We prove
0-1 loss convergence and show the strong generalization, including robustness to concept recombination and distribution shifts. These results elucidate the advantages of transformers
over static embedding predecessors. Empirical
simulations corroborate our theoretical insights.

Role of Task Vector. A growing body of research seeks
to uncover the internal mechanisms underpinning ICL,
shedding light on how LLMs retrieve function/task from
demonstration. Recent studies employing advanced probing techniques have identified the emergence of a task
vector (Hendel et al., 2023; Merullo et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2025) (or function vector (Todd et al., 2024; Kahardipraja et al., 2025)) within the latent representations
of LLMs during ICL deduction. This vector appears
around the 15-19th layers in models like GPT-J-6B (Wang
& Komatsuzaki, 2021). Formally, Hendel et al. (2023);
Merullo et al. (2024) propose that, given the prompt T =
[x1 , f (x1 ), x2 , f (x2 ), · · · , xquery ], the LLM θ constructs
the task vector in the earlier layers, denoted as afθ (T),
based on its understanding of the task/function message
in T. Furthermore, Merullo et al. (2024) revealed that,
certain factual-recall ICL tasks indeed correspond to some
latent representation f (xquery ) = afθ (T) + bquery
(xquery ),
θ
where bquery
(x
)
is
the
query-encoded
residual
stream
query
θ
in deeper layers. That is, the model θ can execute the ICL
task through a simple vector addition:
Z
pθ (f (xquery ) = · | T) = pθ (aθ + bquery
| aθ , T)
θ
(1)
· pθ (aθ | T)d(aθ ),

1. Introduction
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs)
(Vaswani et al., 2017) have ushered in a new era of foun†

Work completed during internship at RIKEN. 1 Department
of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong SAR 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN,
Japan 3 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University
of Sydney, Australia 4 Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A⋆STAR), Singapore 5 Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A⋆STAR), Singapore 6 College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 7 Department of Mathematical Informatics, The University of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Wei Huang <wei.huang.vr@riken.jp>, Hau-San Wong
<cshswong@cityu.edu.hk>.

where pθ (aθ | T) denotes the model’s confidence in recognizing aθ as the task vector afθ (T). The formulation in
Eq. (1) highlights the pivotal role of residual streams. However, existing theories on ICL either overlook the residual
term entirely (Tian et al., 2023; Kim & Suzuki, 2024; Bu
et al., 2024a) or handle it in an unnatural manner (Nichani
et al., 2024). Additionally, while some studies suggest that
Question-Answer (QA) training data are crucial for enabling LLMs to retrieve factual knowledge (Allen-Zhu &

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

