Efficient Personalized Adaptation for Physiological Signal Foundation Model

Chenrui Wu 1 2 Haishuai Wang∗ 1 Xiang Zhang 3 Chengqi Zhang 4 Jiajun Bu 1

Abstract

(a) TSFM for Local Adaption

Time series analysis is crucial across various fields
like energy, environment, transportation, finance
and health. Deep learning has significantly advanced this field, particularly, the Time Series
Foundation Model (TSFM) excels in multiple domains due to extensive pre-training. In this work,
we focus on TSFM’s challenges in medical practice: limited computing resources and medical
data privacy. TSFM variants include fine-tuned
models and those pre-trained for rapid deployment on diverse data. There may not be enough
computing resources to train physiological signals
locally in hospitals, and generalized TSFM is still
inferior to task-specific methods on private, imbalanced local data. To address this, we propose
PhysioPFM, a framework for efficiently personalizing TSFM. Our approach involves low-rank
pre-training on public datasets, generator training
by trained LoRA weights, and efficient weight
generation via local data. Experimental results
demonstrate that integrating generated models
with TSFM enhances performance, and transferability, and reduces the need for additional sensitive data training.

(b) TSFM for Generic Pretraining

Pretrained LM

Pretrained LM

Unified Model

Fine-tuning & Testing

Pre-training

Testing

Foreign domain data

Foreign domain task

Target data

Target task

Figure 1. Illustration of existing two categories of time series
foundation model. (a) represents the methods applying pre-trained
LLM to train target data, and conducting tests on target data. (b)
demonstrate the methods that pre-train on a large and multi-domain
dataset, then test on the target data for the zero-shot prediction.

(EEG), cardiotocography (CTG), electrooculogram (EOG),
galvanic skin response (GSR), electrocardiogram (ECG),
electromyogram (EMG), and others (Thapa et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024; Al-Saegh et al.,
2021). These physiological signals are usually quantitatively
measured by medical devices and then analyzed by doctors
or specialists to evaluate the patient’s current state and make
data-driven decisions, which shows great significance for
health monitoring, disease diagnosis, and treatment (Liu
et al., 2023). Specifically, we focus on various medical
time series classification (TSC) tasks based on the physiological signals, including emotion recognition (Li et al.,
2024a), sleep stage detection (Supratak et al., 2017; Dong
et al., 2017), neurological disorder classification (Yang et al.,
2022b; Zhang et al., 2022), etc.

1. Introduction
The recent trend of integrating deep learning algorithms
on advanced wearable sensors and fixed medical equipment has catalyzed massive amounts of valuable medical
data (Spathis et al., 2020; Che et al., 2017). These recorded
medical time series data are continuous observations related
to human health, usually including electroencephalogram

However, while the community has benefited greatly from
the large amount of new data collected by professional medical devices or ubiquitous wearable devices, analyzing physiological signals with existing deep-learning methods still
faces inherent challenges in practice. First, the amount of
data available for each signal is unbalanced. Most existing
studies focus on EEG and ECG data. In contrast, other
physiological signals have minor data available, making it
challenging to establish unified and generic models for all
signals. Furthermore, the sampling frequency and duration
of different signals may also vary, further causing the diver-

1

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems, College of Computer Science and Technology,
Zhejiang University. 2 School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser
University. 3 Department of Computer Science, The University of
North Carolina at Charlotte. 4 Department of Data Science and
Artificial Intelligence, Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Correspondence to: Haishuai Wang <haishuai.wang@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

