ArrayDPS: Unsupervised Blind Speech Separation with a Diffusion Prior

Zhongweiyang Xu 1 Xulin Fan 1 Zhong-Qiu Wang 2 Xilin Jiang 3 Romit Roy Choudhury 1

Abstract

ture their voices. Each microphone records a mixture of all
the speakers’ voices. The objective is to separate these mixtures to recover the individual voice sources. In recent years,
supervised learning based methods have shown remarkable
potential to solve the cocktail party problem (Wang & Chen,
2018). However, these methods are usually trained with
supervision from speech datasets that were synthesized by
using acoustic simulators. Such synthetic supervision inherits several problems:
(1) Generalizability: The simulated dataset does not match
real-world acoustic environments, causing model generalization issues (Pandey & Wang, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021).
(2) Deterministic: These models are trained to be deterministic, and hence they output one fixed separation solution
for a given mixture. This can give blurred results when the
solution is not unique (Jayaram & Thickstun, 2020), i.e., the
probability distribution of the sources, given the mixture, is
a multi-modal distribution.
(3) Fixed Array Geometry: These models usually assume
the geometry of microphone arrays is fixed and known, preventing flexibility to unseen arrays (Taherian et al., 2022).

Blind Speech Separation (BSS) aims to separate multiple speech sources from audio mixtures
recorded by a microphone array. The problem is
challenging because it is a blind inverse problem,
i.e., the microphone array geometry, the room impulse response (RIR), and the speech sources, are
all unknown. We propose ArrayDPS to solve the
BSS problem in an unsupervised, array-agnostic,
and generative manner. The core idea builds on
diffusion posterior sampling (DPS), but unlike
DPS where the likelihood is tractable, ArrayDPS
must approximate the likelihood by formulating
a separate optimization problem. The solution
to the optimization approximates room acoustics
and the relative transfer functions between microphones. These approximations, along with the
diffusion priors, iterate through the ArrayDPS
sampling process and ultimately yield separated
voice sources. We only need a simple singlespeaker speech diffusion model as a prior, along
with the mixtures recorded at the microphones; no
microphone array information is necessary. Evaluation results show that ArrayDPS outperforms
all baseline unsupervised methods while being
comparable to supervised methods in terms of
SDR. Audio demos and codes are provided at:
https://arraydps.github.io/ArrayDPSDemo/ and
https://github.com/ArrayDPS/ArrayDPS.

To address all the problems above, we propose ArrayDPS,
a generative, unsupervised, and array-agnostic algorithm
for speech separation, which fully exploits speech prior information. Building on the diffusion posterior sampling
(DPS) technique (Chung et al., 2023b; Song et al., 2023),
ArrayDPS treats speech separation as an inverse problem.
Briefly, our goal is to recover speech sources s from multimicrophone mixture measurements x = A(s) + ϵ, where
A(·) denotes the source mixing process in reverberant conditions. DPS samples from p(s|x) by using a pre-trained
diffusion prior p(s), and a tractable likelihood model p(x|s).
While we use a pre-trained speech source diffusion prior
as well, unfortunately, the likelihood is intractable in our
case. This is because the distortion function A(·) depends
not only on the unknown array geometry but also on the
unknown RIRs over which the speech arrives at each microphone. Without any knowledge of the array geometry, the
RIRs, and the speech sources, this is referred to as a “blind”
separation problem.

1. Introduction
The cocktail party problem is a classic challenge in audio
signal processing and machine learning (Cherry, 1953; McDermott, 2009). It arises when multiple speakers talk simultaneously in the same room, and several microphones cap1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of
Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China 3 Columbia University, NYC, USA. Correspondence to: Romit Roy Choudhury
<croy@illinois.edu>, Zhongweiyang Xu <zx21@illinois.edu>.

To solve the problems mentioned above, at each diffusion
sampling step, with the current source estimate ŝ, we estimate A by: Â = arg max p(x|ŝ, A). Then we use p(x|ŝ, Â)

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

A

1

