Optimal Survey Design for Private Mean Estimation

Yu-Wei Chen 1 Raghu Pasupathy 1 Jordan Awan 1

Abstract

ysis (Gaboardi et al., 2016; Gaboardi & Rogers, 2017; Wang
et al., 2018), simulation-based inference (Awan & Wang,
2024), and bootstrapping methods (Ferrando et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022). However, there is also a growing need
to integrate DP into the design of data collection schemes.

This work identifies the first privacy-aware stratified sampling scheme that minimizes the variance for general private mean estimation under the
Laplace, Discrete Laplace (DLap) and TruncatedUniform-Laplace (TuLap) mechanisms within the
framework of differential privacy (DP). We view
stratified sampling as a subsampling operation,
which amplifies the privacy guarantee; however,
to have the same final privacy guarantee for each
group, different nominal privacy budgets need to
be used depending on the subsampling rate. Ignoring the effect of DP, traditional stratified sampling
strategies risk significant variance inflation. We
phrase our optimal survey design as an optimization problem, where we determine the optimal
subsampling sizes for each group with the goal of
minimizing the variance of the resulting estimator. We establish strong convexity of the variance
objective, propose an efficient algorithm to identify the optimal design, and offer insights on the
structure of this design in different settings.

Survey sampling traditionally encompasses three components: sample selection, data collection, and estimation
(Brick, 2011). Over time, survey sampling has been evolving to incorporate new technologies (Frankel & Frankel,
1987), such as registration-based sampling (Green & Gerber, 2006), telephone sampling (Force et al., 2010), and
computerization (Baker, 1998). Differential privacy represents one of the latest advances, fostering the need to
optimize data collection to balance privacy and utility.

1. Introduction

Among survey sampling methods, stratified sampling stands
out as a robust scheme that leverages auxiliary information to collect valuable samples that can minimize variance.
Unlike simple random sampling (SRS), stratified sampling
minimizes the risk of having bad samples by dividing the
population into groups (strata) based on common characteristics (Lohr, 2021). Neyman (1934) was the first to formalize stratified sampling, introducing an optimal allocation of
samples to minimize variance across groups—a goal aligned
with the principles of experimental design (Wu & Hamada,
2011).

Differential Privacy (DP), introduced by Dwork et al. (2006),
is a popular probabilistic framework designed to protect individual privacy while preserving the utility of data. By introducing calibrated random noise into the data processing, DP
ensures that outputs remain informative while reducing the
risk of identifying individuals. However, this added noise
introduces unique challenges for data analysis. Neglecting
the effects of DP mechanisms can lead to biased and incorrect conclusions (Santos-Lozada et al., 2020; Kenny et al.,
2021). To address these challenges, researchers commonly
employ various inference strategies, such as Bayesian inference (Bernstein & Sheldon, 2018 & 2019; Schein et al.,
2019; Kulkarni et al., 2021; Ju et al., 2022), asymptotic anal-

Developing DP techniques for surveys is very important to
protect individual respondents, especially when sensitive
questions are asked. Furthermore, another key motivation
for incorporating DP is as a technique to reduce response
bias—also known as answer bias—which often arises when
individuals avoid answering sensitive or controversial questions truthfully, leading to skewed or inaccurate conclusions.
Randomized response, introduced by Warner (1965), provides a mechanism for respondents to address such questions
while satisfying differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2014).
Incorporating appropriate noise through DP techniques, our
framework effectively balances data utility with individual
privacy and can also reduce response biases.

1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette IN,
USA. Correspondence to: Jordan Awan <jawan@purdue.edu>.

When considering differential privacy for survey sampling,
it is first important to recognize a crucial result of differential
privacy under sampling which plays a key role in the formulation of our problem: When a privacy mechanism is applied
to a randomly sampled subset of a population (while the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

