Learning to Plan & Reason for Evaluation with Thinking-LLM-as-a-Judge

Swarnadeep Saha 1 Xian Li 1 Marjan Ghazvininejad 1 Jason Weston 1 Tianlu Wang 1

Abstract

as evaluators (Zheng et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024a; Saha
et al., 2024a; Dubois et al., 2024). LLM-as-a-Judge models
also serve as reward models during training for iterative
preference optimization and self-improvement (Yuan et al.,
2024). Compared to traditional reward models that only
output scalar scores, LLM-as-a-Judge models expend more
test-time compute by generating Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
rationales of the underlying reasoning process of evaluation. This has been shown to not only improve evaluation
accuracy but also enhance transparency (Zheng et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2024c; Ankner et al., 2024).

LLM-as-a-Judge models generate chain-ofthought (CoT) sequences intended to capture the
step-by-step reasoning process that underlies the
final evaluation of a response. However, due to
the lack of human-annotated CoTs for evaluation,
the required components and structure of effective reasoning traces remain understudied. Consequently, previous approaches often (1) constrain
reasoning traces to hand-designed components,
such as a list of criteria, reference answers, or
verification questions and (2) structure them such
that planning is intertwined with the reasoning for
evaluation. In this work, we propose EvalPlanner,
a preference optimization algorithm for ThinkingLLM-as-a-Judge that first generates an unconstrained evaluation plan, followed by its execution, and then the final judgment. In a self-training
loop, EvalPlanner iteratively optimizes over synthetically constructed evaluation plans and executions, leading to better final verdicts. Our method
achieves a new state-of-the-art performance for
generative reward models on RewardBench and
PPE, despite being trained on fewer amount of,
and synthetically generated, preference pairs. Additional experiments on other benchmarks like
RM-Bench, JudgeBench, and FollowBenchEval
further highlight the utility of both planning and
reasoning for building robust LLM-as-a-Judge
reasoning models.

Despite the promise of LLM-as-a-Judge models, the lack of
human-annotated CoTs makes it difficult to train such models. Hence, a crucial step in building these judges is generating rationales by writing down detailed evaluation instructions or rubrics that LLMs can follow. These hand-crafted
instructions vary for every new domain (e.g., safety versus
coding) (Yu et al., 2024b) and include manually designing
evaluation criteria (Zheng et al., 2023; Saha et al., 2024a;
Trivedi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b;c), scoring rubrics,
and steps for each criterion (Yuan et al., 2024; Trivedi et al.,
2024; Kim et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024d). This is limiting
because different tasks necessitate evaluation standards or
procedures tailored to each specific task. For instance, evaluating an essay requires measuring quality along multiple,
potentially subjective, fine-grained criteria like relevance
and clarity whereas evaluating a math problem requires
objectively verifying the correctness of the solution in a
step-by-step manner (Lightman et al., 2024). Simply using
predefined evaluation prompts hurts evaluation accuracy,
while manually adjusting the evaluation instructions is neither scalable nor realistic, given the wide range of arbitrary
and complex tasks that LLM-as-a-Judge models are used for.

1. Introduction

To overcome these limitations, we propose EvalPlanner, a
novel approach to building Thinking-LLM-as-a-Judge models that teaches LLMs to both plan and reason for evaluation.
EvalPlanner is trained to perform complex evaluation by
thinking and spending more test-time compute with CoTs
that are decoupled into a planning component and a reasoning component. In the planning component, the model
generates a detailed evaluation plan, that consists of all the
necessary steps to evaluate responses specific to the given
instruction. In the reasoning component, the model executes the plan step-by-step and reasons through the input

As large language models (LLMs) continue to improve, reliably evaluating their long-form outputs has become even
more challenging. Owing to the high cost of human evaluation, the LLM-as-a-Judge paradigm has emerged as a
promising alternative where LLMs themselves are employed
1
FAIR at Meta. Correspondence to: Swarnadeep Saha <swarnadeep@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

