Self-Discriminative Modeling for Anomalous Graph Detection
Anomalous Data
Training Normal Data
Testing Normal Data
Generated Anomalous Data

Jinyu Cai * 1 Yunhe Zhang * 2 Jicong Fan 3
Anomalous Data
Training Normal Data
Testing Normal Data
Generated Anomalous Data

Abstract

et al., 2024), tabular data (Dai et al., 2025; Dai & Fan, 2025),
and graph nodes or edges (Duan et al., 2020; Zheng et al.,
2021), graph-level anomaly detection (GLAD) (Akoglu
et al., 2015; Qiao et al., 2024a), which aims to identify
entire graphs that substantially deviate from normal patterns, remains a greater challenge due to the difficulty in
analyzing overall relationship between graphs.

Identifying anomalous graphs is essential in realworld scenarios such as molecular and social network analysis, yet anomalous samples are generally scarce and unavailable. This paper proposes a
Self-Discriminative Modeling (SDM) framework
that trains a deep neural network only on normal graphs to detect anomalous graphs. The neural network simultaneously learns to construct
pseudo-anomalous graphs from normal graphs
and learns an anomaly detector to recognize these
pseudo-anomalous graphs. As a result, these
pseudo-anomalous graphs interpolate between
normal graphs and real anomalous graphs, which
leads to a reliable decision boundary of anomaly
detection. In this framework, we develop three
algorithms with different computational efficiencies and stabilities for anomalous graph detection. Extensive experiments on 12 different graph
benchmarks demonstrated that the three variants
of SDM consistently outperform the state-of-theart GLAD baselines. The success of our methods
stems from the integration of the discriminative
classifier and the well-posed pseudo-anomalous
graphs, which provided new insights for graphlevel anomaly detection.

Anomalous Data
Training Normal Data
Testing Normal Data
Generated Anomalous Data

Anomalous Data
Training Normal Data
Testing Normal Data
Generated Anomalous Data

Anomalous data (unavailable in training)

Normal data

Generated anomalous data

Decision boundary

Anomalous Data
Training Normal Data
Testing Normal Data
Generated Anomalous Data

𝑤𝑤
r

Figure 1. Motivation of our method. The left plot illustrates a toy
example, where the shadowed region is approximated as a rectangle (or a hypercuboid when d > 3). The right plot shows a real
example, the t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) visualization of the result of our method on the real dataset AIDS.

Early research on GLAD explored the graph kernel (GK)
methods (Vishwanathan et al., 2010; Shervashidze et al.,
2011) to identify graph anomalies by utilizing various similarity measurements, though these approaches are limited by
their scalability. The emergence of graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Huang et al.,
2023) has significantly advanced the development of GLAD
through its powerful graph representation learning capability. Recent works (Zhao & Akoglu, 2021; Qiu et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2024) have explored the integration of GNNs
with deep one-class classification (DeepSVDD) (Ruff et al.,
2018) for GLAD. A hypersphere is taught to model the distribution of normal graphs in the latent space, and anomalies
are identified as graphs whose embeddings fall outside of the
hypersphere. Beyond these methods, other works have leveraged various paradigms, such as knowledge distillation (Ma
et al., 2022), information bottleneck (Liu et al., 2023a),
and Rayleigh quotient (Dong et al., 2024), to enhance the
detection of anomalies. Moreover, semi-supervised learning (Zhang et al., 2022a) has been investigated to address the
imbalance issue in GLAD by incorporating a small fraction
of labeled anomalies for decision boundary learning.

1. Introduction
Graphs are widely utilized to represent complex relationships or interactions between entities in a variety of realworld contexts, such as molecules, biology, and social network data analysis (Mislove et al., 2007; Li et al., 2021; Sun
et al., 2023; 2024). Although there have been a lot of works
of anomaly detection on image data (Cai & Fan, 2022; Fu
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Computer and
Information Science, SKL-IOTSC, University of Macau, Macau,
China 3 School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Jicong Fan <fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Despite the recent advances, several critical challenges
still remain to be addressed. The DeepSVDD-based ap1

