TimeFilter: Patch-Specific Spatial-Temporal Graph Filtration
for Time Series Forecasting

Yifan Hu 1 * Guibin Zhang 2 * Peiyuan Liu 1 * Disen Lan 3 Naiqi Li 1
Dawei Cheng 4 Tao Dai 5 Shu-Tao Xia 1 Shirui Pan 6

Abstract

Channel
Clustering
(CC)

Time series forecasting methods generally fall
into two main categories: Channel Independent
(CI) and Channel Dependent (CD) strategies.
While CI overlooks important covariate relationships, CD captures all dependencies without distinction, introducing noise and reducing generalization. Recent advances in Channel Clustering (CC) aim to refine dependency modeling by grouping channels with similar characteristics and applying tailored modeling techniques. However, coarse-grained clustering struggles to capture complex, time-varying interactions effectively. To address these challenges,
we propose TimeFilter, a GNN-based framework
for adaptive and fine-grained dependency modeling. After constructing the graph from the
input sequence, TimeFilter refines the learned
spatial-temporal dependencies by filtering out irrelevant correlations while preserving the most
critical ones in a patch-specific manner. Extensive experiments on 13 real-world datasets
from diverse application domains demonstrate the
state-of-the-art performance of TimeFilter. The
code is available at https://github.com/
TROUBADOUR000/TimeFilter.

CD Cluster

CI Cluster

DTW 0.091 (High Similarity)

DTW 0.185 (Low Similarity)

DTW 0.075 (High Similarity)

DTW 0.529 (Low Similarity)

Support
Case

Failure
Case
DTW 0.226 (Low Similarity)
Electricity

Channel 1

DTW 0.057 (High Similarity)
Channel 2

Channel 3

Figure 1. Analysis of three channels from the Electricity dataset
shows the pros and cons of CI, CD, and CC strategies in different
cases. Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is a metric for measuring
the similarity between two sequences, with lower values indicating
higher similarity. The CI strategy ignores the highly correlated covariate information in the Supporting Case (left). The CD strategy
fuses all information, including the irrelevant dependencies in the
Supporting Case (right). The CC strategy addresses these issues
by using global correlation to form CD and CI clusters. However,
it cannot model the dynamic interactions of channels at different
time steps at a fine-grained level. For example, in the Failure Case,
it still faces the same dilemma as CD and CI strategies.

ing (Volkovs et al., 2024), traffic flow analysis (Shu et al.,
2021), health monitoring (Morid et al., 2023), and financial
investment (Zhu et al., 2024a;b). The literature on deep
learning approaches for this task can be broadly categorized into channel-independent (CI) methods and channeldependent (CD) methods (Han et al., 2024b).

1. Introduction

CI methods rely on the individual historical values of each
channel for prediction (Nie et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024;
Zeng et al., 2023), while CD methods go a step further by
modeling the dependencies between different channels (Yu
et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023; Zhang & Yan, 2023). However, it is important to recognize that data from different
domains often exhibit significant variations in underlying
distributions and characteristics. For instance, in climaterelated data, there are typically natural physical dependencies among variables (Karevan & Suykens, 2020), whereas
in electricity consumption data, the usage patterns of individual users can vary drastically, with little to no interdependence. This stark contrast suggests that the assumption

Multivariate time series forecasting is a challenging task
due to the need to capture both temporal dynamics and
inter-channel dependencies. This problem arises in a wide
range of real-world applications, including weather forecast*

Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 National University of Singapore 3 Fudan University 4 Tongji University 5 Shenzhen University 6 Griffith University. Correspondence to: Tao Dai
<daitao.edu@gmail.com>, Shirui Pan <s.pan@griffith.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

