Fundamental Limits of Visual Autoregressive Transformers: Universal
Approximation Abilities

Yifang Chen 1 Xiaoyu Li 2 Yingyu Liang 3 4 Zhenmei Shi 4 Zhao Song 5

Abstract

The core component in the transformer architecture is the
self-attention mechanism, which captures long-range dependencies in data (Vaswani et al., 2017). A transformervariants model, called the Visual Auto-regressive Transformer (VAR) (Tian et al., 2024), utilizes the transformer
architecture to structure image synthesis. VAR Transformer
uses “next-scale prediction” method to produce high quality
images much more efficiently and outperform many standard diffusion models (Song et al., 2021). The iterative
generation process of VAR demonstrates powerful performance in large-scale visual tasks, but the previous work
is solely empirical, where the theoretical understandings
of why VAR Transformers architecture excel in the image
synthesis tasks is missing.

We investigate the fundamental limits of
transformer-based foundation models, extending
our analysis to include Visual Autoregressive
(VAR) transformers. VAR represents a big step
toward generating images using a novel, scalable,
coarse-to-fine “next-scale prediction” framework.
These models set a new quality bar, outperforming all previous methods, including Diffusion
Transformers, while having state-of-the-art performance for image synthesis tasks. Our primary
contributions establish that, for single-head VAR
transformers with a single self-attention layer and
single interpolation layer, the VAR Transformer
is universal. From the statistical perspective, we
prove that such simple VAR transformers are universal approximators for any word-to-image Lipschitz functions. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that flow-based autoregressive transformers inherit similar approximation capabilities. Our results provide important design principles for effective and computationally efficient VAR Transformer strategies that can be used to extend their
utility to more sophisticated VAR models in image generation and other related areas.

In addition to the VAR transfromer, flow-based generative
methods (e.g., real-valued non-volume preserving (RealNVP) and Glow) have also garnered attention for their ability to generate high-fidelity samples in an invertible and
tractable manner. Recent efforts have integrated autoregressive decompositions with flow-based designs, giving rise to
Flow AutoRegressive (FlowAR) (Ren et al., 2024) architectures. These models aim to blend the interpretability and
stability of normalizing flows with the powerful representation learning of autoregressive transformers, potentially
yielding more robust and scalable training dynamics. Similar to the studies on VAR transformers, the previous work
on FlowAR focus on the empirical results but missing the
theoretical understanding of why FlowAR excels other architetures.

1. Introduction
Transformer architectures have gained many attentions recently, and it has reshaped the landscape of modern machine learning. Transformer-based models have shown the
state-of-the-art performance in many tasks, such as natural
language processing (e.g., GPT-o1 (OpenAI, 2024), Llama
3.3 (Llama Team, 2024; AI, 2024), and Claude 3.5 (Anthropic, 2024)), computer vision, and generative modeling.

To provide the theoretical analysis of the transformer-based
architecture, the universal approximation theory is popular
in recent studies. Standard transformers are proved to be
univeral sequence-to-sequence approximators, which means
that transformer is capable of representing any continuous
mapping between input and output sequences given sufficient width and depth (Yun et al., 2020; Kajitsuka & Sato,
2024). Therefore, given the lack of theoretical analysis of
VAR transformer, it is natural to ask the question:

1
The University of Chicago 2 University of New South Wales
The University of Hong Kong 4 University of Wisconsin–Madison
5
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Zhao
Song <magic.linuxkde@gmail.com>.
3

Are VAR Transformers the universal approximators?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we extend the unviersal approximation result
from (Yun et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2022; Kajitsuka & Sato,
1

