Position: Language model developers should report train-test overlap

Andy K Zhang 1 Kevin Klyman 1 Yifan Mai 1 Yoav Levine 1 Yian Zhang 1 Rishi Bommasani 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract

Prior to the rise of language models trained on web-scale
data, the AI community used standard train/test set splits,
where a model would be trained on the training set and
tested on the test set to ensure validity of results (Jurafsky & Martin, 2009; Russell & Norvig, 2009). In that
regime, the designer of an evaluation generally would specify both the training and test sets. In contrast, today foundation model developers decide on their own training sets,
which they often do not release, and evaluation designers
decide on test sets, which they often release. Overall, the
shift to web-scale training data with poor documentation of
data provenance, along with the two-party specification of
training and test data, contributes to poor understanding of
train-test overlap (Longpre et al., 2023).

Language models are extensively evaluated, but
correctly interpreting evaluation results requires
knowledge of train-test overlap, which refers to
the extent to which the language model is trained
on the very data it is being tested on. The public currently lacks adequate information about
train-test overlap: most models have no public train-test overlap statistics, and third parties
cannot directly measure train-test overlap since
they do not have access to the training data. To
make this clear, we document the practices of 30
models, finding that just 9 models report traintest overlap: 4 models release training data under open-source licenses, enabling the community to directly measure train-test overlap, and 5
models publish their train-test overlap methodology and statistics. By engaging with language
model developers, we provide novel information about train-test overlap for three additional
models. Overall, this position paper argues that
language model developers should publish traintest overlap statistics and/or training data whenever they report evaluation results on public test
sets. We hope our work increases transparency
into train-test overlap to increase the communitywide trust in model evaluations.

Train-test overlap can arise for several reasons. First, since
evaluation datasets are often made public on the Internet
(e.g. via public repositories like GitHub and Hugging
Face), these datasets may be scraped and then trained upon.
Second, since evaluation datasets often use already-public
material (e.g. the held-out examples in SQuAD still depend
on public Wikipedia data (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)), the underlying data may be easily trained upon. Third, since evaluation datasets are often input into models to conduct evaluations (e.g. to evaluate GPT-4 via the OpenAI API), these
datasets may be stored and used to train future models. Better understanding how train-test overlap arises may facilitate solutions for appropriately navigating the challenges it
presents (Oren et al., 2023).
A growing literature demonstrates high train-test overlap for language models, which contributes to significant
degradation in performance between seen and unseen test
examples (Lewis et al., 2020; Elangovan et al., 2021; Vu
et al., 2023). For example, OpenAI initially reported that
GPT-4 had achieved state-of-the-art performance on a test
set of Codeforces coding questions, claiming that there was
no contamination (OpenAI, 2023). Yet it was later demonstrated1 that while GPT-4 achieves 100% accuracy for 10
pre-2021 problems, the model achieves 0% accuracy on
more recent problems. More recently, Anthropic claimed
a ”zero to one” moment in solving Capture The Flag tasks
(Anthropic, 2025). Yet Transluce found that Claude 3.5

1. Introduction
The artificial intelligence (AI) community has built hundreds of evaluations to better understand language models
(Srivastava et al., 2023; Hendrycks et al., 2021a; Gao et al.,
2024; Myrzakhan et al., 2024; Chiang et al., 2024; Rein
et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023). These evaluations cannot be correctly interpreted without knowledge of train-test
overlap, which we define as the extent to which the evaluation test data appears in the training data.
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Andy, Zhang <andyzh@stanford.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

See https://twitter.com/cHHillee/status/
1635790330854526981?lang=en

1

