Discrete Markov Probabilistic Models: An Improved Discrete Score-Based
Framework with sharp convergence bounds under minimal assumptions

Le Tuyet Nhi Pham * 1 Dario Shariatian * 2 Antonio Ocello 1 Giovanni Conforti 3 Alain Durmus 1

Abstract

et al., 2024). In continuous time, this approach benefits
from a strong theoretical framework, and a scalable, stable
learning objective.

This paper introduces the Discrete Markov Probabilistic Model (DMPM), a novel algorithm for
discrete data generation. The algorithm operates
in discrete space, where the noising process is a
continuous-time Markov chain that can be sampled exactly via a Poissonian clock that flips labels
uniformly at random. The time-reversal process,
like the forward noise process, is a jump process,
with its intensity governed by a discrete analogue
of the classical score function. Crucially, this intensity is proven to be the conditional expectation
of a function of the forward process, strengthening
its theoretical alignment with score-based generative models while ensuring robustness and efficiency. We further establish convergence bounds
for the algorithm under minimal assumptions and
demonstrate its effectiveness through experiments
on low-dimensional Bernoulli-distributed datasets
and high-dimensional binary MNIST data. The
results highlight its strong performance in generating discrete structures. This work bridges theoretical foundations and practical applications,
advancing the development of effective and theoretically grounded discrete generative modeling.

By contrast, discrete generative modeling continues to pose
significant challenges. Multiple diffusion-based methods
have recently been proposed for discrete spaces (Austin
et al., 2021; Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2024; Campbell et al., 2022; Holderrieth et al., 2024; Ren et al., 2024),
or spaces of mixed type (Bertazzi et al., 2024), but there
is still no consensus on which approach is theoretically
sound or most practically efficient. Various formulations
rely on complex forward kernels or computationally unstable ratio-based estimators for backward transitions, leading
to limited convergence guarantees and high computational
costs in high dimensions. Furthermore, recent analyses of
discrete diffusions have introduced valuable theoretical tools
(Campbell et al., 2022; Holderrieth et al., 2024; Ren et al.,
2024), yet most methods remain either overly generic or
require strong assumptions, making them difficult to scale
or to deploy with simple, stable training objectives.
Contributions. In this paper, we introduce Discrete Markov
Probabilistic Models (DMPMs), a score-based generative
models for discrete data inspired by Sohl-Dickstein et al.
(2015) and Austin et al. (2021) that bridges these gaps.
Our framework specializes the forward noising process to
a continuous-time Markov chain on the hypercube {0, 1}d .
Leveraging theoretical insights on time-reversal Markov
dynamics of this process, this choice preserves the key
strengths and structure of continuous SGMs, addressing
the issues raised in prior work. Our main results are summarized as follows:

Introduction
Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) have become a key
reference for generating complex data, such as images (see,
e.g., Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia
et al., 2022), audio (Chen et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2020),
and video (Ho et al., 2022; Villegas et al., 2022; Bar-Tal

• Forward-Backward Construction. We provide a principled derivation of the noising (forward) and denoising (backward) processes.

*
Equal contribution 1 Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
(CMAP), École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de
Paris, 91120 Palaiseau, France 2 Sierra lab, Inria, Paris,
France 3 Department of Mathematics, University of Padova,
Italy. Correspondence to: Le Tuyet Nhi Pham <le-tuyetnhi.pham@polytechnique.edu>.

• Score and denoiser function and stable estimation.
Our analysis reveals that the time-reversed process inherits a score function with an explicit conditional expectation form. By formulating the learning objective
as an L2 projection onto this score, we obtain a simple
and principled regression loss term, as opposed to the
high-variance estimators based on probability ratios

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

