Gap-Dependent Bounds for Federated Q-Learning

Haochen Zhang 1 * Zhong Zheng 1 * Lingzhou Xue 1

Abstract

approach accelerates the learning process with low communication costs. In this paper, we focus on the online FRL
tailored for episodic tabular MDPs with inhomogeneous
transition kernels. Specifically, we assume the presence of a
central server and M local agents in the system. Each agent
interacts independently with an episodic MDP consisting of
S states, A actions, and H steps per episode.

We present the first gap-dependent analysis of
regret and communication cost for online federated Q-Learning in tabular episodic finite-horizon
Markov decision processes (MDPs). Existing federated reinforcement learning (FRL) methods
fo√
cus on worst-case scenarios, leading to T -type
regret bounds and communication cost bounds
with a log T term scaling with the number of
agents M , states S, and actions A, where T is
the average total number of steps per agent. In
contrast, our novel framework leverages the benign structures of MDPs, such as a strictly positive suboptimality gap, to achieve a log T -type
regret bound and a refined communication cost
bound that disentangles exploration and exploitation. Our gap-dependent regret bound reveals a
distinct multi-agent speedup pattern, and our gapdependent communication cost bound removes
the dependence on M SA from the log T term.
Notably, our gap-dependent communication cost
bound also yields a better global switching cost
when M = 1, removing SA from the log T term.

Multiple recent works studied the online FRL for tabular MDPs. Zheng et al. (2024) proposed model-free algorithms FedQ-Hoeffding
√ and FedQ-Bernstein
√ that show
the regret bounds Õ( M H 4 SAT ) and Õ( M H 3 SAT )
respectively under O(M H 3 SA log T ) rounds of communications. Here, T is the average total number of steps
for each agent, and Õ hides logarithmic factors. Zheng
et al. (2025a) proposed
FedQ-Advantage that improved
√
the regret to Õ( M H 2 SAT ) under a reduced communication rounds of O(fM H 2 SA(log H) log T ) where
fM ∈ {1, M } reflects the optional forced synchronization scheme. Chen et al. (2022) and Labbi et al. (2024)
proposed model-based algorithms that extend the singleagent algorithm UCBVI (Azar et al., 2017).
Byzan-UCBVI
√
(Chen et al., 2022) reaches regret Õ( M H 3 S 2 AT ) under
O(M HSA log T ) rounds of communications.
Fed-UCBVI
√
(Labbi et al., 2024) reaches the regret Õ( M H 2 SAT ) under O(HSA log T + M HSA log log T ) rounds of communications. Here, model-based methods require estimating
the transition kernel so that their memory requirements scale
quadratically with the number of states S. Model-free methods, which are also called Q-Learning methods (Watkins,
1989), directly learn the action-value function, and their
memory√requirements only scale linearly with S. The regret Õ( M H 2 SAT ) reached by both FedQ-Advantage
and Fed-UCBVI√is almost optimal compared to the regret
lower bound Õ( M H 2 SAT ) (Jin et al., 2018; Domingues
et al., 2021). In summary, all the works above provided
worst-case
guarantees for all possible MDPs and proved
√
T -type regret bounds and communication cost bounds
that linearly depend on M SA log T or SA log T . The results of these works are also summarized in Table 1.

1. Introduction
Federated reinforcement learning (FRL) is a distributed
learning framework that combines the principles of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) and federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017). Focusing on
sequential decision-making, FRL aims to learn an optimal
policy through parallel explorations by multiple agents under the coordination of a central server. Often modeled as
a Markov decision process (MDP), multiple agents independently interact with an initially unknown environment
and collaboratively train their decision-making models with
limited information exchange between the agents. This
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. Correspondence to: Lingzhou Xue <lzxue@psu.edu>.

In practice, RL algorithms often perform better than their
worst-case guarantees, as they can be significantly improved
under MDPs with benign structures (Zanette & Brunskill,
2019). This motivates the problem-dependent analysis exploiting benign MDPs (Wagenmaker et al., 2022a; Zhou

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

