EvoPress: Accurate Dynamic Model Compression via Evolutionary Search

Oliver Sieberling 1 Denis Kuznedelev 2 Eldar Kurtic 3 4 Dan Alistarh 3 4

Abstract

or activations, e.g. (Frantar et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023;
Dettmers & Zettlemoyer, 2022; Tseng et al., 2024), pruningbased, which sparsify the weight matrices, e.g. (Frantar &
Alistarh, 2023; Yin et al., 2024), or structured pruning / layer
dropping, which drop entire model components, e.g. (Kim
et al., 2024; Men et al., 2024). While improvements are
still being made, existing methods are reaching diminishing
returns in terms of accuracy-vs-compression (Dettmers et al.,
2023; Tseng et al., 2024).

The high computational costs of large language
models (LLMs) have led to a flurry of research
on LLM compression, via methods such as quantization, sparsification, or structured pruning. A
new frontier in this area is given by dynamic, nonuniform compression methods, which adjust the
compression levels (e.g., sparsity) per-block or
even per-layer in order to minimize accuracy loss,
while guaranteeing a global compression threshold. Yet, current methods rely on estimating the
“importance” of a given layer, implicitly assuming
that layers contribute independently to the overall
compression error. We begin from the motivating
observation that this independence assumption
does not generally hold for LLM compression:
pruning a model further may even significantly
recover performance. To address this, we propose EvoPress, a novel evolutionary framework
for dynamic LLM compression. By formulating
dynamic compression as a general optimization
problem, EvoPress identifies optimal compression profiles in a highly efficient manner, and
generalizes across diverse models and compression techniques. Via EvoPress, we achieve stateof-the-art performance for dynamic compression
of Llama, Mistral, and Phi models, setting new
benchmarks for structural pruning (block/layer
dropping), unstructured sparsity, and quantization
with dynamic bitwidths. Our code is available at
https://github.com/IST-DASLab/EvoPress.

In this context, a new direction is dynamic, or non-uniform,
layer-wise compression, in which different layers can be
compressed to various levels, according to their “sensitivity” relative to the model output. Dynamic compression
allows to maximize model accuracy while satisfying a given
compression requirement, e.g. a target model size. Instancespecific solutions for this problem have already been proposed for essentially every compression type: sparsity (Yin
et al., 2024), quantization (Frantar & Alistarh, 2022), or
layer dropping (Kim et al., 2024; Men et al., 2024). Broadly,
these approaches work by assigning an error/sensitivity
score to each layer and compression level, which measures
the impact of its compression on output loss increase. Then,
one calculates a compression assignment which minimizes
the sum of error scores, while still satisfying the global
compression constraint. Thus, such approaches inherently
assume error monotonicity: i.e., that a lower sum of error
scores taken over layers implies a lower compression error
for the entire model.
Our work starts from the observation that error monotonicity
does not hold generally for LLM compression: specifically,
there are instances where compressed models with lower
sums of per-layer errors can perform worse than models
with higher error. We illustrate this fact in Table 1, which
shows an instance of a layer dropping configuration where
pruning more blocks leads to significantly better perplexity
than an instance which prunes strictly fewer blocks.

1. Introduction
Compression has become a standard way of reducing the
deployment costs of large language models (LLMs). Current
post-training techniques can be roughly categorized into
quantization-based, which reduce the bit-width of weights

Contribution. This refutation of error monotonicity implies that most prior approaches, which are based on this
assumption, can lead to sub-optimal solutions. Thus, it
motivates our investigation of alternatives towards optimal
non-uniform compression. For this, we propose a new evolutionary search approach called EvoPress, which is provably
convergent, and is also sample and iteration efficient. Thus,

1
ETH Zürich 2 Yandex Research 3 IST Austria 4 Red Hat AI.
Correspondence to: Dan Alistarh <dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

