PASS: Private Attributes Protection with Stochastic Data Substitution
Yizhuo Chen 1 2 Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen 2 Hsiang Hsu 2 Shaohan Hu 2 Tarek Abdelzaher 1

Abstract

to extract the content (Kheddar et al., 2024), which would
inadvertently contain private attributes such as the speaker’s
gender or accent, imposing the risk of privacy leakage when
an adversary tries to eavesdrop on the voice. Therefore,
there has been a lasting interest in developing a data obfuscation module that can be inserted into the data sharing or
ML service pipelines to protect the private attributes by suppressing or removing them from the data, while maintaining
the utility of the data for downstream tasks.

The growing Machine Learning (ML) services
require extensive collections of user data, which
may inadvertently include people’s private information irrelevant to the services. Various studies
have been proposed to protect private attributes
by removing them from the data while maintaining the utilities of the data for downstream tasks.
Nevertheless, as we theoretically and empirically
show in the paper, these methods reveal severe vulnerability because of a common weakness rooted
in their adversarial training based strategies. To
overcome this limitation, we propose a novel
approach, PASS, designed to stochastically substitute the original sample with another one according to certain probabilities, which is trained
with a novel loss function soundly derived from
information-theoretic objective defined for utilitypreserving private attributes protection. The comprehensive evaluation of PASS on various datasets
of different modalities, including facial images,
human activity sensory signals, and voice recording datasets, substantiates PASS’s effectiveness
and generalizability.

Various methods are proposed towards this goal. Roy & Boddeti (2019); Bertran et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2020) focused
on suppressing private attributes while preserving explicitly annotated useful attributes. On the other hand, Huang
et al. (2018); Malekzadeh et al. (2019); Dave et al. (2022)
extended their researches to managing unannotated general features for broader applicability. Furthermore, Chen
et al. (2024) summarized and satisified SUIFT, 5 desirable
properties of utility-preserving private attributes protection
methods. Notably, these state-of-the-art methods are adversarial training based, where their obfuscation module is
trained to prevent an adversarial private attributes classifier
from making correct inferences.
However, as widely discussed in the neighboring fields of
adversarial robustness (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye
et al., 2018; Ilyas et al., 2019; Carlini et al., 2019), generated
image/vedio detection (Yu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020;
Masood et al., 2023), membership inference attacks (Carlini et al., 2022) and gradient inversion in federated learning (Geiping et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021), a common
weakness with adversarial training based methods is that,
although the defender can tolerate the jointly-trained adversary, it may be vulnerable to slightly stronger or unseen
adversaries. In the private attributes protection context, as
we theoretically and empirically demonstrate in Section 3.2,
this weakness can indeed cause significant negative impact
on the state-of-the-art methods, reducing their practicality
in real-world deployment.

1. Introduction
The expansion of modern Machine Learning (ML) services
has seamlessly improved the convenience of daily lives,
where the service providers oftentimes gather data from
users and then utilize advanced models to cater to users’
needs (Secinaro et al., 2021; Ahmed et al., 2022). However, the data collected frequently includes private information that users may be reluctant to disclose (Boulemtafes
et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2023). For instance, a human
voice recognition service needs to collect speaker’s voice
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 Global Technology Applied Research, JPMorgan Chase, USA. Correspondence to: Yizhuo
Chen <yizhuoc@illinois.edu>, Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen
<richard.cf.chen@jpmchase.com>.

To overcome the above weakness, we present a novel
method for private attributes protection, called Private
Attributes protection with Stochatsic data Substitution (or
PASS), which avoids the adversarial training strategy altogether. Specifically, we propose to substitute each input
sample of the data sharing system or ML service pipeline
with another sample according to a stochastic data substitu-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

