Learning Imbalanced Data with Beneficial Label Noise

Guangzheng Hu 1 Feng Liu 2 Mingming Gong 1 Guanghui Wang 3 Liuhua Peng 1

Abstract

In practice, the minority class, often representing rare
anomalies, is the focus, making accuracy an inadequate
metric, especially in binary classification. Metrics like F1
score, G-mean, and Area Under the Curve (AUC) for binary classification (He & Garcia, 2009; Krawczyk, 2016), or
Minority-Accuracy and Many/Medium/Few-shots for stepwise or long-tailed multi-class data, better reflect minority
class performance (Cao et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021a).
This paper theoretically shows that optimizing for accuracy leads to a decision boundary in binary classification
misaligned with metrics like the F1 score.

Data imbalance is a common factor hindering
classifier performance. Data-level approaches
for imbalanced learning, such as resampling, often lead to information loss or generative errors.
Building on theoretical studies of imbalance ratio in binary classification, it is found that adding
suitable label noise can adjust biased decision
boundaries and improve classifier performance.
This paper proposes the Label-Noise-based Rebalancing (LNR) approach to solve imbalanced
learning by employing a novel design of an asymmetric label noise model. In contrast to other
data-level methods, LNR alleviates the issues of
informative loss and generative errors and can
be integrated seamlessly with any classifier or
algorithm-level method. We validated the superiority of LNR on synthetic and real-world
datasets. Our work opens a new avenue for imbalanced learning, highlighting the potential of beneficial label noise. Code is available at https:
//github.com/guangzhengh/LNR.git

Imbalanced learning approaches can be roughly classified
into data-level and algorithm-level methods. Data-level
methods, such as resampling, mitigate imbalance by adding
or removing samples (Kaur et al., 2019; Napierala & Stefanowski, 2016; Wang et al., 2020; 2021a) but may introduce information loss, overfitting, or generative errors.
Algorithm-level methods (Chawla et al., 2004; Cao et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2022b) adjust learning
algorithms to account for imbalance but are often tailored to
specific models or problem settings, limiting their general
applicability.
This paper theoretically studies how the imbalance ratio (IR)
biases decision boundaries in binary classification with different metrics, such as accuracy and F1 score. Presentation
or introduction of label noise, which flips sample labels
to another class, can significantly alter classifier decision
boundaries. Inspired by studies on harmless label noise
(Ahfock & McLachlan, 2021; Cannings et al., 2020), which
does not degrade classifier performance under certain conditions, we propose a novel Label-Noise-Re-balancing (LNR)
approach that introduces artificial label noise to reallocate
imbalanced class labels and thus de-biases the decision
boundary to improve classifier performance. We further extend LNR to multi-class classification with class imbalance.
As a data-level method, LNR is model-agnostic and can be
seamlessly integrated with any classifier or algorithm-level
approach. This flexibility enables improved performance
across both binary and multi-class settings without requiring significant modifications to existing algorithms, thereby
offering a robust solution to imbalanced learning.

1. Introduction
Imbalanced data is pervasive in many real-world problems,
including fraud transactions (Phua et al., 2004), disease
diagnoses (Fotouhi et al., 2019), and behavioral analysis
(Azaria et al., 2014). These datasets are often characterized
by a high disparity in class distribution, where some classes
have abundant samples while others contain very few. Such
imbalance challenges traditional classifiers, which naturally
require an equal sample size across classes or a sufficient
number of minority class samples for effective performance
(He & Garcia, 2009; Krawczyk, 2016).
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
3
School of Statistics and Data Science, LPMC, KLMDASR, and
LEBPS, Nankai University. Correspondence to: Liuhua Peng
<liuhua.peng@unimelb.edu.au>.

Figure 1 illustrates the effect of adding beneficial label noise
to imbalanced MNIST data with minority classes “5”, “7”,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

