From Language Models over Tokens to Language Models over Characters

Tim Vieira 1 Benjamin LeBrun 2 Mario Giulianelli 1 Juan Luis Gastaldi 1 Brian DuSell 1 John Terilla 3
Timothy J. O’Donnell 4 2 5 Ryan Cotterell 1

Abstract

the prompt boundary problem as well as other oddities that
make interfacing with token-level language models with
character-level prompts hard for users.

Modern language models are internally—and
mathematically—distributions over token strings
rather than character strings, posing numerous
challenges for programmers building user applications on top of them. For example, if a prompt
is specified as a character string, it must be
tokenized before passing it to the token-level language model. Thus, the tokenizer and consequent
processing are very sensitive to the specification
of the prompt (e.g., whether the prompt ends with
a space or not). This paper presents algorithms
for converting token-level language models to
character-level ones. We present both exact and
approximate algorithms. In the empirical portion
of the paper, we benchmark the practical runtime
and approximation quality. Across four publicly
available language models, we find that—even
with a small computation budget—our method is
able to accurately approximate the character-level
distribution at reasonably fast speeds, and that a
significant improvement in the language model’s
compression rate (bits/byte) is achieved.

Tokenized language models: A brief overview.1 Let Σ
be an alphabet of characters, and let Σ∗ denote the set of
all strings that can be built from it. Suppose there is a true
distribution p∗Σ over Σ∗ that we seek to model. We observe a
i.i.d.

training corpus of character strings: σ (1) , ... , σ (M ) ∼ p∗Σ .
However, rather than estimating a language model that approximates p∗Σ directly, we employ a (possibly stochastic) tokenizer τ that transforms the training corpus into a corpus of
token strings. δ (1) ∼ τ (· | σ (1) ), ... , δ (M ) ∼ τ (· | σ (M ) ).
Next, we estimate a token-level language model to fit the
strings δ (1) , ... , δ (M ) . Lastly, we use p∆ to generate character strings through the following generative process: (i)
sample δ ∼ p∆ and (ii) return σ = κ(δ) where κ is a decoding function. Let pΣ denote the resulting distribution
of this process. Practically, we hope that the choice of τ
and κ should aid in our ability to estimate p∗Σ in the sense
that p∗Σ ≈ pΣ . Commonly used tokenizers in the realm of
LLMs use tokenizers τ that break long strings into chunks.
Intuitively, generating chunks instead of individual characters helps because it effectively shortens strings without
obfuscating them using a complicated encoding.

https://github.com/genlm/genlm-bytes

1. Introduction

The prompt boundary problem. Consider the case of
GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019), which was trained over token
strings created from byte-pair encoding (BPE; Sennrich et al.
(2016); Gage (1994)). Suppose we wish to generate continuations of the prompt: "In␣the␣kingdom␣of␣the␣blind,␣the.
Unfortunately, the interface to p∆ is not ideal: it does not
accept a character string; thus, it is common to encode it as
a token string with an encoding function τ BPE :2,3

Modern language models are engineered as probability
distributions over strings of tokens rather than strings of
characters. However, this leads to a fundamental tension
between the users of language models and the engineers
who build them. Specifically, token-level models are
rife with unintuitive behaviors that—without a technical
fix—baffle users. As an illustrative example of a common
user complaint, we exhibit the prompt boundary problem
(see below). This paper provides a principled solution to
1

2

3

τ BPE ("In␣the␣kingdom␣of␣the␣blind,␣the)
" In ␣the ␣kingdom ␣of ␣the ␣blind , ␣the

= [1, 818, 262 , 13239 , 286, 262 , 7770 , 11, 262 ]

4

ETH Zürich Mila City University of New York McGill University 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair . Correspondence to: Tim Vieira
<tim.f.vieira@gmail.com>.

1

We adopt the notation of Gastaldi et al. (2025), who gave a general
characterization for when training with tokenization allows for
consistent estimation of the true distribution over characters.
2
In practice, τ BPE outputs an integer sequence; we provide the
substring gloss for readability.
3
We write δ = τ (σ) when τ is deterministic (i.e., a function).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

