PINNsAgent: Automated PDE Surrogation with Large Language Models

Qingpo Wuwu 1 * Chonghan Gao 2 * Tianyu Chen 2 Yihang Huang 3 Yuekai Zhang 1 Jianing Wang 1
Jianxin Li 2 Haoyi Zhou 2 Shanghang Zhang 1

Abstract

ods, such as finite difference (Strikwerda, 2004), finite element (Hughes, 2000), and finite volume methods (LeVeque,
2002), often incur significant computational costs, struggle
to handle nonlinearities and complex geometries (Canuto
et al., 2007; Berger & Oliger, 1984), motivating the development of data-driven alternatives. Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) have recently emerged as a promising deep learning-based approach for solving PDEs (Raissi
et al., 2017; 2019). However, designing effective neural
architectures for PINNs heavily relies on expert knowledge
and often requires extensive trial-and-error to mitigate training pathologies (Wang et al., 2023b), prompting extensive
research to explore optimal PINNs architectures and hyperparameters through numerous manual experiments. (Wang
et al., 2022) conducted a comprehensive study to understand
the relationship between PINNs architectures and their performance, while (Kaplarević-Mališić et al., 2023) manually
explored various evolutionary strategies for PINNs architecture optimization. Similarly, (Wang & Zhong, 2024)
investigated the impact of different architectural choices on
PINNs performance through extensive experiments. These
works often summarize their findings as thumb rules or
guidelines for several PDE families to assist non-experts in
manually tuning PINNs architectures and hyperparameters.
However, this manual approach is time-consuming, laborintensive, and may not generalize well to a wide range of
PDEs, highlighting the need for an automated framework
capable of hierarchically formulating and optimizing PINNs
architectures for given PDEs.

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) using neural methods has been a long-standing
scientific and engineering research pursuit.
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) have
emerged as a promising alternative to traditional
numerical methods for solving PDEs. However,
the gap between domain-specific knowledge and
deep learning expertise often limits the practical
application of PINNs. Previous works typically
involve manually conducting extensive PINNs experiments and summarizing heuristic rules for
hyperparameter tuning. In this work, we introduce PINNsAgent, a novel surrogation framework
that leverages large language models (LLMs) to
bridge the gap between domain-specific knowledge and deep learning. PINNsAgent integrates
Physics-Guided Knowledge Replay (PGKR) for
efficient knowledge transfer from solved PDEs
to similar problems, and Memory Tree Reasoning for exploring the search space of optimal
PINNs architectures. We evaluate PINNsAgent on
14 benchmark PDEs, demonstrating its effectiveness in automating the surrogation process and
significantly improving the accuracy of PINNsbased solutions. Project website: https://
qingpowuwu.github.io/PINNsAgent/.

1. Introduction

Recent advancements in large language model (LLM)-based
intelligent agents have showcased their capacity in the realm
of scientific computing, automating tasks such as code generation (Nijkamp et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Madaan
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023c), hyper-parameter tuning
(Zhang et al., 2023), and physical modeling (Alexiadis &
Ghiassi, 2024; Ali-Dib & Menou, 2023). These agents
leverage the vast knowledge encoded within LLMs to provide intelligent assistance and recommendations, opening
up new possibilities for accelerating scientific research and
development. However, their application in developing deep
learning-based solvers for PDEs has yet to fully exploit the
potential of leveraging existing database as foundational
knowledge and experimental logs as iterative feedback. We

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) is a fundamental challenge with wide-ranging applications across various
scientific and engineering domains, including fluid dynamics (Kutz, 2013), quantum mechanics (Teschl, 2014), and climate modeling (Stocker, 2011). Traditional numerical meth*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 School of Computer Science, Beihang University 3 School of
Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University. Correspondence
to: Shanghang Zhang <shanghang@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

