Point Cloud Dataset Distillation
Deyu Bo 1

Xinchao Wang 1

Abstract

significantly reduces the computational cost of training neural networks from scratch. Due to its remarkable efficiency
and effectiveness, DD has been used in a variety of domains, such as image (Zhao et al., 2021; Zhao & Bilen,
2023; Cazenavette et al., 2022), video (Wang et al., 2024),
graph (Jin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024), etc.

This study introduces dataset distillation (DD) tailored for 3D data, particularly point clouds. DD
aims to substitute large-scale real datasets with
a small set of synthetic samples while preserving model performance. Existing methods mainly
focus on structured data such as images. However, adapting DD for unstructured point clouds
poses challenges due to their diverse orientations
and resolutions in 3D space. To address these
challenges, we theoretically demonstrate the importance of matching rotation-invariant features
between real and synthetic data for 3D distillation.
We further propose a plug-and-play point cloud
rotator to align the point cloud to a canonical
orientation, facilitating the learning of rotationinvariant features by all point cloud models. Furthermore, instead of optimizing fixed-size synthetic data directly, we devise a point-wise generator to produce point clouds at various resolutions
based on the sampled noise amount. Compared
to conventional DD methods, the proposed approach, termed DD3D, enables efficient training
on low-resolution point clouds while generating
high-resolution data for evaluation, thereby significantly reducing memory requirements and enhancing model scalability. Extensive experiments
validate the effectiveness of DD3D in shape classification and part segmentation tasks across diverse scenarios, such as cross-architecture and
cross-resolution settings.

Despite great progress, existing DD methods have primarily
been applied to structured 1D and 2D data, while the distillation of unstructured 3D data, e.g., point cloud, remains
largely unexplored. Point cloud data exists in large quantities in machine vision. For example, MVPNet (Yu et al.,
2023) scans more than 87K point clouds from real-world
videos, and Objaverse-XL (Deitke et al., 2023) provides
more than 10M high-quality 3D assets. Training on such
datasets from scratch is time- and resource-intensive, highlighting the need for more efficient alternatives.
However, extending DD to 3D point clouds presents unique
challenges. First, point clouds with different orientations
represent the same semantic information, e.g., shapes. However, existing DD methods do not take the symmetry of data
into account, which cannot handle the randomly rotated
data and result in sub-optimal performance. As shown in
Figure 1(a), directly applying DD to the point clouds with
different orientations cannot obtain meaningful synthetic
data. Second, point clouds have flexible resolutions, i.e.,
the number of points, depending on specific models and
applications. Generally, a larger resolution encodes more
fine-grain information but also increases the computational
costs (Huang et al., 2024; Qiu et al., 2021). Existing DD
methods initialize the synthetic data as a fixed-size tensor,
which cannot be customized for different point cloud models. Moreover, the memory budget for fixed-size tensors
will increase rapidly when dealing with dense-resolution
scenes, e.g., segmentation (Chang et al., 2015).

1. Introduction

Once the weaknesses of existing methods are identified, it
is natural to ask: How can we build a distillation framework that overcomes the orientation and resolution issues
of 3D point clouds? To answer this question, we first theoretically prove that random rotations weaken the principle
components of real data, thereby degenerating the distillation performance. Based on this discovery, we propose
DD3D, the first DD framework for 3D point clouds, illustrated in Figure 1(b). Specifically, DD3D first uses a rotator
to convert the point cloud into a canonical orientation by

Dataset distillation (DD) (Wang et al., 2018) aims to distill
the knowledge of a large-scale dataset into a few synthetic
samples, where the models trained on the real and synthetic
data will have comparable performance. By doing so, DD
1
National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Xinchao Wang <xinchao@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

