Few-Shot Learner Generalizes Across AI-Generated Image Detection

Shiyu Wu 1 2 3 Jing Liu 1 3 Jing Li 4 Yequan Wang 2

Abstract

human society and sparked unprecedented concerns on the
credibility of online information.

Current fake image detectors trained on large
synthetic image datasets perform satisfactorily
on limited studied generative models. However,
these detectors suffer a notable performance decline over unseen models. Besides, collecting
adequate training data from online generative
models is often expensive or infeasible. To overcome these issues, we propose Few-Shot Detector (FSD), a novel AI-generated image detector
which learns a specialized metric space for effectively distinguishing unseen fake images using
very few samples. Experiments show that FSD
achieves state-of-the-art performance by +11.6%
average accuracy on the GenImage dataset with
only 10 additional samples. More importantly,
our method is better capable of capturing the
intra-category commonality in unseen images
without further training. Our code is available
at https://github.com/teheperinko541/Few-ShotAIGI-Detector.

To curb the spread of AI-generated images used for malicious purposes, there is a growing urgency to develop
detection methods capable of distinguishing fake images
from authentic ones. Early works (Zhang et al., 2019b;
Chai et al., 2020) focus on identifying artifacts in synthetic
images, which have proved to be particularly useful for
detecting GAN-generated images. With the improvement
of synthetic image datasets (Zhu et al., 2023; Boychev &
Cholakov, 2024), detecting fake images from seen generative models is no longer a difficult task. Thus, a novel challenge arises in developing classifiers that generalize across
unseen models. To address this problem, some studies (Ojha
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024) adopt a large vision-language
model to analyze images from a semantic perspective, while
others (Wang et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024) leverage the
reconstruction ability of diffusion models.
Another difficulty is the acquisition of training data. It
is often expensive or infeasible to collect enough images
from closed-source models such as DALL-E (Ramesh et al.,
2021) and Midjourney (mid, 2022). This is due to their
service prices and access restrictions. However, most existing fake image detectors (Wang et al., 2023; Ojha et al.,
2023) require large amounts of training data to achieve good
generalization, and fine-tuning without adequate data often
results in overfitting. Furthermore, the ongoing release and
updating of generative models pose a significant challenge
for existing detection systems to keep up.

1. Introduction
The development of generative models has led to significant strides in synthesizing photorealistic images, making
it much more difficult to distinguish AI-generated images
from real ones. Over the past few years, diffusion-based
models (Ho et al., 2020) have exceeded GANs (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) and become the mainstream paradigm of image
generation, due to their exceptional ability to synthesize
high-quality images. With the rapid release of open-source
models and web APIs, users can easily create vivid images
from brief textual descriptions. However, the increasing
abuse of deepfake technology has dramatically influenced

After gaining a deep insight into these limitations, we propose an innovative approach based on few-shot learning
to overcome them. A robust model is also developed to
validate the efficacy of our solution. We first point out
that current AI-generated image detection is a domain generalization task. Previous studies have been dedicated to
discovering a universal indicator effective for detecting diverse fake images. However, they overlook the significant
distinctions among data from different domains. We observe
that images from unseen domains can actually be obtained
in many real-world scenarios. Based on this fact, the complicated task can be transformed into a more tractable one,
called few-shot classification, through limited samples from
unseen domains. Thus, we can extract rich domain-specific

1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing,
China 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Yequan Wang <tshwangyequan@gmail.com>, Jing Liu
<jliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

