MGD3 : Mode-Guided Dataset Distillation using Diffusion Models

Jeffrey A. Chan-Santiago 1 Praveen Tirupattur 1 Gaurav Kumar Nayak 2 Gaowen Liu 3 Mubarak Shah 1
Optimization-based Dataset Distillation

Abstract
Dataset distillation has emerged as an effective
strategy, significantly reducing training costs and
facilitating more efficient model deployment. Recent advances have leveraged generative models to distill datasets by capturing the underlying data distribution. Unfortunately, existing
methods require model fine-tuning with distillation losses to encourage diversity and representativeness. However, these methods do not
guarantee sample diversity, limiting their performance. We propose a mode-guided diffusion
model leveraging a pre-trained diffusion model
without the need to fine-tune with distillation
losses. Our approach addresses dataset diversity in three stages: Mode Discovery to identify distinct data modes, Mode Guidance to enhance intra-class diversity, and Stop Guidance to
mitigate artifacts in synthetic samples that affect
performance. Our approach outperforms stateof-the-art methods, achieving accuracy gains of
4.4%, 2.9%, 1.6%, and 1.6% on ImageNette,
ImageIDC, ImageNet-100, and ImageNet-1K,
respectively. Our method eliminates the need
for fine-tuning diffusion models with distillation losses, significantly reducing computational
costs. Our code is available on the project
webpage: https://jachansantiago.github.io/modeguided-distillation/

S

Dataset
Matching Loss

T

Distilled Dataset

Original Dataset
Gradient Flow

Generative Dataset Distillation

S

T
Original Dataset

Generative
Model

Dataset Distribution Learning

Generative
Model

Distilled Dataset

Dataset synthesis

Figure 1. Optimization-based Dataset Distillation: Optimizes
the distilled dataset to match the statistics of gradient/features of
the Original Dataset. Generative Dataset Distillation: First, it
learns the dataset distribution of the original dataset and then sample a dataset that approximates the original dataset distribution.

presents significant challenges for researchers constrained
by limited computation and storage resources. In response,
the research community started to focus on developing techniques to address these limitations. While model pruning
(Liu et al., 2017; He et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2019; Sharma
& Foroosh, 2022) and quantization (Wu et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2021; Chauhan et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023) have been
introduced to improve model efficiency, core set selection
and dataset distillation (Wang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2022)
have emerged as prominent techniques for reducing the size
of training datasets to accelerate model training.

1
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central
Florida, Orlando, Florida, United States 2 Mehta Family School of
Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India 3 Cisco Research,
San Jose, California, United States. Correspondence to: Jeffrey A.
Chan-Santiago <jeffrey.chansantiago@ucf.edu>.

The process of reducing the training dataset involves removing redundant information while retaining essential data.
Core set selection (Welling, 2009; Chen et al., 2010; Rebuffi
et al., 2017; Castro et al., 2018) based approaches were
initially introduced for building condensed datasets, which
involves selecting a few prototypical examples from the
original dataset to build the smaller dataset. However, these
approaches are limited to choosing the samples from the
original dataset, which considerably restricts the expressiveness of the condensed dataset. The task of dataset distillation
is to distill information from a large training dataset into
a smaller dataset with few synthetic samples such that a
model trained on the smaller dataset achieves performance
comparable to the model trained on the original dataset.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Optimization-based dataset distillation methods follow the
data matching framework (Cazenavette et al., 2022; 2023;
Zhao & Bilen, 2023), where the distilled dataset is updated

1. Introduction
The rapid advancements in machine learning are marked by
a trend towards increasingly large datasets and models to
achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, this trend

1

