A General Framework for Inference-Time Scaling
and Steering of Diffusion Models

Raghav Singhal * 1 Zachary Horvitz * 2 Ryan Teehan * 1
Mengye Ren 1 Zhou Yu 2 3 Kathleen McKeown 2 Rajesh Ranganath 1 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015) have led to advances in modeling images (Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2020b), videos (Ho et al., 2022), and
proteins (Gruver et al., 2023), as well as promising results
for text generation (Li et al., 2022; Han et al., 2023; Gong
et al., 2023; Gulrajani & Hashimoto, 2023; Horvitz et al.,
2024). Despite these advances, diffusion models have failure modes. For example, text-to-image models often fail
to adhere to text prompts (Ghosh et al., 2024). Additionally, adapting models to produce samples that conform to
specific user preferences remains a challenge.

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable
performance in generative modeling, but generating samples with specific desiderata remains
challenging. Existing solutions — such as finetuning, best-of-n sampling, and gradient-based
guidance — are expensive, inefficient, or limited in applicability. In this work, we introduce Feynman-Kac (FK) steering, which applies
Feynman-Kac interacting particle systems to the
inference-time steering of diffusion models with
arbitrary reward functions. FK steering works by
generating multiple trajectories, called particles,
and resampling particles at intermediate steps
based on scores computed using functions called
potentials. Potentials are defined using rewards
for intermediate states and are chosen such that a
high score indicates the particle will yield a highreward sample. We explore various choices of
potentials, rewards, and samplers. Steering textto-image models with a human preference reward, we find that FK steering outperforms finetuned models with just 2 particles. Moreover,
FK steering a 0.8B parameter model outperforms
a 2.6B model, achieving state-of-the-art performance on prompt fidelity. We also steer text diffusion models with rewards for text quality and
rare attributes such as toxicity, and find that FK
steering generates lower perplexity text and enables gradient-free control. Overall, inferencetime scaling and steering of diffusion models,
even training-free, provides significant quality
and controllability benefits. Code available here.

One approach for making generative models pθ (x) adhere
to user preferences is to encode preferences in a reward
r(x0 ) and sample from the tilted distribution ptarget (x) ∝
pθ (x) exp(r(x)) (Korbak et al., 2022), where r(x) can
be human preference models (Xu et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
2023b), vision-language models (Liu et al., 2024a), or likelihoods p(y | x) (Wu et al., 2023a). Sampling from this
tilted distribution favors high-reward samples. Current
approaches for sampling from the tilted distribution can
be categorized into (a) fine-tuning and (b) inference-time
steering methods.
Black et al. (2023), Fan et al. (2024), Domingo-Enrich
et al. (2024), and Wallace et al. (2024) fine-tune diffusion
models with reward functions. However, fine-tuning requires expensive training and ties the model to the reward
used while training. Alternatively, two common inferencetime approaches are gradient-based guidance (Song et al.,
2020b; Bansal et al., 2023) and best-of-n sampling. Bestof-n sampling can be used for any diffusion model and
reward function, however, it wastes computation on lowreward samples (Chatterjee & Diaconis, 2018). Gradientbased guidance presents an efficient alternative, but it is
limited to differentiable reward functions and continuousstate diffusion models.

*

Equal contribution 1 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University 2 Columbia University 3 Arxlex.ai
4
Center for Data Science, New York University. Correspondence
to: Raghav Singhal <rsinghal@nyu.edu>, Zachary Horvitz
<zfh2000@columbia.edu>, Ryan Teehan <rst306@nyu.edu>.

In this work, we present FK steering, a flexible framework
for steering diffusion-based generative models with arbitrary rewards that uses FK interacting particle system methods (Moral, 2004; Vestal et al., 2008). We generalize previous works that define Feynman-Kac measures to condition-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

