How to set AdamW’s weight decay as you scale model and dataset size

Xi Wang 1 Laurence Aitchison 2

Abstract

from small-scale student projects to the largest LLM training runs. However, for this workflow to be effective, we
need to understand how to transfer optimal hyperparameters from smaller-scale prototyping runs to the final, largest
model and dataset. This is very well studied for the optimal
learning rate as you scale up width and depth (e.g. Yang
et al., 2022; Bordelon et al., 2024; Noci et al., 2024; Everett
et al., 2024). However, the largest LLM pretraining runs (e.g.
Zhang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Tow et al., 2023)
use an optimizer with a weight decay term such as AdamW
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018), and it is not understood how to
scale the AdamW weight decay hyperparameter with model
sizes, and how to scale hyperparameters as we scale dataset
size. Here, we fix this gap, showing how the optimal weight
decay transfers across model width and dataset size.

The scaling of the optimal AdamW weight decay
hyperparameter with model and dataset size is
critical as we seek to build larger models, but is
poorly understood. We show that weights learned
by AdamW can be understood as an exponential
moving average (EMA) of recent updates. This
gives critical insights for how to set the weight decay in AdamW, and how the weight decay should
scale with model and dataset size. In particular,
the key hyperparameter for an exponential moving average is the EMA timescale. Intuitively, the
EMA timescale can be understood as the number of recent iterations the EMA averages over.
We find that the optimal timescale, measured in
epochs, is roughly constant as we change model
and dataset size. Moreover, given a learning rate,
there is a one-to-one mapping from the EMA
timescale to the weight decay hyperparameter.
Thus, if the optimal EMA timescale is constant,
that implies that as the dataset size increases, the
optimal weight decay should fall and as the model
size increases, the optimal weight decay should
increase (if we follow the muP recommendation
for scaling the learning rate). We validate these
scaling rules on ResNet-18 and Vision Transformers trained on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, and on
NanoGPT pre-training on OpenWebText. Finally,
we found that as training progresses, muP’s learning rate scaling breaks down for AdamW unless
weight decay is scaled appropriately.

To understand how to transfer weight decay across model
and dataset sizes, we argue that AdamW should be understood as an Exponential Moving Average (EMA). Of course,
both Adam and AdamW use EMAs to estimate the average
gradient, mt , and average squared gradient, vt . That is not
what we are talking about. Instead, we observe that in algorithms with decoupled weight decay (i.e. AdamW but not
Adam), the weights themselves are an EMA of recent updates (see Sec. 3.1). The key hyperparameter in an EMA is
the EMA timescale, which intuitively describes the number
of previous iterations that the EMA averages over, which
is given by τiter = 1/(ηλ) (Sec. 3.1). In fact, we prove and
empirically verify that under a η-dependent initialization
and a fully-scale invariant network, AdamW’s optimization
trajectory is controlled solely by the timescale τiter for all
combinations of learning rate η and weight decay coefficient
λ (Sec. 3.2).
Perhaps more importantly, the EMA perspective tells us
how to set the weight decay parameter. Specifically, we
can take into account the dataset and batch sizes to measure the timescale in epochs, i.e. τepoch = τiter /M , where
M = N/B denotes the number of iterations per epoch in a
training dataset of N samples under a batch size of B, which
measures the fraction of the dataset that contributes to the
current weights through the EMA. We empirically observed
that the optimal τepoch is stable across model and dataset
sizes, which, consequently provides a guideline for scaling weight decay. In particular, under a fixed learning rate
schedule, as the dataset size N increases, we find that the

1. Introduction
A common machine learning workflow is to prototype by
training many smaller models, then at the end do one final
training run, with the largest possible model on the largest
possible dataset. This workflow is used in many settings,
1
Johns Hopkins University, US 2 University of Bristol, UK.
Correspondence to: Xi Wang <xidulu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

