Nonlinear transformers can perform inference-time feature learning

Naoki Nishikawa * 1 2 Yujin Song * 1 2 Kazusato Oko 2 3 Denny Wu 4 5 Taiji Suzuki 1 2

Abstract

contain input-output pairs exhibiting certain functional relationships. For instance, a substantial body of research (Garg
et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023;
Mahankali et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2023; Gatmiry et al.,
2024) has demonstrated that linear transformers can perform
linear regression in-context. As for nonlinear transformers, which possess greater expressive power to implement
more complex algorithms (Bai et al., 2023; Cheng et al.,
2023; Guo et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024), existing optimization analyses generally do not provide end-to-end statistical
guarantees for in-context learning of nontrivial nonlinear
function classes (Kim & Suzuki, 2024a; Yang et al., 2024;
Bu et al., 2024). A notable exception is Oko et al. (2024b),
which characterizes the optimization and sample complexity
of in-context learning for Gaussian single-index models using a shallow transformer. Specifically, they showed that for
a degree-P single-index function class of dimension r, the
required in-context sample size of the pretrained transformer
scales as rΘ(P ) , which is comparable to the performance of
kernel methods on an r-dimensional subspace.

Pretrained transformers have demonstrated the
ability to implement various algorithms at inference time without parameter updates. While theoretical works have established this capability
through constructions and approximation guarantees, the optimization and statistical efficiency aspects remain understudied. In this work, we investigate how transformers learn features in-context –
a key mechanism underlying their inference-time
adaptivity. We focus on the in-context learning of
single-index models y = σ∗ (⟨x, β⟩), which are
low-dimensional nonlinear functions parameterized by feature vector β. We prove that transformers pretrained by gradient-based optimization can
perform inference-time feature learning, i.e., extract information of the target features β solely
from test prompts (despite β varying across different prompts), hence achieving an in-context statistical efficiency that surpasses any non-adaptive
(fixed-basis) algorithms such as kernel methods.
Moreover, we show that the inference-time sample complexity surpasses the Correlational Statistical Query (CSQ) lower bound, owing to nonlinear label transformations naturally induced by the
Softmax self-attention mechanism.

2

Inference-Time Feature Learning. Our starting point
is the observation that for learning low-dimensional target functions (e.g., single-index models) on isotropic data,
kernel methods and, more generally, non-adaptive (fixedfeature) estimators are statistically suboptimal. Numerous
prior studies have shown that neural networks can outperform kernel methods due to feature learning (Ghorbani et al.,
2019; Ba et al., 2022; Damian et al., 2022; Abbe et al., 2022),
where model parameters adapt to the low-dimensional structure of the learning problem during gradient-based training.
In the ICL analysis of Oko et al. (2024b), transformers implement a kernel-like inference algorithm on a nonlinear
m
feature map
P {fj (·)}j=1 fixed across tasks, constructing the
predictor j aj fj (·) by fitting the coefficients aj in-context.
In contrast, we expect that better sample complexity can be
achieved by an algorithm that adaptively selects the feature
map at inference time, i.e., varying {fj (·)}m
j=1 based on the
in-context examples.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Motivated by the importance of adaptivity in the statistical
efficiency of neural networks (Bach, 2017; Suzuki, 2019),
in this work we theoretically study inference-time feature
learning – the ability to adaptively extract latent features of
the ground truth from test prompts without any parameter
updates. We ask the following question.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are capable of In-Context
Learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020), where they construct
variable inference-time algorithms based on examples provided in the test prompt, without updating the model parameters. Recent theoretical studies have shown that pretrained
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) can implement regression algorithms in their forward passes when test prompts
*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan 3 Unversity of California, Berkeley
4
New York University 5 Flatiron Institute. Correspondence to:
Naoki Nishikawa <nishikawa-naoki259@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>,
Yujin Song <y.song.research@gmail.com>.

1

