Maintaining Proportional Committees with Dynamic Candidate Sets

Chris Dong 1 Jannik Peters 2

Abstract

of multiwinner voting: n voters submit preferences over a
subset of candidates, from which k need to be selected. For
instance, in the classical centroid clustering problem, the
voters correspond to the points to be clustered, the candidates are the possible cluster centers, k is the number of
cluster centers to be selected, and the preferences are derived from the distances between the points and the cluster
centers.

Multiwinner voting is the study of electing a fixedsize committee given individual agents’ preferences over candidates. Most research in this field
has been limited to a static setting, with only one
election over a fixed set of candidates. However,
this approach overlooks the dynamic nature of
applications, where candidate sets are subject to
change. We extend the study of proportionality
in multiwinner voting to dynamic settings, allowing candidates to join or leave the election and
demanding that each chosen committee satisfies
proportionality without differing too much from
the previously selected committee. We consider
approval preferences, ranked preferences, and the
proportional clustering setting. In these settings,
we either provide algorithms making few changes
or show that such algorithms cannot exist for various proportionality axioms. In particular, we
show that such algorithms cannot exist for ranked
preferences and provide amortized and exact algorithms for several proportionality notions in the
other two settings.

In the vast majority of settings studied so far, multiwinner
voting is “one-shot”: voters and candidates are given, and
the task is to make one selection only. However, assuming
such a static setting might be too restrictive for real-world
applications (a concern raised, for instance, by Boehmer and
Niedermeier, 2021; Elkind et al., 2024). In election settings,
candidates might concede their seat and then need to be
replaced (Gallagher, 1996); in hiring settings, candidates
could apply for the job or decline offers at any time during a
hiring procedure (Brill et al., 2023); and in facility location
problems, new possible locations might open up.
As a possible application, consider the setting of civic participation platforms (Halpern et al., 2023; Fish et al., 2024). A
website (such as https://pol.is, studied by Halpern
et al.) wants to curate a slate of representative new comments on its homepage. In this setting, the comments correspond to candidates, and the voters correspond to the users
of the website. The voters express which comments they
like, for instance, by up- or down-voting them. Such a setting, however, is inherently “online”, as new comments get
posted, and old comments get removed when they become
out-of-date. Our work studies if it is possible to maintain
a slate of representative comments, while only making a
small amount of changes with each update.

1. Dynamic Committee Selection
Given diverse preferences of agents, a central subject of research in artificial intelligence, collective decision-making,
and social choice theory is the task of choosing a subset
of possible candidate items that proportionally represents
the agents’ preferences. Applications include clustering
(Caragiannis et al., 2024; Kellerhals and Peters, 2024), facility location (Jung et al., 2020), query answering, and
top-k selection protocols (Behar and Cohen, 2022; Islam
et al., 2024), or democratic innovations like participatory
budgeting (Peters et al., 2021) or civic participation platforms (Fish et al., 2024). Most of the previously mentioned
papers derive their models from the basic social choice task

We follow in the footsteps of recent work in the matching (Matuschke et al., 2019; Bernstein et al., 2019), and
clustering (Bhattacharya et al., 2024; Ł ˛
acki et al., 2024) literature and study dynamic multiwinner voting. In particular,
we study low recourse dynamic proportional multiwinner
voting and answer the following question: can we select
proportional committees such that after the candidate set
changes, we can restore proportionality by altering the original committee slightly?

*

Equal contribution 1 TU Munich 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Chris Dong <chris.dong@tum.de>,
Jannik Peters <peters@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In a recent paper Chen, Hatschka, and Simola (2024) examined a highly related problem: given two different commit1

