Energy-Based Flow Matching for Generating 3D Molecular Structure

Wenyin Zhou 1 Christopher Iliffe Sprague 1 2 3 Vsevolod Viliuga 2 4 5 Matteo Tadiello 2 4 Arne Elofsson 2 4
Hossein Azizpour 1 2

Abstract

& Ben-Tal, 2018). It finds various applications, such as
protein docking, which generates the bound structure of
protein-ligand complex, and de novo protein design, which
creates novel proteins fulfilling certain desirable biological functions. Regression-based structure prediction models (Jumper et al., 2021; Baek et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023)
have demonstrated remarkable performance by using a deep
neural network to make a point estimate of the structure.
However, these methods do not capture aleatoric uncertainty
due to the possibility of multiple molecular conformations.

Molecular structure generation is a fundamental
problem that involves determining the 3D positions of molecules’ constituents. It has crucial
biological applications, such as molecular docking, protein folding, and molecular design. Recent advances in generative modeling, such as
diffusion models and flow matching, have made
great progress on these tasks by modeling molecular conformations as a distribution. In this work,
we focus on flow matching and adopt an energybased perspective to improve training and inference of structure generation models. Our view
results in a mapping function, represented by a
deep network, that is directly learned to iteratively map random configurations, i.e. samples
from the source distribution, to target structures,
i.e. points in the data manifold. This yields a conceptually simple and empirically effective flow
matching setup that is theoretically justified and
has interesting connections to fundamental properties such as idempotency and stability, as well
as the empirically useful techniques such as structure refinement in AlphaFold. Experiments on
protein docking as well as protein backbone generation consistently demonstrate the method’s effectiveness, where it outperforms recent baselines
of task-associated flow matching and diffusion
models, using a similar computational budget.

In contrast to regression-based models, generative methods, such as diffusion (Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021) and flow matching models (Lipman et al., 2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Liu
et al., 2022), can generate several possible configurations
modeling the positional distribution of molecules. Owing
to this advantage, sampling-based approach has recently
attracted huge interest in molecular structure generation, including molecular conformer generation (Hoogeboom et al.,
2022), molecular docking (Corso et al., 2023), and protein
design (Watson et al., 2023; Campbell et al., 2024).
Here, importantly, we first observe that these families
of generative modeling are generally reminiscent of the
computational models for molecular structure determination. Particularly, in computational models, a stable equilibrium structure is sought as the local minimum of an
energy function governed by the Boltzmann distribution
p(x) ∝ exp (−E(x)), which resembles modeling (and generating from) the data distribution by estimating the score –
or a corresponding energy – of its density. In this work, we
make this connection explicit and propose a simple modification of the objective in flow matching that directly minimizes
an energy function.

1. Introduction
Structure prediction, the task to determine a molecule’s 3D
structure, is a fundamental problem in structural biology
for understanding diverse biological mechanisms (Kessel

Specifically, we take the reconstruction error ∥x − x̂∥ as the
energy function and locally construct the energy landscape
using contrastive predictions sampled from the flow model.
Leveraging a data parameterization (Stärk et al., 2023; Yim
et al., 2023a) of flow matching, minimizing our devised
energy, quite intriguingly, translates into training a neural
network that iteratively predicts and refines the generated
sample as shown in Fig. 1, rendering the neural network, an
approximated idempotent function.

1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
Science for Life Laboratory, Sweden 3 The Alan Turing Institute,
London, United Kingdom 4 DBB at Stockholm University, Sweden
5
Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany.
Correspondence to: Wenyin Zhou <wenyinz@kth.se>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

