On the Vulnerability of Applying Retrieval-Augmented Generation within
Knowledge-Intensive Application Domains

Xun Xian 1 Ganghua Wang 2 Xuan Bi 3 Rui Zhang 4 Jayanth Srinivasa 5 Ashish Kundu 5 Charles Fleming 5
Mingyi Hong 1 Jie Ding 6

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved exceptional
performance across a wide range of benchmark tasks spanning multiple domains (Anil et al., 2023; Achiam et al.,
2023; Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023). However, they also
suffer from several undesirable behaviors. For example,
LLMs can generate responses that seem reasonable but are
not factually correct, a phenomenon known as hallucination (Ji et al., 2023). Additionally, due to data privacy regulations such as GDPR (Voigt & Von dem Bussche, 2017),
direct training on specific data domains may be restricted.
This can result in disparities between their acquired internal
knowledge and the real-world challenges they encounter. It
can be particularly concerning in domains require extensive
knowledge, such as healthcare (Tian et al., 2024; Hersh,
2024), finance (Loukas et al., 2023) and legal questionanswering (Wiratunga et al., 2024). These challenges have
sparked interest in more principled methods for decoding
and alignment (Wang et al., 2025), as well as techniques
that inject external knowledge to bridge domain gaps, such
as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Khandelwal
et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022; Xiong
et al., 2024).

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has been
empirically shown to enhance the performance
of large language models (LLMs) in knowledgeintensive domains such as healthcare, finance, and
legal contexts. Given a query, RAG retrieves relevant documents from a corpus and integrates
them into the LLMs’ generation process. In this
study, we investigate the adversarial robustness
of RAG, focusing specifically on examining the
retrieval system. First, across 225 different setup
combinations of corpus, retriever, query, and targeted information, we show that retrieval systems
are vulnerable to universal poisoning attacks in
medical Q&A. In such attacks, adversaries generate poisoned documents containing a broad spectrum of targeted information, such as personally
identifiable information. When these poisoned
documents are inserted into a corpus, they can
be accurately retrieved by any users, as long as
attacker-specified queries are used. To understand
this vulnerability, we discovered that the deviation from the query’s embedding to that of the poisoned document tends to follow a pattern in which
the high similarity between the poisoned document and the query is retained, thereby enabling
precise retrieval. Based on these findings, we develop a new detection-based defense. Through
extensive experiments spanning various Q&A domains, we observed that our proposed method
consistently achieves excellent detection rates in
nearly all cases.

The RAG approach typically involves two steps: retrieval
and augmentation. Upon receiving an input query, RAG
retrieves the top K relevant data from an external data
corpus. It then integrates this retrieved information with
its internal knowledge to make final predictions. Empirical evidence suggests that LLMs employing the RAG
scheme significantly outperform their non-retrieval-based
counterparts in knowledge-intensive domains like finance
and medicine (Borgeaud et al., 2022; Xiong et al., 2024).
For instance, the authors of (Xiong et al., 2024) developed
a state-of-the-art benchmark for the use of RAG in the medical domain. The authors observed an increase in prediction
accuracy of up to 18% with RAG compared to non-retrieval
and chain-of-thoughts versions across large-scale healthcare
tasks, utilizing 41 different combinations of medical data
corpora, retrievers, and LLMs.

1
Department of ECE, University of Minnesota 2 University
of Chicago, Data Science Institute 3 Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota 4 Division of Computational Health
Sciences, University of Minnesota 5 Cisco Research 6 School of
Statistics, University of Minnesota. Correspondence to: Jie Ding
<dingj@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The use of retrieved knowledge in RAG has also raised security and privacy concerns, especially when the external
1

