Empirical Privacy Variance

Yuzheng Hu * 1

Fan Wu * 1 Ruicheng Xian 1
Yuhang Liu 2 Lydia Zakynthinou 3
Chiyuan Zhang 4 David Forsyth 1

Abstract

Pritish Kamath 4

solving that involves reasoning and coding (Stiennon et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2023; Roziere et al., 2023); these capabilities arise from large-scale pre-training on massive
datasets (Dubey et al., 2024; Gemma Team et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2024). To enhance domain specialization and personalization, a common practice is to fine-tune pre-trained models on downstream tasks with user-contributed data (Guo
& Yu, 2022; Li et al., 2024). However, this process introduces significant privacy concerns, as datasets often contain
sensitive information of individuals or organizations, which
could be memorized and potentially divulged by LLMs (Carlini et al., 2021; 2023; Lukas et al., 2023; Biderman et al.,
2024; Prashanth et al., 2025).

We propose the notion of empirical privacy
variance and study it in the context of differentially private fine-tuning of language models.
Specifically, we show that models calibrated to
the same (ε, δ)-DP guarantee using DP-SGD
with different hyperparameter configurations
can exhibit significant variations in empirical
privacy, which we quantify through the lens of
memorization. We investigate the generality of
this phenomenon across multiple dimensions and
discuss why it is surprising and relevant. Through
regression analysis, we examine how individual
and composite hyperparameters influence empirical privacy. The results reveal a no-free-lunch
trade-off: existing practices of hyperparameter
tuning in DP-SGD, which focus on optimizing
utility under a fixed privacy budget, often come at
the expense of empirical privacy. To address this,
we propose refined heuristics for hyperparameter
selection that explicitly account for empirical
privacy, showing that they are both precise and
practically useful. Finally, we take preliminary
steps to understand empirical privacy variance.
We propose two hypotheses, identify limitations
in existing techniques like privacy auditing, and
outline open questions for future research.

In response, differential privacy (DP; Dwork et al., 2006), a
widely-adopted standard for privacy protection, has been incorporated into various stages of the LLM training pipeline,
leading to a fruitful line of research advancing the utilityprivacy trade-off in LLMs (Anil et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2022; Bu et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024). Nevertheless, privacy in LLMs is a nuanced concept, stemming not
only from the unstructured and context-dependent nature of
private information in natural language (Brown et al., 2022),
but also from the generative nature of these models: during
real-time user-model interactions, LLMs can inadvertently
regurgitate private information, and such leaks are immediately made apparent to users (Sebastian, 2023; Falcão &
Canedo, 2024). This reflects a pragmatic view on privacy
centering on perceptions of model behaviors, which we term
empirical privacy,1 in contrast to the theoretically-grounded
definition of DP. The gap between DP’s theoretical
guarantees and empirical privacy concerns surrounding
LLMs has significant implications: research shows that
people can understand better the implications of DP than
its formal definitions (Xiong et al., 2020), and failures to
effectively communicate DP’s promise can discourage data
sharing (Cummings et al., 2021; Nanayakkara et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Modern large language models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable proficiency on a wide range of tasks, from traditional ones such as summarization, to complex problem
*

Equal contribution Work done in part while at Simons Institute. 1 Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences 3 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of California Berkeley 4 Google Research. Correspondence to: Yuzheng Hu <yh46@illinois.edu>,
Fan Wu <fanw6@illinois.edu>.

1
While the term empirical privacy is usually associated with
privacy attacks (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Shokri et al., 2017; Balle
et al., 2022) in the literature (Cormode et al., 2013; Andrew et al.,
2024), our definition is broader and more aligned with LLMs: it
extends the existing notion by framing vulnerability against attacks
as a model behavior and shifts from worst-case threat models to
practical, user-focused metrics that reflect tangible privacy risks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

