Commute Graph Neural Networks

Wei Zhuo † 1 2 Han Yu 2 Guang Tan 1 Xiaoxiao Li 3 4

Abstract

Digraph

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown
remarkable success in learning from graphstructured data. However, their application to
directed graphs (digraphs) presents unique challenges, primarily due to the inherent asymmetry in
node relationships. Traditional GNNs are adept at
capturing unidirectional relations but fall short in
encoding the mutual path dependencies between
nodes, such as asymmetrical shortest paths typically found in digraphs. Recognizing this gap,
we introduce Commute Graph Neural Networks
(CGNN), an approach that seamlessly integrates
node-wise commute time into the message passing scheme. The cornerstone of CGNN is an efficient method for computing commute time using
a newly formulated digraph Laplacian. Commute
time is then integrated into the neighborhood aggregation process, with neighbor contributions
weighted according to their respective commute
time to the central node in each layer. It enables
CGNN to directly capture the mutual, asymmetric
relationships in digraphs. Extensive experiments
on 8 benchmarking datasets confirm the superiority of CGNN against 13 state-of-the-art methods.

asymmetric relationships

Undirected
graph

symmetric relationships

Figure 1: A digraph and its undirected counterpart. Blue
arrows indicate unidirectional paths, together with longer
paths in the gray area, forming commute closed loops between the central node vi and its outgoing neighbors vj and
vk . In the undirected graph, shortest path distances (SPD)
between nodes are symmetric. However, in the digraph, the
fact that unidirectional SPDs are equal does not imply that
mutual SPDs will also be equal. For instance, while the
SPDs from vi to vj and vk are identical, the reverse SPD
from vj and vk back to vi do not necessarily match these
distances.

2023). The essence of GNN-based digraph analysis lies in
utilizing GNNs to learn expressive node representations that
encode edge direction information.
To achieve this, modern digraph neural networks are designed to integrate edge direction information into the message passing process by distinguishing between incoming
and outgoing edges. This distinction enables the central
node to learn directionally discriminative information from
its neighbors. As illustrated in the digraph of Figure 1,
given a central node vi , a 1-layer digraph neural network
can aggregate messages from vi ’s incoming neighbor vm
and outgoing neighbor vj , and simultaneously capture edge
directions by applying direction-specific aggregation functions (Rossi et al., 2023), or by predefining edge-specific
weights (Zhang et al., 2021; Tong et al., 2020b).

1. Introduction
Directed graphs (digraphs) are widely employed to model
relational structures in diverse domains, such as social
networks (Cross et al., 2001) and recommendation systems (Qiu et al., 2020). Recently, the advances of graph
neural networks (GNNs) have inspired various attempts to
adopt GNNs for analyzing digraphs (Tong et al., 2020a;b;
2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Rossi et al., 2023; Geisler et al.,
†
Most of this work was done when Wei Zhuo
<wei.zhuo@ntu.edu.sg> was with Shenzhen Campus of
Sun Yat-sen University. 1 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 The
University of British Columbia, Canada 4 Vector Institute, Canada.
Correspondence to: Guang Tan <tanguang@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Despite the advancements, current digraph neural networks
primarily capture unidirectional1 relationships between
nodes, neglecting the complexity arising from path asymme-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
‘unidirectional’ refers to relationships in digraphs where edges
have a specific direction from one node to another.

1

