The Double-Ellipsoid Geometry of CLIP

Meir Yossef Levi 1 Guy Gilboa 1

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP)
is highly instrumental in machine learning applications within a large variety of domains. We investigate the geometry of this embedding, which
is still not well understood, and show that text
and image reside on linearly separable ellipsoid
shells, not centered at the origin. We explain the
benefits of having this structure, allowing to better embed instances according to their uncertainty
during contrastive training. Frequent concepts in
the dataset yield more false negatives, inducing
greater uncertainty. A new notion of conformity
is introduced, which measures the average cosine
similarity of an instance to any other instance
within a representative data set. We prove this
measure can be accurately estimated by simply
computing the cosine similarity to the modality
mean vector. Furthermore, we find that CLIP’s
modality gap optimizes the matching of the conformity distributions of image and text.

Figure 1. Sketch of CLIP general geometry: image and text are
embedded on linearly separable ellipsoid shells, not centered at the
origin. This allows to control uncertainty in contrastive learning,
where as themes become more rare (lower uncertainty) they reside
farther from the mean modality vector.

2022).
Despite these advances, the structure of CLIP’s latent space
remains poorly understood. Existing studies focus on properties like alignment, uniformity, and the modality gap (Liang
et al., 2022) but overlook the geometry underlying this multimodal space. The L2-normalization phase, which is integral
when performing cosine similarity, practically reducing the
data to the unit hypersphere. Since normalization is an
information-reducing process, understanding the primary
embeddings prior to normalization can reveal deeper insights into the latent space geometry.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal approaches, particularly Contrastive LanguageImage Pre-Training (CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021), have
revolutionized computer vision tasks, enabling applications
such as high-quality image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022;
Nichol et al., 2021), open-vocabulary classification (He
et al., 2023), segmentation (Liang et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2024), detection (Wu et al., 2023), captioning (Mokady
et al., 2021; Cho et al., 2022), and semantic editing (Kim
et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2023). Beyond images, CLIP’s
success extends to 3D (Hegde et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2022), video (Tang et al., 2021; Luo et al.,
2022), and audio domains (Wu et al., 2022; Guzhov et al.,

In this paper, we propose analyzing the pre-normalized
CLIP primary embedding for three key reasons: (1) Enhancing downstream tasks. While L2 -normalization is integral
to the cosine similarity used during training, the primary embedding is directly employed in critical downstream tasks,
including image generation and semantic editing. Analysis
of the latent geometry can enhance the performance of these
tasks. (2) Semantic significance of magnitude. Despite
the cosine similarity is agnostic to the norm, we observe
that magnitude still plays a significant and meaningful role.
Notably, the largest embeddings in MS-COCO correspond

1
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Meir Yossef Levi <me.levi@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Guy Gilboa <guy.gilboa@ee.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

