AuPair: Golden Example Pairs for Code Repair

Aditi Mavalankar 1 Hassan Mansoor 1 Zita Marinho 1 Masha Samsikova 1 Tom Schaul 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent progress in the field of Large Language Models
(LLMs) has resulted in models that keep getting better
at generating responses to user queries. When providing
these already powerful models with more inference-time
compute—increasing number of LLM calls—methods that
sample different responses and then select the best among
them, such as best-of-N (Stiennon et al., 2020) or selfconsistency (Wang et al., 2023b), have shown clear benefits. While these approaches are more breadth-focused,
another way to leverage inference time compute is to improve or repair the LLM’s initial guesses by generating
better fixes (Olausson et al., 2024). We propose combining
the benefits of both these approaches to generate a wide set
of repaired solutions for poor initial LLM responses, out of
which the highest-scoring solution is the final answer.

Scaling up inference-time compute has proven
to be a valuable strategy in improving the performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) without fine-tuning. An important task that can benefit
from additional inference-time compute is selfrepair; given an initial flawed response or guess,
the LLM corrects its own mistake and produces
an improved response or fix. We leverage the incontext learning ability of LLMs to perform selfrepair in the coding domain. The key contribution
of our paper is an approach that synthesises and
selects an ordered set of golden example pairs,
or AuPairs, of these initial guesses and subsequent fixes for the corresponding problems. Each
such AuPair is provided as a single in-context
example at inference time to generate a repaired
solution. For an inference-time compute budget
of N LLM calls per problem, N AuPairs are used
to generate N repaired solutions, out of which
the highest-scoring solution is the final answer.
The underlying intuition is that if the LLM is
given a different example of fixing an incorrect
guess each time, it can subsequently generate a
diverse set of repaired solutions. Our algorithm
selects these AuPairs in a manner that maximises
complementarity and usefulness. We demonstrate
the results of our algorithm on 5 LLMs across 7
competitive programming datasets for the code
repair task. Our algorithm yields a significant
boost in performance compared to best-of-N and
self-repair, and also exhibits strong generalisation across datasets and models. Moreover, our
approach shows stronger scaling with inferencetime compute budget compared to baselines.

To generate a wide range of repaired solutions for each
initial LLM response, we exploit the in-context learning
capability exhibited by LLMs. The main contribution of our
paper is an algorithm that, given an inference-time compute
budget of N LLM calls, produces an ordered set of up to
N golden example pairs, or AuPairs1 . Each such AuPair
contains the initial guess and consequent fix for the corresponding coding problem, along with their respective unit
test scores. An example AuPair is illustrated in Fig. 1. At
inference time, the contents of an AuPair are concatenated
as described in § A.10, and provided as a 1-shot example to
generate a fix for the test problem. This is done for each of
the N AuPairs; of all the fixes generated, the one that gets
the highest score on the unit tests is selected.
A core ingredient of our proposed algorithm involves the
selection of these AuPairs. We propose a submodular approach that selects AuPairs based on the ability of each
pair to solve different problems in a held-out validation
set. Since the AuPairs are selected such that each subsequent AuPair solves a different set of problems than the
ones solved by its predecessor AuPairs, by design, we get
complementary AuPairs. Also, as the list of AuPairs is constructed by taking the greedy pair at each step, only those

1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Aditi Mavalankar
<mavalankar@deepmind.com>.

1
The name AuPair is a coupling of Au, the chemical symbol for
gold, and Pair, jointly referring to golden pairs that are produced
by our algorithm. The high-level interpretation is that like an "au
pair", the approach guides the LLM towards better behaviour.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

