DEALing with Image Reconstruction: Deep Attentive Least Squares

Mehrsa Pourya 1 Erich Kobler 2 Michael Unser 1 Sebastian Neumayer 3

Abstract

Both terms are balanced by the hyperparameter λ ∈ R≥0 .
Throughout this paper, x is the vectorized version of a (color
or grayscale) image of size (Nin × H × W ).

State-of-the-art image reconstruction often relies
on complex, abundantly parameterized deep architectures. We propose an alternative: a datadriven reconstruction method inspired by the classic Tikhonov regularization. Our approach iteratively refines intermediate reconstructions by solving a sequence of quadratic problems. These updates have two key components: (i) learned filters
to extract salient image features; and (ii) an attention mechanism that locally adjusts the penalty of
the filter responses. Our method matches leading
plug-and-play and learned regularizer approaches
in performance while offering interpretability, robustness, and convergent behavior. In effect, we
bridge traditional regularization and deep learning
with a principled reconstruction approach.
Code: https://github.com/mehrsapo/DEAL.

From classic signal processing to the advent of deep learning, substantial research efforts have focused on designing
regularizers R. In the context of data-driven methods, two
primary approaches have emerged: (i) the explicit modeling
of R; and (ii) the modeling of operators associated with R,
such as its proximal operator, which is required in plug-andplay (PnP) reconstruction (Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013).
Following the explicit approach, the starting point for this
work is the fields-of-experts (Roth & Black, 2009), which
reads
NC
X
Rm : x 7→
mc , ψc (Wc x) .
(2)
c=1
HW ×d

Here, each Wc ∈ R
convolves x with the filter
template wc ∈ RNin ×K×K where K denotes the spatial
kernel size. Then, the nonnegative potentials ψc ∈ C(R)
are applied entry-wise to the Wc x. Finally, the weights
mc ∈ [ϵM , 1]HW with ϵM > 0 determine the (spatially
varying) contribution of ψ(Wc x). Every component of (2)
can be learned. Most implementations to date use mc = 1.
They differ in the parameterization of ψc and Wc for the
learning process (Chen et al., 2014; Goujon et al., 2024;
Zach et al., 2024) or include nonlinear feature transforms
(Li et al., 2020; Kobler et al., 2022). While the learning of
Wc and ψc have been studied extensively, the local weights
mc have received little attention so far.

1. Introduction
Image reconstruction plays a fundamental role in computational imaging and computer vision (McCann & Unser,
2019; Zeng, 2001). The task is to recover an unknown image of interest x ∈ Rd from noisy measurements y ∈ RM .
Their relation is modeled as y = Hx, where the forward operator H ∈ RM ×d encodes the acquisition process. When
H is ill-conditioned, one can resort to the regularized reconstruction


2
(1)
x̂ ∈ arg min ∥Hx − y∥2 + λR(x) .

The use of spatially varying mc in (2) is referred to as
anisotropic regularization. For instance, mc = M(y) can
be derived from the data y using heuristics (Chan et al.,
2008; Grasmair & Lenzen, 2010) or a neural network (Kofler
et al., 2023; Lefkimmiatis & Koshelev, 2023). When M
extracts features from an estimated reconstruction, it is natural to consider an iterative refinement of mc . Specifically,
the reconstruction from (1) can be fed back into M to obtain an improved mc for (2). This leads to the attentivereconstruction process


2
xk+1 ∈ arg min ∥Hx − y∥2 + λRM(xk ) (x)
(3)

x∈Rd

2

The data fidelity ∥Hx − y∥2 controls the consistency of
the reconstruction with the measurements. The regularizer
R : Rd → R≥0 encodes prior information about the solution and is also intended to make the problem well-posed.
1
Biomedical Imaging group, EPFL Lausanne, Switzerland
Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz, Austria 3 Faculty
of Mathematics, TU Chemnitz, Germany. Correspondence to:
Mehrsa Pourya <mehrsa.pourya@epfl.ch>.
2

x∈Rd

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

studied by Pourya et al. (2024) for ψc = | · |. We note that
their scheme is computationally demanding since each of
1

