Near-optimal Regret Using Policy Optimization
in Online MDPs with Aggregate Bandit Feedback

Tal Lancewicki 1 Yishay Mansour 1 2

Abstract

(2021b), who considered the setting we study here, where
the losses are non-stochastic and may be chosen by an adversary. They introduce a variant of bandit linear optimization
which they call Distorted Linear Bandits and provide a solution for it. Through the framework of occupancy measures,
they reduce the problem of adversarial MDPs with aggregate
bandit feedback to Distorted Linear Bandits. This
√ approach
allows them to obtain a regret of Õ(H 5 S 6 A5/2 K), where
K is the number of episodes, H is the horizon, S is the
number of states and A is the number of actions. While
the dependency on K is optimal, the dependency on other
parameters is far from optimal.

We study online finite-horizon Markov Decision
Processes with adversarially changing loss and aggregate bandit feedback (a.k.a full-bandit). Under
this type of feedback, the agent observes only the
total loss incurred over the entire trajectory, rather
than the individual losses at each intermediate
step within the trajectory. We introduce the first
Policy Optimization algorithms for this setting.
In the known-dynamics case, we√achieve the first
optimal regret bound of Θ̃(H 2 SAK), where
K is the number of episodes, H is the episode
horizon, S is the number of states, and A is the
number of actions. In the unknown dynamics
case
√
we establish regret bound of Õ(H 3 S AK), significantly improving the best known result by a
factor of H 2 S 5 A2 .

In this paper, we revise the setting considered in Cohen et al.
(2021b), both in the known and unknown dynamics cases.
We present algorithms based on the Policy Optimization
framework (Cai et al., 2020; Shani et al., 2020; Luo et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022a), which has strong connections
to many practical algorithms such as NGP (Kakade, 2001),
TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), and PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017). Our algorithms have a closed-form update and are
more efficient than that of Cohen et al. (2021b), which
requires solving a convex optimization problem in each
iteration. We obtain the first optimal bound under known
dynamics and significantly improve the regret bound of
Cohen et al. (2021b) in the unknown dynamics case.

1. Introduction
The standard model of reinforcement learning (RL) assumes
a rich feedback loop, where for each step within the episode
the agent observes the loss in that state as feedback. While
ideal, this is often not the case in real-world applications.
For example, in multi-turn dialogues with an LLM, feedback
is typically available only at the end of the entire dialogue,
not for each intermediate response. Similarly, in robotic
manipulation, feedback is often only available for the entire
trajectory, indicating whether the robot successfully completed its task, rather than providing feedback at every step
of the robot’s movement.

Summary of Contributions.
the paper are as follows:

The main contributions of

• We present the first Policy Optimization algorithms for
Online MDPs with aggregate bandit feedback.
• Under known dynamics we are the first
√ to establish the
near-optimal regret bound of Θ̃(H 2 SAK).
• In the unknown
dynamics case, we achieve a regret
√
of Õ(H 3 S AK). Surprisingly, this regret bound
matches the best known regret for Policy Optimization with semi-bandit feedback (Luo et al., 2021).1
√
• We establish a new lower bound Ω(H 2 SAK) for
online MDPs with aggregate bandit feedback. To the

To address this challenge, Efroni et al. (2021) have initiated
the study of aggregate bandit feedback in a stochastic setting where losses are generated in an i.i.d. manner. More
recently, Cassel et al. (2024) have extended this to linear
MDPs. Most related to our work is that of Cohen et al.
1

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University,
Israel 2 Google Research, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Tal
Lancewicki <lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il>.

1
Luo et al. (2021) presents a slightly different dependence on
the horizon H. This is due to their assumption of a loop-free
MDP, which effectively enlarges their state space by a factor of H
compared to our model — see Remark 1.1.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

