PaperBench: Evaluating AI’s Ability to Replicate AI Research

Giulio Starace 1 * Oliver Jaffe 1 * Dane Sherburn 1 * James Aung 1 * Chan Jun Shern 1 * Leon Maksin 1 *
Rachel Dias 1 * Evan Mays 1 Benjamin Kinsella 1 Wyatt Thompson 1 Johannes Heidecke 1 Amelia Glaese 1
Tejal Patwardhan 1 *

Abstract

pabilities are developed safely. PaperBench can be used as
a measure of model autonomy in OpenAI’s Preparedness
Framework (OpenAI, 2023), autonomous capabilities in Anthropic’s Responsible Scaling Policy (Anthropic, 2024), and
ML R&D in Google DeepMind’s Frontier Safety Framework (Google DeepMind, 2024).

We introduce PaperBench, a benchmark evaluating the ability of AI agents to replicate stateof-the-art AI research. Agents must replicate
20 ICML 2024 Spotlight and Oral papers from
scratch, including understanding paper contributions, developing a codebase, and successfully
executing experiments. For objective evaluation, we develop rubrics that hierarchically decompose each replication task into smaller subtasks with clear grading criteria. In total, PaperBench contains 8,316 individually gradable tasks.
Rubrics are co-developed with the author(s) of
each ICML paper for accuracy and realism. To enable scalable evaluation, we also develop an LLMbased judge to automatically grade replication
attempts against rubrics, and assess our judge’s
performance by creating a separate benchmark for
judges. We evaluate several frontier models on PaperBench, finding that the best-performing tested
agent, Claude 3.5 Sonnet (New) with open-source
scaffolding, achieves an average replication score
of 21.0%. Finally, we recruit top ML PhDs to
attempt a subset of PaperBench, finding that models do not yet outperform the human baseline. We
open-source our code to facilitate future research
in understanding the AI engineering capabilities
of AI agents.

Our setup considers AI agents with the ability to write and
execute code autonomously. For each ML research paper in
our benchmark, we present the agent with the paper content
and ask it to replicate the paper’s empirical contributions.
Complete replication involves understanding the paper, developing a codebase from scratch to implement all experiments, and running, monitoring, and troubleshooting these
experiments as needed. In general, each replication task is
highly challenging and takes human experts several days of
work at a minimum.
Our benchmark consists of 20 Spotlight and Oral papers
selected from those presented at the 2024 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). These papers span 12
different ICML topics, including deep reinforcement learning, robustness, and probabilistic methods. Each paper is
accompanied by a manually created rubric, which specifies
all the necessary outcomes for replicating the paper in detail;
resulting in a total of 8,316 individually gradable outcomes
across 20 papers. Each of the rubrics in PaperBench has
been co-developed with one of the original authors of the
paper to ensure that it is high quality and accurate in assessing replication. Rubrics are constructed in a hierarchical
manner, such that outcomes can be decomposed into finegrained sub-outcomes, allowing granular measurement of
partial progress towards replicating papers.

1. Introduction

Given the complexity of ML research papers, we found
that even grading a single replication attempt can take tens
of hours for a human expert. To streamline the grading
process, we explore LLM-based judges and introduce an
auxiliary evaluation, JudgeEval, which compares the outputs
of automated judges against a dataset of gold labels from
human expert judges. Our best LLM-based judge, which
uses o3-mini-high with custom scaffolding, achieves an F1
score of 0.83 on the auxiliary evaluation, suggesting that
this judge is a reasonable stand-in for a human judge.

We introduce PaperBench, a benchmark evaluating the ability of AI agents to replicate state-of-the-art AI research. AI
agents that can autonomously replicate ML research papers
could accelerate machine learning progress, a prospect that
is exciting but also warrants careful study to ensure AI ca*
Equal contribution 1 OpenAI, San Francisco, USA. Correspondence to: Giulio Starace <giulio.starace@c-openai.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

