Learning to Reuse Policies in State Evolvable Environments

Ziqian Zhang * 1 2 Bohan Yang * 1 2 Lihe Li 1 2 Yuqi Bian 1 2 Ruiqi Xue 1 2 Feng Chen 1 2 Yi-Chen Li 1 2
Lei Yuan 1 2 3 Yang Yu 1 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

The policy trained via reinforcement learning
(RL) makes decisions based on sensor-derived
state features. It is common for state features to
evolve for reasons such as periodic sensor maintenance or the addition of new sensors for performance improvement. The deployed policy fails in
new state space when state features are unseen during training. Previous work tackles this challenge
by training a sensor-invariant policy or generating multiple policies and selecting the appropriate
one with limited samples. However, both directions struggle to guarantee the performance when
faced with unpredictable evolutions. In this paper, we formalize this problem as state evolvable
reinforcement learning (SERL), where the agent
is required to mitigate policy degradation after
state evolutions without costly exploration. We
propose Lapse by reusing policies learned from
the old state space in two distinct aspects. On one
hand, Lapse directly reuses the robust old policy
by composing it with a learned state reconstruction model to handle vanishing sensors. On the
other hand, the behavioral experience from the old
policy is reused by Lapse to train a newly adaptive policy through offline learning, better utilizing new sensors. To leverage advantages of both
policies in different scenarios, we further propose
automatic ensemble weight adjustment to effectively aggregate them. Theoretically, we justify
that robust policy reuse helps mitigate uncertainty
and error from both evolution and reconstruction.
Empirically, Lapse achieves a significant performance improvement, outperforming the strongest
baseline by about 2× in benchmark environments.

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown tremendous
potential in various applications (Wang et al., 2022), such as
sequential recommendation systems (Lin et al., 2023) and
robotic control (Singh et al., 2022). However, deploying RL
agents in the real world faces a major challenge: policies
trained under a fixed state feature space often fail to generalize to new, unseen ones in open environments (Zhou,
2022; Yuan et al., 2023). For instance, autonomous driving
agents utilize heterogeneous sensor sources for information
gathering (Kiran et al., 2021). However, the sensors might
wear out due to limited lifespan or require maintenance, and
new sensors with different camera views may be deployed
to improve performance from richer informatioin (Shukla
et al., 2023). Such common scenarios lead to continuous
changes (evolutions) in the state space during deployment,
requiring agents to adapt to the state evolvale environments.
This presents a critical challenge: adapting to new state
spaces demands extensive interactions to learn a policy,
which is costly in online deployment. Existing methods
learn a sensor-invariant policy that is robust to changes in
the state space (Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Hansen
et al., 2021), or generate multiple source policies beforehand
and select the appropriate one using hierarchical high-level
policies or value function estimation (Cheng et al., 2020;
Yang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023).
However, learning a sensor-invariant policy requires determining which aspects of state features are task-specific and
which are shared. This is complex and previous methods often assume prior knowledge about new state spaces (Laskin
et al., 2020a; Zhou et al., 2023). Meanwhile, enumerating
all possible state spaces is a daunting task, making it impractical to generate sufficiently diverse source policies for
reuse (Cheng et al., 2020; Barekatain et al., 2021). Consequently, both directions fail to guarantee the performance
when faced with unpredictable state evolutions.

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University 3 Polixir Technologies. Correspondence to: Lei Yuan <yuanl@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Yang Yu
<yuy@nju.edu.cn>.

To tackle the challenges posed by evolvable state features,
we formalize the problem as state evolvable reinforcement
learning (SERL), where unknown evolutions map the old
state space to a new one, leading to changes in transition and
reward functions as well. To mitigate performance degradation resulted from state space evolutions, we propose

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

