GCAL: Adapting Graph Models to Evolving Domain Shifts

Ziyue Qiao * 1 Qianyi Cai * 2 Hao Dong 3 Jiawei Gu 1 Pengyang Wang 4 Meng Xiao 3 Xiao Luo 5 Hui Xiong 2 6

Abstract

Graph Model

This paper addresses the challenge of graph domain adaptation on evolving, multiple out-ofdistribution (OOD) graphs. Conventional graph
domain adaptation methods are confined to singlestep adaptation, making them ineffective in handling continuous domain shifts and prone to catastrophic forgetting. This paper introduces the
Graph Continual Adaptive Learning (GCAL)
method, designed to enhance model sustainability and adaptability across various graph domains.
GCAL employs a bilevel optimization strategy.
The ”adapt” phase uses an information maximization approach to fine-tune the model with new
graph domains while re-adapting past memories
to mitigate forgetting. Concurrently, the ”generate memory” phase, guided by a theoretical lower
bound derived from information bottleneck theory,
involves a variational memory graph generation
module to condense original graphs into memories. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate that GCAL substantially outperforms existing methods in terms of adaptability and knowledge retention. The code of GCAL is available at
https://github.com/joe817/GCAL.

Continual
Adaptation

Graph Model

Θ(,$

Θ(
t
ven g
Pre ettin
g
r
o
F

…
…

…

…

…

…

.(,$
.(
Evolving OOD graphs
(a)

…

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The challenge of continual adaptation of graph models on evolving OOD graph sequences. (b) Empirical evaluations
of the SOTA graph adaptation method across four OOD graph
datasets in a continual adaptation setting.

tricate connections, have been pivotal in advancing data mining and knowledge discovery. Classic graph models such as
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2016) and Graph Attention Networks (GATs) (Veličković
et al., 2017) have been successfully applied in numerous
applications ranging from social network analysis (Dong
et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2024) to bioinformatics (Huang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024c) and recommendation systems (He et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2024b).
Despite the successes, the sustainability of graph models
in handling ever-increasing volumes of graph data presents
unique challenges, particularly in scenarios involving new,
unseen graphs. Such OOD scenarios commonly arise when
a model trained on one set of graph data is applied to a
different and novel set. This discrepancy underscores a
pivotal issue in graph machine learning: Domain Adaptation
in Graph Models. The objective is to enhance the model’s
inference ability to generalize across different but related
graph distributions without substantial retraining.

1. Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitously present in the real world, serving as
fundamental structures for representing complex systems in
a multitude of domains. Graph models, leveraging these in*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing and Information
Technology, Great Bay University 2 Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 3 Computer Network Information Center, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 University of
Macau 5 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles 6 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to: Hui Xiong
<xionghui@ust.hk>, Xiao Luo <xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu>, Meng
Xiao <shaow@cnic.cn>.

However, the current body of research often limits its focus
to single-step adaptations employing techniques like Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Dziugaite et al., 2015)
and adversarial learning (Dan et al., 2024; Qiao et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2018). While useful, these techniques fall short
when the model is subjected to continual domain shifts over
time or domains: As graph datasets grow and evolve, models
encounter new domains that necessitate ongoing adaptation
but lose their ability to adapt to previous graphs, resulting

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

