Learning Distribution-Wise Control in Representation Space
for Language Models

Chunyuan Deng 1 Ruidi Chang 1 Hanjie Chen 1

Abstract

𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝒛

Interventions in language models (LMs) are applied strategically to steer model behavior during the forward pass. Learnable interventions,
also known as representation fine-tuning, aim to
apply pointwise control within the concept subspace and have proven effective in altering highlevel behaviors. In this work, we extend this
approach to the distribution level, enabling the
model to learn not only pointwise transformations
but also the surrounding regions of the concept
subspace. We demonstrate that these methods
perform effectively in early layers, with larger
standard deviations correlating strongly with improved performance. Across eight commonsense
reasoning and seven arithmetic reasoning benchmarks, our distribution-wise interventions consistently outperform pointwise interventions in
controllability and robustness. These results illustrate that distribution-wise interventions provide a more comprehensive method for steering model behavior and enabling finer-grained
control over language models. The code is at:
https://github.com/chili-lab/D-Intervention.

−1

𝑥

1

0

𝒘. 𝑵𝒆𝒊𝒈𝒉𝒃𝒐𝒓𝒉𝒐𝒐𝒅 [−𝝈, +𝝈]

−1

0

𝑦

1

𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛-𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝒛~𝑵(𝝁, 𝝈𝟐 )

Figure 1. Distribution-wise vs. Pointwise Intervention. This is
an intuitive yet effective adaptation, as previous research suggests
that the concept space is continuous (Gandikota et al., 2023).

tions allow researchers to steer model behavior, often by
manipulating representation in the model’s latent space.
A core challenge in intervention-based methods lies in
advancing from low-level control to high-level control.
Low-level control includes steering the model to output
antonyms/synonyms, or binary labels (e.g., positive/negative
sentiment). While these tasks served as foundational benchmarks for early intervention research, the field needs to address more complex, high-level behaviors (Zhang & Nanda,
2024). These tasks require interventions that operate at a
deeper, more abstract level, capturing the intricate relationships and dependencies within the model’s hidden representations.

1. Introduction

Learnable interventions, or representation fine-tuning (Wu
et al., 2024b; Yin et al., 2024), have emerged as a promising
solution. It enables more powerful high-level control, often
outperforming parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods on tasks like commonsense question answering (QA),
mathmetical reasoning and alignment tasks, while using
10x-100x fewer parameters (Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu et al.,
2022; 2023; Liu et al., 2024). This highlights the potential
to modify model behavior in a finer-grained manner.

As language models (LMs) continue to grow in complexity
and capability, understanding and controlling their behavior
has become increasingly critical (Olah et al., 2015; Geva
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023; Geiger et al., 2023). Recent
advances in interpretability research have highlighted the
potential of model interventions–targeted modifications to
model behavior during forward passes–as a promising approach to achieving this control (Meng et al., 2022; Conmy
et al., 2023; Ghandeharioun et al., 2024). These interven-

A potential improvement for these methods is to explore an
ideal “concept space”. This space should be continuous, as
previous research suggests that once an intervention vector
is identified, its magnitude can be adjusted to control its
effect (Gandikota et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023; Turner et al.,
2023). This implies that even if an intervention is learned,
its neighboring regions should also produce relevant effects.

1

Department of Computer Science, Rice University. Correspondence to: Chunyuan Deng <chunyuan.deng@rice.edu>, Hanjie
Chen <hanjie@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

