Proto Successor Measure: Representing the Behavior Space of an RL Agent

Siddhant Agarwal * 1 Harshit Sikchi * 1 Peter Stone 1 2 † Amy Zhang 1 †

Abstract

to explore various routes to figure out the most efficient
way to get to the nearest supermarket or place of work. But
eventually, you could probably travel to new places efficiently the very first time you needed to get there. Like
humans, intelligent agents should be able to infer the necessary information about the environment during exploration
and use this experience for solving any downstream task
efficiently. Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have
seen great success at finding a sequence of decisions that
optimally solves a given task in the environment (Wurman
et al., 2022; Fawzi et al., 2022). In RL settings, tasks are
defined using reward functions with different tasks having
their own optimal agent policy or behavior corresponding
to the task reward. RL agents are usually trained for a given
task (reward function) or on a distribution of related tasks;
most RL agents do not generalize to solving any task, even
in the same environment. While related machine learning
fields like computer vision and natural language processing
have shown success at zero-shot (Ramesh et al., 2021) and
few-shot (Radford et al., 2021) adaptation to a wide range
of downstream tasks, RL lags behind in such functionalities. Unsupervised RL aims to extract reusable information such as skills (Eysenbach et al., 2019; Zahavy et al.,
2023), representations (Ghosh et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023),
world-models (Janner et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2020), or
goal-reaching policies (Agarwal et al., 2024; Sikchi et al.,
2024a) from the environment using task-independent data to
efficiently train RL agents for any task. Recent advances in
unsupervised RL (Wu et al., 2019; Touati & Ollivier, 2021a;
Blier et al., 2021b; Touati et al., 2023) have shown some
promise towards achieving zero-shot RL.

Having explored an environment, intelligent
agents should be able to transfer their knowledge
to most downstream tasks within that environment without additional interactions. Referred to
as “zero-shot learning”, this ability remains elusive for general-purpose reinforcement learning
algorithms. While recent works have attempted
to produce zero-shot RL agents, they make assumptions about the nature of the tasks or the
structure of the MDP. We present Proto Successor
Measure: the basis set for all possible behaviors
of a Reinforcement Learning Agent in a dynamical system. We prove that any possible behavior
(represented using visitation distributions) can be
represented using an affine combination of these
policy-independent basis functions. Given a reward function at test time, we simply need to find
the right set of linear weights to combine these
bases corresponding to the optimal policy. We
derive a practical algorithm to learn these basis
functions using reward-free interaction data from
the environment and show that our approach can
produce the near-optimal policy at test time for
any given reward function without additional environmental interactions. Project page: agarwalsiddhant10.github.io/projects/psm.html

1. Introduction
A wide variety of tasks can be defined within an environment (or any dynamical system). For instance, in navigation
environments, tasks can be defined to reach a goal, follow
a path, reach a goal while avoiding certain states etc. Once
familiar with an environment, humans have the wonderful
ability to perform new tasks in that environment without
any additional practice. For example, consider the last time
you moved to a new city. At first, you may have needed

Recently proposed pretraining algorithms (Stooke et al.,
2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021b; Sermanet et al., 2017; Nair
et al.; Ma et al., 2023) use self-supervised learning to learn
representations from large-scale data to facilitate few-shot
RL but these representations are dependent on the policies
used for collecting the data. These algorithms assume that
the large scale data is collected from a “good” policy demonstrating expert task solving behaviors.

*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Texas at Austin
Sony AI. Correspondence to: Siddhant Agarwal <siddhant@cs.utexas.edu>, Harshit Sikchi <hsikchi@utexas.edu>.

Several prior works aim to achieve generalization in
multi-task RL by building upon successor features (Dayan,
1993) which represent rewards as a linear combination of
state features. These methods have limited generalization
capacity to unseen arbitrary tasks. Other works (Mahadevan,

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

