UniSim: A Unified Simulator for Time-Coarsened Dynamics of Biomolecules

Ziyang Yu 1 Wenbing Huang 2 3 Yang Liu 1 4

Abstract

small
molecules

Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations are essential for understanding the atomic-level behavior of
molecular systems, giving insights into their transitions and interactions. However, classical MD
techniques are limited by the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency, while recent deep learningbased improvements have mostly focused on
single-domain molecules, lacking transferability
to unfamiliar molecular systems. Therefore, we
propose Unified Simulator (UniSim), which leverages cross-domain knowledge to enhance the understanding of atomic interactions. First, we employ a multi-head pretraining approach to learn a
unified atomic representation model from a large
and diverse set of molecular data. Then, based on
the stochastic interpolant framework, we learn the
state transition patterns over long timesteps from
MD trajectories, and introduce a force guidance
module for rapidly adapting to different chemical
environments. Our experiments demonstrate that
UniSim achieves highly competitive performance
across small molecules, peptides, and proteins.

peptides

timestep 𝜏

UniSim

proteins

Figure 1. UniSim enables time-coarsened dynamics simulations of
small molecules, peptides, and proteins over a long timestep τ .

2018). One of the MD’s core objectives is to generate
trajectories of molecular states that adhere to underlying
physics constraints over a period of time, given the initial
state of the molecular system and environment configurations (Allen et al., 2004). To achieve this end, classical
MD methods (van Gunsteren & Oostenbrink, 2024) update
the next step of motion by numerically integrating Newton
equations or Langevin dynamics (Langevin, 1908), with the
potential energy and atomic forces calculated based on the
current molecular state. It should be noted that the stability
of the numerical integration requires an extremely small
timestep ∆t ≈ 10−15 s during MD simulations (Plimpton,
1995).

1. Introduction
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations, an in silico method
used to comprehend the time evolution of molecular systems in given environments, serve as a fundamental and
essential tool in various fields like computational chemistry, pharmacology, material design, and condensed matter physics (Van Gunsteren & Berendsen, 1990; LindorffLarsen et al., 2011; Hollingsworth & Dror, 2018; Lau et al.,

In terms of how energy is calculated, classical MD methods can be divided into Quantum Mechanics (QM) methods (Griffiths & Schroeter, 2019) and empirical force field
methods (Pearlman et al., 1995; Vanommeslaeghe et al.,
2010). On the one hand, QM methods provide highly accurate energy calculations, while their great computational
complexity makes it prohibitively expensive for accurate
transition path sampling on a long time scale, like protein
folding (Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2011). On the other hand,
empirical force field methods are faster but less accurate. To
accelerate the sampling of conformation transition pathways,
some MD methods based on reinforcement learning (Shin
et al., 2019), adaptive sampling (Markwick et al., 2011; Botu
& Ramprasad, 2015a), as well as enhanced sampling (Bal &
Neyts, 2015; M. Sultan & Pande, 2017; Wang et al., 2021;
Célerse et al., 2022) have been proposed, yet achieving a

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Gaoling School
of Artificial intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing,
China 3 Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE 4 Institute for AI Industry
Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>, Yang Liu
<liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

