Toward Efficient Kernel-Based Solvers for Nonlinear PDEs
Zhitong Xu * 1 Da Long * 1 Yiming Xu 2 Guang Yang 1 Shandian Zhe 1 Houman Owhadi 3

Abstract

designs and intricate numerical techniques, enabling simpler, faster, and more convenient implementation and use.
Among these solvers, kernel methods or Gaussian processes
(GPs) (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006) hold promise due to
their solid mathematical foundations, offering high expressiveness, robustness, and the ability to quantify and reason
under uncertainty. Recently, Chen et al. (2021) introduced a
general kernel method to approximate solutions of nonlinear
PDEs. They augmented the representation by incorporating differential operators (more generally, linear operators)
into the kernels, and jointly estimate the solution values and
their derivatives of the PDE on a set of collocation points.
The approach has shown promising performance in solving
several benchmark nonlinear PDEs, backed by a rigorous
error analysis, including both convergence and convergence
rates (Chen et al., 2021; Batlle et al., 2023).

We introduce a novel kernel learning framework
toward efficiently solving nonlinear partial
differential equations (PDEs). In contrast to
the state-of-the-art kernel solver that embeds
differential operators within kernels, posing
challenges with a large number of collocation
points, our approach eliminates these operators
from the kernel. We model the solution using a
standard kernel interpolation form and differentiate the interpolant to compute the derivatives.
Our framework obviates the need for complex
Gram matrix construction between solutions and
their derivatives, allowing for a straightforward
implementation and scalable computation. As an
instance, we allocate the collocation points on a
grid and adopt a product kernel, which yields a
Kronecker product structure in the interpolation.
This structure enables us to avoid computing the
full Gram matrix, reducing costs and scaling
efficiently to a large number of collocation
points. We provide a proof of the convergence
and rate analysis of our method under appropriate regularity assumptions. In numerical
experiments, we demonstrate the advantages
of our method in solving several benchmark
PDEs. Our implementation is released at https:
//github.com/BayesianAIGroup/
Efficient-Kernel-PDE-Solver.

1

Despite its success, the methodology requires manual construction of a Gram matrix between the solution and its
derivatives that show up in the PDEs. It enumerates combinations between the operators on the kernel to compute
different sub-blocks. The process enlarges the size of the
Gram matrix (as compared to the number of collocation
points), and the computation becomes challenging with a
large number of collocation points, a crucial factor for capturing complex PDE solutions such as those with potential
roughness (or even non-smoothness) and higher frequencies.
In response, this work proposes an alternative kernel-based
framework for solving nonlinear PDEs with several key
contributions:
• Framework: We remove the basis functions associated with the differential evaluation functionals in the
approximation and use a standard kernel interpolation
for solution modeling. To approximate solution derivatives, we directly differentiate the interpolant. By minimizing the RKHS norm along with a boundary and
residual loss, we estimate the solution without the need
for manually constructing a complex Gram matrix. Implementation is straightforward and convenient with
the aid of modern automatic differential libraries.
• Computational Method: Our framework allows an
immediate use of many existing efficient Gram matrix
computation and/or approximation techniques. As an
instance, we propose to place collocation points on
a grid and employ a product kernel over each input

Introduction

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) stands as a
central task in scientific and engineering domains. Recently,
machine learning (ML)-based solvers have garnered significant attention. Unlike traditional numerical methods,
ML-based solvers eliminate the need for complex mesh
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Utah 2 University of Kentucky 3 California Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

