Causal Discovery from Conditionally Stationary Time Series

Carles Balsells-Rodas 1 Xavier Sumba 1 Tanmayee Narendra 2 Ruibo Tu 3
Gabriele Schweikert 2 Hedvig Kjellström 3 Yingzhen Li 1

Abstract

et al., 2017). Practically, better algorithms are needed to
accurately extract the causal structure from data.

Causal discovery, i.e., inferring underlying causal
relationships from observational data, is highly
challenging for AI systems. In a time series modeling context, traditional causal discovery methods mainly consider constrained scenarios with
fully observed variables and/or data from stationary time-series. We develop a causal discovery approach to handle a wide class of nonstationary time series that are conditionally stationary, where the nonstationary behaviour is modeled as stationarity conditioned on a set of latent
state variables. Named State-Dependent Causal
Inference (SDCI), our approach is able to recover
the underlying causal dependencies, with provable identifiablity for the state-dependent causal
structures. Empirical experiments on nonlinear
particle interaction data and gene regulatory networks demonstrate SDCI’s superior performance
over baseline causal discovery methods. Improved results over non-causal RNNs on modeling NBA player movements demonstrate the
potential of our method and motivate the use of
causality-driven methods for forecasting.

In time series analysis, causal discovery identifies the underlying temporal causal structure of the observed sequences.
Historical approaches rely on a restrictive assumption: stationarity (Granger, 1969; Peters et al., 2017; Tank et al.,
2021; Löwe et al., 2022), while real-world data is often
nonstationary with potential hidden confounders. To address this issue, three major strategies have been recently
proposed: (1) modelling nonstationary noise (Huang et al.,
2020; Gong et al., 2023); (2) introducing time-dependent effects with a fixed causal structure (Huang et al., 2015; 2019);
and (3) using discrete latent variables to capture structural
changes over time (Saggioro et al., 2020). Despite these advances, causal discovery in nonstationary time series under
realistic assumptions remains an open challenge.
This work addresses causal discovery for nonstationary time
series based on a much relaxed assumption, conditionally
stationary time series, where the dynamics of the observed
system change depending on a set of discrete “state” variables. These causal structures can change not only during
time, but also across samples (Löwe et al., 2022). This
assumption holds for many real-world scenarios, such as
individuals whose different decisions depend on mood, past
experiences, or interactions with others. The causal discovery task for such conditionally stationary time series poses
different challenges depending on the observability and dependency of the states, which we classify into 3 scenarios:

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved profound success in vision and
language modelling (Brown et al., 2020; Nichol et al., 2022).
Still, it remains a grand challenge for deep neural networks
to perform causal discovery (Yi et al., 2020; Girdhar & Ramanan, 2020; Sauer & Geiger, 2021), which is critical for
interpretability, generalization, and robustness (Lake et al.,
2017; Schölkopf et al., 2021). Theoretically, structure identifiability is key to ensure a unique correspondence between
observations and the underlying causal structures (Peters

States observed/independent: The states are observed
and/or independent on observations (Fig. 1a). Structure
identifiability can be established for both cases by Peters
et al. (2013), and Balsells-Rodas et al. (2024), respectively.
States determined: The states are hidden but depend on
observations directly. In Fig. 1b, the states are determined
by the balls’ positions (pink vs purple regions).

Imperial College London 2 University of Dundee 3 KTH Royal
Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Carles Balsells-Rodas
<cb221@imperial.ac.uk>.

States recurrent: The states depend on historical events.
E.g., in Fig. 1c, particles have state changes upon collision.
Also in a football game a player acts differently based on
earlier actions of the others.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We propose a novel framework to tackle both the theoretical
and algorithmic challenges for causal discovery from condi-

1

1

