Variance-Reduced Forward-Reflected-Backward Splitting Methods for
Nonmonotone Generalized Equations

Quoc Tran-Dinh 1

Abstract

ing and robust optimization has brought renewed interest
to generalized equations and their special case: minimax
problem. They serve as powerful tools for handling Nash’s
equilibria and minimax models in generative adversarial
nets, adversarial training, and robust learning, see (Arjovsky
et al., 2017; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2018;
Namkoong & Duchi, 2016). Notably, most problems arising
from these applications are nonmonotone, nonsmooth, and
large-scale. This paper develops new and simple stochastic
algorithms with variance reduction for solving this class of
problems, equipped with rigorous theoretical guarantees.

We develop two novel stochastic variancereduction methods to approximate solutions of
a class of nonmonotone [generalized] equations.
Our algorithms leverage a new combination of
ideas from the forward-reflected-backward splitting method and a class of unbiased variancereduced estimators. We construct two new
stochastic estimators within this class, inspired
by the well-known SVRG and SAGA estimators.
These estimators significantly differ from existing
approaches used in minimax and variational inequality problems. By appropriately choosing parameters, both algorithms achieve state-of-the-art
oracle complexity of O(n + n2/3 ϵ−2 ) for obtaining an ϵ-solution in terms of the operator residual
norm for a class of nonmonotone problems, where
n is the number of summands and ϵ signifies the
desired accuracy. This complexity aligns with the
best-known results in SVRG and SAGA methods
for stochastic nonconvex optimization. We test
our algorithms on some numerical examples and
compare them with existing methods. The results
demonstrate promising improvements offered by
the new methods compared to their competitors.

1.1. Nonmonotone finite-sum generalized equations
The central problem we study in this paper is the following
[possibly nonmonotone] generalized equation (also known
as composite inclusion) (Rockafellar & Wets, 1997):
Find x⋆ ∈ Rp such that: 0 ∈ Gx⋆ + T x⋆ ,

(NI)

where G : Rp → Rp is a single-valued operator, possibly
2
nonlinear, and T : Rp ⇒ 2R is a multivalued mapping
p
from Rp to 2R (the set of all subsets of Rp ). In addition,
we assume that G is given in the following large finite-sum:
n

Gx :=

1X
Gi x,
n i=1

(1)

where Gi : Rp → Rp are given operators for all i ∈ [n] :=
{1, 2, · · · , n} and n ≫ 1. This structure often arises from
statistical learning, [generative] machine learning, networks,
distributed systems, and data science. For simplicity of
notation, we denote Ψ := G+T and dom(Ψ) := dom(G)∩
dom(T ), where dom(R) is the domain of R.

1. Introduction
[Non]linear equations and inclusions are cornerstones of
computational mathematics, finding applications in diverse
fields like engineering, mechanics, economics, statistics,
optimization, and machine learning, see, e.g., (Bauschke
& Combettes, 2017; Burachik & Iusem, 2008; Facchinei &
Pang, 2003; Phelps, 2009; Ryu & Yin, 2022; Ryu & Boyd,
2016). These problems, known as generalized equations
(Rockafellar & Wets, 1997), are equivalent to fixed-point
problems. The recent revolution in modern machine learn-

We highlight that the methods developed in this paper
 can be
straightforwardly extended to tackle Gx = Eξ∼P G(x, ξ)
as the expectation of a stochastic operator G involving a
random vector ξ defined on a probability space (Ω, P, Σ).
1.2. Equivalent forms and special cases
The model (NI) covers many fundamental problems in optimization and related fields, including the following ones.

1

Department of Statistics and Operations Research, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
Correspondence to: Quoc Tran-Dinh <quoctd@email.unc.edu>.

(a) [Non]linear equation. If T = 0, then (NI) reduces to
the following [non]linear equation:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Find x⋆ ∈ dom(G) such that: Gx⋆ = 0.
1

(NE)

