Training a Generally Curious Agent

Fahim Tajwar * 1 Yiding Jiang * 1 Abitha Thankaraj 1 Sumaita Sadia Rahman 2 J Zico Kolter 1 Jeff Schneider 1
Russ Salakhutdinov 1

Abstract

sequential decision-making problems or performing reinforcement learning (RL) with language models as the agent.
However, two challenges hinder the development of these
interactive capabilities. First, most naturally occurring data
lacks the structure and context needed to model interactions.
Second, directly deploying models into the real world to
collect interaction data can produce critical errors, which is
expensive and potentially risky.

Efficient exploration is essential for intelligent
systems interacting with their environment, but
existing language models often fall short in scenarios that require strategic information gathering.
In this paper, we present PAPRIKA, a fine-tuning
approach that enables language models to develop
general decision-making capabilities that are not
confined to particular environments. By training
on synthetic interaction data from different tasks
that require diverse strategies, PAPRIKA teaches
models to explore and adapt their behavior on
a new task based on environment feedback incontext without more gradient updates. Experimental results show that models fine-tuned with
PAPRIKA can effectively transfer their learned
decision-making capabilities to entirely unseen
tasks without additional training. Unlike traditional training, our approach’s primary bottleneck
lies in sampling useful interaction data instead
of model updates. To improve sample efficiency,
we propose a curriculum learning strategy that
prioritizes sampling trajectories from tasks with
high learning potential. These results suggest
a promising path towards AI systems that can
autonomously solve novel sequential decisionmaking problems that require interactions with
the external world.

Given the impracticality of direct deployment in the wild,
a natural alternative is to generate interaction data synthetically. Although generating synthetic data for every possible
problem is infeasible, LLMs possess the capacity for incontext learning (ICL), which allows them to adapt to new
tasks with minimal demonstrations (Brown et al., 2020).
Instead of teaching the model to do all the interaction tasks
that we care about, we should instead teach the model incontext reinforcement learning (Laskin et al., 2022) so that
the model can solve new problems without being trained on
them a priori. It shifts the focus from training the model on
particular problems to training it on the general process of
solving problems. This paradigm shares similarities with
the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF) stages of training a language
model (vs pretraining) where only a relatively small number
of examples is needed to produce a model that can generate
responses to a wide range of queries that they are not trained
on. Our approach is also closely related to the principles of
meta reinforcement learning (Beck et al., 2023).
In this work, we explore the feasibility of teaching LLMs
to perform in-context RL that generalizes across different
tasks, with the specific goal of training a curious agent with
general information gathering capability. A popular notion
of curiosity is intrinsic motivation which has been used
to train agents with an exploration bonus not necessarily
related to the success of any particular task (Schmidhuber,
1991; 2007). Our work differs from this notion of curiosity
in that we do not leverage intrinsic motivation. Instead,
we train our agents to explore and interact with an entirely
unseen environment to gather information that is needed
for completing the task at hand. PAPRIKA can be thought
of as a form of amortized exploration, since our goal is
to learn good exploration strategies from trajectories from
many different environments to make exploration on a new

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are considered to be a
promising foundation for autonomous agents, systems capable of achieving goals independently with minimal human
supervision or intervention. A crucial requirement for such
systems is the ability to interact effectively with external environments and gather the information necessary to achieve
their objectives. This capability can be formalized as solving
*
Equal contribution 1 CMU 2 North Carolina State University.
Correspondence to: Fahim Tajwar <ftajwar@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

