Sample Efficient Demonstration Selection for In-Context Learning

Kiran Purohit * 1 Venktesh V * 2 Sourangshu Bhattacharya 1 Avishek Anand 2

Abstract
The in-context learning paradigm with LLMs has
been instrumental in advancing a wide range of
natural language processing tasks. The selection
of few-shot examples (exemplars / demonstration
samples) is essential for constructing effective
prompts under context-length budget constraints.
In this paper, we formulate the exemplar selection task as a top-m best arms identification problem. A key challenge in this setup is the exponentially large number of arms that need to be evaluated to identify the m-best arms. We propose
CASE (Challenger Arm Sampling for Exemplar
selection), a novel sample-efficient selective exploration strategy that maintains a shortlist of
“challenger” arms, which are current candidates
for the top-m arms. In each iteration, only one
of the arms from this shortlist or the current topm set is pulled, thereby reducing sample complexity and, consequently, the number of LLM
evaluations. Furthermore, we model the scores
of exemplar subsets (arms) using a parameterized
linear scoring function, leading to stochastic linear bandits setting. CASE achieves remarkable
efficiency gains of up to 7× speedup in runtime
while requiring 7× fewer LLM calls (87% reduction) without sacrificing performance compared to
state-of-the-art exemplar selection methods. We
release our code and data. 1

Demonstration
samples: (S)

Exemplar/
Demonstration subsets

Multi-arm bandit
based selection

e1: Can drinking

lemon water provide
vitamin C?
e2: Is a Boeing 737
cost covered by
Wonder Woman (2017
lm) box o ce?

Selection Stage

E1: Can drinking water
provide Vitamin C?

Top-m exemplar/
demonstration
subsets

E3: Can a telescope
help in seeing Jupiter ?
E10: Is boeing 737 cost
covered by Avatar Movie
Collection?

LLM
call

E3: Can chordata
breathe in water?

Train set

Exponential
search space: |S|C2

…
…
.

Reward
from LLM

LLM

Sample-e cient
reward estimation

Inference Stage
Top-m exemplar
subsets

Prompt generator
(π)
Lowest validation
loss top-1 subset
selection

…

Similarity based top-1
subset selection (KNN)

fi

LLM

Prediction

Diversity based
top-1 subset selection
(MMR)

Can a human heart
last from NYC to
Rayleigh?

Test Question

ffi
ffi

Figure 1: Overview of CASE for selection of top-m best
exemplar subsets (arms).
LLMs to perform tasks by conditioning on a context that
includes demonstration examples or instructions, without
the need for additional fine-tuning, making it flexible and
adaptable. COT facilitates stepwise problem-solving by
employing rationales. However, one key challenge in maximizing the effectiveness of ICL is the careful selection of
few-shot examples along with their corresponding rationales
(Lu et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2021). We refer to the triplet
of (input, rationale, output) as an exemplar/demonstration
examples.

1. Introduction

Most existing approaches for selecting demonstration examples are based on heuristics or trial-and-error methods (Fu
et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020), with only a few attempting
to address the problem in a more principled way (Xiong
et al., 2024). Exemplar / demonstration example selection
can be classified into two categories: task-level, where a
static set of exemplars representative of the task is chosen
for inference, and instance-level, where exemplars are dynamically selected for each test instance during inference
(Rubin et al., 2022; Xiong et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2023b),
which introduces overhead during inference. Additionally,
these methods do not consider the positive and negative

In-context learning (ICL) and Chain-of-Thought (COT)
have emerged as important techniques for enhancing the
capabilities of large language models (LLMs) across a range
of natural language tasks (Yang et al., 2018; Roy & Anand,
2022; Nanekhan et al., 2025; V et al., 2023). ICL allows
*

Equal contribution. 1 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
India 2 Delft University of Technology (TU Delft), Netherlands.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/kiranpurohit/CASE

1

