Active Learning for Efficient Discovery of Optimal Combinatorial Perturbations

Jason Qin 1 Hans-Hermann Wessels 1 Carlos Fernandez-Granda 2 3 Yuhan Hao 1

Abstract

single-gene targeting (Nature Medicine, 2017; Hwangbo
et al., 2023). One of the most notable successes in transitioning cellular phenotype is the discovery of the Yamanaka
factors—a specific combination of four transcription factors capable of reprogramming differentiated cells back to
a pluripotent state (Takahashi & Yamanaka, 2006). This
groundbreaking achievement demonstrates the significant
potential within the combinatorial perturbation space to engineer cellular phenotypes.

Combinatorial CRISPR screening enables largescale identification of synergistic gene pairs for
combination therapies, but exhaustive experimentation is infeasible. We introduce NAIAD1 , an active learning framework that efficiently discovers
optimal gene pairs by leveraging single-gene perturbation effects and adaptive gene embeddings
that scale with the training data size, mitigating
overfitting in small-sample learning while capturing complex gene interactions as more data is
collected. Evaluated on four CRISPR datasets
with over 350,000 interactions, NAIAD trained
on small datasets outperforms existing models by
up to 40%. Its recommendation system prioritizes gene pairs with maximum predicted effects,
accelerating discovery with fewer experiments.
We also extend NAIAD to optimal drug combination identification among 2,000 candidates.
Overall, NAIAD enhances combinatorial perturbation design and drives advances in genomics
research and therapeutic development in combination therapy. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/NeptuneBio/NAIAD

The critical question now is how to systematically identify additional effective combinatorial perturbations that can
transform cells to achieve desired phenotypes. Comprehensively exploring this huge space presents a mathematical
challenge due to the exponential growth of possible combinations. With approximately 20,000 protein-coding genes
in the human genome, the total number of two-gene combinations approaches 200 million, and for four-gene combinations exceeds 6 quadrillion (1015 ). Experimentally testing
all possible combinations is infeasible. Therefore, developing computational models that can predict the most effective
gene combinations is essential for the efficient identification
of the most effective combinatorial perturbations. Notably,
active learning frameworks (Eisenstein, 2020), such as the
AI + Experiment Loop (Rood et al., 2024), have offered
promising solutions by enabling efficient exploration of this
space.

1. Introduction

We frame the discovery of optimal gene or drug combinations as a machine learning problem of active search over
a high-dimensional combinatorial space, where evaluating
each combination (via experiment) is costly. Our method
trains a neural surrogate model that predicts the effects of
unseen perturbation pairs by combining overparameterized
encodings of single-gene outcomes with a learned gene embedding space that models interaction effects. The surrogate
guides new experiment selection via acquisition strategies
inspired by Bayesian optimization, with the ability to leverage both exploitation and exploration.

Targeting multiple genes through drug combinations or
polypharmacology offers a transformative therapeutic approach for developing effective treatments across diverse
medical fields, including oncology (Al-Lazikani et al., 2012;
Mokhtari et al., 2017), infectious diseases (Hammond et al.,
2022; Shyr et al., 2021), and metabolic disorders (Samms
et al., 2020; Jastreboff et al., 2023). Combinatorial gene perturbations can yield additive or synergistic effects, enhancing therapeutic outcomes beyond what is achievable with
1

Neptune Bio, New York, NY, USA 2 Center for Data Science,
New York University, New York, NY, USA 3 Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY,
USA . Correspondence to: Yuhan Hao <yuhan@neptune.bio>.

While this work is motivated by biological discovery,
similar challenges arise across machine learning domains—including data augmentation policy search in vision
(Cubuk et al., 2019), cold-start item selection in recommender systems (De Pessemier et al., 2021), and sampleefficient policy learning in robotics (Anwar et al., 2025)—all

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Named after the innermost satellite of the planet Neptune

1

