Faster Stochastic Optimization with Arbitrary Delays
via Adaptive Asynchronous Mini-Batching

Amit Attia 1 Ofir Gaash 1 Tomer Koren 1 2

Abstract

a server for averaging, followed by an update step to the
model. A primary drawback of this method is the synchronization performed by the server, which confines the
iteration time to be aligned with that of the slowest machine.
Hence, variation in arrival time of stochastic gradients due
to different factors such as hardware imbalances and varying
communication loads, can dramatically degrade optimization performance.

We consider the problem of asynchronous stochastic optimization, where an optimization algorithm makes updates based on stale stochastic gradients of the objective that are subject
to an arbitrary (possibly adversarial) sequence
of delays. We present a procedure which, for
any given 𝑞 ∈ (0, 1], transforms any standard stochastic first-order method to an asynchronous method with convergence guarantee depending on the 𝑞-quantile delay of the sequence.
This approach leads to
√ convergence rates of the
form 𝑂 (𝜏𝑞 /𝑞𝑇 + √𝜎/ 𝑞𝑇) for non-convex and
𝑂 (𝜏𝑞2 /(𝑞𝑇) 2 + 𝜎/ 𝑞𝑇) for convex smooth problems, where 𝜏𝑞 is the 𝑞-quantile delay, generalizing and improving on existing results that
depend on the average delay. We further show
a method that automatically adapts to all quantiles simultaneously, without any prior knowledge of the delays, achieving convergence
rates
√
of the form 𝑂 (inf 𝑞 𝜏𝑞 /𝑞𝑇 + 𝜎/ √𝑞𝑇) for nonconvex and 𝑂 (inf 𝑞 𝜏𝑞2 /(𝑞𝑇) 2 + 𝜎/ 𝑞𝑇) for convex smooth problems. Our technique is based on
asynchronous mini-batching with a careful batchsize selection and filtering of stale gradients.

An approach to mitigate degradation caused by delayed gradient computation is asynchronous stochastic optimization
(Nedić et al., 2001; Agarwal & Duchi, 2011; Chaturapruek
et al., 2015; Lian et al., 2015; Feyzmahdavian et al., 2016),
where stochastic gradients from each worker are sent to a
server, which applies them immediately and without synchronization. Thus, an update is executed as soon as a
stochastic gradient is received by the server, independent
of other pending gradients. A significant challenge in these
methods is the use of stale gradients, i.e., gradients that were
computed in earlier steps and thus suffer from substantial delays, potentially rendering them outdated. Numerous studies
have investigated asynchronous optimization under various
delay models, including recent results under constant delay
(Arjevani et al., 2020; Stich & Karimireddy, 2020), constant
compute time per machine (Tyurin & Richtarik, 2023), and
the more general arbitrary delay model (Aviv et al., 2021;
Cohen et al., 2021; Mishchenko et al., 2022; Koloskova
et al., 2022; Feyzmahdavian & Johansson, 2023), where
the sequence of delays is entirely arbitrary, and possibly
generated by an adversary. The latter challenging setting is
the focus of our work.

1. Introduction
Stochastic first-order optimization methods play a pivotal
role in modern machine learning. Given their sequential
nature, large-scale applications employ distributed optimization techniques to leverage multiple cores or machines.
Mini-batching (Cotter et al., 2011; Dekel et al., 2012; Duchi
et al., 2012), perhaps the most common approach, involves
computing several stochastic gradients of a single model
across a number of distributed workers, sending them to

Early work on asynchronous stochastic optimization considered constant or bounded delay and showed that the maximal
delay only affects a lower-order term in the convergence
rates, first for quadratic objectives (Arjevani et al., 2020)
and subsequently for general smooth functions (Stich &
Karimireddy, 2020). More recent studies in the arbitrary
delay model established that a tighter dependence can be
obtained, moving from dependency on the maximal delay to
bounds depending on the average delay (Cohen et al., 2021;
Aviv et al., 2021; Feyzmahdavian & Johansson, 2023) or
the number of distributed workers (Mishchenko et al., 2022;
Koloskova et al., 2022).

1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2 Google Research Tel Aviv. Correspondence to: Amit Attia <ami-

tattia@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

