Think Smarter not Harder:
Adaptive Reasoning with Inference Aware Optimization

Zishun Yu 1 Tengyu Xu 2 Di Jin 2 Karthik Abinav Sankararaman 2 Yun He 2 Wenxuan Zhou 2
Zhouhao Zeng 2 Eryk Helenowski 2 Chen Zhu 2 Sinong Wang 2 Hao Ma 2 Han Fang 2

Abstract

observation merged in the LLM reasoning literature is that
longer reasoning traces often leads to improved reasoning
soundness and correctness. The seminal work of chain-ofthought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) is an excellent example
of how enriching reasoning details, by decomposing reasoning traces into steps, improves its problem-solving capability. CoT has been considered a standard technique
in reasoning, recent works extend CoT by allow LLMs
to expand its reasoning steps, by for example CoT with
more steps (Jin et al., 2024) (as explicitly required by instruction), self-reflection/correction (Madaan et al., 2024;
Zelikman et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2024),
multi-turn reasoning (Kumar et al., 2024) or multi-agent
debate (Liang et al., 2023; Pham et al., 2023) (as a heterogeneous case of multi-turn). It was conjectured that scaling
the test-time compute or the reasoning length unleashes
LLMs’ potential for reasoning (Snell et al., 2024), which
has been empirically verified by recent hype of ultra-long
reasoning models, such as OpenAI-o1 (Jaech et al., 2024)
and DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). We’ll later
categorizes these type of responses as (standard) CoT responses, extended responses, and (ultra-)long responses,
respectively, given the nature of their reasoning lengths.

Solving mathematics problems has been an intriguing capability of language models, and many
efforts have been made to improve reasoning by
extending reasoning length, such as through selfcorrection and extensive long chain-of-thoughts.
While promising in problem-solving, advanced
long reasoning chain models exhibit an undesired
uni-modal behavior, where trivial questions require unnecessarily tedious long chains of thought.
In this work, we propose a way to allow models
to be aware of inference budgets by formulating
it as utility maximization with respect to an inference budget constraint, hence naming our algorithm Inference Budget-Constrained Policy Optimization (IBPO). In a nutshell, models fine-tuned
through IBPO learn to “understand” the difficulty
of queries and allocate inference budgets to harder
ones. With different inference budgets, our best
models are able to have a 4.14% and 5.74% absolute improvement (8.08% and 11.2% relative)
on MATH500 using 2.16x and 4.32x inference
budgets respectively, relative to LLaMA3.1 8B Instruct. These improvements are approximately 2x
those of self-consistency under the same budgets.

While scaling reasoning length is promising in problemsolving, advanced long reasoning-chain models show an
undesired uni-modal behavior that trivial questions may require unnecessarily tedious long reasoning trace, an example
is shown in Appendix A. This uni-modal behavior creates
unnecessarily higher inference costs and increased carbon
footprints (Henderson et al., 2020; Anthony et al., 2020). To
partially address this, we study how to enable multi-modal
behavior for reasoning models in a way the length of reasoning traces are automatically adjusted according to the hardness level of the queries. From the aspect of query-adaptive
reasoning length, some heuristic methods (e.g. Aggarwal
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024) have been
making effort towards better token efficiency, by which is
meant better accuracy with (hopefully) less token overhead.
We take a reinforcement learning (RL) perspective, where
the accuracy gain over the token overhead is nothing but a
non-differentiable objective to be optimized. One could, for
instance, take the negative response length or a metric of this

1. Introduction
Complex reasoning has been an intriguing ability of large
language models (LLMs), with application in for example mathematical problem-solving (Cobbe et al., 2021;
Hendrycks et al., 2021b; Lightman et al., 2023) or coding (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al.,
2021a), which does not only require nature language comprehending but also logical and critical “thinking”. An
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Illinois
Chicago, USA 2 MetaAI, Menlo Park, USA. Correspondence to:
Zishun Yu <zyu32@uic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

