DS-VLM: Diffusion Supervision Vision Language Model

Zhen Sun 1 Yunhang Shen 2 Jie Li 3 Xing Sun 2 Pingyang Dai 1 Liujuan Cao 1 Rongrong Ji 1 4

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) face two critical limitations in visual representation learning:
degraded supervision due to information loss during gradient propagation, and the inherent semantic sparsity of textual supervision compared to visual data. We propose the Diffusion Supervision
Vision-Language Model (DS-VLM), a plug-andplay framework that introduces diffusion-based
direct supervision for vision-language alignment.
By reconstructing input images through a diffusion model conditioned on outputs of the visual
encoder and the connector, our method establishes
a short-path gradient propagation channel from
pixel space to visual features. This approach simultaneously preserves high-level semantic alignment through conventional text supervision while
enhancing visual feature quality via pixel-level
reconstruction constraints. Extensive experiments
conducted across various visual encoders and
LLMs of different scales demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

(a) The text knowledge propagation chain of current methods.

(b) The image knowledge propagation chain of the proposed
DS-VLM.
Figure 1. The figure illustrates the knowledge propagation process
of current methods and our proposed DS-VLM. In comparison, the
DS-VLM has a shorter propagation chain and leverages the rich
semantic details contained in the image.

et al., 2023b) can be delineated into three components: the
pre-trained vision encoder (Radford et al., 2021; Sun et al.,
2023), the pre-trained LLM (Zhang et al., 2023c; Touvron
et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023), and the connector (Alayrac
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024b;a) trained from
scratch to bridge the vision and language models.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), exemplified by ChatGPT,
have achieved remarkable progress in text understanding
and generation. Meanwhile, multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) have further extended the capabilities of
LLMs by incorporating image understanding, evolving into
models capable of integrating visual and textual modalities.
This development has made MLLMs a new focal point for
research and discussion.

The most critical factor affecting the performance of models in understanding multi-modal content lies in the effectiveness of the vision encoder and connector in processing
image features. Therefore, most current methods focus
on improving the structure of either the Vision Encoder or
the Connector components. For example, Cumo (Li et al.,
2024) applies the Mixture of Experts (MoE) mechanism to
MLLMs by integrating Top-K sparse-gating MoE blocks
into the multilayer perceptron (MLP) connector. BLIP-2 (Li
et al., 2023b) introduces Q-Former, which leverages a set
of learnable query vectors to filter and refine raw visual
features, extracting visual information relevant to language
tasks. Similarly, MG-LLava (Zhao et al., 2024b) integrates
object-level features by incorporating bounding boxes iden-

In general terms, the architecture of mainstream MLLMs (Li
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China. 2 Tencent YouTu Lab 3 School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. 4 Institute of Artificial
Intelligence,Xiamen University,Xiamen,China. Correspondence
to: Liujuan Cao <caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

