Knowledge-Guided Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Optimization

Zitao Wang 1 Ziyuan Wang 2 Molei Liu * 3 Nian Si * 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning methods or empirical risk minimization often suffer from overfitting and a lack of generalization power, particularly in high-dimensional and smallsample-size settings. In recent years, distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has emerged as a powerful framework for mitigating the effects of model misspecification
and enhancing robustness in machine learning generalizations. Among various DRO formulations, Wasserstein-DRO
(WDRO) gained more attention due to its tractability and
generalizability. Specifically, in WDRO, one optimizes over
worst-case distributions within an ambiguity set defined by
a Wasserstein ball centered at an empirical measure.

Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Optimization
(WDRO) is a principled framework for robust estimation under distributional uncertainty. However,
its standard formulation can be overly conservative, particularly in small-sample regimes. We
propose a novel knowledge-guided WDRO (KGWDRO) framework for transfer learning, which
adaptively incorporates multiple sources of external knowledge to improve generalization accuracy. Our method constructs smaller Wasserstein
ambiguity sets by controlling the transportation
along directions informed by the source knowledge. This strategy can alleviate perturbations
on the predictive projection of the covariates and
protect against information loss. Theoretically,
we establish the equivalence between our WDRO
formulation and the knowledge-guided shrinkage
estimation based on collinear similarity, ensuring tractability and geometrizing the feasible set.
This also reveals a novel and general interpretation for recent shrinkage-based transfer learning
approaches from the perspective of distributional
robustness. In addition, our framework can adjust
for scaling differences in the regression models
between the source and target and accommodates
general types of regularization such as lasso and
ridge. Extensive simulations demonstrate the superior performance and adaptivity of KG-WDRO
in enhancing small-sample transfer learning.

However, one persistent challenge with WDRO is its tendency to be overly conservative, which can lead to suboptimal performance in practice as found in (Liu et al., 2024).
In many real-world scenarios, prior knowledge can be leveraged to improve model performance and robustness. This
transfer learning approach falls under the category of Domain Adaptation, which adapts models trained on a source
domain to perform well on a related target domain with
limited labeled data.
A key application is in clinical trials, where the binary outcome Y ∈ {0, 1} indicates treatment success or failure,
and the high-dimensional covariate X encodes a patient’s
physical and health conditions along with treatment details.
Data scarcity is common—especially for underrepresented
populations. To address this, we leverage a classifier trained
on a majority group (parameterized by θ) as a reference to
estimate a classifier for the minority group (parameterized
by β). This knowledge-guided transfer learning reduces
uncertainty by anchoring the search for β in the direction of
θ. In such a context, transfer learning has proven to be a versatile approach for improving performance on a target task.
Despite its successes, the integration of prior knowledge
into WDRO frameworks has remained an open question.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, USA. 2 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston,
USA. 3 Department of Biostatistics, Peking University Health Science Center; Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Peking University, Beijing, China. 4 Department of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.. Correspondence to:
Nian Si <niansi@ust.hk>, Molei Liu <moleiliu@bjmu.edu.cn>.

In this work, we introduce Knowledge-Guided Wasserstein
Distributionally Robust Optimization (KG-WDRO), a novel
framework that adapts the Wasserstein ambiguity set using external knowledge (parameters). We assume access
to prior predictors of pre-trained models, which can guide
the predictive model in the target dataset. By constraining the transport cost along directions informed by prior

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

