Differentially Private Boxplots

Kelly Ramsay * 1 Jairo Diaz-Rodriguez * 1

Abstract

practitioners, Garrido et al. (2023) found that “most analysts
employed aggregations and visualizations to fulfill their use
case,” rather than machine learning models.

Despite the potential of differentially private data
visualization to harmonize data analysis and privacy, research in this area remains underdeveloped. Boxplots are a widely popular visualization
used for summarizing a dataset and for comparison of multiple datasets. Consequentially, we
introduce a differentially private boxplot. We
evaluate its effectiveness for displaying location,
scale, skewness and tails of a given empirical
distribution. In our theoretical exposition, we
show that the location and scale of the boxplot are
estimated with optimal sample complexity, and
the skewness and tails are estimated consistently,
which is not always the case for a boxplot naively
constructed from a single existing differentially
private quantile algorithm. As a byproduct of
this exposition, we introduce several new results
concerning private quantile estimation. In simulations, we show that this boxplot performs similarly to a non-private boxplot, and it outperforms
the naive boxplot. Additionally, we conduct a
real data analysis of Airbnb listings, which shows
that comparable analysis can be achieved through
differentially private boxplot visualization.

Differentially private versions of several popular visualizations have been considered in the literature. Nanayakkara
et al. (2022) developed a plot to visualize privacy utility
trade-offs. Zhou et al. (2022) developed DPVisCreator,
a visualization system, which relies on publishing a synthetic dataset. Visualizations in other privacy models were
considered by Dasgupta & Kosara (2011); Dasgupta et al.
(2013; 2019), and recently reviewed by Bhattacharjee et al.
(2020). There has been substantial study of the differentially private histogram (Hay et al., 2010; Li et al., 2010;
Acs et al., 2012; Kellaris & Papadopoulos, 2013; Xu et al.,
2013; Zhang et al., 2014; Budiu et al., 2022). Visualizations based on clustering (Hongde et al., 2014), for mobility
data (He et al., 2016), heatmaps (Zhang et al., 2016) and
scatterplots (Panavas et al., 2024) have also been considered.
Surprisingly, despite its widespread use, a differentially
private boxplot has not been directly studied. Boxplots,
invented by Tukey et al. (1977), are used for visualizing
the characteristics of a univariate sample, as well as for
visualizing the relationship between a continuous variable
and a categorical variable. Despite its simplicity, many
key distributional characteristics can be evaluated from the
boxplot: namely, location, scale, skewness, and tails. This
has made it popular among practitioners.

1. Introduction

In addition, its simplicity is beneficial from a privacy standpoint. The boxplot only requires estimating a few summary
statistics in order to convey the distributional characteristics
of a univariate sample, making the boxplot efficient in its
use of privacy budget. For instance, by contrast, a histogram
can also be used to convey the same information. However,
a histogram is generally a consistent estimate of the population density, which intuitively, should then require more
noise to ensure privacy.

It is now well established that differential privacy (Dwork
et al., 2006) is a powerful framework for protecting the
privacy of individuals’ data. As a result, a plethora of differentially private data analysis tools have been developed over
the last several decades (Dwork, 2008; Ji et al., 2014; Liu
et al., 2023). However, one area that has been considerably
underdeveloped is that of differentially private visualization.
This is despite the fact that data visualization is a key tool
in exploratory analysis, which is an essential component of
data analysis. In fact, in a recent study of data analysts and
*

Motivated by these observations, we take the first steps in developing and studying differentially private boxplots. First,
one can observe that a boxplot is made up of sample quantiles. It is then natural to first consider how well a boxplot
constructed from naive applications of existing differentially
private quantile algorithms. Succinctly:

1

Equal contribution Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
York University, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Kelly
Ramsay <kramsay2@yorku.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

