Nesterov Method for Asynchronous Pipeline Parallel Optimization

Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan 1 Sameera Ramasinghe 1 Yan Zuo 1 Gil Avraham 1 Alexander Long 1

Abstract

The main objective of PP methods is to mask the communication overhead and improve device utilization so as to minimize training time. To this end, many pipeline scheduling
strategies (i.e., the order of processing forward and backward passes of microbatches) have been developed (Huang
et al., 2019; Narayanan et al., 2021b; Qi et al., 2023). However, the main bottleneck in these methods is the requirement to synchronize the weights and gradients across stages
at each update step, hindering 100% pipeline utilization.

Pipeline Parallelism (PP) enables large neural network training on small, interconnected devices
by splitting the model into multiple stages. To
maximize pipeline utilization, asynchronous optimization is appealing as it offers 100% pipeline
utilization by construction. However, it is inherently challenging as the weights and gradients are
no longer synchronized, leading to stale (or delayed) gradients. To alleviate this, we introduce a
variant of Nesterov Accelerated Gradient (NAG)
for asynchronous optimization in PP. Specifically,
we modify the look-ahead step in NAG to effectively address the staleness in gradients. We theoretically prove that our approach converges at
a sublinear rate in the presence of fixed delay in
gradients. Our experiments on large-scale language modelling tasks using decoder-only architectures with up to 1B parameters, demonstrate
that our approach significantly outperforms existing asynchronous methods, even surpassing the
synchronous baseline.†

To enable full pipeline utilization, we consider asynchronous
optimization in PP, where the weight updates are performed
independently at each stage without waiting for the corresponding backward pass to complete. This approach introduces gradient staleness, as weights are updated multiple
times between the forward and backward passes of a microbatch, resulting in outdated gradients being used for weight
updates. This gradient staleness presents a significant optimization challenge, necessitating sophisticated delay correction mechanisms to ensure convergence, even in traditional
distributed settings (Agarwal & Duchi, 2011; Zheng et al.,
2017; Stich & Karimireddy, 2019; Mishchenko et al., 2022).
Typically, delay correction methods directly estimate the
gradients via forecasting approaches (Zheng et al., 2017;
Liu et al., 2024b) or extrapolate the previous update step in
the weight space (Hakimi et al., 2019; Guan et al., 2019).
We follow the latter approach as delay correction in the
weight space does not make any assumptions on the loss
landscape (as in gradient forecasting methods), but rather
assumes that the update directions change slowly. Noting
that the smoothness of update directions can be controlled in
momentum based optimizers, we derive a look-ahead based
optimization method to alleviate gradient staleness.

1. Introduction
Pipeline Parallelism (PP) is a standard parallelism technique
for training large-scale frontier foundational models (Dubey
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a). PP partitions neural networks into sequential stages, enabling the training of models
that exceed the memory capacity of any single device by
distributing computations across multiple interconnected
devices. The devices can be co-located in datacenters or
connected via the internet (i.e., low bandwidth connections)
in a fully decentralised setting. Each device processes a
stage (i.e., a set of consecutive layers) and communicates
the activations and gradients with adjacent stages often via
bandwidth-constrained interconnects.

Specifically, we introduce a variant of the Nesterov Accelerated Gradient (NAG) method (Nesterov, 1983; 2013) for
asynchronous PP optimization. Our idea stems from the
observation that NAG has a look-ahead step which can be
repurposed as a delay correction in the weight space, by
carefully modifying the update formula (refer to Fig. 1).
Our approach is a simple, yet elegant modification to NAG
that does not introduce any hyperparameters. We theoretically prove that our approach converges at a sublinear rate
for convex, smooth functions with a fixed delay in gradients.

1
Pluralis Research. Correspondence to: Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan <aj@pluralis.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
†
Our code is available at https://github.com/
PluralisResearch/AsyncPP.

We demonstrate the merits of our approach on large-scale
1

