Mind the Gap: a Spectral Analysis of Rank Collapse
and Signal Propagation in Attention Layers

Thiziri Nait Saada * 1 Alireza Naderi * 1 Jared Tanner 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have emerged as the
dominant architecture in machine learning, achieving remarkable success across various domains, particularly in
natural language processing and computer vision, largely
due to their defining feature: the self-attention mechanism
(Bahdanau et al., 2016). However, despite their empirical
success, transformers are often plagued by training instability and high sensitivity to numerous hyperparameters, which
require careful tuning. This challenge has motivated recent
efforts to establish a theoretical framework for understanding transformer architectures, even in their most basic forms,
to ensure reliable information flow through deeper layers
and facilitate training.

Attention layers are the core component of transformers, the current state-of-the-art neural network architecture. Alternatives to softmax-based
attention are being explored due to its tendency
to hinder effective information flow. Even at initialisation, it remains poorly understood why the
propagation of signals and gradients through these
random networks can be pathological, resulting
in issues known as (i) vanishing/exploding gradients and (ii) rank collapse in depth, i.e. when all
tokens converge to a single representation along
layers. While rank collapse in depth naturally
arises from repeated matrix multiplications—a
common pattern across various architectures—we
identify an additional and previously unknown
challenge unique to softmax attention layers: (iii)
rank collapse in width, which occurs as the context length increases. Using Random Matrix Theory, we conduct a rigorous analysis that uncovers
a spectral gap between the two largest singular
values of the attention matrix as the cause of (iii),
which in turn exacerbates (i) and (ii). Building on
this insight, we propose a novel yet simple practical solution to mitigate rank collapse in width
by removing the outlier eigenvalue(s). Our theoretical framework offers a fresh perspective on
recent practical studies, such as (Ye et al., 2025;
Ali et al., 2023), whose ad hoc solutions can now
be interpreted as implicit efforts to address the
spectral gap issue. This work provides valuable
theoretical support for ongoing large-scale empirical research, bringing theory and practice one step
closer in the understanding of transformers.1

The purpose of this work is to analyse signal propagation
in softmax-based attention layers at initialisation, i.e. with
randomly initialised model parameters. While the issues of
rank collapse (in depth) and vanishing/exploding gradients
have been previously identified in transformers at initialisation (Dong et al., 2021; Noci et al., 2022), our work extends
these findings and uncovers an additional phenomenon—
rank collapse in width—due to the use of softmax in the
self-attention mechanism. By width, we specifically refer
to the context length, which, despite its increasing scale in
modern attention layers, seems to have been overlooked in
favour of depth in previous analyses of rank collapse in transformers. Indeed, rank collapse in width, which is unique
to attention layers, has not been identified in the existing
literature nor recognised as a catalyst for rank collapse along
the depth. In contrast, rank collapse in depth is not specific
to transformer-like networks, as it typically results from successive matrix multiplications, a shared feature of various
deep neural network architectures. Investigating the spectra
of the random matrices formed by the model’s parameters,
we detect a spectral gap between the two largest eigenvalues
of the attention matrix, which drives rank collapse in width
and further accelerates rank collapse in depth. Moreover,
we propose a provably effective remedy for the spectral gap,
a solution that naturally arises when the problem is viewed
through a spectral lens. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first study to examine the attention mechanism in the
large context length regime, as well as the first to identify

*

Equal contribution 1 Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Thiziri Nait Saada and Alireza Naderi
<naitsaadat@maths.ox.ac.uk, naderi@maths.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/thizirinait/SpectralAnalysis-of-Attention-Layers.git.

1

