UnHiPPO: Uncertainty-aware Initialization for State Space Models

Marten Lienen 1 2 Abdullah Saydemir 1 Stephan Günnemann 1 2
high-order polynomial projection operator (HiPPO) initialization for their dynamics introduced by Gu et al. (2020).
The HiPPO dynamics compress a sequence into a finitedimensional state that represents the projection of the sequence onto a basis of Legendre polynomials. Importantly,
maintaining this state requires only the current state and the
next value in the sequence and is thus independent of the
sequence length. This enables the construction of SSMs
that efficiently capture long-range dependencies with linear
computational complexity. Such SSMs are well-suited for
deep learning applications where sequence length can be
substantial, such as language (Gu & Dao, 2023) or video
modeling (Park et al., 2025).

Abstract
State space models are emerging as a dominant
model class for sequence problems with many relying on the HiPPO framework to initialize their
dynamics. However, HiPPO fundamentally assumes data to be noise-free; an assumption often
violated in practice. We extend the HiPPO theory
with measurement noise and derive an uncertaintyaware initialization for state space model dynamics. In our analysis, we interpret HiPPO as a
linear stochastic control problem where the data
enters as a noise-free control signal. We then reformulate the problem so that the data become
noisy outputs of a latent system and arrive at an
alternative dynamics initialization that infers the
posterior of this latent system from the data without increasing runtime. Our experiments show
that our initialization improves the resistance of
state-space models to noise both at training and
inference time.

However, the original HiPPO framework assumes that the
observed data is noise-free – an assumption that is easily violated. In many practical scenarios, measurements
are contaminated with noise due to sensor imperfections,
environmental factors, or inherent variability in the datagenerating process. Thus, this noise-free assumption limits
the applicability of HiPPO-initialized SSMs, as they may
perform suboptimally when exposed to noisy observations
commonly encountered in real-world applications.

1. Introduction

We address this limitation by extending the HiPPO framework to explicitly account for measurement noise. By reinterpreting HiPPO as a linear stochastic control problem
where data emerges as noisy observations of a latent system, we derive the uncertainty-aware HiPPO (UnHiPPO)
initialization for SSMs. With UnHiPPO, an SSM implicitly
performs posterior inference in a linear dynamical system,
making it robust against noise in the data without increasing
computational complexity or changes to the model structure.

In 2019, Voelker et al. proposed a novel memory cell, the
Legendre Memory Unit (LMU), for recurrent neural networks. Their cell keeps a continuously updated representation of input in a sliding window in terms of orthogonal
polynomials. After Gu et al. (2020) generalized LMUs to
variable length input windows, they were further extended as
state space models (SSMs) by Gu et al. (2021) and applied
across a multitude of domains. Their ability to capture temporal dependencies over long sequences made them a great
fit for natural language processing (Mehta et al., 2022), time
series analysis (Patro & Agneeswaran, 2024b), speech generation (Goel et al., 2022) and more (Patro & Agneeswaran,
2024a).

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We provide a thorough description and derivation of
HiPPO and its application to SSM initialization in Sections A to 3.

A significant contribution to the success of SSMs is the

• In Section 4, we analyze HiPPO with respect to its
noise robustness using the framework of linear stochastic control theory. We modify HiPPO based on this
analysis so that it performs implicit posterior inference
under the assumption of observation noise and propose
a regularization technique to make this numerically
stable.

1

Department of Computer Science, Technical University of
Munich 2 Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of
Munich. Correspondence to: Marten Lienen <m.lienen@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

