any4: Learned 4-bit Numeric Representation for LLMs

Mostafa Elhoushi * 1 Jeff Johnson * 1

Abstract

FP16

We present any4, a learned 4-bit weight quantization solution for large language models (LLMs)
providing arbitrary numeric representations without requiring pre-processing of weights or activations. any4 yields higher accuracy compared to
other related 4-bit numeric representation types:
int4, fp4 and nf4, as evaluated on a range of
model sizes, generations and families (Llama
2, Llama 3, Mistral and Mixtral). While any4
does not require preprocessing of weights or
activations, it is also competitive with orthogonal techniques that require such preprocessing
(e.g., AWQ and GPTQ). We also experiment
with any3 and any2 and show competitiveness
at lower bits. Additionally, we show that we can
calibrate using a single curated diverse sample
rather than hundreds of samples from a dataset
as done in most quantization approaches. We
also open source tinygemm, a latency optimized
GPU matrix multiplication library for LLMs, that
implements any4 using a GPU-efficient lookup
table strategy along with other common quantization methods. We open source our code at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/any4.

INT4

FP4

NF4

ANY4

18

16

← C4 Perplexity

14

12

10

8

6
Llama3.2 1B

Llama3.2 3B

Llama3 8B

Llama3 70B

Model

Figure 1: Perplexity by quantizing various Llama3 model
sizes. Our proposed any4 is the most accurate across numeric formats.

as 4-bit integer (int4), floating point (fp4), or custom distributions such as NormalFloat4 (nf4) (Dettmers et al., 2023))
along with quantization grouping (Dai et al., 2021) are used
to increase accuracy. Pre-processing weights and/or activations (e.g., AWQ (Lin et al., 2024), GPTQ (Frantar et al.,
2023), or weight Hadamard transforms (Ashkboos et al.,
2024b; Liu et al., 2024) can aid with accuracy as well. In
this paper, we present a new learned numeric representation,
any4, that does not require online or offline modification of
weights or activations. any4 quantization accuracy outperforms other numeric representation types, and is competitive with orthogonal quantization algorithms that preprocess weights and/or activations (orthogonality implying that
some of these techniques can be applied together with any4
representation). Accuracy was evaluated on a wide range of
model sizes, generations and families.

1. Introduction
Reduced neural network parameter sizes are important for
efficient inference, whether at datacenter scale, where accelerators can be provisioned based more upon arithmetic
throughput rather than memory requirements, or with edge
devices, where smaller, slower memories could be used
improving battery lifetime while meeting performance constraints. Given training is typically done in high dynamic
range floating point arithmetic, techniques to lossily compress weights must deal with the possibility of varying scale
factors and outliers. Various weight numeric formats, such
*

Equal contribution 1 FAIR at Meta.
Correspondence
to: Mostafa Elhoushi <m.elhoushi@ieee.org>, Jeff Johnson
<jhj@meta.com>.

2. Background
Trained neural network weights tend to be roughly Gaussian
in nature but with heavier tails (Goodfellow et al., 2016).
In attempting to lossily compress weights via quantization
(yielding fewer reproduction values than the original do-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

