Elucidating Flow Matching ODE Dynamics via Data Geometry and Denoisers

Zhengchao Wan * 1 Qingsong Wang * 2 Gal Mishne 2 Yusu Wang 2

Abstract

et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019). Compared to previous generative models (e.g., GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014)), diffusion models are easier to train
but suffer from long sampling times due to the sequential
nature of the sampling process. ODE-based samplers were
introduced to address this limitation, where the sampling
process is done by integrating an ODE. With its efficiency,
ODE-based samplers have become the dominant approach
in diffusion models (Song et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022; Karras et al., 2022). Recently, the ODE-based viewpoint of
diffusion models has been extended to a general framework
known as flow matching (FM) (Lipman et al., 2022; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Liu et al., 2023), which
uses an ODE to interpolate between a prior and a target data
distribution. FM models learn a vector field ut , similar to
the score function in diffusion models. During sampling, a
data sample x1 is generated by integrating the ODE starting
from some x0 ∈ Rd sampled from a prior distribution:

Flow matching (FM) models extend ODE sampler
based diffusion models into a general framework,
significantly reducing sampling steps through
learned vector fields. However, the theoretical
understanding of FM models, particularly how
their sample trajectories interact with underlying
data geometry, remains underexplored. A rigorous theoretical analysis of FM ODE is essential
for sample quality, stability, and broader applicability. In this paper, we advance the theory of FM
models through a comprehensive analysis of sample trajectories. Central to our theory is the discovery that the denoiser, a key component of FM
models, guides ODE dynamics through attracting
and absorbing behaviors that adapt to the data geometry. We identify and analyze the three stages
of ODE evolution: in the initial and intermediate
stages, trajectories move toward the mean and local clusters of the data. At the terminal stage, we
rigorously establish the convergence of FM ODE
under weak assumptions, addressing scenarios
where the data lie on a low-dimensional submanifold—cases that previous results could not handle.
Our terminal stage analysis offers insights into
the memorization phenomenon and establishes
equivariance properties of FM ODEs. These findings bridge critical gaps in understanding flow
matching models, with practical implications for
optimizing sampling strategies and architectures
guided by the intrinsic geometry of data.

dxt
= ut (xt ), t ∈ [0, 1).
dt

Data (Circle)
Starting Point x0
Converged Point

(a) Convergent trajectory

(b) Winding trajectory

Figure 1. Comparing two ODE trajectory behaviors.

1. Introduction

Various versions of the FM model have gained popularity,
such as the rectified flow model (Liu et al., 2023), which
is utilized in commercial image generation software (Esser
et al., 2024). Furthermore, the succinct and deterministic
formulation of the FM model also makes theoretical analysis
potentially easier. Despite the empirical success, critical
theoretical questions remain insufficiently addressed: How
does the data geometry (e.g., clusters, manifold structure)
influence and guide individual sampling trajectories? Are
these trajectories guaranteed to converge toward the data
distribution as t → 1, especially when the data lies on a
low-dimensional subspace or manifold? This convergence is

Diffusion-based generative models have become the de facto
method for the task of image generation (Sohl-Dickstein
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University
of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA 2 Halıcıoǧlu Data Science
Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California,
USA. Correspondence to: Gal Mishne <gmishne@ucsd.edu>,
Yusu Wang <yusuwang@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

