On Explaining Equivariant Graph Networks via Improved Relevance
Propagation

Hongyi Ling 1 Haiyang Yu 1 Zhimeng Jiang 1 Na Zou 2 Shuiwang Ji 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Equivariant graph neural networks have shown significant
promise in addressing complex problems across quantum
physics, molecular science, materials science, and protein
research (Thomas et al., 2018; Fuchs et al., 2020; Liao &
Smidt, 2022; Liao et al., 2023; Batzner et al., 2022; Passaro
& Zitnick, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Du et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2023; 2022). Despite their potential, a
critical challenge in assessing the scientific plausibility of
these models’ outcomes is their interpretability. Most equivariant GNNs are treated as black boxes, which undermines
their reliability and limits their applicability in scientific
domains. Therefore, developing explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) techniques tailored for equivariant GNNs is
highly desirable. These techniques can provide insights into
how equivariant GNNs make predictions, thereby increasing
the trustworthiness of their outcomes. Moreover, XAI techniques can not only diagnose and improve existing models
but also facilitate further scientific knowledge discovery.

We consider explainability in equivariant graph
neural networks for 3D geometric graphs. While
many XAI methods have been developed for analyzing graph neural networks, they predominantly
target 2D graph structures. The complex nature
of 3D data and the sophisticated architectures of
equivariant GNNs present unique challenges. Current XAI techniques either struggle to adapt to
equivariant GNNs or fail to effectively handle
positional data and evaluate the significance of
geometric features adequately. To address these
challenges, we introduce a novel method, known
as EquiGX, which uses the Deep Taylor decomposition framework to extend the layer-wise relevance propagation rules tailored for spherical
equivariant GNNs. Our approach decomposes
prediction scores and back-propagates the relevance scores through each layer to the input
space. Our decomposition rules provide a detailed explanation of each layer’s contribution to
the network’s predictions, thereby enhancing our
understanding of how geometric and positional
data influence the model’s outputs. Through
experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets, our method demonstrates its capability to identify critical geometric structures and
outperform alternative baselines. These results
indicate that our method provides significantly enhanced explanations for equivariant GNNs. Our
code has been released as part of the AIRS library
(https://github.com/divelab/AIRS/).

While many XAI methods have been proposed to study
GNNs, they primarily focus on 2D graphs (Yuan et al.,
2023; 2020; Zheng et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2021). The high dimensionality of 3D geometric data
and the complexity of equivariant GNN models pose unique
challenges and opportunities in this domain. Current XAI
techniques either struggle to adapt to equivariant GNNs or
fail to effectively handle positional data and evaluate the
significance of geometric features adequately. Specifically,
many XAI methods (Huang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021;
Vu & Thai, 2020) overlook the complex behavior of equivariant models, thus requiring additional effort before they
can be applied to equivariant GNNs. On the other hand,
some XAI methods, known for their simplicity and adaptability, such as SA (Baldassarre & Azizpour, 2019), are
insufficient to provide a comprehensive explanation for the
importance of geometric features.

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, Texas, USA 2 Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Houston, Texas, USA. Correspondence to:
Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.

To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel XAI method, known
as EquiGX, which captures the importance of input components by decomposing the model predictions. The primary
challenge in decomposing the predictions of spherical equivariant GNNs lies in attributing the tensor product-based
message-passing operations that are central to these net-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

