Fixed-Confidence Multiple Change Point Identification
under Bandit Feedback
Joseph Lazzaro 1 Ciara Pike-Burke 1

Abstract

or in Oceanology we may wish to map out the edge of a cliff
on the seafloor (Hayashi et al., 2019). In all these settings,
data is expensive to collect due to the cost, time, or compute
of each experiment. Moreover, there are often health or
safety constraints which mean that we need to have high
confidence in our results. This motivates us to develop sequential methods which can learn about the locations of
these change points efficiently and with high confidence.

Piecewise constant functions describe a variety of
real-world phenomena in domains ranging from
chemistry to manufacturing. In practice, it is
often required to confidently identify the locations of the abrupt changes in these functions
as quickly as possible. For this, we introduce a
fixed-confidence piecewise constant bandit problem. Here, we sequentially query points in the
domain and receive noisy evaluations of the function under bandit feedback. We provide instancedependent lower bounds for the complexity of
change point identification in this problem. These
lower bounds illustrate that an optimal method
should focus its sampling efforts adjacent to each
of the change points, and the number of samples
around each change point should be inversely proportional to the magnitude of the change. Building on this, we devise a simple and computationally efficient variant of Track-and-Stop and prove
that it is asymptotically optimal in many regimes.
We support our theoretical findings with experimental results in synthetic environments demonstrating the efficiency of our method.

In this paper we consider a multi-armed bandit setting in
which the expected rewards are piecewise constant across an
action space A, see Figure 1 for an example. In each round
t = 1, 2, . . . we select an action in our action space and
observe the mean reward at that action plus some random
noise (see Section 3 for more details). We assume the mean
reward function is stationary across time, but piecewise constant across A. The objective of the learner is to confidently
identify the locations of the N change points/jumps in the
mean reward function with the fewest number of samples
possible. While there exist methods for locating the minimum of a smooth or convex function under bandit feedback
(e.g. Kleinberg et al., 2008; Srinivas et al., 2010; Bubeck
et al., 2011), the abrupt changes in the mean reward function
across the action space make these methods inapplicable
to our setting. There has been work on identification of a
single change point across the action space with bandit feedback, under a fixed-budget constraint (Hall & Molchanov,
2003; Lan et al., 2009; Lazzaro & Pike-Burke, 2025). However, in practice it is often necessary to continue sampling
until we are sufficiently confident we have identified N ≥ 1
change points correctly, at which point we stop playing. For
example, in material development we need to identify the
phase transitions of an unfamiliar new material with high
confidence for the sake of both production and safety precautions (Park et al., 2021; 2023). It is therefore important
to study this fixed-confidence variant of the problem, which
we will refer to as the fixed-confidence piecewise constant
bandits problem.

1. Introduction
There are a variety of settings where it is necessary to confidently identify the location of change points in a piecewise constant function via sequential queries. For example,
in communication and computer system engineering, the
system can become overloaded and we need to determine
the point at which this happens (Lan et al., 2009); during
material development it is essential to find the experimental conditions under which the behavior of a new material
changes abruptly between phases (Park et al., 2021; 2023);
1

In this paper we provide a comprehensive study of the fixedconfidence piecewise constant bandits problem. We firstly
study the complexity of searching for N change points,
when the true number of change points is known to be exactly N (see Definition 5.1). However, in practice, there may
be an unknown number of additional changes present and it

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London,
London, England.
Correspondence to: Joseph Lazzaro
<joseph.lazzaro18@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

