Compositional Scene Understanding through Inverse Generative Modeling

Yanbo Wang 1 Justin Dauwels 1 Yilun Du 2

Abstract

(a) Infer object locations

Generative models have demonstrated remarkable
abilities in generating high-fidelity visual content.
In this work, we explore how generative models can further be used not only to synthesize visual content but also to understand the properties
of a scene given a natural image. We formulate
scene understanding as an inverse generative modeling problem, where we seek to find conditional
parameters of a visual generative model to best
fit a given natural image. To enable this procedure to infer scene structure from images substantially different than those seen during training,
we further propose to build this visual generative
model compositionally from smaller models over
pieces of a scene. We illustrate how this procedure enables us to infer the set of objects in a
scene, enabling robust generalization to new test
scenes with an increased number of objects of
new shapes. We further illustrate how this enables
us to infer global scene factors, likewise enabling
robust generalization to new scenes. Finally, we
illustrate how this approach can be directly applied to existing pretrained text-to-image generative models for zero-shot multi-object perception. Code and visualizations are at https://energybased-model.github.io/compositional-inference.

1

In-distribution
query

Result

Out-of-distribution
query

Result

(b) Infer facial attributes

In-distribution
query

• Black-hair

• Black-hair

• Eyeglasses ❌

• Eyeglasses

• Smiling

• Smiling

Result

Out-of-distribution
query

Result

(c) Infer object categories

Zero-shot query

• A dog

• A dog

• A cat

• A cat ❌

• A rabbit ❌

• A rabbit

Result

Zero-shot query

Result

Figure 1: Compositional Scene Understanding. Our approach
demonstrates strong generalization across various scene understanding tasks. For object location inference (first row), the model
is trained on CLEVR images containing 3-5 objects, while the test
set is CLEVRTex, which contains 6-8 objects. For multi-facial
attribute inference (second row), the model is trained only on female faces from CelebA, and is tested exlusively on male faces.
For object category inference (third row), we use pretrained Stable Diffusion without any additional fine-tuning, and the test set
consists of multi-object natural images.

Introduction

world (Shepard & Metzler, 1971). Such a generative learning mechanism is the key for us to accurately parse scenes
that we have never encountered before, i.e., zero-shot scene
understanding (Chomsky, 1965; Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988;
Bengio, 2019). We are interested in equipping machines
with such generalizable scene-understanding abilities by
leveraging recent advances in generative models.

“What I cannot create, I do not understand.”
– Richard Feynman
To understand surrounding physical scenes, human intelligence is able to learn abstract visual concepts from the
physical world and compositionally reuse them (Biederman,
1987; Greff et al., 2020; Fodor & Lepore, 2002). Given
an image of an object, we can then easily imagine how
the object would look if it were rotated or moved in 3D

Conventionally, scene understanding tasks have been dominated by discriminative models that learn a direct mapping from input images to visual attributes (Vapnik et al.,
1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Redmon, 2016), which, however, is demonstrated to struggle with generalizing to even
slightly shifted test distributions (Geirhos et al., 2018; Recht
et al., 2019; Taori et al., 2020; Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016;
Geirhos et al., 2020). In contrast, generative models have

1
TU Delft 2 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Yanbo
Wang <y.wang-27@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

