Graph Generative Pre-trained Transformer

Xiaohui Chen 1 Yinkai Wang 1 Jiaxing He 2 Yuanqi Du 3 Soha Hassoun 1 Xiaolin Xu 2 Li-Ping Liu 1

Abstract

sequential models. These approaches employed sequential
frameworks (e.g., RNNs or LSTMs (Sherstinsky, 2020)) to
generate graphs sequentially. For instance, GraphRNN generates adjacency matrix entries step by step. For undirected
graphs, it only needs to generate the lower triangular part
of the adjacency matrix. DeepGMG frames graph generation as a sequence of actions (e.g., add-node, add-edge), and
utilizes an agent-based model to learn the action trajectories.

Graph generative models, which can produce
complex structures that resemble real-world data,
serve as essential tools in domains such as molecular design and network analysis. While many
existing generative models rely on adjacency matrices, this work introduces a token-based approach that represents graphs as token sequences
and generates them via next-token prediction,
offering a more efficient encoding. Based on
this methodology, we propose the Graph Generative Pre-trained Transformer (G2PT), an autoregressive Transformer architecture that learns
graph structures through this sequence-based
paradigm. To extend G2PT’s capabilities as a
general-purpose foundation model, we further develop fine-tuning strategies for two downstream
tasks: goal-oriented generation and graph property prediction. Comprehensive experiments on
multiple datasets demonstrate G2PT’s superior
performance in both generic graph generation and
molecular generation. Additionally, the good experiment results also show that G2PT can be effectively applied to goal-oriented molecular design and graph representation learning. The code
of G2PT is released at https://github.com/tuftsml/G2PT.

Recent advances in graph generative models have primarily focused on permutation-invariant methods, particularly
diffusion-based approaches (Ho et al., 2020; Austin et al.,
2021). For example, models like EDP-GNN (Niu et al.,
2020) and GDSS (Jo et al., 2022a) learn from adjacency
matrices as continuous values. DiGress (Vignac et al., 2022)
and EDGE (Chen et al., 2023) employ discrete diffusion,
treating node types and all node pairs (edges and non-edges)
as categorical variables. These models start from a random
or a fixed adjacency matrix and run “denoising” steps to sample an adjacency matrix from the target graph distribution.
They specify exchangeable (permutation-invariant) distributions over graphs by assigning the same probability to
adjacency matrices of the same graph. However, achieving
the permutation-invariant property has a price: the underlying neural network needs to be permutation-invariant as
well, limiting the architecture choice to graph neural networks only. Discrete diffusion has an additional limitation:
it samples matrix entries independently at each denoising
step, making it challenging to learn the true distribution
when the number of denoising steps is insufficient (Lezama
et al., 2022; Campbell et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

In recent years, the revolutionary success of large language
models (Achiam et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024) shows the
power of autoregressive Transformers and also inspired the
application of these models in other fields such as image
generation (Esser et al., 2021). In this work, we revisit the
sequential approach to graph generation and introduce a
novel token-based encoding scheme for representing sparse
graphs as sequences. This new encoding strategy unlocks
the potential of Transformer architectures for graph generation. We train autoregressive Transformers to generate
graphs by predicting token sequences, resulting in our proposed method: Graph Generative Pre-trained Transformer
(G2PT). While G2PT does not maintain permutation invariance, we argue that its capacity to learn accurate graph

Graph generation has emerged as a crucial task across diverse fields such as chemical discovery and social network
analysis, thanks to its ability to model complex relationships
and produce realistic, structured data (Du et al., 2021; Zhu
et al., 2022).
Early generation methods such as DeepGMG (Li et al.,
2018) and GraphRNN (You et al., 2018b) model graphs with
1

Tufts University 2 Northeastern University 3 Cornell University.
Correspondence to: Xiaohui Chen <xiaohui.chen@tufts.edu>,
Li-Ping Liu <liping.liu@tufts.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

