Towards Universal Offline Black-Box Optimization
via Learning Language Model Embeddings

Rong-Xi Tan * 1 2 Ming Chen * 1 2 Ke Xue † 1 2 Yao Wang 3 Yaoyuan Wang 3 Sheng Fu 3 Chao Qian † 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The pursuit of universal black-box optimization (BBO) algorithms, i.e., capable of adapting to diverse problems, has
been a long-standing challenge (Wolpert & Macready, 1997;
Chen et al., 2022b; Lehre & Lin, 2024). Traditional BBO
methods, including Bayesian optimization (Garnett, 2023)
and evolutionary algorithms (Bäck, 1996; Zhou et al., 2019),
excel in many tasks (Turner et al., 2021). However, these
traditional BBO methods are not only confined to singletype and fixed-dimensional settings (Chen et al., 2022b;
Song et al., 2025) but also struggle to leverage large-scale
offline data (Song et al., 2024c; Wei et al., 2024), heavily
relying on online evaluations, which is a severe limitation
that becomes particularly challenging in many real-world
expensive scenarios.

The pursuit of universal black-box optimization
(BBO) algorithms is a longstanding goal. However, unlike domains such as language or vision,
where scaling structured data has driven generalization, progress in offline BBO remains hindered by the lack of unified representations for
heterogeneous numerical spaces. Thus, existing offline BBO approaches are constrained to
single-task and fixed-dimensional settings, failing
to achieve cross-domain universal optimization.
Recent advances in language models (LMs) offer a promising path forward: their embeddings
capture latent relationships in a unifying way, enabling universal optimization across different data
types possible. In this paper, we discuss multiple potential approaches, including an end-to-end
learning framework in the form of next-token prediction, as well as prioritizing the learning of latent spaces with strong representational capabilities. To validate the effectiveness of these methods, we collect offline BBO tasks and data from
open-source academic works for training. Experiments demonstrate the universality and effectiveness of our proposed methods. Our findings
suggest that unifying language model priors and
learning string embedding space can overcome
traditional barriers in universal BBO, paving the
way for general-purpose BBO algorithms. The
code is provided at https://github.com/
lamda-bbo/universal-offline-bbo.

Offline black-box optimization (Trabucco et al., 2022; Kim
et al., 2025) aims to identify optimal designs for an unknown
objective function using only a fixed and pre-collected
dataset, which attempts to mitigate the issue mentioned
above. Existing offline BBO approaches have shown impressive performance, such as in real-world engineering
design (Tanabe & Ishibuchi, 2020; Kumar et al., 2022), protein design (Khan et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Kim et al.,
2023), and molecule design (Gaulton et al., 2012; Stanton
et al., 2022; Dara et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2024). Their success relies on two assumptions: (1) the training and test
tasks share identical input dimensions and variable types,
and (2) sufficient historical data exists for each task.
While real-world optimization problems often exhibit inherent correlations across domains (Bai et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2024a), existing offline BBO methods face two challenges: (1) insufficient training data for model development (Nguyen et al., 2023), and (2) fundamental inability to
exploit cross-task relationships. The critical barrier lies in
the heterogeneity of search spaces (Fan et al., 2024). This
limitation forces practitioners to collect large datasets for
every new problem, due to their inability to unify parametric
representations across domains, which is unsustainable in
practical scenarios characterized by sparse data availability
and diverse task requirements. Thus, there is an urgent need
for universal offline BBO.

*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 3 Advanced Computing
and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., China. Correspondence to: Ke Xue <xuek@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Chao Qian
<qianc@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

