Armijo Line-search Can Make (Stochastic) Gradient Descent Provably Faster

Sharan Vaswani 1 Reza Babanezhad 2

Abstract

Given an initial step-size, the simplest form of Armijo-LS
“searches” for the largest step-size that guarantees a sufficient decrease in the function value. When minimizing
L-smooth functions using GD, Armijo-LS alleviates the
need to know L, the global smoothness constant and enables setting the GD step-size in an adaptive manner. For
both L-smooth convex and non-convex functions, GD with
Armijo-LS (henceforth GD-LS) has been shown to match
the favorable theoretical guarantees of GD with a constant
1/L step-size (henceforth GD(1/L)). However, empirically,
GD-LS typically results in faster convergence and is consequently, the default choice in practice.

Armijo line-search (Armijo-LS) is a standard
method to set the step-size for gradient descent
(GD). For smooth functions, Armijo-LS alleviates the need to know the global smoothness constant L and adapts to the “local” smoothness,
enabling GD to converge faster. Existing theoretical analyses show that GD with Armijo-LS
(GD-LS) can result in constant factor improvements over GD with a 1/L step-size (denoted as
GD(1/L)). We strengthen these results and show
that if the objective function satisfies a certain nonuniform smoothness condition, GD-LS can result
in a faster convergence rate than GD(1/L). In
particular, we prove that for convex objectives corresponding to logistic regression and multi-class
classification, GD-LS can converge to the optimum at a linear rate, and hence improves over
the sublinear convergence of GD(1/L). Furthermore, for non-convex objectives satisfying gradient domination (e.g. those corresponding to the
softmax policy gradient in RL or generalized linear models with a logistic link function), GD-LS
can match the fast convergence of algorithms tailored for these specific settings. Finally, we analyze the convergence of stochastic GD with a
stochastic line-search on convex losses under the
interpolation assumption.

One often-cited reason to explain the faster convergence of
GD-LS is that it adapts to the “local” smoothness constant
L(θ) near the point θ, and results in an effective step-size of
1/L(θ). In some regions, L(θ) might be much smaller than
the global smoothness L, thus allowing GD-LS to use much
bigger step-sizes and consequently lead to faster convergence. Existing works that define notions of local smoothness (Scheinberg et al., 2014; Lu & Mei, 2023; Mishkin
et al., 2024; Fox & Schmidt, and references there in) can
be used to formalize this intuition and show that GD-LS
can result in constant factor improvements over GD(1/L),
while having the same rate of convergence. In contrast, we
consider a special class of objective functions and show
that GD-LS (with a large initial step-size) can result in a
provably faster rate of convergence compared to GD(1/L).
In particular, we make the following contributions.
Contribution 1. In Sec. 2, we introduce a class of functions that satisfy an (L0 , L1 ) non-uniform smoothness condition. In particular, we consider functions where the
local smoothness constant around a point θ is given by
L(θ) = L0 + L1 f (θ) where L0 and L1 are non-negative
constants (and L1 = 0 corresponds to the standard uniform
smoothness). We show that the proposed condition is satisfied by common objectives; for example, both the logistic
and exponential losses used for linear classification satisfy
the condition with L0 = 0 and L1 ̸= 0. Furthermore, we
prove that this condition is also satisfied by non-convex
functions corresponding to generalized linear models with
a logistic link function, and the softmax policy gradient
objective in reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Gradient descent (GD) (Cauchy et al., 1847) and its stochastic variants are the preferred optimization methods in machine learning. The practical effectiveness of gradient methods heavily relies on the choice of the step-size (“learning
rate”) parameter. Backtracking Armijo line-search (Armijo,
1966; Nocedal & Wright, 2006) (referred to as Armijo-LS)
is a standard method to set the step-size for gradient descent.
1

Simon Fraser University 2 Samsung AI, Montreal. Correspondence to: Sharan Vaswani <vaswani.sharan@gmail.com>, Reza
Babanezhad <babanezhad@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

This condition is similar to that proposed in Zhang et al.

1

