Stochastic Encodings for Active Feature Acquisition

Alexander Norcliffe 1 Changhee Lee 2 Fergus Imrie 3 Mihaela van der Schaar 4 Pietro Liò 1
ray might be prioritized. Active Feature Acquisition (AFA)1
is an inference time task, where the features are not assumed
to be all available at once. Instead, on an instance-wise basis,
a model sequentially acquires features based on the existing
observations to best aid long-term prediction. A common
approach is to use Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Rückstieß
et al., 2013; Shim et al., 2018), since this is a natural solution to a sequential decision making problem. However,
RL suffers from training difficulties such as sparse reward,
exploration vs exploitation, and the deadly-triad (Henderson
et al., 2018; Erion et al., 2022; Van Hasselt et al., 2018).
An alternative approach is to select features that greedily
maximize the conditional mutual information (CMI) (Chen
et al., 2015a;b). This has a significant drawback: CMI does
not capture the effects of unobserved features that can be
acquired at a later stage. This results in myopic decision
making that favors immediate predictive power over sets
of jointly informative features, or features that are highly
informative of which feature to acquire next. Additionally,
we argue that CMI is not even guaranteed to be the best
short-term objective from the perspective of the 0-1 Loss
(making a single decisive prediction). Since maximizing
CMI is equivalent to minimizing entropy, and this can be
achieved by making unlikely classes even more unlikely,
rather than distinguishing between more probable outcomes.
We further explore the drawbacks of CMI in Section 4.

Abstract
Active Feature Acquisition is an instance-wise,
sequential decision making problem. The aim is
to dynamically select which feature to measure
based on current observations, independently for
each test instance. Common approaches either
use Reinforcement Learning, which experiences
training difficulties, or greedily maximize the conditional mutual information of the label and unobserved features, which makes myopic acquisitions.
To address these shortcomings, we introduce a latent variable model, trained in a supervised manner. Acquisitions are made by reasoning about
the features across many possible unobserved realizations in a stochastic latent space. Extensive
evaluation on a large range of synthetic and real
datasets demonstrates that our approach reliably
outperforms a diverse set of baselines.

1. Introduction
The standard supervised learning paradigm is to learn a predictive model using a training dataset of features and labels,
such that the model can make accurate predictions on unseen
test inputs. A fundamental assumption is that, at test time,
all features are jointly available. However, this assumption
does not always hold. Consider the example of a doctor diagnosing a patient (Kachuee et al., 2019b;a). Initially, there
is little to no information available and, while there are many
tests that could be conducted, the doctor will choose which
ones to carry out based on their current understanding of
the specific patient’s condition. For instance, if a patient has
pain in their leg, and the doctor suspects a fracture, a leg X-

Motivated by the shortcomings of RL and CMI maximization, we introduce a novel AFA approach, which we call
Stochastic Encodings for Feature Acquisition (SEFA), that
departs from existing methods in several key ways. First,
we shift the acquisition problem from reasoning in a complex feature space to a latent space. We use an information
bottleneck-inspired term (Tishby et al., 1999) to regularize
the latent space such that decisions are made using labelrelevant information only and not noise associated with the
features. Second, we use stochastic encoders, allowing us
to acquire features by considering their effect across a diverse range of possible latent realizations. This allows us to
capture the effects of features that are yet to be observed, resulting in acquisitions that are non-greedy by design. Third,
our acquisition objective places more focus on labels with
higher predicted likelihood, leading to acquisitions that help

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea 3 Department
of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
4
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Alexander Norcliffe <alin2@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
This problem has also been referred to as Dynamic Feature
Selection (DFS).

1

