Implicit Riemannian Optimism with Applications to Min-Max Problems

Christophe Roux * 1 2 David Martı́nez-Rubio * 1 2 3 Sebastian Pokutta 1 2

Riemannian optimization methods have many application
in machine learning such as hyperbolic embeddings (Sala
et al., 2018), hyperbolic neural networks (Ganea et al., 2018;
Chami et al., 2019), Gaussian mixture models (Hosseini &
Sra, 2015), the Karcher mean (Karcher, 1977), dictionary
learning (Cherian & Sra, 2017; Sun et al., 2017), low-rank
matrix completion (Vandereycken, 2013; Mishra & Sepulchre, 2014; Tan et al., 2014; Cambier & Absil, 2016; Heidel
& Schulz, 2018), and optimization under orthogonality constraints (Edelman et al., 1998; Lezcano-Casado & Martı́nezRubio, 2019).

Abstract
We introduce a Riemannian optimistic online
learning algorithm for Hadamard manifolds based
on inexact implicit updates. Unlike prior work,
our method can handle in-manifold constraints,
and matches the best known regret bounds in the
Euclidean setting, removing the dependence on
geometric constants, like the minimum curvature.
Building on this method, we develop multiple
algorithms for g-convex, g-concave smooth minmax problems on Hadamard manifolds. Notably,
one method nearly matches the gradient oracle
complexity of the lower bound for Euclidean problems, for the first time.

In this work, we analyze Riemannian optimization in the
online setting where an agent receives an arbitrary, possibly
adversarial, sequence of Riemannian loss functions and
selects actions before knowing the loss functions. Its goal is
to minimize the cumulative values of the losses associated
to the actions it chooses, i.e., its regret. In particular, we
are interested in optimistic methods, which allow the agent
to improve its regret whenever the environment is not fully
adversarial by predicting the next loss based on a hint.

1. Introduction
Riemannian optimization refers to the optimization functions defined over Riemannian manifolds. Such problems
arise when the constraints of Euclidean optimization problems can be viewed as Riemannian manifolds, such as the
symmetric positive-definite cone, the sphere, or the set of
orthogonal linear layers for a neural network. This Riemannian formulation enables us to leverage the geometric structure of such problems by viewing them as unconstrained
problems on a manifold.

Online optimistic Riemannian algorithms were analyzed by
Hu et al. (2023a); Wang et al. (2023b). Both works face
issues with circular arguments related to the geometry of the
manifold. Hu et al. (2023a) consider the constrained setting
but can only guarantee the actions to lie in a neighborhood
of the constraint set. The size of this neighborhood depends
on the step size, which in turn depends on a geometric
factor dependent on the neighborhood’s size. Wang et al.
(2023b) consider the unconstrained setting but their step
sizes depend on the diameter of the set in which the iterates
stay set via geometric constants, which again influence the
size of this set. They address this issue by assuming that the
method’s iterates stay in a compact set whose diameter is
known a-priori.

Further, some non-convex Euclidean problems, such as operator scaling or optimistic likelihood estimation become
geodesically convex, i.e., convex along all geodesics, when
viewed as Riemannian optimization problems under the
right metric (Allen-Zhu et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2019).
*
1
Equal contribution (arbitrary order).
Zuse Institute
Berlin, Germany 2 Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
3
Carlos III University of Madrid, Spain. Correspondence
to: Christophe Roux <roux@zib.de>, David Martı́nez-Rubio
<martinez-rubio.zib.de>.

Such circular relationships between step sizes and other
problem parameters, which depend on the size of the set
in which the iterates lie via geometric terms occur in many
Riemannian optimization settings and lead to unfinished
analyses, cf. Martı́nez-Rubio et al. (2024).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
Most of the non-local notations in this work have a link to
their definitions, using this code, such as Expx , which links to
where this notation is defined as the exponential map of a manifold
from a point x.

Chen & Orabona (2023); Choi et al. (2023); Ajalloeian et al.
(2020); Dixit et al. (2019) study implicit online algorithms
in the Euclidean setting. However, implicit optimistic algorithms have not been developed, even in the Euclidean case.
1

