Faster Global Minimum Cut with Predictions
Helia Niaparast 1 Benjamin Moseley 1 Karan Singh 1

Abstract

chine learning is naturally suited to this setting. Lykouris
& Vassilvitskii (2021) provide a theoretical framework that
characterizes the competitive ratio of algorithms based on
the quality of machine-learned predictions. Subsequent research has applied this model to achieve higher-quality solutions and break worst-case lower bounds in various problems, including caching (Im et al., 2022; Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021), binary search (Dinitz et al., 2024), scheduling (Lindermayr & Megow, 2022; Lattanzi et al., 2020; Im
et al., 2023), and clustering (Lattanzi et al., 2021). For a
comprehensive overview, see the survey by Mitzenmacher
& Vassilvitskii (2022).

Global minimum cut is a fundamental combinatorial optimization problem with wide-ranging
applications. Often in practice, these problems
are solved repeatedly on families of similar or
related instances. However, the de facto algorithmic approach is to solve each instance of
the problem from scratch discarding information
from prior instances.
In this paper, we consider how predictions informed by prior instances can be used to warmstart practical minimum cut algorithms. The
paper considers the widely used Karger’s algorithm and its counterpart, the Karger-Stein
algorithm. Given good predictions, we show
these algorithms become near-linear time and
have robust performance to erroneous predictions. Both of these algorithms are randomized
edge-contraction algorithms. Our natural idea is
to probabilistically prioritize the contraction of
edges that are unlikely to be in the minimum cut.

Interestingly, the work of Kraska et al. (2018), which arguably initiated this line of work, had a different goal in
mind and emphasized improvements in running time, a direction that remains underexplored compared to advancements in solution quality. Their empirical results highlight
the significant potential of machine learning to accelerate
algorithms and motivate exploration of the algorithmic possibilities of using machine learning for runtime improvements.

Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Helia Niaparast <hniapara@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Traditionally, computer science solves problems from
scratch, with running times analyzed using worst-case scenarios. However, in practice, many problems are repeatedly solved over time. The conventional worst-case model
often discards valuable information shared between instances. Given that problem instances frequently exhibit
similarities, machine learning offers an opportunity to learn
a warm-starting state that can enhance algorithmic performance. The community has begun to investigate theoretical
guarantees for algorithms that use machine-learned warm
starts to achieve runtime improvements. Dinitz et al. (2021)
initiated this line of inquiry by showing how predicted dual
variables could accelerate the Hungarian algorithm for bipartite matching. Building on this idea, researchers have
developed runtime-improving algorithms for discrete combinatorial optimization problems, such as shortest paths
(Chen et al., 2022; McCauley et al., 2025), maximum flow
(Davies et al., 2023), list labeling data structures (McCauley et al., 2024b), and dynamic graph algorithms (McCauley et al., 2024a).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Despite these advances, this area remains underdeveloped,
with significant open questions regarding how machinelearned predictions can improve algorithmic runtimes.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is driving scientific breakthroughs.
While this has transformed many areas, there remain domains where machine learning holds immense, yet unrealized potential. One such area is the reimagining of computer science foundations through machine learning, particularly for designing faster discrete algorithms.
A rapidly growing body of work, collectively referred to
as algorithms with predictions, focuses on leveraging
machine-learned predictions to overcome worst-case performance barriers. In recent years, hundreds of papers have
explored this model, mainly applying it to improve quality
of solutions produced by online algorithms. The primary
challenge in the online setting is uncertainty. Hence, ma1

1

