Enhancing Treatment Effect Estimation via Active Learning:
A Counterfactual Covering Perspective

Hechuan Wen 1 Tong Chen 1 Mingming Gong 2 3 Li Kheng Chai 4 Shazia Sadiq 1 Hongzhi Yin 1

Abstract

across diverse domains, including randomized control trials
(RCTs) in medication (Pilat et al., 2015), A/B testing for
business decision-making (Kohavi & Longbotham, 2015)
and government policy evaluation (MacKay, 2020), etc.
However, real-world scenarios often involve the trade-off
between cost and return, e.g., the high cost of tumor imaging
or biopsy at scale frequently limits the amount of treatment
effects (labels) collected from the individuals given a particular drug, which in turn impacts the accuracy of estimation.
Such a challenge highlights the need for designing dataefficient treatment effect estimation methods, which can be
described as the following optimization problem:

Although numerous complex algorithms for treatment effect estimation have been developed in
recent years, their effectiveness remains limited
when handling insufficiently labeled training sets
due to the high cost of labeling the post-treatment
effect, e.g., the expensive tumor imaging or biopsy
procedures needed to evaluate treatment effects.
Therefore, it becomes essential to actively incorporate more high-quality labeled data, all while
adhering to a constrained labeling budget. To enable data-efficient treatment effect estimation, we
formalize the problem through rigorous theoretical analysis within the active learning context,
where the derived key measures – factual and
counterfactual covering radii determine the risk
upper bound. To reduce the bound, we propose
a greedy radius reduction algorithm, which excels under an idealized, balanced data distribution.
To generalize to more realistic data distributions,
we further propose FCCM, which transforms the
optimization objective into the Factual and Counterfactual Coverage Maximization to ensure effective radius reduction during data acquisition.
Furthermore, benchmarking FCCM against other
baselines demonstrates its superiority across both
fully synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets. Code:
https://github.com/uqhwen2/FCCM.

min ϵ(fS ) s.t. |S| ≤ B,

S⊂D

(1)

where ϵ is a risk metric e.g. precision in estimation of heterogeneous effect (PEHE) (Shalit et al., 2017), D is the pool
set containing all candidate samples, fS is the regression
model trained on subset S, and B is the labeling budget.
Depending on whether or not the treatment indicator t is
readily available alongside the covariates in D, there are two
branches of research related to the formulation in Eq. (1). If
t is not given, one is to build the dataset S via active experimental design (Addanki et al., 2022; Connolly et al., 2023;
Ghadiri et al., 2024), i.e., a subset of D consisting only of
covariates is selected, which is then partitioned to receive
treatments, and subsequently annotated with treatment effects. Otherwise, given the pool set D consisting of both the
covariates and the treatment indicator (Sundin et al., 2019;
Qin et al., 2021; Jesson et al., 2021b; Wen et al., 2025), the
algorithm only deals with selection from the pool set, then
let the oracle label the selected samples. Although both aim
to facilitate reliable, data-efficient predictions by selectively
expanding the labeled dataset for training, studies on the latter are scarcer compared with those on the former. Despite
the under-exploration of the latter setting, it has been widely
encountered in real-world applications, such as collecting
customer preferences from those who have already received
different services, tracking patients’ side effects from those
who have already been administered different drugs, etc.
Therefore, in this paper, we study the latter scenario where
both the covariates and the treatment indicator are known in
the pool set, while in the presence of high treatment effect

1. Introduction
Understanding the causal effects of interventions is essential
for making informed decisions, positioning treatment effect
estimation as a fundamental tool with broad applications
1
School of EECS, The University of Queensland, Australia
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Australia 3 Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates 4 Health and Wellbeing Queensland, Australia. Correspondence to: Hongzhi Yin <h.yin1@uq.edu.au>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

