Generalizing Causal Effects from Randomized Controlled Trials to Target
Populations across Diverse Environments

Baohong Li 1 Yingrong Wang 1 Anpeng Wu 1 Ming Ma 2 Ruoxuan Xiong 3 Kun Kuang 1

Abstract

considered the gold standard for estimating causal effects
of treatments (Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Hariton & Locascio,
2018). However, due to the long duration and high cost of
RCTs, it is often desired to generalize the treatment effect
estimates from existing RCTs to target populations across
different environments.

Generalizing causal effects from Randomized
Controlled Trials (RCTs) to target populations
across diverse environments is of significant practical importance, as RCTs are often costly and
logistically complex to conduct. A key challenge is environmental shift, defined as changes
in the distribution and availability of covariates
between source and target environments. A common approach addressing this challenge is to identify a separating set–covariates that govern both
treatment effect heterogeneity and environmental differences–and combine RCT samples with
target populations matched on this set. However,
this approach assumes that the separating set is
fully observed and shared across datasets, an assumption often violated in practice. We propose a
novel Two-Stage Doubly Robust (2SDR) method
that relaxes this assumption by allowing the separating set to be observed in only one of the two
datasets. 2SDR leverages shadow variables to impute missing components of the separating set and
generalize treatment effects across environments
in a two-stage procedure. We show the identification of causal effects in target environments under
2SDR and demonstrate its effectiveness through
extensive experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets.

A major challenge in generalizing RCT findings across environments is environmental shifts, defined as changes in the
distribution and availability of covariates between the RCT
sample and the target population (Kuang et al., 2018; 2020).
Such shifts cause RCT participants to no longer represent
the target population, thereby limiting the external validity
and generalizability of causal effect estimates from the RCT
(Nguyen et al., 2018; Colnet et al., 2024).
A common solution to addressing the challenge of environmental shifts is to combine RCT data with observational
data from the target population, using a separating set for
adjustment. Compared to collecting new RCT data, obtaining observational data from the target population is typically
more cost-effective and feasible. The separating set consists of covariates that simultaneously affect both treatment
effect heterogeneity and environmental shifts. Prior work
has shown that the Target population Average Treatment
Effect (TATE) is identifiable with the separating set (Cole &
Stuart, 2010; Tipton, 2013; Kern et al., 2016; Egami & Hartman, 2021; Pearl & Bareinboim, 2022), and many methods
have been proposed to leverage the separating set for generalizing treatment effects from RCTs to target populations
(Stuart et al., 2011; Hartman et al., 2015; Lesko et al., 2017;
Dahabreh et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

The limitation of this common approach is its reliance on the
assumption that the covariates shared across both datasets
fully contain the separating set–an assumption that is often
violated in real-world settings with environmental shifts.
When data from the RCT and the target population are collected in different environments, it is challenging to ensure
complete alignment in the covariates measured, leading to
a missing covariates problem: certain covariates present
in one dataset may be entirely absent in the other. If these
missing covariates include variables from the separating set,
existing methods may fail to generalize treatment effects
accurately, as shown in prior studies (Nguyen et al., 2017;

Estimating treatment effects is crucial for informing whether
to apply a new policy or treatment in a given population
(the target population) (Hernán & Robins, 2020; Luo et al.,
2024). Randomized Controlled Trials (RCT) are generally
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Kuaishou, Beijing, China 3 Department
of Quantitative Theory & Methods, Emory University, Atlanta,
USA. Correspondence to: Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

