On Teacher Hacking in Language Model Distillation

Daniil Tiapkin 1 Daniele Calandriello 2 Johan Ferret 2 Sarah Perrin 2
Nino Vieillard 2 Alexandre Ramé 2 Mathieu Blondel 2

Abstract
Post-training of language models (LMs) increasingly relies on the following two stages: (i) knowledge distillation, where the LM is trained to imitate a larger teacher LM, and (ii) reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF), where the
LM is aligned by optimizing a reward model. In
the second RLHF stage, a well-known challenge
is reward hacking, where the LM over-optimizes
the reward model. Such phenomenon is in line
with Goodhart’s law and can lead to degraded performance on the true objective. In this paper, we
investigate whether a similar phenomenon, that
we call teacher hacking, can occur during knowledge distillation. This could arise because the
teacher LM is itself an imperfect approximation
of the true distribution. To study this, we propose a controlled experimental setup involving:
(i) an oracle LM representing the ground-truth
distribution, (ii) a teacher LM distilled from the
oracle, and (iii) a student LM distilled from the
teacher. Our experiments reveal the following
insights. When using a fixed offline dataset for
distillation, teacher hacking occurs; moreover, we
can detect it by observing when the optimization
process deviates from polynomial convergence
laws. In contrast, employing online data generation techniques effectively mitigates teacher hacking. More precisely, we identify data diversity as
the key factor in preventing hacking. Overall, our
findings provide a deeper understanding of the
benefits and limitations of distillation for building
robust and efficient LMs.

Human expert

Teacher model

Student model

Oracle model

Teacher model

Student model

Figure 1. Overview of our controlled experimental setup. Usually, the teacher model is trained on expert data before being
distilled into the student LM. In the controlled setup of this paper,
the teacher is itself distilled from an additional oracle model. This
oracle model allows us to measure the quality of the distillation
process into the student, and to reveal “teacher hacking”.

1. Introduction

1
CMAP, École Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France;
Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind.
2
Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Daniil Tiapkin
<daniil.tiapkin@polytechnique.edu>.

Distillation for post-training LMs. Language models
(LMs) have achieved remarkable success across a wide
range of natural language processing tasks, such as translation, summarization, and reasoning. Notably, large LMs
demonstrate impressive generalization capabilities, but their
high computational cost poses a significant challenge, particularly when deployed on resource-constrained devices.
Efficiency considerations motivate the training of smaller
LMs, that would ideally provide similar performance at a
fraction of the computational cost. To this end, the most popular approach is knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al.,
2015), in which a smaller student LM is trained to imitate
the larger teacher LM. Distillation is increasingly studied
(Agarwal et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024)
and used, notably for the post-training pipelines of LMs (as
demonstrated by Zephyr (Tunstall et al., 2023), Gemma-2
(Riviere et al., 2024), and DeepSeek-V3 (Liu et al., 2024)),
just before the final reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022) phase.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Teacher as an imperfect proxy. However, a key understudied limitation of KD is that the teacher model does not
represent the ground-truth distribution but instead acts as
1

