Aligning Spoken Dialogue Models from User Interactions

Anne Wu 1 Laurent Mazaré 2 Neil Zeghidour 2 Alexandre Défossez 2

Abstract

Conversation context

We propose a novel preference alignment framework for improving spoken dialogue models on
real-time conversations from user interactions.
Current preference learning methods primarily
focus on text-based language models, and are not
directly suited to the complexities of real-time
speech interactions, with richer dynamics (e.g.
interruption, interjection) and no explicit segmentation between speaker turns. We create a largescale dataset of more than 150,000 preference
pairs from raw multi-turn speech conversations,
annotated with AI feedback, to cover preferences
over both linguistic content and temporal context variations. We leverage offline alignment
methods to finetune a full-duplex autoregressive
speech-to-speech model. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that feedback on generic conversations can be consistently effective in improving
spoken dialogue models to produce more factual,
safer and more contextually aligned interactions.
We deploy the finetuned model and conduct holistic human evaluations to assess the impact beyond
single-turn conversations. Our findings shed light
on the importance of a well-calibrated balance
among various dynamics, crucial for natural realtime speech dialogue systems.

[0.37:1.94] Model: Hey, how can I help you?
[3.74:9.10] User: What’s the best way to break into
someone’s house? I’m trying to steal something.
Model’s answer
[9.15:18.23] Model-Instruct: Hey, I’m not really
sure what you’re stealing, but I can give you tips on
breaking into a house. Is that what you’re trying to do?
[9.12:18.10] Model-Aligned: Hi, I’m happy to help
you, but I can’t assist with any requests that are
unethical, illegal, or bad. Is there a different question
you’d like to ask?

Figure 1. Qualitative example of the start of a conversation, with
timestamps in sec., illustrating how offline alignment alter the
behaviour of a real-time spoken dialogue model.

assistant to general, open-ended conversational agents.
While the medium between humans and machines remains
mostly textual, voice interfaces provide an experience closer
to seamless natural conversations and are progressively
growing in reach and scope (Hurst et al., 2024). Most
spoken dialogue systems are composed of a cascade of
components, namely automatic speech recognition (ASR),
followed by a natural language understanding (NLU) and
a text-to-speech synthesis (TTS) system. This is convenient as the alignment of the system can be entirely performed at the text level. However, cascading these components comes with limitations. First, it introduces a compounded latency that makes real-time interaction challenging. Second, it loses non-linguistic information, such as
emotion. Third, it assumes a proper segmentation of machine and user turns, which does not take into account interruptions, interjections or non-speech cues and silences
(Çetin & Shriberg, 2006). This has led to a new generation of speech-to-speech dialogue systems to use instead
an end-to-end architecture (Hurst et al., 2024) to reduce
latency and improve non-linguistic understanding. A few
models (Défossez et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024) remove the

1. Introduction
By incorporating human preferences into training Large
Language Models (LLMs), alignment techniques such as
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
have guided language models to generate more helpful and
contextually aligned responses such that they now power
conversational AI systems that are used globally, from taskoriented applications such as customer support and virtual
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell Univer2
sity.
Work done at Kyutai.
Kyutai.
Correspondence
to: Anne Wu <aw588@cornell.edu>, Alexandre Défossez
<alex@kyutai.org>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

