In-Context Adaptation to Concept Drift for Learned Database Operations

Jiaqi Zhu 1 Shaofeng Cai * 2 Yanyan Shen 3 Gang Chen 4 Fang Deng 1 Beng Chin Ooi 2 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Data systems are increasingly integrating machine learning
functionalities to enhance performance and usability, marking a paradigm shift in how data is managed and processed
in databases (Ooi et al., 2024; McGregor, 2021; Li et al.,
2021; Ooi et al., 2015). The integration has transformed
key database operations such as query optimization, indexing, and workload forecasting into more precise, efficient,
and adaptive processes (Zhang et al., 2024a; Kurmanji &
Triantafillou, 2023; Anneser et al., 2023).

Machine learning has demonstrated transformative potential for database operations, such as
query optimization and in-database data analytics.
However, dynamic database environments, characterized by frequent updates and evolving data
distributions, introduce concept drift, which leads
to performance degradation for learned models
and limits their practical applicability. Addressing
this challenge requires efficient frameworks capable of adapting to shifting concepts while minimizing the overhead of retraining or fine-tuning.

Despite these advancements, learned database operations
face a persistent challenge: concept drift. Databases are
inherently dynamic, undergoing frequent insert, delete, and
update operations that result in shifts in data distributions
and evolving input-output relationships over time (Zeighami
& Shahabi, 2024). These drifts, often subtle but cumulative,
can alter the patterns and mappings that traditional machine
learning models rely upon, rendering their assumptions of
static distributions invalid. This phenomenon requires adaptive methods for maintaining predictive accuracy in dynamic
database environments.

In this paper, we propose FLAIR, an online adaptation framework that introduces a new paradigm
called in-context adaptation for learned database
operations. FLAIR leverages the inherent property of data systems, i.e., immediate availability
of execution results for predictions, to enable dynamic context construction. By formalizing adaptation as f : px | Ct q Ñ y, with Ct representing a
dynamic context memory, FLAIR delivers predictions aligned with the current concept, eliminating
the need for runtime parameter optimization. To
achieve this, FLAIR integrates two key modules:
a Task Featurization Module for encoding taskspecific features into standardized representations,
and a Dynamic Decision Engine, pre-trained via
Bayesian meta-training, to adapt seamlessly using
contextual information at runtime. Extensive experiments across key database tasks demonstrate
that FLAIR outperforms state-of-the-art baselines,
achieving up to 5.2ˆ faster adaptation and reducing error by 22.5% for cardinality estimation.

Traditional reactive training-based adaptation approaches
to handling concept drift, such as transfer learning (Jain
et al., 2023; Kurmanji & Triantafillou, 2023; Kurmanji et al.,
2024), active learning (Ma et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022), and
multi-task learning (Kollias et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2021),
come with significant drawbacks in learned database operations. As illustrated in Figure 1, delays and costs in
post-deployment data collection and model updates, and reliance on static mappings limit their practicality in dynamic
database environments (Kurmanji et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2022). In addition, they process each input independently.
The negligence of inter-query dependencies and shared contextual information in databases results in poor modeling
of database operations. Addressing these limitations raises
two critical challenges: (1) How can we support one-the-fly
adaptation to constantly evolving data without incurring the
overhead of frequent retraining or fine-tuning in databases?
(2) How can we dynamically inject contextual information
into the modeling process to achieve context-aware prediction for learned database operations?

1
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China 4 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Shaofeng Cai <shaofeng@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address these challenges, we introduce FLAIR, an
eFficient and effective onLine AdaptatIon fRamework that
1

