CERTAIN: Context Uncertainty-aware One-Shot Adaptation for
Context-based Offline Meta Reinforcement Learning

Hongtu Zhou * 1 Ruiling Yang * 1 Yakun Zhu 1 Haoqi Zhao 1 Hai Zhang 1 Di Zhang 1 Junqiao Zhao 1
Chen Ye 1 Changjun Jiang 1

Abstract

ing(Mnih, 2013; Lample & Chaplot, 2017), robotic control(Nguyen & La, 2019), and recommendation systems
(Zheng et al., 2018). However, RL faces a critical challenge
of low sample efficiency due to its reliance on extensive
interactions with the environment, a limitation that becomes
even more pronounced in multi-task settings (Levine et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020a).

Existing
context-based
offline
metareinforcement learning (COMRL) methods
primarily focus on task representation learning
and given-context adaptation performance. They
often assume that the adaptation context is
collected using task-specific behavior policies or
through multiple rounds of collection. However,
in real applications, the context should be
collected by a policy in a one-shot manner to
ensure efficiency and safety. We find that inherent
context ambiguity across multiple tasks and
out-of-distribution (OOD) issues due to distribution shift significantly affect the performance
of one-shot adaptation, which has been largely
overlooked in most COMRL research. To address
this problem, we propose using heteroscedastic
uncertainty in representation learning to identify
ambiguous and OOD contexts, and train an
uncertainty-aware context collecting policy
for effective one-shot online adaptation. The
proposed method can be integrated into various
COMRL frameworks, including classifier-based,
reconstrution-based and contrastive learningbased approaches. Empirical evaluations on
benchmark tasks show that our method can
improve one-shot adaptation performance by up
to 36% and zero-shot adaptation performance by
up to 34% compared to existing baseline COMRL
methods.

Context-based offline meta reinforcement learning
(COMRL) provides a promising solution to improve sample
efficiency in multi-task environments by leveraging offline
datasets for training and enabling fast adaptation to new
tasks with minimal online samples (Li et al., 2020b).
COMRL treats task-specific trajectories or transitions
as context information and operates in two key phases:
the offline meta-training and the online adaptation. In
the first phase, a context encoder is learned through
task representation learning, alongside a meta-policy
conditioned on the learned task representations. During
the second phase, the meta-policy adapts to new tasks by
conditioning on the task representation inferred from the
online-collected context.
Despite its promise, COMRL encounters two major challenges, as depicted in Figure 1 left: context ambiguity and
out-of-distribution (OOD). Context ambiguity arises when
a context fails to uniquely infer a task because it appears
across multiple tasks (Dorfman et al., 2021). Context OOD,
on the other hand, occurs when a context falls outside the
task distribution of the offline dataset. Both issues can lead
the context encoder to infer unreliable task representations,
resulting in suboptimal policy performance.
Most existing COMRL methods predominantly focus on
task representation learning (Li et al., 2020b; Gao et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2024). These methods often assume that
contexts are either in-distribution, thereby avoiding OOD
issues, or can be collected through multiple rounds, which
mitigates the impact of ambiguity. While CORRO (Yuan &
Lu, 2022) attempts to address OOD challenges, its applicability is limited to (s, a) pairs observed in the dataset, and it
fails to generalize to truly OOD (s, a) scenarios. However,
in many practical scenarios, context collection is constrained
to a one-shot manner due to safety and efficiency considera-

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in a wide range of domains, including game play*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to:
Junqiao Zhao <zhaojunqiao@tongji.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

