Wrapped Gaussian on the manifold of Symmetric Positive Definite Matrices

Thibault de Surrel 1 Fabien Lotte 2 Sylvain Chevallier 3 Florian Yger 4

Abstract

solution by leveraging the exponential map to wrap probability distributions defined in the Euclidean tangent space
onto the manifold itself. This approach yields a wrapped distribution, intrinsically aligned with the manifold’s geometry.
Wrapped distributions have found applications across many
domains, such as embedding single-cell RNA data (Ding &
Regev, 2021), analyzing wave patterns (Jona-Lasinio et al.,
2012), recognizing video and image features (Turaga et al.,
2011), modeling Gaussian processes on manifolds (Mallasto & Feragen, 2018; Liu et al., 2024) or doing statistics
on measurements of orientations (Lopez-Custodio, 2024).

Circular and non-flat data distributions are prevalent across diverse domains of data science, yet
their specific geometric structures often remain
underutilized in machine learning frameworks. A
principled approach to accounting for the underlying geometry of such data is pivotal, particularly
when extending statistical models, like the pervasive Gaussian distribution. In this work, we
tackle those issue by focusing on the manifold
of symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices, a
key focus in information geometry. We introduce
a non-isotropic wrapped Gaussian by leveraging
the exponential map, we derive theoretical properties of this distribution and propose a maximum
likelihood framework for parameter estimation.
Furthermore, we reinterpret established classifiers
on SPD through a probabilistic lens and introduce
new classifiers based on the wrapped Gaussian
model. Experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate the robustness and flexibility
of this geometry-aware distribution, underscoring its potential to advance manifold-based data
analysis. This work lays the groundwork for extending classical machine learning and statistical
methods to more complex and structured data.

In this paper, we focus on wrapping Gaussian distributions
on the Riemannian manifold of Symmetric Positive Definite
(SPD) matrices equipped with the Affine Invariant Riemannian Metric (Pennec, 2020). Gaussian distributions are a
cornerstone of machine learning and statistics (see p.102 of
Casella & Berger 2001) due to their ubiquity and theoretical
underpinnings, such as the Central Limit Theorem (CLT)
(Section 5.4 of Wasserman 2004), which ensures that Gaussian distributions naturally arise in many scenarios. We will
see that we are able to extend the CLT to wrapped Gaussians, providing a theoretical justification for their study.
SPD matrices, which form the Riemannian manifold Pd ,
are pivotal in numerous applications, including Diffusion
Tensor Imaging (Pennec, 2020), Brain-Computer Interfaces
(BCI) (Lotte et al., 2018), process control (Willjuice Iruthayarajan & Baskar, 2010), and video processing (Tuzel et al.,
2008). The inherent Riemannian geometry of Pd necessitates adopting methods that respect its manifold structure
when analyzing SPD data.

1. Introduction
When dealing with complex data, modeling them as lying
on a manifold often provides a powerful solution (Sanborn
et al., 2024; Jo & Hwang, 2024). However, classical Euclidean probability distributions fail to capture the intrinsic
geometry of the underlying manifold. This limitation necessitates adapting the choice of probability distributions to
respect the manifold’s structure. In this work, we propose a

This paper is organized as follows: in Section 3, we introduce the Riemannian geometry of Pd . Next, we define
wrapped Gaussians on Pd and explore their theoretical properties in Section 4. In Section 5, we develop a Maximum
Likelihood Estimator for parameter estimation and validate
it with synthetic experiments. Building on this foundation, Section 6 revisits existing classifiers on Pd through a
probabilistic lens and introduces novel classifiers based on
wrapped Gaussians. Finally, we evaluate these classifiers
with synthetic and real-world datasets in Section 6.4.

1

LAMSADE, CNRS, PSL Univ. Paris-Dauphine, France 2 Inria
center at the University of Bordeaux / LaBRI, France 3 TAU, LISN,
University Paris-Saclay, France 4 LITIS, INSA Rouen-Normandy,
France. Correspondence to: Thibault de Surrel <thibault.desurrel@lamsade.dauphine.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

