MODULI: Unlocking Preference Generalization via Diffusion Models
for Offline Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning

Yifu Yuan * 1 Zhenrui Zheng * 1 2 Zibin Dong 1 Jianye Hao 1

Abstract

tion to OOD preferences. Codes are available on
this repository.

Multi-objective Reinforcement Learning (MORL)
seeks to develop policies that simultaneously
optimize multiple conflicting objectives, but it
requires extensive online interactions. Offline
MORL provides a promising solution by training on pre-collected datasets to generalize to
any preference upon deployment. However, realworld offline datasets are often conservatively and
narrowly distributed, failing to comprehensively
cover preferences, leading to the emergence of
out-of-distribution (OOD) preference areas. Existing offline MORL algorithms exhibit poor generalization to OOD preferences, resulting in policies
that do not align with preferences. Leveraging
the excellent expressive and generalization capabilities of diffusion models, we propose MODULI (Multi Objective DiffUsion planner with
sLIding guidance), which employs a preferenceconditioned diffusion model as a planner to generate trajectories that align with various preferences and derive action for decision-making. To
achieve accurate generation, MODULI introduces
two return normalization methods under diverse
preferences for refining guidance. To further enhance generalization to OOD preferences, MODULI proposes a novel sliding guidance mechanism, which involves training an additional slider
adapter to capture the direction of preference
changes. Incorporating the slider, it transitions
from in-distribution (ID) preferences to generating OOD preferences, patching, and extending the
incomplete Pareto front. Extensive experiments
on the D4MORL benchmark demonstrate that our
algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art Offline
MORL baselines, exhibiting excellent generaliza-

1. Introduction
Real-world decision-making tasks, such as robotic control (Liu et al., 2014; Cui et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2025),
autonomous driving (Li & Czarnecki, 2018), and industrial
control (Bae et al., 2023), often require the optimization
of multiple competing objectives simultaneously. It necessitates the trade-offs among different objectives to meet
diverse preferences (Roijers et al., 2017; Yuan et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2025). For instance, in robotic
locomotion tasks, users typically focus on the robot’s movement speed and energy consumption (Xu et al., 2020). If the
user has a high preference for speed, the agent will move
quickly regardless of energy consumption; if the user aims
to save energy, the agent should adjust to a lower speed.
One effective approach is Multi-objective Reinforcement
Learning (MORL), which enables agents to interact with
vector-rewarded environments and learn policies that satisfy multiple preferences (Hayes et al., 2022; Roijers et al.,
2013; Yang et al., 2019). These methods either construct
a set of policies to approximate the Pareto front of optimal
solutions (Alegre et al., 2023; Felten et al., 2024) or learn a
preference-conditioned policy to adapt to any situation (Lu
et al., 2023b; Hung et al., 2022). However, exploring and
optimizing policies for each preference while alleviating
conflicts among objectives, requires extensive online interactions (Alegre, 2023), thereby posing practical challenges
due to high costs and potential safety risks.
Offline MORL (Zhu et al., 2023a) proposes a promising
solution that can learn preference-conditioned policies from
pre-collected datasets with various preferences, improving
data efficiency and minimizing interactions when deploying
in high-risk environments. Most Offline MORL approaches
focus on extending return-conditioned methods (Thomas
et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2023a) or encouraging consistent
preferences through policy regularization (Lin et al., 2024).
However, real-world offline datasets often come from users
with different behavior policies, making it difficult to cover
the full range of preferences and leading to missing prefer-

*
Equal contribution 1 College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University 2 Harbin Engineering University. This work was
done when ZZ was visiting Tianjin University. Correspondence to:
Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

