LIMEFLDL: A Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations Approach for
Label Distribution Learning

Xiuyi Jia 1 Jinchi Li 1 Yunan Lu 1 2 Weiwei Li 3

Abstract

data mining in recent years. There are currently several
paradigms for dealing with label ambiguity, such as multilabel learning (Tsoumakas & Katakis, 2007), multi-instance
learning (Carbonneau et al., 2018), and label distribution
learning (LDL) (Geng, 2016). Among these, LDL stands
out as an innovative learning paradigm that not only answers which labels are relevant to the sample but also further characterizes the relative importance of labels to the
sample. LDL handles multi-label samples where labels
exhibit co-occurrence patterns (simultaneous changes) and
dependency propagation (one label’s presence affects others’
distributions). Given that LDL can provide richer semantic
information, it has been widely applied in practical application scenarios such as disease diagnosis (Wang et al., 2022),
emotion recognition (Jia et al., 2019), etc. Existing LDL
research primarily focuses on the design and optimization
of algorithms, but the interpretability of LDL algorithms
have been neglected.

Label distribution learning (LDL) is a novel machine learning paradigm that can handle label ambiguity. This paper focuses on the interpretability
issue of label distribution learning. Existing local
interpretability models are mainly designed for
single-label learning problems and are difficult to
directly interpret label distribution learning models. In response to this situation, we propose an
improved local interpretable model-agnostic explanations algorithm that can effectively interpret
any black-box model in label distribution learning.
To address the label dependency problem, we introduce the feature attribution distribution matrix
and derive the solution formula for explanations
under the label distribution form. Meanwhile, to
enhance the transparency and trustworthiness of
the explanation algorithm, we provide an analytical solution and derive the boundary conditions
for explanation convergence and stability. In addition, we design a feature selection scoring function and a fidelity metric for the explanation task
of label distribution learning. A series of numerical experiments and human experiments were
conducted to validate the performance of the proposed algorithm in practical applications. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
algorithm achieves high fidelity, consistency, and
trustworthiness in explaining LDL models.

Interpretability plays a crucial role in understanding the
decision-making logic of models on given data, helping researchers optimize models more effectively, and promoting
the application of models in real-world scenarios. Within
the existing field of interpretable machine learning, the
LIME (local interpretable model-agnostic explanations) algorithm (Ribeiro et al., 2016) is widely used to enhance
the interpretability of models. This is achieved by generating simple models to approximate the local behavior of
black-box models. However, the LIME algorithm is designed for single-label learning tasks and focuses on the
local region of a single label, making it unsuitable for direct
application to LDL tasks that involve multiple interdependent real-valued labels. One intuitive approach is to apply
the LIME algorithm in parallel to LDL tasks, but this approach faces significant challenges: (1) In LDL tasks, there
are complex dependencies and interactions among labels. In
such cases, the single-label explanations provided by LIME
can be misleading due to the disregard for inter-label correlations. For example, in medical diagnostic tasks, “pneumonia” and “acute respiratory distress syndrome” often need to
be addressed simultaneously; a parallel explanation might
overestimate the risk of pneumonia alone and underestimate
the risk when both pneumonia and acute respiratory distress
syndrome are present. (2) The approach encounters compu-

1. Introduction
Learning with ambiguity has emerged as an important
research direction in the fields of machine learning and
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China 2 Department of Computing,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China 3 College of School
of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Li
<liweiwei@nuaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

