Improved and Oracle-Efficient Online ℓ1 -Multicalibration

Rohan Ghuge 1 Vidya Muthukumar 2 Sahil Singla 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

We study online multicalibration, a framework
for ensuring calibrated predictions across multiple groups in adversarial settings, across T rounds.
Although online calibration is typically studied
in the ℓ1 norm, prior approaches to online multicalibration have taken the indirect approach of
obtaining rates in other norms (such as ℓ2 and
ℓ∞ ) and then transferred these guarantees to ℓ1
at additional loss. In contrast, we propose a direct method that achieves improved and oraclee −1/3 ) and O(T
e −1/4 ) reefficient rates of O(T
spectively, for online ℓ1 -multicalibration. Our
key insight is a novel reduction of online ℓ1 multicalibration to an online learning problem
with product-based rewards, which we refer to as
online linear-product optimization (OLPO).
To obtain the improved rate of e
O(T −1/3 ), we
introduce a linearization of OLPO and design a
no-regret algorithm for this linearized problem.
Although this method guarantees the desired sublinear rate (nearly matching the best rate for online
calibration), it is computationally expensive when
the group family H is large or infinite, since it
enumerates all possible groups. To address scalability, we propose a second approach to OLPO
that makes only a polynomial number of calls to
an offline optimization (multicalibration evaluation) oracle, resulting in oracle-efficient online
ℓ1 -multicalibration with a rate of e
O(T −1/4 ). Our
framework also extends to certain infinite families
of groups (e.g., all linear functions on the context
space) by exploiting a 1-Lipschitz property of the
ℓ1 -multicalibration error with respect to H.

Machine learning algorithms, powered by advances in data
availability and model development, play a crucial role in
decision-making across domains such as healthcare diagnostics, recidivism risk assessment, and loan approvals. This
work focuses on forecasting algorithms that predict, say, the
probability of binary outcomes y (such as patient’s severity or loan repayment) based on observable features x, in
online settings where predictions are made as data is collected. A key metric used to evaluate the performance of
such probability forecasters is calibration (Dawid, 1982).
Roughly, it says that for any candidate prediction p ∈ [0, 1],
the fraction of forecasts with prediction p should converge
to p. In 1998, the seminal work of Foster & Vohra (1998)
showed a bound of O(T −1/3 ) for online calibration in the
ℓ1 metric. Since then, this O(T −1/3 ) bound has been reproved through insightful alternative approaches (Abernethy
et al., 2011; Hart, 2022). However, improving this bound
is a challenging open problem that has only recently seen
some progress (Dagan et al., 2025; Qiao & Valiant, 2021).
Despite its popularity, calibration has a major limitation:
calibrated predictions may perform poorly on specific subpopulations in the data, identifiable through contextual features such as gender, race, and age. To address this issue,
Hébert-Johnson et al. (2018) proposed multicalibration, a
framework designed to address discrimination arising from
data in the batch setting. Informally, multicalibration is a
requirement that the forecasts be statistically unbiased conditional both on its own prediction and on membership in
any one of a large collection of intersecting subsets of the
data space H. Multicalibration and its variants have been
an active area of research (see, e.g., Globus-Harris et al.
(2023); Gupta et al. (2022); Jung et al. (2021); Kim et al.
(2019; 2022)). Multicalibration has also found applications
in omniprediction (Gopalan et al., 2022; 2023), a concept
that asks for a single prediction which can be simultaneously
used to optimize a large number of loss functions such that
it is competitive with some hypothesis class H. Approximately multicalibrated models in the ℓ1 metric turn out to
automatically be omnipredictors, in both the batch (Gopalan
et al., 2022) and online (Garg et al., 2024) settings.

1
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering / Algorithms and Randomness Center, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, USA. 2 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering/H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and
Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
USA. 3 School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.. Correspondence to: Rohan Ghuge
<rghuge3@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We are especially focused on online multicalibration (Garg
et al., 2024; Gupta et al., 2022), which naturally generalizes
1

