Are LLMs Prescient?
A Continuous Evaluation using Daily News as the Oracle

Hui Dai 1 Ryan Teehan 1 Mengye Ren 1

Abstract

formation, making it difficult to track models’ performance
variations over time (McIntosh et al., 2025). This creates
a need for evaluation methods that always remain relevant
and incorporate temporal dynamics.

Many existing evaluation benchmarks for Large
Language Models (LLMs) quickly become outdated due to the emergence of new models and
training data. These benchmarks also fall short
in assessing how LLM performance changes over
time, as they consist of a static set of questions
without a temporal dimension. To address these
limitations, we propose using future event prediction as a continuous evaluation method to assess
LLMs’ temporal generalization and forecasting
abilities. Our benchmark, Daily Oracle, automatically generates question-answer (QA) pairs
from daily news, challenging LLMs to predict
“future” event outcomes. Our findings reveal that
as pre-training data becomes outdated, LLM performance degrades over time. While Retrieval
Augmented Generation (RAG) has the potential
to enhance prediction accuracy, the performance
degradation pattern persists, highlighting the need
for continuous model updates. Code and data
are available at https://agenticlearning.ai/dailyoracle.

Daily news provides a natural setting for continuous evaluation of LLMs. Since the world is constantly changing,
a benchmark designed around forecasting the next day’s
news will never be out of date by construction. In addition
to enabling continuous evaluation, forecasting is itself a
longstanding challenge with significant implications across
various domains, including healthcare, finance, and policymaking (Tetlock & Gardner, 2016; Dempsey et al., 2017;
Gillingham et al., 2018; Lopez-Lira & Tang, 2023). While
human experts have traditionally made such forecasts, machine learning models, particularly LLMs, have emerged as
promising alternatives due to their ability to learn from vast
and diverse corpora (Halawi et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024; Yan
et al., 2024). Several recent forecasting question-answer
(QA) datasets have been developed (Jin et al., 2021; Zou
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024), however, they are limited
in either size, scope, or they do not continuously keep pace
with the rapidly changing world. More critically, the extent to which LLMs’ predictive abilities change over time
remains understudied.
In this work, we propose Daily Oracle—a continuous evaluation benchmark that uses automatically generated QA
pairs from daily news to assess how the future prediction
capabilities of LLMs evolve over time. The QA pairs are
generated on a daily basis, consisting of True/False (TF) and
Multiple Choice (MC) questions across various categories
such as business, politics, and arts. Unlike traditional reading comprehension tasks, these QA pairs are designed to
challenge LLMs to predict future events based on their own
existing knowledge, effectively evaluating their temporal
generalization and forecasting abilities.

1. Introduction
Traditional Large Language Model (LLM) benchmarks are
often static, and do not reflect real-world information that
evolves over time. This presents two significant challenges.
First, as LLMs are updated, there is a risk that static benchmarks become outdated and more vulnerable to data leakage, where their content might end up in the training data
of newer models. This undermines the reliability of performance assessments on these benchmarks (Sainz et al.,
2023; Xu et al., 2024; McIntosh et al., 2025; Li & Flanigan,
2024). Second, static benchmarks often lack temporal in-

We continuously evaluate various LLMs, both with and
without access to a limited archive of news articles. Our
experiments reveal that LLMs experience significant performance degradation between January 2020 and December 2024, with degradation becoming more pronounced
before and after the models’ knowledge cutoff dates. On
average, performance drops by 21.55% on TF questions

1

New York University. Correspondence to: Hui Dai
<hd2584@nyu.edu>, Ryan Teehan <rst306@nyu.edu>, Mengye
Ren <mengye@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

