E-LDA: Toward Interpretable LDA Topic Models with Strong Guarantees
in Logarithmic Parallel Time
Adam Breuer 1

Abstract

Djourelova, 2023; Blanes i Vidal et al., 2012; Catalinac,
2016; Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004; Hall et al., 2008; Lauderdale and Clark, 2014; Martin and McCrain, 2019; Dietrich et al., 2019; Mueller and Rauh, 2018; Pan and Chen,
2018; Tingley, 2017). These models seek to learn the latent thematic structure that describes the content of a text
dataset. Specifically, topic models posit that each document’s words were drawn from a (latent) document-specific
mixture of (latent) topics, where each topic is a distribution
over all words in a vocabulary.

In this paper, we provide the first practical algorithms with provable guarantees for the problem
of inferring the topics assigned to each document
in an LDA topic model. This is the primary inference problem for many applications of topic
models in social science, data exploration, and
causal inference settings. We obtain this result by
showing a novel non-gradient-based, combinatorial approach to estimating topic models. This
yields algorithms that converge to near-optimal
posterior probability in logarithmic parallel computation time (adaptivity)—exponentially faster
than any known LDA algorithm. We also show
that our approach can provide interpretability
guarantees such that each learned topic is formally associated with a known keyword. Finally, we show that unlike alternatives, our approach can maintain the independence assumptions necessary to use the learned topic model
for downstream causal inference methods that
allow researchers to study topics as treatments.
In terms of practical performance, our approach
consistently returns solutions of higher semantic quality than solutions from state-of-the-art
LDA algorithms, neural topic models, and LLMbased topic models across a diverse range of text
datasets and evaluation parameters.

For many applications of topic models, the primary goal is
to estimate the set of latent topics, which provides a simple
yet semantically rich summary of the data. In contrast, for
the majority of applications in social science and data exploration, practitioners’ primary goal is to infer each document’s most probable assigned topics. These documentlevel topic assignments are then used as document labels
that can be piped into downstream document-level regression analysis or causal inference methods.
Social scientists continue to strongly prefer LDA for this
task over recent neural and LLM/BERT-based topic models
for two reasons. First, social science research designs favor parametric models that are amenable to analysis. This
is particularly important when using topic model outputs
as labels for downstream models whose theoretic guarantees require that labels are well-estimated, consistent, conditionally independent, etc. Second, social scientists assume that the latent LDA topic space is semantically interpretable. However, there are three key challenges.

1. Introduction

There are no known provable guarantees for the topic
assignment problem. First, it is well-known that full posterior inference of LDA parameters is NP-hard even with
just 2 topics (Arora et al., 2012). Under various assumptions, it is possible to approximate LDA’s set of topics in
poly-time (Anandkumar et al., 2012; Arora et al., 2012;
2013; 2016a; 2018). However, even if these latent topics
are known, it is still NP-hard in general to learn LDA’s
Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) assignments (i.e., which
topic probably generated each word in a given document)
(Sontag and Roy, 2011). Practitioners therefore resort to
heuristic inference techniques such as variational inference (Blei et al., 2003) or Gibbs samplers (Griffiths and

Topic models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
(Blei et al., 2003) have become central to numerous highprofile streams of social science research ranging from the
history of science to economics and political science (Ash
and Hansen, 2023; Barberá et al., 2019; Bybee et al., 2024;
1
Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH, USA. Correspondence to: Adam Breuer
<adam.breuer@dartmouth.edu>. Code available at:
https://github.com/BreuerLabs/E-LDA

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

