Aligning Multimodal Representations through an Information Bottleneck

Antonio Almudévar 1 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 2 Sameer Khurana 3 Ricard Marxer 4 Alfonso Ortega 1

Abstract

(Kaplan et al., 2020; Cuervo & Marxer, 2024); and (iii) it
is essential in real-world applications such as autonomous
vehicles (Xiao et al., 2020), healthcare (Kline et al., 2022)
or human-computer interaction (Sinha et al., 2010).

Contrastive losses have been extensively used
as a tool for multimodal representation learning.
However, it has been empirically observed that
their use is not effective to learn an aligned representation space. In this paper, we argue that
this phenomenon is caused by the presence of
modality-specific information in the representation space. Although some of the most widely
used contrastive losses maximize the mutual information between representations of both modalities, they are not designed to remove the modalityspecific information. We give a theoretical description of this problem through the lens of the
Information Bottleneck Principle. We also empirically analyze how different hyperparameters
affect the emergence of this phenomenon in a controlled experimental setup. Finally, we propose a
regularization term in the loss function that is derived by means of a variational approximation and
aims to increase the representational alignment.
We analyze in a set of controlled experiments and
real-world applications the advantages of including this regularization term.

Similarly to humans, most AI systems work through obtaining intermediate representations, which are compressed
versions of the raw data that preserve useful information
to solve different downstream tasks (Bengio et al., 2013;
Cadieu et al., 2014). One of the most widely used ways of
training multimodal systems is Contrastive Representation
Learning (Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015; Oord et al., 2018; Tian
et al., 2020a). In this paradigm, representations corresponding to similar input data are brought closer than dissimilar
ones. For example, the caption “a photo of a dog” should
become closer to an image of a dog than to that of a cat. The
most widely used of the contrastive losses is the InfoNCE
(Oord et al., 2018). Minimizing this loss is equivalent to
maximizing a lower bound of the mutual information of the
representations from both modalities. In other words, when
minimizing this loss, representations from each modality
should maximize the information that they contain about
what is common between them.
However, the above does not imply that representations
from both modalities contain the same information. Representations could contain all the information about what is
common to both modalities, but still preserve much of the
information that is specific to their own modality (a.k.a. nuisances from now on). We argue that this can translate into a
substantial representational misalignment (Klabunde et al.,
2023), especially when the inputs contain a high level of nuisances. In other words, representations from two modalities
of a positive pair could be not so similar to each other due
to the fact that they are encoding different information. Figure 1 illustrates a trivial example in which two similar, yet
different, images have exactly the same caption. Thus, the
text representations are exactly the same, while the image
representations are different from each other, since they can
be encoding information about aspects like the color of the
dog, the number of clouds in the sky or the number of blades
of grass. This misalignment phenomenon has been already
observed and denominated modality gap (Liang et al., 2022).
However, to the best of our knowledge, the present is the
first work in which this phenomenon is explained from an
information theory perspective.

1. Introduction
Multimodal Learning is an area of AI that is focused on processing and integrating information from multiple modalities (e.g., text, image or audio). It is becoming a pivotal topic
in the community because of multiple reasons, including,
but not limited to, (i) it permits to mimic human cognition
processes (Fei et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023); (ii) it allows to
use a greater amount of training data from different modalities, which tends to improve the performance of the models
1
ViVoLab, Aragón Institute for Engineering Research (I3A),
University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 3 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, USA 4 Université de Toulon, Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIS, Toulon, France. Correspondence to: Antonio Almudévar <almudevar@unizar.es>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

