Boost-and-Skip: A Simple Guidance-Free Diffusion for Minority Generation

Soobin Um * 1 Beomsu Kim * 1 Jong Chul Ye 1

Abstract
Minority samples are underrepresented instances
located in low-density regions of a data manifold, and are valuable in many generative AI applications, such as data augmentation, creative
content generation, etc. Unfortunately, existing
diffusion-based minority generators often rely on
computationally expensive guidance dedicated for
minority generation. To address this, here we
present a simple yet powerful guidance-free approach called Boost-and-Skip for generating minority samples using diffusion models. The key
advantage of our framework requires only two
minimal changes to standard generative processes:
(i) variance-boosted initialization and (ii) timestep
skipping. We highlight that these seeminglytrivial modifications are supported by solid theoretical and empirical evidence, thereby effectively promoting emergence of underrepresented
minority features. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that Boost-and-Skip greatly
enhances the capability of generating minority
samples, even rivaling guidance-based state-ofthe-art approaches while requiring significantly
fewer computations. Code is available at https:
//github.com/soobin-um/BnS.

Figure 1: Trade-off between minority generation performance and complexity on ImageNet 64 × 64. The area
of each bubble corresponds to peak memory consumption.
cFID (Parmar et al., 2022) calculations are based on real
minority data (as in Um et al. (2023); Um & Ye (2024b)),
meaning that lower values indicate generation of more realistic minority samples. Note that our framework achieves
competitive minority generation performance comparable to
guided samplers (Sehwag et al., 2022; Um et al., 2023; Um
& Ye, 2024b) while maintaining minimal complexity, thus
advancing beyond the existing Pareto Frontier. See Table 3
for detailed metric values.

1. Introduction

has been readily adopted by researchers, leading to significant progress in minority generation – the task of generating
minority samples that reside in low-density regions of a
data manifold1 (Sehwag et al., 2022; Um et al., 2023; Um
& Ye, 2024b;a). The distinctive characteristics of minority instances make them important in various applications,
including medical diagnosis (Um et al., 2023), anomaly detection (Du et al., 2022; 2023), and creative AI (Rombach
et al., 2022; Han et al., 2022).

Diffusion models are a prominent class of modern generative AI, known for their ability to generate high-quality
content across various data modalities (Ho et al., 2020;
2022; Zhang et al., 2023). Unlike traditional frameworks
like GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), diffusion models are
notably robust, effectively learning the underlying data distribution even for rare or underrepresented examples in the
training data (Sehwag et al., 2022). This inherent advantage

Existing high-performance minority generators primarily
rely upon guided sampling (Sehwag et al., 2022; Um et al.,
2023; Um & Ye, 2024b;a). For instance, the authors in Se-

*
Equal contribution 1 Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Jong Chul Ye
<jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr>.

1
Formally, the task of minority generation is expressible as
drawing instances from Sϵ := {z ∈ M : pθ (x) < ϵ}, where M
represents the data manifold, and pθ denotes the implicit density
learned by the diffusion model. Here ϵ is a small positive constant.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

