P(all-atom) Is Unlocking New Path For Protein Design

Wei Qu 1 2 Jiawei Guan 2 Rui Ma 2 Ke Zhai 2
Weikun Wu † 2 Haobo Wang † 2

Abstract

tein structure prediction task, which involves determining the three-dimensional structure of a protein given its
amino acid sequence (Abramson et al., 2024; Jumper et al.,
2021; Lin et al., 2023; Baek et al., 2023). The latter,
P (seq | backbone), underpins the fixed-backbone design
task, where the goal is to identify a sequence that will fold
into a given protein backbone structure (Dauparas et al.,
2022; Hsu et al., 2022). In summary, these probability distributions has successfully advanced the field of protein
engineering.

We introduce Pallatom, an innovative protein
generation model capable of producing protein
structures with all-atom coordinates. Pallatom
directly learns and models the joint distribution
P (structure, seq) by focusing on P (all-atom), effectively addressing the interdependence between
sequence and structure in protein generation. To
achieve this, we propose a novel network architecture specifically designed for all-atom protein
generation. Our model employs a dual-track
framework that tokenizes proteins into residuelevel and atomic-level representations, integrating
them through a multi-layer decoding process with
“traversing” representations and recycling mechanism. We also introduce the atom14 representation method, which unifies the description of
unknown side-chain coordinates, ensuring high
fidelity between the generated all-atom conformation and its physical structure. Experimental
results demonstrate that Pallatom excels in key
metrics of protein design, including designability, diversity, and novelty, showing significant improvements across the board. Our model not only
enhances the accuracy of protein generation but
also exhibits excellent sampling efficiency, paving
the way for future applications in larger and more
complex systems.

With the advancement of deep learning in protein science,
two distinct approaches for protein design have emerged.
One approach is the protein hallucination (Anishchenko
et al., 2021), which explores the landscape of a P (structure |
seq) model using Monte Carlo or gradient-based optimization techniques. This method yields valid protein structures,
but requires an additional P (seq) model, such as protein language models (Rives et al., 2021), to correct or redesign the
sequence. Essentially, this approach can be viewed as optimization process of P (structure | seq) · P (seq). Another
approach attempts to explore the P (backbone) distribution.
a series of protein generation models based on SE(3) invariance or equivariance networks (Jing et al., 2020; Satorras
et al., 2021) have recently emerged, these method rely on an
additional P (seq | backbone) process to determine the protein sequence. This optimization strategy can be regarded
as P (backbone) · P (seq | backbone).
This step-wise design process has limitation in approximating the joint distribution through marginal distributions. The
P (structure | seq) · P (seq) strategy faces challenges when
sampling in the high-dimensional sequence space, while the
P (backbone) · P (seq | backbone) strategy fails to account
for explicit side-chain interactions and is bottlenecked by
the capability of the fixed-backbone design model.

1. Introduction
The theoretical foundation of protein modeling has been
built upon two key conditional probability distributions:
P (structure | seq) and P (seq | backbone). The former, P (structure | seq), corresponds to the all-atom pro-

The ultimate goal of protein generation is to directly obtain a sequence along with its corresponding structure, i.e.,
to develop a model capable of describing the joint distribution P (structure, seq) or P (backbone, seq). Recently, some
studies have started to adopt co-generation approaches, such
as model based on co-diffusion (Campbell et al., 2024) or
co-design (Ren et al., 2024). While these methods primarily rely on SE(3) networks, they still separately model the

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Science and Technology for
Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
LEVINTHAL Biotechnology Co.Ltd, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Weikun Wu <weikun.wu@levinthal.bio>, Haobo
Wang <haobowang@levinthal.bio>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

