Improving Soft Unification with Knowledge Graph Embedding Methods

Xuanming Cui 1 Chionh Wei Peng 2 Adriel Kuek 2 Ser-Nam Lim 1

Abstract

differentiability (Rocktäschel & Riedel, 2017; Minervini
et al., 2019; Badreddine et al., 2022). Neural Theorem
Prover (Rocktäschel & Riedel, 2017) (NTP) is a representative of such approach. It introduces the concept of soft
unification during backward chaining process, where the unification operation is on the learnt embedding space instead
of between discrete symbols. Subsequent works Greedy
Neural Theorem Prover (GNTP) (Minervini et al., 2019)
and Conditional Theorem Prover (CTP) (Minervini et al.,
2020) implement top-k rule retrieval and rule reformulation
to improve NTP’s scalability and performance.

Neural Theorem Provers (NTPs) present a promising framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning,
combining end-to-end differentiability with the
interpretability of symbolic logic programming.
However, optimizing NTPs remains a significant
challenge due to their complex objective landscape and gradient sparcity. On the other hand,
Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) methods offer smooth optimization with well-defined learning objectives but often lack interpretability. In
this work, we propose several strategies to integrate the strengths of NTPs and KGEs, and
demonstrate substantial improvements in both
accuracy and computational efficiency. Specifically, we show that by leveraging the strength of
structural learning in KGEs, we can greatly improve NTPs’ poorly structured embedding space,
while by substituting NTPs with efficient KGE
operations, we can significantly reduce evaluation
time by over 1000× on large-scale dataset such
as WN18RR with a mild accuracy trade-off.

Although there are numerous NeSy frameworks (Cohen, 2016; Das et al., 2018; Minervini et al., 2017) and
knowledge-base reasoning methods, we are particularly interested in NTPs due to their straightforward reasoning
process based on similarity. This simplicity brings better scaling potential compared to complex tensor operations employed in other NeSy frameworks and GNN-based
approaches. Moreover, such similarity-based design also
makes NTPs well-suited for leveraging pre-trained embeddings obtained from the recent advances in foundational
models, thereby enabling multi-modal reasoning and potential zero-shot capabilities. This is crucial, as most existing NeSy (Maene & De Raedt, 2023; Yang et al., 2017;
Minervini et al., 2017) and Knowledge-Graph-related methods (Trouillon et al., 2016; Han et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2021)
struggles to generalize to unseen entities, significantly lagging behind the recent foundational and language models.

1. Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) methods have recently achieved
tremendous progress in various tasks such as language modeling (Touvron et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) and content
generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Kerbl et al., 2023). However, when compared with symbolic systems, they are still
limited by the long-lasting problems of the lack of interpretation, out-of-domain generalizability and reasoning abilities.

Although NTP has been shown to be effective on various
datasets, it is known to be hard to optimize (Rocktäschel &
Riedel, 2017; Minervini et al., 2019; Maene & Raedt, 2023;
de Jong & Sha, 2019). Specifically, as NTPs perform top-k
retrievals for unification, only a fraction of retrieved embedding parameters will receive gradient updates. The model
optimization is thus heavily dependent on the initialization,
and can get stuck in local minima (de Jong & Sha, 2019).
DeepSoftLog (Maene & Raedt, 2023) addresses the above
limitation by using differentiable probabilistic semiring instead of fuzzy semiring, along with other proposed properties to smooth out the back-propagation process. However,
as it requires additional modules for knowledge compilation (Darwiche, 2011) and requires all possible proofs to be
considered during training (as opposed to k-best approximation), it is intrinsically hard to scale to larger datasets.

To address the above challenges, the concept of NeuroSymbolic AI (NeSy) has been proposed to integrate DL and
symbolic AI into one end-to-end differentiable system. A
popular approach for such integration is to embed discrete
symbols into continuous vector space to enable end-to-end
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Central
Florida 2 DSO National Laboratories. Correspondence to: Xuanming Cui <xuanming.cui@ucf.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

