Learning Parametric Distributions from Samples and Preferences

Marc Jourdan 1 Gizem Yüce 1 Nicolas Flammarion 1

Abstract

data-generating process (Ge et al., 2024).

Recent advances in language modeling have underscored the role of preference feedback in enhancing model performance. This paper investigates the conditions under which preference feedback improves parameter estimation in classes
of continuous parametric distributions. In our
framework, the learner observes pairs of samples
from an unknown distribution along with their
relative preferences depending on the same unknown parameter. We show that preference-based
M-estimators achieve a better asymptotic variance
than sample-only M-estimators, further improved
by deterministic preferences. Leveraging the hard
constraints revealed by deterministic preferences,
we propose an estimator achieving an estimation
error scaling of O(1/n)—a
significant improve√
ment over the Θ(1/ n) rate attainable with samples alone. Next, we establish a lower bound
that matches this accelerated rate; up to dimension and problem-dependent constants. While the
assumptions underpinning our analysis are restrictive, they are satisfied by notable cases such as
Gaussian or Laplace distributions for preferences
based on the log-probability reward.

To understand the role of preference feedback, we focus on
a simpler yet illustrative problem: parameter estimation for
parametric distributions and preferences. Specifically, the
learner observes pairs of samples from an unknown distribution, along with preferences informed by the same parameter.
For instance, preferences based on log-probabilities naturally link the preference and probability models, though
other formulations are possible (Huang et al., 2024).
For continuous distributions, we uncover a significant statistical learning gap between preference-based and sampleonly estimators. This paper primarily investigates this
gap, taking the sample-only maximum likelihood estimator
(MLE)—optimal among unbiased estimators—as a baseline. The well-established theory of M-estimators (Van der
Vaart, 2000) suggests that preference-based M-estimators
improve asymptotic variance under certain conditions. Yet,
this improvement is modest: when samples are of similar
quality, preference feedback approaches a fair coin toss,
providing minimal additional information. While reducing
asymptotic variance is encouraging, it does not fully explain
the substantial performance gains observed empirically in
large-scale language models.
For deterministic preferences, we prove a more striking result: preference-based estimators achieve a statistically significant acceleration in parameter estimation. Specifically,
we show that√the estimation error scales as O(1/n) instead
of the O(1/ n) rate achieved by sample-only estimators.
This acceleration is supported by a matching lower bound,
up to dimension and problem-dependent constants.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in language modeling has showcased the
effectiveness of preference feedback for fine-tuning (Ziegler
et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024). Preference data—
indicating relative quality between outcomes—consistently
outperforms approaches using positive examples only like
supervised fine-tuning (Ivison et al., 2024). This empirical success suggests that preference feedback introduces
new, complementary information beyond the observed data.
Understanding how and why preferences provide this advantage requires connecting the preference model to the

While this acceleration might sound surprising, the Θ(1/n)
rate can already be observed in a special case of sampleonly parameter estimation. For instance, consider estimating the location parameter θ of a uniform distribution on
[θ, θ + 1] based solely on samples (Wainwright, 2019). The
minimax rate for estimation error is Θ(1/n). The optimal
estimator achieving the accelerated rate is the minimum of
uniform observations whose density is positive at θ. This
improved rate arises from the accumulation of random variables having a positive density at a specific point through a
minimum (or maximum) operator, in contrast to the slower
aggregation inherent to averaging. Similarly, for deterministic preferences with log-likelihood rewards, we observe

1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Marc Jourdan
<marc.jourdan@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

