Understanding the Logic of Direct Preference Alignment through Logic

Kyle Richardson 1 Vivek Srikumar 2 Ashish Sabharwal 1

Abstract

Loss functions

Symbolic Programs
Decompilation

Recent direct preference alignment algorithms
(DPA), such as DPO, have shown great promise in
aligning large language models to human preferences. While this has motivated the development
of many new variants of the original DPO loss,
understanding the differences between these recent proposals, as well as developing new DPA
loss functions, remains difficult given the lack
of a technical and conceptual framework for reasoning about the underlying semantics of these
algorithms. In this paper, we attempt to remedy
this by formalizing DPA losses in terms of discrete reasoning problems. Specifically, we ask:
Given an existing DPA loss, can we systematically
derive a symbolic program that characterizes its
semantics? We propose a novel formalism for
characterizing preference losses for single model
and reference model based approaches, and identify symbolic forms for a number of commonly
used DPA variants. Further, we show how this formal view of preference learning sheds new light
on both the size and structure of the DPA loss landscape, making it possible to not only rigorously
characterize the relationships between recent loss
proposals but also to systematically explore the
landscape and derive new loss functions from first
principles. We hope our framework and findings
will help provide useful guidance to those working on human AI alignment.

DPO loss

Implies(
And(M(x,yl ),Ref(x,yw )),
And(M(x,yw ),Ref(x,yl ))
)


− log σ

πθ (yl |x)
log ππrefθ (y(yww|x)
|x) − log πref (yl |x)



Modify
DPO variant

Implies(
And(M(x,yl ),Ref(x,yw )),
M(x,yw )
)


− log σ

|x)πref (yl |x)(1−πθ (yl |x))
log ππθθ(y(ylw|x)π
ref (yw |x)(1−πθ (yw |x))



Compilation
Semantics PDPO |= PDPO2

Figure 1. Can we uncover the hidden logic of DPO? Here we show
the decompilation of the DPO loss into a symbolic expression that
expresses its high-level model behavior, along with a semantically
modified version that we can compile into a novel DPO variant.
We study how to translate between these two spaces to better understand the semantics of existing preference learning algorithms
and to derive new ones from first principles.

reasoning that are driven by declarative knowledge, in sharp
contrast to purely machine learning-based approaches, have
the advantage of allowing us to reason transparently about
the behavior and correctness of the resulting systems. In this
paper we focus on the broad question: Can the declarative
approach be leveraged to better understand and formally
specify algorithms for large language models (LLMs)?
We specifically investigate direct preference alignment
(DPA) algorithms, such as direct preference optimization (DPO, Rafailov et al., 2023), for pairwise preference
learning, which are currently at the forefront of research
on LLM alignment and learning from human preferences
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). While there has
been much recent work on algorithmic variations of DPO
(Azar et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024) that
modify or add new terms to the original loss, understanding
the differences between these new proposals, as well as coming up with new variants, remains a formidable challenge
due to the lack of a conceptual and technical framework for
reasoning about their underlying semantics.

1. Introduction
Symbolic logic has long served as the de-facto language for
expressing complex knowledge throughout computer science (Halpern et al., 2001), including in AI (McCarthy et al.,
1960; Nilsson, 1991) and early ML (McCulloch & Pitts,
1943), owing to its clean semantics. Symbolic approaches to

Our study attempts to remedy this problem by formalizing
the corresponding loss functions in terms of logic, trying to
answer the question: Given an existing loss function, such
as DPO (see Figure 1), can we derive a symbolic expression that captures the core semantics of that loss function
(i.e., one that we can then systematically compile back into

1

Allen Institute for AI 2 University of Utah. Correspondence to:
Kyle Richardson <kyler@allenai.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

