Information Bottleneck-guided MLPs for Robust Spatial-temporal Forecasting

Min Chen * 1 Guansong Pang * 2 Wenjun Wang 1 Cheng Yan † 1
Flow Data in PEMS08 Dataset with No Noise

Abstract
Flow

Spatial-temporal forecasting (STF) plays a pivotal
role in urban planning and computing. SpatialTemporal Graph Neural Networks (STGNNs) excel in modeling spatial-temporal dynamics, thus
being robust against noise perturbation. However, they often suffer from relatively poor computational efficiency. Simplifying the architectures can speed up these methods but it also
weakens the robustness w.r.t. noise interference. In this study, we aim to investigate the
problem – can simple neural networks such as
Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) achieve robust
spatial-temporal forecasting yet still be efficient?
To this end, we first disclose the dual noise effect behind the spatial-temporal data noise, and
propose theoretically-grounded principle termed
Robust Spatial-Temporal Information Bottleneck
(RSTIB), which preserves wide potentials for enhancing the robustness of different types of models. We then meticulously design an implementation, termed RSTIB-MLP, along with a new
training regime incorporating a knowledge distillation module, to enhance the robustness of
MLPs for STF while maintaining its efficiency.
Comprehensive experimental results show that
an excellent trade-off between the robustness
and the efficiency can be achieved by RSTIBMLP compared to state-of-the-art STGNNs and
MLP models. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/mchen644/RSTIB.

(a)

Flow

Flow Data in PEMS08 Dataset with Noise Ratio=40%

(b)

Time

Figure 1. (a) Two time series are distinguishable at both historical
input (P area) and forecasting target (F area), but (b) they become
indistinguishable in both cases in the presence of noise.

spatial-temporal forecasting have effectively adopted convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Lai et al., 2018), recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) (Meng et al., 2020), temporal convolution networks (TCNs) (Wu et al., 2019) to model spatialtemporal relations. Lately, there has been a growing interest
in spatial-temporal graph neural networks (STGNNs) (Shao
et al., 2022b;c; Wu et al., 2019) due to their strong capacity.
Though achieving exceptional performance, STGNN-based
methods suffer from slow computational efficiency.
To alleviate this, a few recent works (Shao et al., 2022a;
Qin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Yi et al., 2024) adopt
Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) due to its advantageous efficiency. However, these simple yet efficient baselines lack
effective architectures to combat against spatial-temporal
noise perturbation, which is common in the real world (Jiang
et al., 2023b; Tang et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2024c; Zhang et al., 2023). Noise perturbation would result
in sample- and feature-level harmful impacts, leading to issues like sample indistinguishability (Shao et al., 2022a) and
feature collapse respectively. As shown in Fig. 1, two time
series may become indistinguishable in both the historical
input end and the forecasting target end due to the presence
of noise perturbation; besides, one can also observe severe
feature collapse reflected by much lower feature variance,

1. Introduction
Spatial-temporal forecasting (STF) holds great significance
in modeling complex dynamic systems (Bai et al., 2020;
Guo et al., 2021a; Deng et al., 2021). Previous works in
*

Equal contribution 1 Tianjin University 2 Singapore Management University.
Correspondence to:
Cheng Yan
<yancheng work@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

（）

