Test-Time Adaptation for Online Vision-Language Navigation
with Feedback-based Reinforcement Learning

Sung June Kim * 1 Gyeongrok Oh * 1 Heeju Ko 1 Daehyun Ji 2 Dongwook Lee 2
Byung-Jun Lee 1 Sujin Jang 2 Sangpil Kim 1

Abstract
Navigating in an unfamiliar environment during deployment poses a critical challenge for a
vision-language navigation (VLN) agent. Yet,
test-time adaptation (TTA) remains relatively underexplored in robotic navigation, leading us to
the fundamental question: what are the key properties of TTA for online VLN? In our view, effective adaptation requires three qualities: 1) flexibility in handling different navigation outcomes,
2) interactivity with external environment, and
3) maintaining a harmony between plasticity and
stability. To address this, we introduce F EED TTA,
a novel TTA framework for online VLN utilizing
feedback-based reinforcement learning. Specifically, F EED TTA learns by maximizing binary
episodic feedback, a practical setup in which the
agent receives a binary scalar after each episode
that indicates the success or failure of the navigation. Additionally, we propose a gradient regularization technique that leverages the binary
structure of F EED TTA to achieve a balance between plasticity and stability during adaptation.
Our extensive experiments on challenging VLN
benchmarks demonstrate the superior adaptability of F EED TTA, even outperforming the stateof-the-art offline training methods in REVERIE
benchmark with a single stream of learning.

Figure 1. Illustration of the learning paradigm of F EED TTA. The
navigation agent adapts to streaming online test data by learning
to maximize the cumulative binary episodic feedback, which indicates navigation success or failure. The simplicity and efficacy
of the FeedTTA framework demonstrate its potential for practical
applications in real-world navigation scenarios.

via imitation learning on a vast collection of annotated expert demonstrations, aiming to translate human behavior
into generalized robotic actions (Hao et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2022c). However, it is inevitable for a trained policy
to encounter unseen environments during online deployment, leading to compromised reliability. Therefore, the
ability of instantly adapting to test-time environment and
performing beyond its trained capabilities, i.e., test-time
adaptation (TTA), is crucial in real-world robot navigation.
Despite its potential benefits, the application of TTA on online robotic navigation remains underexplored. One existing
approach (Gao et al., 2024a) relies on the widely adopted
TTA paradigm of entropy minimization (Wang et al., 2020a;
Zhang et al., 2022), where we identify several limitations of
its usage on navigational policies. First, entropy minimization reduces policy resilience on failed trials. That is, the
adaptations derived from failed samples attempt to improve
general predictive accuracy, but induce overfitting on similar
failure patterns. For example, when the initial navigation
fails, entropy minimization intensifies the probabilities of
the actions that lead to failure in repeated episodes. Second,
entropy minimization limits exploration. The sequential
decision-making nature of VLN requires a careful balance
between exploitation and exploration. By prioritizing entropy minimization, the approach overly focuses on exploiting existing knowledge while neglecting the opportunity to
learn from new, unfamiliar scenarios.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) is a fundamental task of
connecting human interactions with robotic AI systems (Wu
et al., 2024). The navigation policies are typically trained
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of AI, Korea University,
Seoul, S.Korea 2 Samsung AI Center, DS Division, Suwon, S.Korea.
Correspondence to: Sujin Jang <s.steve.jang@samsung.com>,
Sangpil Kim <spk7@korea.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

