Concentration Distribution Learning from Label Distributions

Jiawei Tang 1 2 Yuheng Jia 1 2

Abstract
Label distribution learning (LDL) is an effective
method to predict the relative label description degree (a.k.a. label distribution) of a sample. However, the label distribution is not a complete representation of an instance because it overlooks
the absolute intensity of each label. Specifically,
it’s impossible to obtain the total description degree of hidden labels that not in the label space,
which leads to the loss of information and confusion in instances. To solve the above problem,
we come up with a new concept named background concentration to serve as the absolute
description degree term of the label distribution
and introduce it into the LDL process, forming
the improved paradigm of concentration distribution learning. Moreover, we propose a novel
model by probabilistic methods and neural networks to learn label distributions and background
concentrations from existing LDL datasets. Extensive experiments prove that the proposed approach is able to extract background concentrations from label distributions while producing
more accurate prediction results than the stateof-the-art LDL methods. The code is available in
https://github.com/seutjw/CDL-LD.

Figure 1. The LD-CD diagrams of two pairs (a,b and c,d) of pictures that share similar or same LDs. After introducing the background concentration, their CDs can be distinguished easily.

binary value. To this end, label distribution learning (LDL)
(Geng, 2016) was developed, which uses real numbers to
illustrate how important a label is to a particular sample.
All labels’ description degrees make up a label distribution
(LD). Specifically, let dlx stand for the description degree
of the label l to the instance x, which is governed by the
l
non-negative
P l constraint dx ∈ [0, 1] and the sum-to-one constraint l dx = 1. Unlike traditional MLL, LDL is a more
general paradigm that attempts to predict the LD for unseen
samples.

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) (Tsoumakas & Katakis, 2007;
Zhang & Zhou, 2014; Peng et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025) is
a well-researched machine learning paradigm where a set
of labels is assigned to each sample. In MLL, a logical
value (0 or 1) is used to indicate whether a label is capable
of describing a sample. But each label’s relative importance to a sample cannot be accurately described by this

In LDL, ground-truth LDs are considered complete representations of the corresponding instances. However, there
exist some cases where we cannot describe an instance perfectly only with its label distribution. Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b)
show two pictures of boating. Although there is a significant difference between the sizes of people and boats in
the two pictures, similar LDs are assigned to them due to
the similar relative proportions of the two labels (“Person”
and “Boat”), which goes strongly against our intuition. To
solve this problem, we introduce the concept of background
concentration, which represents the description degree of
the complementary set of all existing labels. In this case, it
can be regarded as the proportion of the background in the
two pictures, which differs a lot from each other. Appending background concentration terms (Backgr. in Fig. 1(a)

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Yuheng Jia <yhjia@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

