Rethinking Aleatoric and Epistemic Uncertainty

Freddie Bickford Smith 1 Jannik Kossen 1 Eleanor Trollope 1
Mark van der Wilk 1 Adam Foster 1 Tom Rainforth 1

Abstract

sumptions are made about how uncertainty will decompose
on unseen data (Seeböck et al, 2019; Wang & Aitchison,
2021), and misleading connections are drawn between uncertainty and predictive accuracy (Orlando et al, 2019; Wang
et al, 2019). Meanwhile distinct mathematical quantities
are used to refer to notionally the same concepts: epistemic
uncertainty, for example, has been variously defined using density-based (Mukhoti et al, 2023; Postels et al, 2020),
information-based (Gal et al, 2017) and variance-based (Gal,
2016; Kendall & Gal, 2017; McAllister, 2016) quantities.

The ideas of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty
are widely used to reason about the probabilistic
predictions of machine-learning models. We identify incoherence in existing discussions of these
ideas and suggest this stems from the aleatoricepistemic view being insufficiently expressive to
capture all the distinct quantities that researchers
are interested in. To address this we present a
decision-theoretic perspective that relates rigorous notions of uncertainty, predictive performance
and statistical dispersion in data. This serves to
support clearer thinking as the field moves forward. Additionally we provide insights into popular information-theoretic quantities, showing they
can be poor estimators of what they are often purported to measure, while also explaining how they
can still be useful in guiding data acquisition.

1

We suggest this incoherence arises from the aleatoricepistemic view being too simplistic in the context of machine learning. Researchers are looking for concrete notions
of a model’s predictive uncertainty and how that uncertainty
might or might not change with more data (associated with a
decomposition into irreducible and reducible components),
but also related notions of predictive performance and data
dispersion. The aleatoric-epistemic view cannot satisfy all
these needs: many concepts stand to be defined, while the
view fundamentally only has capacity for two concepts. Yet
the current state of play is to nevertheless appeal to the
aleatoric-epistemic view, with different researchers using it
in different ways. A result of this conceptual overloading
is to conflate quantities that ought to be recognised as distinct. Far from just a matter of semantics, this is having a
meaningful effect on the field’s progress: methods are being
designed and evaluated based on shaky foundations.

Introduction

When making decisions under uncertainty, it can be useful
to reason about where that uncertainty comes from (Osband
et al, 2023; Wen et al, 2022). Researchers often aim to do
this by referring to aleatoric (literal meaning: “relating to
chance”) and epistemic (“relating to knowledge”) uncertainty, ideas with a long history in the study of probability
(Hacking, 1975). Aleatoric uncertainty is typically associated with statistical dispersion in data (sometimes thought
of as noise), while epistemic is associated with a model’s internal information state (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021).

To establish a clearer perspective, we draw on powerful
yet underappreciated ideas from decision theory (Dawid,
1998; DeGroot, 1962; Neiswanger et al, 2022). Our starting
point is a final decision of interest with an associated loss
function. Given this, uncertainty in predictive beliefs can be
formalised as the subjective expected loss of acting Bayesoptimally under those beliefs; this generalises quantities like
variance and Shannon entropy. From there we show how
reasoning about new data gives rise to a notion of expected
uncertainty reduction, which we can use to identify a decomposition of uncertainty into irreducible and reducible
components. Then we clarify the connection between uncertainty, predictive performance and data dispersion, linking
to classic decompositions from statistics and information
theory. Overall this provides a coherent synthesis of key
quantities that researchers are interested in (Figure 1).

Concerningly given their scale of use, these ideas are not being discussed coherently in the literature. The line between
model-based predictions and data-generating processes is repeatedly blurred (Amini et al, 2020; Ayhan & Berens, 2018;
Immer et al, 2021; Kapoor et al, 2022; Smith & Gal, 2018;
van Amersfoort et al, 2020). On top of this, tenuous as1
University of Oxford. Correspondence to Freddie Bickford
Smith <fbickfordsmith@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

