INRFlow: Flow Matching for INRs in Ambient Space

Yuyang Wang 1 Anurag Ranjan 1 2 Josh Susskind 1 Miguel Angel Bautista 1

Abstract

proposed following this idea and pushing the quality of
generated samples in many different domains, including
images (Dai et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022; Preechakul
et al., 2022), 3D point clouds (Luo & Hu, 2021), graphs
(Hoogeboom et al., 2022) and video (Ho et al., 2022a).
More recently, flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023) and
stochastic interpolants (Ma et al., 2024) have been proposed
as generalized formulations of the noising process, moving from stochastic gaussian diffusion processes to general
paths connecting a base (e.g. Gaussian) and a target (e.g.
data) distribution.

Flow matching models have emerged as a powerful method for generative modeling on domains
like images or videos, and even on irregular or
unstructured data like 3D point clouds or even
protein structures. These models are commonly
trained in two stages: first, a data compressor
is trained, and in a subsequent training stage a
flow matching generative model is trained in the
latent space of the data compressor. This twostage paradigm sets obstacles for unifying models
across data domains, as hand-crafted compressors
architectures are used for different data modalities.
To this end, we introduce INRFlow, a domainagnostic approach to learn flow matching transformers directly in ambient space. Drawing inspiration from INRs, we introduce a conditionally
independent point-wise training objective that enables INRFlow to make predictions continuously
in coordinate space. Our empirical results demonstrate that INRFlow effectively handles different
data modalities such as images, 3D point clouds
and protein structure data, achieving strong performance in different domains and outperforming
comparable approaches. INRFlow is a promising step towards domain-agnostic flow matching
generative models that can be trivially adopted in
different data domains.

In practice, these iterative refinement approaches are commonly applied in a latent space obtained from a pre-trained
compressor model. Thus, the training recipe consists of
two independent training stages: compressor (auto-encoder)
training and subsequent generative modeling in latent space.
General purpose transformer architectures have been used
in the generative modeling step in latent space (Peebles &
Xie, 2023; Ma et al., 2024; Esser et al., 2024). However, the
first stage compressor uses architectures that are specific to
the data domain, requiring hand-crafted inductive biases (i.e.
ConvNets for image data (Rombach et al., 2022), PointNet
for point clouds (Vahdat et al., 2022), Evoformer for protein
structures (Jumper et al., 2021)).
We see this as one of the core issues preventing the ML community to develop truly domain-agnostic generative models
that can be applied to different data domains in a trivial manner. Our goal in this paper is to provide a powerful single
training stage approach that is domain-agnostic and simple
to implement in practice, thus dispensing with the complexities of two-stage training recipes and enabling modeling
of different data modalities directly in ambient (i.e. data)
space.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative modeling have enabled learning complex data distributions by combining both powerful
architectures and training objectives. In particular, state-ofthe-art approaches for image (Esser et al., 2024), video (Dai
et al., 2023) or 3D point cloud (Vahdat et al., 2022) generation are based on the concept of iteratively transforming
data into Gaussian noise. Diffusion models were originally

It is worth noting that training diffusion or flow matching
models in ambient space is indeed possible when using domain specific architecture designs and training recipes. In
the image domain, approaches have exploited its dense nature and applied cascaded U-Nets (Ho et al., 2021; 2022b),
joint training of U-Nets at multiple resolutions (Gu et al.,
2023), multi-scale losses (Hoogeboom et al., 2023) or U-Net
transformer hybrids architectures (Crowson et al., 2024), obtaining strong results. However, developing strong domainagnostic models, using general purposes architectures that

1

Apple, Machine Learning Research 2 Work done while at Apple. Correspondence to: Yuyang Wang <yuyangw@apple.com>,
Miguel Angel Bautista <mbautistamartin@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

