Interpreting CLIP with Hierarchical Sparse Autoencoders

Vladimir Zaigrajew 1 Hubert Baniecki 1 2 Przemyslaw Biecek 1 2

Abstract
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are useful for detecting and steering interpretable features in neural networks, with particular potential for understanding complex multimodal representations.
Given their ability to uncover interpretable features, SAEs are particularly valuable for analyzing vision-language models (e.g., CLIP and
SigLIP), which are fundamental building blocks
in modern large-scale systems yet remain challenging to interpret and control. However, current
SAE methods are limited by optimizing both reconstruction quality and sparsity simultaneously,
as they rely on either activation suppression or
rigid sparsity constraints. To this end, we introduce Matryoshka SAE (MSAE), a new architecture that learns hierarchical representations at
multiple granularities simultaneously, enabling
a direct optimization of both metrics without
compromise. MSAE establishes a state-of-theart Pareto frontier between reconstruction quality and sparsity for CLIP, achieving 0.99 cosine
similarity and less than 0.1 fraction of variance
unexplained while maintaining 80% sparsity. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of MSAE as
a tool for interpreting and controlling CLIP by
extracting over 120 semantic concepts from its
representation to perform concept-based similarity search and bias analysis in downstream tasks
like CelebA. We make the codebase available at
https://github.com/WolodjaZ/MSAE.

Figure 1.
Matryoshka Sparse Autoencoder (MSAE) enables
learning hierarchical concept representations from coarse to finegrained features while avoiding rigid sparsity constraints in TopK
and the activation shrinkage problem in ReLU SAE. (B) At training, MSAE uses multiple top-k values up to dimension d instead
of a single k like in TopK SAE, combining losses across different granularities. (C) At inference, our method uses the whole
d-dimensional representation. (D) MSAE allows for more precise
editing and manipulation in the concept space.

learning robust representations that bridge visual and textual information. Through contrastive learning on massive
datasets, CLIP and its less adopted successor SigLIP (Zhai
et al., 2023) demonstrate remarkable capabilities that extend far beyond their primary objective of cross-modal similarity search. Its representation is a foundational component in text-to-image generation models like Stable Diffusion (Podell et al., 2024) and serves as a powerful feature
extractor for numerous downstream vision and language
tasks (Shen et al., 2022), establishing CLIP as a crucial
building block in modern VLMs (Liu et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Vision-language models, particularly contrastive languageimage pre-training (CLIP, Radford et al., 2021; Cherti
et al., 2023), revolutionize multimodal understanding by

Despite CLIP’s widespread adoption, understanding how it
processes and represents information remains a challenge.
The distributed nature of its learned representations and
the complexity of the optimized loss function make it particularly difficult to interpret. Traditional explainability
approaches have limited success in addressing this challenge: gradient-based feature attributions (Simonyan, 2013;

1

Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
2
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Correspondence to:
Vladimir Zaigrajew <vladimir.zaigrajew.dokt@pw.edu.pl>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

