Piloting Structure-Based Drug Design via Modality-Specific Optimal Schedule

Keyue Qiu * 1 2 Yuxuan Song * 1 2 Zhehuan Fan 3 Peidong Liu 4
Zhe Zhang 2 Mingyue Zheng 3 Hao Zhou 1 Wei-Ying Ma 1
100

Abstract

90

Structure-Based Drug Design (SBDD) is crucial
for identifying bioactive molecules. Recent deep
generative models are faced with challenges in
geometric structure modeling. A major bottleneck lies in the twisted probability path of multimodalities—continuous 3D positions and discrete
2D topologies—which jointly determine molecular geometries. By establishing the fact that noise
schedules decide the Variational Lower Bound
(VLB) for the twisted probability path, we propose VLB-Optimal Scheduling (VOS) strategy in
this under-explored area, which optimizes VLB
as a path integral for SBDD. Our model effectively enhances molecular geometries and interaction modeling, achieving a state-of-the-art PoseBusters passing rate of 95.9% on CrossDock,
more than 10% improvement upon strong baselines, while maintaining high affinities and robust
intramolecular validity evaluated on a held-out
test set. Code is available at https://github.
com/AlgoMole/MolCRAFT.

80

97.9 97.3

PB-Valid-Mol (ID)
PB-Valid-Mol (OOD)
79.1

89.3
68.1

70
60
50

57.6

51.0

57.7

40
30

TargetDiff

DecompDiff

MolCRAFT

Ours

Figure 1. PoseBusters passing rates (%) for non-autoregressive
models, where ours maintains the best ID and OOD performance.
ID: in-distributional CrossDock test; OOD: out-of-distributional
PoseBusters test. PB-Valid-Mol: intramolecular validity. Detailed
results can be found in Appendix D.

Recent advances in geometric deep generative models have
centered on non-autoregressive methods such as diffusion
(Guan et al., 2023) and Bayesian Flow Network (BFN) (Qu
et al., 2024), showing promise by capturing the structures at
the global level. However, when evaluated with a rigorous
out-of-distribution (OOD) test on PoseBusters benchmark
(Buttenschoen et al., 2024), Fig. 1 shows a notable performance drop in intramolecular validity, suggesting that current global generation strategies may inadequately capture
the fine-grained molecular geometries.

1. Introduction

One key factor in geometric structure modeling is the intertwined probability path of different modalities: continuous
atom positions and discrete molecular topologies. While
these modalities jointly determine molecular geometries
and protein-ligand interaction types, there lacks a systematic understanding in designing the twisted probability path
for SBDD. Prior works (Peng et al., 2023; Vignac et al.,
2023; Guan et al., 2023) adopt sophisticated noise schedules
adapted for different modalities, and propose to generate
3D positions first. In our preliminary studies (Sec. 2), we
identify the potential problem of prioritizing the 3D modality, where the model cannot effectively utilize 2D topology
information in the generation, suggesting that the current
noise schedule is suboptimal. Despite its importance, the
design of optimal noise schedules for twisted probability
path remains a largely underexplored area.

Structure-Based Drug Design (SBDD) plays a pivotal role in
the discovery of bioactive molecules, leveraging the knowledge of protein-ligand interactions to identify potential therapeutic compounds. At the core of SBDD is the accurate
modeling of 3D protein-ligand geometries, as only when
bioactive compounds can bind effectively to their target receptors can they elicit their therapeutic effects (Isert et al.,
2023). Despite its importance, achieving high-fidelity interaction modeling remains a significant challenge, primarily
due to the complexity of the underlying binding dynamics.
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR),
Tsinghua University 2 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Sichuan University. Correspondence to: Hao Zhou <zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address the gap left by previous methods, we aim at a
systematic solution for the optimal schedule for the twisted
1

