Beyond Matryoshka: Revisiting Sparse Coding for Adaptive Representation

Tiansheng Wen * 1 2 Yifei Wang * 3 Zequn Zeng 1 Zhong Peng 1 Yudi Su 1 Xinyang Liu 1 Bo Chen 1
Hongwei Liu 1 Stefanie Jegelka 3 4 Chenyu You 2

Feature Dim
0.1

0.4

0.7

0.3

0

0.1

0.2

Full Rep.
Dense

0.3

MRL Rep.
Dense

0

0

0.9

CSR Rep.
Sparse

(a) Overview of different representations

(b) Retrieval efficiency across different methods

(c) Training GPU hours of different models

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed method. (a) Illustrative comparison between standard embeddings (dense, long) and two different
compression schemes: Matryoshka representations (MRL) (Kusupati et al., 2022) with short length and our Contrastive Sparse Representation (CSR) based on sparsification. (b) Comparison of retrieval accuracy and time of different methods on ImageNet with GPUs. For
CSR, we present results with the SOTA RN50 backbone from Wightman (2019) as well as the same RN50 backbone from Kusupati et al.
(2022) for a fair comparison. Compared to MRL and int8 quantification (Quant Int8) methods, our sparse embedding approach CSR
attains the best retrieval accuracy (very close to full representations) while being much more efficient in retrieval time, using sparse matrix
multiplication on GPU. (c) Training GPU hours of CSR compared to baseline methods, where we outperform MRL on average 1-NN
accuracy with much less training time.

Abstract

into a high-dimensional but selectively activated
feature space. By leveraging lightweight autoencoding and task-aware contrastive objectives,
CSR preserves semantic quality while allowing
flexible, cost-effective inference at different sparsity levels. Extensive experiments on image,
text, and multimodal benchmarks demonstrate
that CSR consistently outperforms MRL in terms
of both accuracy and retrieval speed—often by
large margins—while also cutting training time
to a fraction of that required by MRL. Our results
establish sparse coding as a powerful paradigm
for adaptive representation learning in real-world
applications where efficiency and fidelity are both
paramount. Code is available at this https URL.

Many large-scale systems rely on high-quality
deep representations (embeddings) to facilitate
tasks like retrieval, search, and generative modeling. Matryoshka Representation Learning (MRL)
recently emerged as a solution for adaptive embedding lengths, but it requires full model retraining
and suffers from noticeable performance degradations at short lengths. In this paper, we show
that sparse coding offers a compelling alternative for achieving adaptive representation with
minimal overhead and higher fidelity. We propose Contrastive Sparse Representation (CSR),
a method that sparsifies pre-trained embeddings
*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, China 2 Stony Brook
University, New York, USA 3 MIT CSAIL, MA, USA 4 TU Munich. Correspondence to: Bo Chen <bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn>,
Hongwei Liu <hwliu@xidian.edu.cn>.

1. Introduction
Representation learning is at the core of deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) and high-quality representations of inputs
(e.g., image, text) empower numerous large-scale systems,
including but not limited to search engines, vector databases,

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

