Combinatorial Reinforcement Learning with Preference Feedback

Joongkyu Lee 1 Min-hwan Oh 1

Abstract

some previous studies have addressed problems within this
setting—particularly in deep RL (Sunehag et al., 2015; He
et al., 2016; Swaminathan et al., 2017; Metz et al., 2017;
Ryu et al., 2019; Ie et al., 2019; Delarue et al., 2020; McInerney et al., 2020; Vlassis et al., 2021; Chaudhari et al.,
2024), with less emphasis on theoretical RL—to the best
of our knowledge, it appears that no prior work has formally and theoretically defined the concept of combinatorial
RL.1 This framework is especially relevant for real-world
applications such as recommender systems and online advertising, where multiple items (base actions) must be selected
simultaneously, such as a set of products to recommend or
advertisements to display. The challenge in combinatorial
RL lies in the exponentially large action space and the need
to efficiently optimize the agent’s action selection while
balancing exploration and exploitation (a challenge even
for single action selection), while considering the long-term
effects of these actions.

In this paper, we consider combinatorial reinforcement learning with preference feedback, where a
learning agent sequentially offers an action—an
assortment of multiple items—to a user, whose
preference feedback follows a multinomial logistic (MNL) model. This framework allows us
to model real-world scenarios, particularly those
involving long-term user engagement, such as
in recommender systems and online advertising.
However, this framework faces two main challenges: (1) the unknown value of each item, unlike traditional MNL bandits that only address
single-step preference feedback, and (2) the difficulty of ensuring optimism while maintaining
tractable assortment selection in the combinatorial
action space with unknown values. In this paper,
we assume a contextual MNL preference model,
where the mean utilities are linear, and the value
of each item is approximated by a general function. We propose an algorithm, MNL-VQL, that
addresses these challenges, making it both computationally and statistically efficient. As a special case, for linear MDPs (with the MNL preference feedback), we establish the first regret lower
bound in this framework and show that MNL-VQL
achieves nearly minimax-optimal regret. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
provide statistical guarantees in combinatorial RL
with preference feedback.

One of the most widely encountered settings in combinatorial RL is preference feedback over combinatorial actions,
commonly seen in streaming services, online retail, and similar platforms. Despite the broad applicability of this setting,
theoretical studies have predominantly focused on the multinomial logistic (MNL) bandit model (Rusmevichientong
et al., 2010; Sauré & Zeevi, 2013; Agrawal et al., 2017;
2019; Oh & Iyengar, 2019; 2021; Perivier & Goyal, 2022;
Agrawal et al., 2023; Zhang & Sugiyama, 2024; Lee & Oh,
2024). The MNL bandit framework focuses on assortment
(a set of items) selection by selecting subsets of items and
receiving feedback on chosen items, modeled by the MNL
model (McFadden, 1977). However, these studies take a
myopic approach, optimizing for immediate, known rewards
without considering the long-term impact on user behavior.

1. Introduction

While MNL bandits have been widely studied, the myopic
approach is limiting in many real-world scenarios. For example in recommender systems, incorporating the long-term
impact of recommendations opens the door to balancing
short-term engagement with long-term user satisfaction. For
instance, recommending junk product or content might lead
to high immediate reward but it can decrease user satis-

We first formally state the concept of Combinatorial Reinforcement Learning (RL), which we refer to as a class
of RL problems where the action space is combinatorial,
meaning that the agent selects a combination or subset of
base actions from a set of possible base actions. Although
1
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to:
Min-hwan Oh <minoh@snu.ac.kr>.

1

Surprisingly, this is in contrast to the rich theoretical literature
in combinatorial bandits (Chen et al., 2013; Kveton et al., 2015b;a;
Combes et al., 2015), which extend the multi-armed bandits.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

