The Relationship Between No-Regret Learning and Online Conformal Prediction

Ramya Ramalingam 1 Shayan Kiyani 1 Aaron Roth 1

Abstract

ate over for even moderately large label spaces. But a
key insight of the conformal prediction literature (see e.g.
(Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021)) is that given an arbitrary
non-conformity score f : X × Y → R≥0 , there is a 1dimensional family of nested prediction sets defined as
Cτ (x) = {y ∈ Y : f (x, y) ≤ τ } that we can optimize over,
and — simply by adjusting τ , we can obtain marginal coverage at any desired rate q ∈ (0, 1). If there is a data distribution D, marginal coverage at a rate of q corresponds to the
guarantee that Pr(x,y)∼D [y ∈ Cτ (x)] = q. Stronger guarantees of groupwise conditional coverage and (thresholdcalibrated) “multivalid” coverage have also been recently
developed (Jung et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2022; Bastani
et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2023; Noarov et al., 2023; Gibbs
et al., 2025), which ask for coverage to hold conditionally
on various events. These methods involve learning a threshold model τ : X → R, and producing prediction sets of the
form Cτ (x) = {y : f (x, y) ≤ τ (x)}. Group conditional
coverage starts with a collection of groups g1 , . . . , gk represented as indicator functions gi : X → {0, 1} (which can
be arbitrary and intersecting) and asks that E(x,y)∼D [y ∈
Cτ (x)|gi (x) = 1] = q for each group gi . Multivalid
coverage asks that the prediction sets simultaneously satisfy group conditional coverage while also being threshold calibrated — i.e. it further conditions on the threshold value τ (x) = v (in a manner similar to calibration),
and asks that for all groups gi and all threshold values v:
E(x,y)∼D [y ∈ Cτ (x)|gi (x) = 1, τ (x) = v] = q. The algorithm proposed by Jung et al. (2023) for obtaining groupwise
coverage over a set of groups learns τ (x) by minimizing
pinball loss over the class of linear combinations of group
indicator functions.

Existing algorithms for online conformal
prediction—guaranteeing marginal coverage
in adversarial settings—are variants of online
gradient descent (OGD), but their analyses of
worst-case coverage do not follow from the regret
guarantee of OGD. What is the relationship
between no-regret learning and online conformal
prediction? We observe that although standard
regret guarantees imply marginal coverage in
i.i.d. settings, this connection fails as soon as
we either move to adversarial environments
or ask for group conditional coverage. On
the other hand, we show a tight connection
between threshold calibrated coverage and
swap-regret in adversarial settings, which extends
to group-conditional (multi-valid) coverage.
We also show that algorithms in the follow the
regularized leader family of no regret learning
algorithms (which includes online gradient
descent) can be used to give group-conditional
coverage guarantees in adversarial settings for
arbitrary grouping functions. Via this connection
we analyze and conduct experiments using a
multi-group generalization of the ACI algorithm
of Gibbs & Candes (2021).

1. Introduction
In prediction problems over a label space Y, a popular
method for quantifying uncertainty is to produce prediction sets C(x) ⊆ Y that contain subsets of the label space.
Given features x, the intended semantics of C(x) is that
the true label y will fall into the prediction set (i.e. will be
covered by the prediction set) with some specified probability, say 90%. A-priori producing prediction sets is
a very high dimensional problem: there are 2|Y| possible prediction sets, which becomes intractable to enumer-

It is also possible to obtain coverage guarantees in online
adversarial settings in which there is no distribution D, but
instead an arbitrary sequence of examples (xt , yt ) that arrive sequentially. Here we ask for empirical coverage — the
threshold (or function) τt can now be updated over time,
and marginal coveragePover T rounds corresponds to the
T
requirement that 1/T t=1 1[yt ∈ Cτt (xt )] = q. Groupwise and multivalid coverage can be similarly defined in the
sequential setting. Gibbs & Candes (2021) and Gupta et al.
(2022) independently studied coverage in online adversarial
settings and proposed quite different algorithms. Gibbs &
Candes (2021) gave a very lightweight algorithm which

1

Department of Computer Science, University of
Pennsylvania.
Correspondence to: Ramya Ramalingam
<ramya23@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

