AutoElicit: Using Large Language Models for
Expert Prior Elicitation in Predictive Modelling

Alexander Capstick 1 2 Rahul G. Krishnan 3 4 Payam Barnaghi 1 2 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

Labelling data in medicine can be a costly and timeconsuming undertaking (Ghassemi et al., 2020; Cooper
et al., 2023). We are particularly interested in the development of automated tools to assist with healthcare monitoring
for people living with dementia. In our study, participant
data is recorded through passive monitoring devices. Although input features are continuously collected at scale,
the process of labelling adverse health conditions, such
as urinary tract infection (UTI), can be challenging. Expert knowledge of a task, as privileged information (Vapnik
et al., 2015), can provide prior distributions of model parameters, which often reduces the number of samples needed to
learn performant models while also enabling more accurate
estimates of predictive uncertainty. However, this expert
knowledge about model parameters can be difficult to obtain
due to the challenges of performing expert prior elicitation,
particularly in low-resource settings (Mikkola et al., 2024).

Large language models (LLMs) acquire a breadth
of information across various domains. However,
their computational complexity, cost, and lack
of transparency often hinder their direct application for predictive tasks where privacy and interpretability are paramount. In fields such as
healthcare, biology, and finance, specialised and
interpretable linear models still hold considerable value. In such domains, labelled data may
be scarce or expensive to obtain. Well-specified
prior distributions over model parameters can reduce the sample complexity of learning through
Bayesian inference; however, eliciting expert priors can be time-consuming. We therefore introduce AutoElicit to extract knowledge from LLMs
and construct priors for predictive models. We
show these priors are informative and can be refined using natural language. We perform a careful study contrasting AutoElicit with in-context
learning and demonstrate how to perform model
selection between the two methods. We find that
AutoElicit yields priors that can substantially reduce error over uninformative priors, using fewer
labels, and consistently outperform in-context
learning. We show that AutoElicit saves over
6 months of labelling effort when building a new
predictive model for urinary tract infections from
sensor recordings of people living with dementia.

Linear models are widely used in real-world applications,
especially in healthcare and as part of our wider study on
dementia care, due to their interpretability, robustness, and
clinical familiarity (Capstick et al., 2024; Tennant et al.,
2024; Ramı́rez Medina et al., 2025). Many studies do not
use prior distributions on their models, possibly due to the
challenges associated with elicitation, but would likely benefit greatly from them.
Due to their diverse training data and rate of development
(Naveed et al., 2023), large language models (LLMs) offer a
new opportunity to fully or partially automate the prior elicitation process, especially given recent advances in reasoning
methods (Huang & Chang, 2023). By prompting an LLM
to approximate a specific form of expertise in a given field,
it is possible to extract insights about a predictive model’s
prior based on the LLM’s training data. This motivates the
construction of a probabilistic framework to extract prior
task knowledge from language models in the form of distributions over the parameters of a linear predictive model.
AutoElicit combines developments in LLMs with trusted
and robust linear predictive models, that are already widely
understood and utilised in real-world applications.

1

Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London
UK Dementia Research Institute, Care Research and Technology Centre 3 Vector Institute 4 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto 5 Data Research, Innovation and Virtual Environments (DRIVE) Unit, The Great Ormond Street
Hospital. Correspondence to: Alexander Capstick <alexander.capstick19@imperial.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In-context learning has been studied as a way to use LLMs
1

