DragLoRA: Online Optimization of LoRA Adapters for Drag-based Image
Editing in Diffusion Model

Siwei Xia 1 Li Sun 1 2 Tiantian Sun 1 Qingli Li 1
30 steps

57 steps

80 steps

User Request

20 steps

60 steps

80 steps

DragLoRA

MinD Curve

DragDiffusion

User Request

User Request

(17 + 13 ) steps (31 + 26 ) steps (49 + 39 ) steps

User Request

(11 + 9 ) steps (27 + 53 ) steps (39 +110 ) steps

Figure 1. Visual comparison between DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024b) and DragLoRA at each step. For a given image and user request,
we present dragged images at four intermediate steps. In DragLoRA, the steps are divided into two types: DOO+ILFA (Red) or ILFA-only
(Blue), where DOO stands for Dual-Objective Optimization and ILFA stands for Input Latent Feature Adaptation. DragDiffusion requires
80 optimization steps but produces results with lower fidelity. In contrast, DragLoRA achieves more precise deformations with fewer
optimization steps and more total steps, which consumes less time thanks to the high-efficiency of ILFA. The middle minD curves
demonstrate that DragLoRA achieves better point tracking, preserving source details more accurately than DragDiffusion.

Abstract

tion ability of the feature in motion supervision,
as well as inefficiencies caused by the large search
space required for point tracking. To address these
limitations, we present DragLoRA, a novel framework that integrates LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) adapters into the drag-based editing pipeline.
To enhance the training of LoRA adapters, we
introduce an additional denoising score distillation loss which regularizes the online model by
aligning its output with that of the original model.
Additionally, we improve the consistency of motion supervision by adapting the input features
using the updated LoRA, giving a more stable and
accurate input feature for subsequent operations.
Building on this, we design an adaptive optimization scheme that dynamically toggles between two
modes, prioritizing efficiency without compromising precision. Extensive experiments demonstrate

Drag-based editing within pretrained diffusion
model provides a precise and flexible way to manipulate foreground objects. Traditional methods optimize the input feature obtained from
DDIM inversion directly, adjusting them iteratively to guide handle points towards target locations. However, these approaches often suffer
from limited accuracy due to the low representa1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing. 2 Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and
Application in Statistics and Data Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Li Sun
<sunli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

