LARM: Large Auto-Regressive Model for Long-Horizon Embodied Intelligence

Zhuoling Li 1 Xiaogang Xu 2 Zhenhua Xu 3 Ser-Nam Lim 4 Hengshuang Zhao 1
https://lizhuoling.github.io/LARM_webpage/

Abstract

specific tasks such as object grasping and indoor navigation (Savva et al., 2019). While notable advancements are
achieved, these agents tend to be specialist models confined
to isolated tasks (Huang et al., 2023). To overcome this limitation, recent studies, including this work, employ Minecraft
(Baker et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022; Guss et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023) as a benchmark to explore embodied agents with open-ended objectives and long-horizon
reasoning chains.

Recent embodied agents are primarily built based
on reinforcement learning (RL) or large language
models (LLMs). Among them, RL agents are
efficient for deployment but only perform very
few tasks. By contrast, giant LLM agents (often more than 1000B parameters) present strong
generalization while demanding enormous computing resources. In this work, we combine their
advantages while avoiding the drawbacks by conducting the proposed referee RL on our developed
large auto-regressive model (LARM). Specifically, LARM is built upon a lightweight LLM
(fewer than 5B parameters) and directly outputs
the next action to execute rather than text. We
mathematically reveal that classic RL feedbacks
vanish in long-horizon embodied exploration and
introduce a giant LLM based referee to handle
this reward vanishment during training LARM.
In this way, LARM learns to complete diverse
open-world tasks without human intervention. Especially, LARM successfully harvests enchanted
diamond equipment in Minecraft, which demands
significantly longer decision-making chains than
the highest achievements of prior best methods.

The early methods for developing such agents primarily rely
on reinforcement learning (RL) (Fan et al., 2022). Due to the
limited exploration efficiency of RL, these methods require
careful reward engineering for different tasks, and the derived RL policies can mostly only complete a single simple
task (Yuan et al., 2023). The advantage of RL policies is that
they are usually lightweight for real-time deployment. Differently, recent embodied works begin to investigate large
language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020). Owing to
the extensive general knowledge and formidable reasoning
capabilities of LLMs, these methods demonstrate promising results with significantly reduced domain-specific engineering efforts (Wang et al., 2023a). Nevertheless, LLMs
continue to exhibit several limitations. First of all, the outputs of LLMs are usually sentences or code (Zhao et al.,
2024) generated through iterative token prediction, necessitating N inference operations for N tokens. Therefore, the
response speeds of LLMs are restricted. Secondly, recent
research suggests that a huge model size is important for
an LLM to generalize well (Achiam et al., 2023), while the
computing resource for embodied agents is usually very limited. Our analysis reveals that while giant LLMs with more
than 1000B parameters like GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023)
can answer questions about exploration and crafting issues
in Minecraft well, the performance of lightweight LLMs
such as LLaVA-7B (Liu et al., 2024a) is limited.

1. Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress has been achieved
in various artificial intelligence (AI) topics (LeCun et al.,
2015) like computer vision (He et al., 2016) and natural
language processing (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019), but most
of them lack the capacity to physically interact with the real
world. To address this disconnect, the concept of embodied
AI is introduced (Chrisley, 2003). Early embodied agents
are predominantly developed on simulation platforms for

As illustrated in Fig. 1, we aim to combine the advantages
of both RL methods and LLM methods while avoiding
their drawbacks. To this end, we first propose Large AutoRegressive Model (LARM), the main body of which shares
the same structure as lightweight LLMs like TinyLLaVA
(Zhou et al., 2024). This choice enables us to first pre-train
it utilizing numerous webpage data to provide it with basic general knowledge. Taking environmental observation

1

The University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of
Hong Kong 3 Tsinghua University 4 University of Central Florida.
Correspondence to: Hengshuang Zhao <hszhao@cs.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

