TtBA: Two-third Bridge Approach for Decision-Based Adversarial Attack

Feiyang Wang 1 2 Xingquan Zuo 1 2 Hai Huang 1 2 Gang Chen 3

Abstract

across a wide range of real-world applications, they remain
significantly vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Biggio et al.,
2013; Brendel et al., 2018; Park et al., 2024). Research
on these attacks is pivotal in advancing the development of
attack-resistant DNNs in the future (Bai et al., 2023).

A key challenge in black-box adversarial attacks
is the high query complexity in hard-label settings, where only the top-1 predicted label from
the target deep model is accessible. In this paper,
we propose a novel normal-vector-based method
called Two-third Bridge Attack (TtBA). A innovative bridge direction is introduced which is a
weighted combination of the current unit perturbation direction and its unit normal vector, controlled by a weight parameter k. We further use
binary search to identify k = kbridge , which has
identical decision boundary as the current direction. Notably, we observe that k = 2/3kbridge
yields a near-optimal perturbation direction, ensuring the stealthiness of the attack. In addition, we investigate the critical importance of local optima during the perturbation direction optimization process and propose a simple and effective approach to detect and escape such local optima. Experimental results on MNIST,
FASHION-MNIST, CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and
ImageNet datasets demonstrate the strong performance and scalability of our approach. Compared
to state-of-the-art non-targeted and targeted attack methods, TtBA consistently delivers superior
performance across most experimented datasets
and deep learning models. Code is available at
https://github.com/BUPTAIOC/TtBA.

Adversarial attack approaches are generally classified into
three categories: white-box attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2015;
Madry et al., 2018), gray-box attacks (soft-label attacks,
score-based attacks) (Chen et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019a),
and black-box attacks (Brendel et al., 2018; Chen & Gu,
2020). White-box and gray-box attacks rely on complete or
partial knowledge of the target model, such as its architecture, trainable parameters, or output probabilities, which is
often impractical in real-world settings (Long et al., 2022).
As a more practical alternative, black-box attacks are typically divided into transfer-based attacks and decision-based
attacks. Transfer-based attacks (Feng et al., 2022; Ghosh
et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Sun et al.,
2024; Park et al., 2024) train a surrogate model using the target model’s training data. Adversarial examples are crafted
using white-box attack methods on this surrogate model.
However, the success of this approach is not guaranteed, due
to unreliable transferability of adversarial examples (Reza
et al., 2023).
Significance of decision-based attacks. Decision-based
attacks (Brendel et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2020; Chen & Gu, 2020; Reza et al., 2023)
do not rely on specific details of the target DNN, such as
training data, network structure, or output probabilities. Instead, adversarial examples are crafted using only feedback
from the DNN’s top-1 predicted label, which is the class
with the highest confidence score assigned by the model.
This makes decision-based attacks the most popular strategy
in practice (Dong et al., 2019; Brunner et al., 2019) and
the key focus of this paper. Decision-based attacks aim to
deceive the target DNN (e.g., an image classifier) with minimal perturbation strength while adhering to a predefined
query budget (Brendel et al., 2018). To improve efficiency,
these attacks focus on optimizing adversarial examples by
exploring perturbation directions and their corresponding
decision boundaries (see Appendix A for more details).

1. Introduction
Background and motivation. Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 2 Key Laboratory of
Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Services, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China 3 School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand.
Correspondence to: Xingquan Zuo <zuoxq@bupt.edu.cn>.

Normal vector-based attacks. Many decision-based adversarial attacks, such as HSJA (Chen et al., 2020), Tangent

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

