General framework for online-to-nonconvex conversion:
Schedule-free SGD is also effective for nonconvex optimization

Kwangjun Ahn * 1 Gagik Magakyan * 2 Ashok Cutkosky 3

Abstract

without any learning rate scheduling. The schedule-free
method is an add-on scheme that can be applied to any chosen base optimizer, converting it into a schedule-free variant.
While this method has shown strong empirical performance
in training large neural network models, its theoretical analysis has been limited to the convex setting (Defazio et al.,
2024). Our aim is to extend the theoretical understanding of
schedule-free methods to nonconvex optimization.

This work investigates the effectiveness of
schedule-free methods, developed by A. Defazio
et al. (NeurIPS 2024), in nonconvex optimization
settings, inspired by their remarkable empirical
success in training neural networks. Specifically,
we show that schedule-free SGD achieves optimal
iteration complexity for nonsmooth, nonconvex
optimization problems. Our proof begins with the
development of a general framework for onlineto-nonconvex conversion, which converts a given
online learning algorithm into a nonconvex optimization algorithm. Our general framework not
only recovers existing conversions but also leads
to two novel conversion schemes. Notably, one
of these new conversions corresponds directly to
schedule-free SGD, allowing us to establish its
optimality. Additionally, our analysis provides
valuable insights into the parameter choice for
schedule-free SGD, addressing a theoretical gap
that the convex theory cannot explain.

As an initial step, this work focuses on the version where the
base optimizer is chosen as SGD, referred to as schedulefree SGD. For a given learning rate γ > 0 and interpolation
weights ct , κt ∈ [0, 1], the updates of schedule-free SGD
maintain xt , yt , and zt , as follows:










xt = (1 − ct )xt−1 + ct zt ,
yt = (1 − κt )zt + κt xt ,
gt = a stochastic gradient at yt ,
zt+1 = zt − γgt .

(SF-SGD)

Here, zt corresponds to the base SGD trajectory, xt is a
(weighted) average of zt , and yt is an interpolation between
xt and zt where the stochastic gradient is computed.

1. Introduction
1.1. Our main result and approach

Training large-scale neural network models, such as large
language models, requires a well-designed optimization
strategy to ensure stable and fast convergence. For instance,
training typically requires a carefully designed optimizer,
such as the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014), along
with meticulously tuned learning rate scheduling.

To understand the effectiveness of schedule-free SGD for
training neural networks, we analyze the method in the nonsmooth and nonconvex setting (Zhang et al., 2020; Davis
et al., 2022b; Tian et al., 2022). Specifically, we adopt
the (λ, ϵ)-stationarity criterion from (Zhang and Cutkosky,
2024; Ahn and Cutkosky, 2024) (Definition 1), which seeks
approximate Goldstein stationary points (Goldstein, 1977).
This criterion emerges as a practical framework for analyzing optimization algorithms, particularly considering recent
findings that show practical optimizers like SGD with momentum and Adam are theoretically optimal (Zhang and
Cutkosky, 2024; Ahn and Cutkosky, 2024).

Recently, Defazio et al. (2024) introduced the schedule-free
method, which achieves impressive training performance
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, MA,
USA 2 Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston,
MA, USA. Correspondence to: Kwangjun Ahn <kwangjunahn@microsoft.com>, Gagik Magakyan <gagmag@mit.edu>,
Ashok Cutkosky <ashok@cutkosky.com>.

Our main results demonstrate that schedule-free SGD is
optimal not only for convex optimization, as established
by Defazio et al. (2024), but also for the most challenging
case of nonsmooth and nonconvex optimization. Our main
results can be summarized informally as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

