The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From Tool Use to Agentic
Evaluation of Large Language Models

Shishir G. Patil 1 Huanzhi Mao 1 Fanjia Yan 1 Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji 1 Vishnu Suresh 1
Ion Stoica 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1

Abstract

soning, and creative multimodal tasks. However, agents
powering use-cases such as coding, and knowledge discovery (Huang et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2022) often require LLMs
to interface with external (e.g., web-search) to either retrieve
up-to-date information or to enact actions which have realworld consequences. To aid in this, previous work such as
Gorilla (Patil et al., 2024) and Toolformer (Schick et al.,
2023) introduced techniques to train LLMs to use tools, and
since then there has been growing interest in enabling LLMs
to leverage external tools, a capability commonly referred
to as function calling or tool use.

Function calling, also called tool use, refers to
an LLM’s ability to invoke external functions,
APIs, or user-defined tools—an essential capability for agentic LLM applications. Despite
its prominence, there does not exist a standard
benchmark to evaluate function calling due to
two reasons – the challenging nature of evaluating when a function call is valid, and the challenge of acquiring diverse, real-world functions.
We present the Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL), a comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate function calling in a wide range
of real-world settings. The BFCL benchmark
evaluates serial and parallel function calls, across
various programming languages, using a novel
Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) evaluation method
that can easily scale to thousands of functions.
We construct the benchmark using a combination
of expert-curated and user-contributed functions
and associated prompts. Finally, BFCL benchmark evaluates the ability of models to abstain
and reason in a stateful multistep agentic setting. Evaluating a wide range of models, we
observe that while state-of-the-art LLMs excel
at single-turn calls, memory, dynamic decisionmaking, and long-horizon reasoning remain open
challenges. Since its preview, BFCL has become
the defacto standard for evaluating function-calls,
and can be accessed at https://gorilla.
cs.berkeley.edu/leaderboard.html

Despite substantial progress in leveraging function calling
in LLMs, evaluating function calling remains challenging.
Existing solutions, such as Gorilla—APIBench (Patil et al.,
2024), propose methods for assessing function calls but
exhibit notable limitations: APIBench’s evaluation metrics focus primarily on functional correctness, overlooking
semantic errors or variations in API usage. Other benchmarks—ToolBench (Guo et al., 2024), ToolSandbox (Lu
et al., 2024), and the Nexus Function Calling Leaderboard
(Srinivasan et al., 2023)—fail to capture real-world use cases
or patterns such as parallel invocations. We discuss some of
these limitations in more detail in the related work section.
To address these challenges, we introduce the Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL), a largescale, multi-task, multi-turn benchmark that distinguishes
function-calling capabilities among LLMs by evaluating
their ability to invoke the correct function call. BFCL is
composed of four parts: (1) ‘single-turn’ that tests singleturn function-calling scenarios, including parallel function
invocations and multiple function candidates; (2) ‘crowdsourced’ which consists of 2, 251 curated from more than
67, 000 community contributed real-life function-calling
datapoints; (3) ‘multi-turn’ featuring eight curated API
suites and 1000 queries, assessing sustained context management and dynamic decision-making; and finally (4) ‘agentic’
spanning applications (Vu et al., 2023), database queries
(Gao et al., 2024), and chatbot context management (Packer
et al., 2024). This comprehensive structure spans singlefunction tasks to complex, multi-step real-world use cases,
enabling a thorough evaluation of an LLM’s adaptability,

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant
strides in diverse domains, including conversational AI, rea1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Shishir
G. Patil <shishirpatil@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

