From Kernels to Features: A Multi-Scale Adaptive Theory of Feature Learning

Noa Rubin * 1 Kirsten Fischer * 2 3 Javed Lindner * 2 4 5 Inbar Seroussi 6 Zohar Ringel 1 Michael Krämer 5
Moritz Helias 2 4

Abstract

1. Introduction

Feature learning in neural networks is crucial for
their expressive power and inductive biases, motivating various theoretical approaches. Some approaches describe network behavior after training through a change in kernel scale from initialization, resulting in a generalization power comparable to a Gaussian process. Conversely, in
other approaches training results in the adaptation of the kernel to the data, involving directional
changes to the kernel. The relationship and respective strengths of these two views have so far
remained unresolved. This work presents a theoretical framework of multi-scale adaptive feature
learning bridging these two views. Using methods
from statistical mechanics, we derive analytical
expressions for network output statistics which
are valid across scaling regimes and in the continuum between them. A systematic expansion of
the network’s probability distribution reveals that
mean-field scaling requires only a saddle-point
approximation, while standard scaling necessitates additional correction terms. Remarkably,
we find across regimes that kernel adaptation can
be reduced to an effective kernel rescaling when
predicting the mean network output in the special case of a linear network. However, for linear
and non-linear networks, the multi-scale adaptive
approach captures directional feature learning effects, providing richer insights than what could
be recovered from a rescaling of the kernel alone.

By mistake, this document lacks David Dahmen, Institute
for Advanced Simulation (IAS-6), Computational and Systems Neuroscience, Jülich Research Centre, Jülich, Germany, as an additional author; he has been an author on this
project from its beginning. To properly reference this work,
please see our arXiv preprint (Rubin et al., 2025).
A central phenomenon that is essential for explaining the
power of neural networks (NNs) is feature learning (FL),
where networks learn meaningful high-dimensional representations of the data (Bengio et al., 2013). FL plays an
increasingly important role in our ability to understand and
rationalize the behavior of large language models (LLMs).
Sparse autoencoders can extract so called monosemantic
features from LLMs that are given by a superposition of
layer activations (Bricken et al., 2023); these features allow
interpreting and even altering model behavior (Templeton
et al., 2024). Beyond interpretability, FL is essential for
efficient generalization with finite data, as it enhances informative directions in the learned representations, reducing
the sample complexity of learning functions of these directions (Abbe et al., 2021; Paccolat et al., 2021; Dandi et al.,
2024). Despite its significance, many open questions remain regarding the mechanisms underlying the emergence
of these feature directions.
A well-characterized case in NN theory is the limit of
infinite-width and finite sample size, where networks behave
as Gaussian processes (GPs) (MacKay, 2003), characterized
by the neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) kernel
(Neal, 1996; Williams, 1998; Matthews et al., 2018; Lee
et al., 2018). However, the NNGP does not capture FL,
which emerges at finite network width, in the proportional
limit, where both network width and sample size tend to infinity proportionally (Li & Sompolinsky, 2021), or in certain
scaling regimes (Yang et al., 2024). Hence the NNGP fails
to capture the networks’ nuanced internal representations
that arise from feature learning (van Meegen & Sompolinsky, 2024). Multiple theoretical approaches have emerged
to describe this phenomenon, yet there is no consensus on
how to characterize FL. A common approach is to study the
change of the network kernel, though the existing frameworks differ in their predictions for this change.

*
Equal contribution 1 The Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 2 Institute for
Advanced Simulation (IAS-6), Computational and Systems Neuroscience, Jülich Research Centre, Jülich, Germany 3 RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany 4 Department of Physics, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 5 Institute for Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany 6 Department of Applied Mathematics, School
of Mathematical Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Correspondence to: Noa Rubin <noa.rubin@mail.huji.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

