OOD-Chameleon:
Is Algorithm Selection for OOD Generalization Learnable?

Liangze Jiang 1 2 Damien Teney 2

Abstract

(a)

Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is challenging because distribution shifts come in many
forms. Numerous algorithms exist to address specific settings, but choosing the right training algorithm for the right dataset without trial and error
is difficult. Indeed, real-world applications often
involve multiple types and combinations of shifts
that are hard to analyze theoretically.

Label shift

Covariate
shift

(b)

Task 1

Task 2

ERM

GroupDRO

ReSample

ERM

GroupDRO

Mixup

…

…

Task 3

…

Extracting data
characteristics

Input
Descriptors of
training set

Method. This work explores the possibility of
learning the selection of a training algorithm for
OOD generalization. We propose a proof of concept (OOD-Chameleon) that formulates the selection as a multi-label classification over candidate
algorithms, trained on a dataset of datasets representing a variety of shifts. We evaluate the ability
of OOD-Chameleon to rank algorithms on unseen
shifts and datasets based only on dataset characteristics, i.e. without training models first, unlike
traditional model selection.

Distribution
shifts

Train
Test

…

(c)

Task 3

Target

Running zoo of
algorithms
Performance on
test set

Dataset of datasets

ReSample

Train robust
model on the task

Figure 1. Choosing the right training algorithm is an oftenoverlooked key factor in OOD generalization. (a) Different
training algorithms perform differently on different distribution
shifts. (b) We propose to automate the selection of a learning
algorithm. We train a selector (OOD-Chameleon) on a “dataset
of datasets” that exemplifies a variety of shifts. (c) For a novel
task/dataset, the learned selector predicts the best algorithm to
train a robust model.

Findings. Extensive experiments show that the
learned selector identifies high-performing algorithms across synthetic, vision, and language
tasks. Further inspection shows that it learns
non-trivial decision rules, which provide new
insights into the applicability of existing algorithms. Overall, this new approach opens the
possibility of better exploiting and understanding
the plethora of existing algorithms for OOD generalization. Code: https://github.com/
LiangzeJiang/OOD-Chameleon

and test data differ. “OOD” is a catch-all term that encompasses many types of distribution shifts (Wiles et al., 2021;
Ye et al., 2022; Nagarajan et al., 2020). In medical imaging
for example (Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020), a model may
process scans from various demographics (covariate shift),
pathologies (label shift), and co-occurrences of patient attributes (spurious correlations). In many applications, these
shifts are combined, making a theoretical analysis challenging (Wiles et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023; Jeon et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization refers to a model’s
ability to remain accurate when the distributions of training
1

Spurious
correlation

The trade-offs of learning algorithms. There exists a
multitude of algorithms1 designed to improve OOD generalization, from standard ERM (Vapnik, 2000) to simple
interventions such as Resampling (Japkowicz & Stephen,

EPFL, Switzerland 2 Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Liangze Jiang <liangze.jiang@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

In this work, “algorithm” refers to a method, or particular element
thereof that takes the training data and produces a trained model.

