When Dynamic Data Selection Meets Data Augmentation: Achieving Enhanced
Training Acceleration

Suorong Yang∗ 1 2 Peng Ye 2 3 Furao Shen 1 Dongzhan Zhou 2

Abstract

parameter-extensive, it is necessary to utilize even larger
datasets, introducing challenges like reduced training efficiency. Moreover, large-scale datasets often include redundant or noisy samples (Xia et al., 2023b; Northcutt et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2018), which can compromise training
effectiveness. To address these challenges, various data selection strategies have been proposed to reduce dataset size
and enhance data efficiency while maintaining model performance. These methods can be broadly categorized into
static data selection (Tan et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Xia
et al., 2023b) and dynamic data selection (or pruning) (Qin
et al., 2024; Raju et al., 2021; He et al., 2024). Static selection identifies a fixed subset of data before training begins,
whereas dynamic pruning continuously selects the most
influential samples during training. While these methods
can effectively reduce training costs without degrading performance, the reduced training data volume often leads to
reduced data diversity. Consequently, the generalization of
deep models is limited, and lossless performance is typically
achieved with relatively high selection ratios.

Dynamic data selection aims to accelerate training with lossless performance. However, reducing training data inherently limits data diversity,
potentially hindering generalization. While data
augmentation is widely used to enhance diversity,
it is typically not optimized in conjunction with
selection. As a result, directly combining these
techniques fails to fully exploit their synergies. To
tackle the challenge, we propose a novel online
data training framework that, for the first time,
unifies dynamic data selection and augmentation,
achieving both training efficiency and enhanced
performance. Our method estimates each sample’s joint distribution of local density and multimodal semantic consistency, allowing for the
targeted selection of augmentation-suitable samples while suppressing the inclusion of noisy or
ambiguous data. This enables a more significant
reduction in dataset size without sacrificing model
generalization. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method outperforms existing state-of-theart approaches on various benchmark datasets and
architectures, e.g., reducing 50% training costs
on ImageNet-1k with lossless performance. Furthermore, our approach enhances noise resistance
and improves model robustness, reinforcing its
practical utility in real-world scenarios.

In fact, to address the issue of data diversity, data augmentation is commonly used in model training, which can also
improve generalization (Xu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022b).
However, effectively combining data selection and augmentation remains a challenge. Existing data selection methods
typically prioritize representative and challenging samples,
which are not specifically designed with augmentation in
mind. Although augmentation can increase the diversity of
selected data and further improve model robustness, applying it to complex samples may introduce ambiguity or noise,
potentially increasing training difficulty (Gong et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2024b). Therefore, integrating data selection
and augmentation in a unified framework presents a promising yet underexplored direction to balance efficiency and
generalization.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has thrived with the growing availability of
large-scale datasets. As models become more complex and
*
This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Shanghai Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Furao Shen <frshen@nju.edu.cn>, Dongzhan
Zhou <zhoudongzhan@pjlab.org.cn>.

In this study, we propose a novel framework that integrates
dynamic data selection with augmentation, enabling a unified approach to enhance training efficiency and model generalization. During model training, low-density samples often correspond to underlearned or insufficiently represented
data points, such as classification boundaries. Applying
augmentation transformations to these samples reinforces

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

