A Reductions Approach to Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning
with Optimized Certainty Equivalents

Kaiwen Wang 1 2 Dawen Liang 2 Nathan Kallus 1 2 Wen Sun 1

Abstract

alternative risk-sensitive objectives (Yaari, 1987; Bowling
et al., 2023). This is especially true in safety-critical settings
(Artzner et al., 1999; Coronato et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2023b). In risk-sensitive RL (RSRL), the objective is some
risk measure of cumulative rewards under a policy rather
than the mean cumulative rewards (Howard and Matheson,
1972; Artzner et al., 1999).

We study risk-sensitive RL where the goal is learn
a history-dependent policy that optimizes some
risk measure of cumulative rewards. We consider a family of risks called the optimized certainty equivalents (OCE), which captures important risk measures such as conditional value-atrisk (CVaR), entropic risk and Markowitz’s meanvariance. In this setting, we propose two metaalgorithms: one grounded in optimism and another based on policy gradients, both of which can
leverage the broad suite of risk-neutral RL algorithms in an augmented Markov Decision Process
(MDP). Via a reductions approach, we leverage
theory for risk-neutral RL to establish novel OCE
bounds in complex, rich-observation MDPs. For
the optimism-based algorithm, we prove bounds
that generalize prior results in CVaR RL and that
provide the first risk-sensitive bounds for exogenous block MDPs. For the gradient-based algorithm, we establish both monotone improvement and global convergence guarantees under a
discrete reward assumption. Finally, we empirically show that our algorithms learn the optimal
history-dependent policy in a proof-of-concept
MDP, where all Markovian policies provably fail.

In this paper, we propose a framework for solving RSRL
with any static risk measure that can be expressed as an optimized certainty equivalent (OCE) (Ben-Tal and Teboulle,
2007). Specifically, for a utility function u : R → [−∞, ∞),
the static OCE of a policy π is defined as
PH
OCEu (π) := maxb∈R {b + Eπ [u( h=1 rh − b)]}, (1)
wherePthe expectation is w.r.t. the random cumulative reH
ward h=1 rh under trajectories from π. The OCE captures
several important risks for different choices of u. For example, with the hinge utility u(t) = min(t/τ, 0), OCEu
becomes CVaR at level τ ∈ (0, 1], which measures the mean
outcome among the worst τ -fraction of cases (Rockafellar
and Uryasev, 2000). Moreover, OCE with the quadratic utility recovers Markowitz’s mean-variance (Markowitz, 1952)
and the exponential utility recovers entropic risk (Föllmer
and Schied, 2011). We present a primer on OCE and more
examples in App. B. We remark that another risk-sensitive
objective is the iterated risk, which captures risk at each
time step and is orthogonal to our static risk objective (as
we explain in related works Sec. 1.1).

1. Introduction

A key technical challenge in OCE RL is that optimal policies are in general non-Markovian (i.e., history-dependent),
which renders this more complex than risk-neutral RL where
a Markovian optimal policy always exists. In prior works, a
promising solution is to augment the MDP with a new state
that tracks the cumulative rewards so far, which has been
studied for CVaR and spectral risks (Bäuerle and Ott, 2011;
Bäuerle and Glauner, 2021; Bastani et al., 2022). In this
paper, we show that the augmented MDP (AugMDP) can
be generalized with an OCE-based reward function to solve
OCE RL with Markovian augmented policies (Sec. 2.1). We
then propose two meta-algorithms that reduce OCE RL to
risk-neutral RL by using the AugMDP as a bridge.

In reinforcement learning (RL), the classical objective by
which we measure how good is a policy is the expected cumulative rewards along the trajectory (Sutton, 2004; Sutton
and Barto, 2018). However, the mean reward of a choice (the
choice of policy in RL being an example of such a choice)
is a risk-neutral objective that is often observed to be inconsistent with human preferences, causing Allais Paradoxes
(Allais, 1990; Kahneman and Tversky, 2013) and calling for
1
Cornell Tech 2 Netflix Research. Correspondence to: Kaiwen
Wang <kaiwenw.github.io>. Work done as Netflix intern.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

First, in Sec. 3, we propose a meta-algorithm based opti1

