Self-Consuming Generative Models with Adversarially Curated Data

Xiukun Wei 1 Xueru Zhang 1

Abstract

on the internet, it is inevitably used for training future generations of models, creating a “self-consuming training loop.”
A line of research has focused on examining the impact
of this self-consuming training loop on generative models’
outputs, both theoretically (Bertrand et al., 2024; Taori &
Hashimoto, 2023) and empirically (Gerstgrasser et al., 2024;
Alemohammad et al., 2024a; Shumailov et al., 2024). These
studies demonstrate that such a self-consuming training loop
may lead to model collapse (Gerstgrasser et al., 2024; Alemohammad et al., 2024a; Shumailov et al., 2024), training
instability (Bertrand et al., 2024), and possibly bias amplification (Taori & Hashimoto, 2023; Wyllie et al., 2024;
Xie & Zhang, 2024). Several solutions have also been proposed to mitigate these issues, such as integration of real
data (Bertrand et al., 2024), leveraging cumulative datasets
(Gerstgrasser et al., 2024), and employing Self-Improving
Diffusion Models with Synthetic Data (SIMS) (Alemohammad et al., 2024b).

Recent advances in generative models have made
it increasingly difficult to distinguish real data
from model-generated synthetic data. Using
synthetic data for successive training of future
model generations creates “self-consuming loops,”
which may lead to model collapse or training instability. Furthermore, synthetic data is often subject to human feedback and curated by users based
on their preferences. Ferbach et al. (2024) recently showed that when data is curated according
to user preferences, the self-consuming retraining
loop drives the model to converge toward a distribution that optimizes those preferences. However,
in practice, data curation is often noisy or adversarially manipulated. For example, competing
platforms may recruit malicious users to adversarially curate data and disrupt rival models. In this
paper, we study how generative models evolve
under self-consuming retraining loops with noisy
and adversarially curated data. We theoretically
analyze the impact of such noisy data curation
on generative models and identify conditions for
the robustness of the retraining process. Building
on this analysis, we design attack algorithms for
competitive adversarial scenarios, where a platform with a limited budget employs malicious
users to misalign a rival’s model from actual user
preferences. Experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithms.

In contrast to these works, a recent study (Ferbach et al.,
2024) explores a more practical scenario in which synthetic
data is curated by human users. To improve safety, user trust,
and the relevance and quality of generated outputs, modern generative models are increasingly trained with human
participation and feedback. For example, platforms such as
JourneyDB (Pan et al., 2023) and Pika Labs (Labs, 2025)
provide multiple variations of outputs for users to choose
from, with only selected outputs being upscaled and used
to train next-generation models. As shown in Ferbach et al.
(2024), when synthetic data is curated based on a reward
model representing user preferences, the generative models
trained iteratively on this curated data tend to converge to
an output distribution that maximizes the expected reward.
However, in practice, data curated from users are likely to
be noisy, biased, or even maliciously manipulated. Consider
a scenario where multiple platforms compete for the same
target user population with similar preference distributions
(e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2025) and Claude (Anthropic,
2025), Stable Diffusion (Diffusion, 2025) and MidJourney
(MidJourney, 2025)). To compete for market share, platforms may leverage their collected datasets, which contain
rich information about actual user preferences, to design
attack algorithms targeting their competitors. For example,
as shown in Fig. 1, a platform may employ malicious users
with limited budgets to deliberately select outputs on a ri-

1. Introduction
The latest generative models can produce highly realistic
texts (OpenAI, 2024), images (Diffusion, 2025), audio (AI,
2025), and videos (ML, 2025). As synthetic data proliferates
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to:
Xueru Zhang <zhang.12807@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

