A Forget-and-Grow Strategy for Deep Reinforcement Learning Scaling in
Continuous Control
Zilin Kang * 1 2 Chenyuan Hu * 3 Yu Luo 4 Zhecheng Yuan 3 1 Ruijie Zheng 5 Huazhe Xu 3 1 6

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning for continuous control has recently achieved impressive progress.
However, existing methods often suffer from primacy bias—a tendency to overfit early experiences stored in the replay buffer—which limits an
RL agent’s sample efficiency and generalizability. In contrast, humans are less susceptible to
such bias, partly due to infantile amnesia, where
the formation of new neurons disrupts early memory traces, leading to the forgetting of initial experiences (Akers et al., 2014). Inspired by this
dual processes of forgetting and growing in neuroscience, in this paper, we propose Forget and
Grow (FoG), a new deep RL algorithm with two
mechanisms introduced. First, Experience Replay Decay (ER Decay)—“forgetting early experience”—which balances memory by gradually
reducing the influence of early experiences. Second, Network Expansion—“growing neural capacity”—which enhances agents’ capability to exploit the patterns of existing data by dynamically
adding new parameters during training. Empirical
results on four major continuous control benchmarks with more than 40 tasks demonstrate the
superior performance of FoG against SoTA existing deep RL algorithms, including BRO, SimBa
and TD-MPC2.

*
Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 2 Department of
Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 3 Institute
for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 5 Computer Science, University of
Maryland 6 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Zilin Kang <kzl22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Chenyuan Hu <cy-hu22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Huazhe Xu
<huazhe xu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Figure 1. Overview. Top: we illustrate two key components of our
strategy: ER Decay and Network Expansion. Bottom: comparison
of normalized score. FoG outperforms popular model-based and
model-free methods including TD-MPC2, SimBa and BRO.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

