Efficient Skill Discovery via Regret-Aware Optimization

He Zhang 1 2 Ming Zhou 2 Shaopeng Zhai 2 Ying Sun 1 Hui Xiong 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated its
potential to surpass human decision-making abilities in
both simulated environments and real-world applications,
such as gaming (Silver et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019),
recommendation systems (Xu et al., 2019; Zheng et al.,
2023), urban computing (Sun et al., 2023), and robotic
control (Black et al., 2024). However, RL is still unable
to self-improve autonomously by accumulating new skills
without end, preventing the achievement of artificial general intelligence (Hughes et al., 2024; Haber et al., 2018;
Colas et al., 2022). The principle of Unsupervised Skills
Discovery (USD) aligns with this challenge, which focuses
on autonomously summarizing diverse and useful skills for
downstream tasks without explicit rewards.

Unsupervised skill discovery aims to learn diverse
and distinguishable behaviors in open-ended reinforcement learning. For existing methods, they
focus on improving diversity through pure exploration, mutual information optimization, and
learning temporal representation. Despite that
they perform well on exploration, they remain
limited in terms of efficiency, especially for the
high-dimensional situations. In this work, we
frame skill discovery as a min-max game of skill
generation and policy learning, proposing a regretaware method on top of temporal representation
learning that expands the discovered skill space
along the direction of upgradable policy strength.
The key insight behind the proposed method is
that the skill discovery is adversarial to the policy learning, i.e., skills with weak strength should
be further explored while less exploration for the
skills with converged strength. As an implementation, we score the degree of strength convergence
with regret, and guide the skill discovery with a
learnable skill generator. To avoid degeneration,
skill generation comes from an up-gradable population of skill generators. We conduct experiments
on environments with varying complexities and
dimension sizes. Empirical results show that our
method outperforms baselines in both efficiency
and diversity. Moreover, our method achieves a
15% zero shot improvement in high-dimensional
environments, compared to existing methods.

USD has emerged from the field of unsupervised RL (Hao
et al., 2023; Eysenbach et al., 2022), exploring environments without external rewards based on information theory.
Pioneering work (Gregor et al., 2016; Eysenbach et al.,
2019; Laskin et al., 2022) in this area introduced the idea of
using diverse and distinguishable skills by calculating mutual information. Building on this, LSD (Park et al., 2022)
achieved a novel discovery of temporal dynamic skills by
learning temporal representations of states. Subsequently,
METRA (Park et al., 2024c) combined temporal representation learning with mutual information and surprisingly
demonstrated that their method is scalable, as it closely resembles PCA clustering. However, these approaches assume
that the skills are uniformly distributed, which simplifies
the optimization objective. Other works (Lee & Seo, 2023;
Wang et al., 2024a) have explored skill selection policies
within hierarchical frameworks to address changing environments for downstream tasks. However, they did not fully
investigate the exploration of diverse skills within a single
environment. In general, previous work has overlooked
the critical role of skill selection in improving learning efficiency and enhancing the diversity of skills.

1
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 Shanghai AI Lab
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR.
Correspondence to: Ming Zhou <zhouming@pjlab.org.cn>, Ying
Sun <yings@hkust-gz.edu.cn>, Hui Xiong <xionghui@ust.hk>.

To address these challenges, our key insights are as follows:
(1) skill discovery should be grounded by the strength of
the policy, sharing a similar idea in auto-curriculum learning (Jiang et al., 2021b); and (2) skills may exhibit sequential dependencies, requiring some to be acquired before others. For instance, in a manipulation task, the agent should

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

