Robust Secure Swap: Responsible Face Swap With Persons of Interest Redaction
and Provenance Traceability

Yunshu Dai 1 Jianwei Fei 2 Fangjun Huang 1 3 Chip Hong Chang 4
Fugitives List

Abstract

Record

As AI generative models evolve, face swap technology has become increasingly accessible, raising concerns over potential misuse. Celebrities
may be manipulated without consent, and ordinary individuals may fall victim to identity
fraud. To address these threats, we propose Secure Swap, a method that protects persons of interest (POI) from face-swapping abuse and embeds a unique, invisible watermark into nonPOI
swapped images for traceability. By introducing an ID Passport layer, Secure Swap redacts
POI faces and generates watermarked outputs for
nonPOI. A detachable watermark encoder and
decoder are trained with the model to ensure
provenance tracing. Experimental results demonstrate that Secure Swap not only preserves face
swap functionality but also effectively prevents
unauthorized swaps of POI and detects different
embedded model’s watermarks with high accuracy. Our method achieves a 100% success rate
in protecting POI and over 99% watermark extraction accuracy for nonPOI. Besides fidelity and
effectiveness, the robustness of protected models against image-level and model-level attacks
in both online and offline application scenarios is
also experimentally demonstrated. Code can be
found at https://github.com/SleepyCat888/RobustSecure-Swap.

Airport Security Checkpoint
POI List
00010101

Face Swap model Security Checkpoint

Figure 1. An illustration of our motivation behind Secure Swap. If
the input image involves POI, the swap will be rejected; otherwise,
the model will complete the swap and apply invisible watermarks
in the generated images.

1. Introduction
In the self-media era, the general public has easier access
to face swap technology. However, while this technology
offers new possibilities, it has also raised significant concerns due to its potential for misuse. Users can provide the
source and target faces in pairs into the face swap model
The source image provides the identity (i.e., the face to be
transferred), and the target image is the image where the
person’s identity is replaced by that of the source. Simply
put, it uses the source person’s face to replace the target
person’s face. Face swap operations targeting persons of
interest (POI) can easily cause social unrest due to the sensitivity of their identities, while ordinary people (nonPOI)
are more vulnerable to face swap fraud due to limited defense awareness and forensic capabilities (Van der Sloot
& Wagensveld, 2022). To address these risks, different regions have proposed distinct governance frameworks for
face swap technologies 1 .

1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus
of Sun Yat-sen University. 2 State Key Laboratory of Internet of
Things for Smart City, Department of Computer and Information
Science, University of Macau. 3 Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology. 4 School of Electrical
and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University..
Correspondence to: Fangjun Hung <huangfj@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Currently, the growing application of generative technologies among the public has led to a more intricate and convoluted crisis. Open-source tools are becoming more accessible and easier to deploy for local inference, while API

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/11/
generative-ai-governance-regulation

1

