IMPACT: Iterative Mask-based Parallel Decoding for Text-to-Audio Generation
with Diffusion Modeling

Kuan-Po Huang 1 2 † Shu-wen Yang 1 2 † Huy Phan 2 Bo-Ru Lu 2 Byeonggeun Kim 2 Sashank Macha 2
Qingming Tang 2 Shalini Ghosh 2 Hung-yi Lee 1 Chieh-Chi Kao 2 Chao Wang 2

Abstract

video gaming to marketing and advertising. The current
state-of-the-art in text-to-audio generation is represented
by the Tango (Ghosal et al., 2023; Kong et al., 2024; Majumder et al., 2024) and AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023; 2024)
series, which leverage diffusion-based models to achieve
high-quality audio synthesis. All these models employ computationally heavy network architectures with attention layers as the backbone for their diffusion models. However, this
design results in high latency due to slow inference speed,
as the iterative denoising steps of the diffusion sampling
process combined with the model’s complexity significantly
increase the time required for generating outputs.

Text-to-audio generation synthesizes realistic
sounds or music given a natural language prompt.
Diffusion-based frameworks, including the Tango
and the AudioLDM series, represent the state-ofthe-art in text-to-audio generation. Despite achieving high audio fidelity, they incur significant inference latency due to the slow diffusion sampling
process. MAGNET, a mask-based model operating on discrete tokens, addresses slow inference
through iterative mask-based parallel decoding.
However, its audio quality still lags behind that
of diffusion-based models. In this work, we introduce IMPACT, a text-to-audio generation framework that achieves high performance in audio
quality and fidelity while ensuring fast inference.
IMPACT utilizes iterative mask-based parallel decoding in a continuous latent space powered by
diffusion modeling. This approach eliminates the
fidelity constraints of discrete tokens while maintaining competitive inference speed. Results on
AudioCaps demonstrate that IMPACT achieves
state-of-the-art performance on key metrics including Fréchet Distance (FD) and Fréchet Audio
Distance (FAD) while significantly reducing latency compared to prior models. The project website is available at https://audio-impact.github.io/.

To address the issue of slow inference speed, MAGNET
(Ziv et al., 2024), a masked-based generative model (MGM),
utilizes iterative mask-based parallel decoding to achieve
efficient audio generation. During inference, the model progressively predicts and refines discrete audio tokens across
multiple decoding iterations, leveraging parallelism to predict multiple tokens simultaneously at each step. This parallel decoding strategy not only delivers significantly faster
inference compared to traditional autoregressive models like
MusicGen (Copet et al., 2024) and AudioGen (Kreuk et al.,
2023), but also surpasses the inference speed of diffusionbased models by eliminating the need for time-consuming
diffusion sampling.
While MAGNET leverages discrete tokens for efficient
and structured audio generation, its performance on textto-audio generation tasks remains inferior to current stateof-the-art models. Given the observed superiority of continuous representations over discrete tokens in tasks such
as text-to-image generation (Fan et al., 2024), speech large
language models (Yuan et al., 2024), and automatic speech
recognition (Xu et al., 2024), one intuitive way to enhance
the generation performance of MAGNET is to replace its
discrete tokens with continuous representations. However,
based on our preliminary experiments, this intuitive modification resulted in significantly worse performance compared
to the original MAGNET model.

1. Introduction
The text-to-audio generation task aims to synthesize highquality and high-fidelity audio that aligns semantically with
a given textual prompt. This task holds immense potential
for applications ranging from audio content creation and
†
Work done during internship at Amazon in 2024. 1 National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 2 Amazon AGI, United States. Correspondence to: Kuan-Po Huang <gerber861017@gmail.com>,
Chieh-Chi Kao <chiehchi@amazon.com>.

Knowing that latent diffusion models (LDMs) are good at
modeling continuous representations (Ghosal et al., 2023;
Huang et al., 2023; Kong et al., 2024; Majumder et al., 2024;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

