AffinityFlow: Guided Flows for Antibody Affinity Maturation

Can (Sam) Chen 1 2 Karla-Luise Herpoldt 2 Chenchao Zhao 2 Zichen Wang 2 Marcus Collins 2 Shang Shang 2
Ron Benson 2

Abstract

enhanced through somatic hypermutation and clonal selection (Victora & Nussenzweig, 2022). When developing a
therapeutic antibody, in vitro affinity maturation—through
targeted mutation and selection—improves the binding affinity of existing antibodies to target antigens (Tabasinezhad
et al., 2019; Chiu & Gilliland, 2016).

Antibodies are widely used as therapeutics, but
their development requires costly affinity maturation, involving iterative mutations to enhance
binding affinity. This paper explores a sequenceonly scenario for affinity maturation, using solely
antibody and antigen sequences. Recently AlphaFlow wraps AlphaFold within flow matching
to generate diverse protein structures, enabling a
sequence-conditioned generative model of structure. Building on this, we propose an alternating optimization framework that (1) fixes the sequence to guide structure generation toward high
binding affinity using a structure-based affinity
predictor, then (2) applies inverse folding to create sequence mutations, refined by a sequencebased affinity predictor for post selection. A key
challenge is the lack of labeled data for training
both predictors. To address this, we develop a coteaching module that incorporates valuable information from noisy biophysical energies into predictor refinement. The sequence-based predictor
selects consensus samples to teach the structurebased predictor, and vice versa. Our method, AffinityFlow, achieves state-of-the-art performance in
proof-of-concept affinity maturation experiments.

These in vitro methods, such as random mutagenesis, are
labor-intensive and time-consuming. Recent advancements
in deep learning have propelled in silico affinity maturation
forward. One line of research enhances affinity prediction
for mutated antibodies (Shan et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021;
Cai et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Xiong et al., 2017); another investigates mutation strategies. Specifically, protein
language models propose plausible mutations to enhance
binding affinities, though they lack specificity for target
antigens (Hie et al., 2024; Ruffolo et al., 2021; Shuai et al.,
2021). Similarly, diffusion models guide the sampling towards high-affinity antibody sequences but require the often
unavailable or insufficiently accurate antigen-antibody complex structure (Luo et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024). Our
research aligns more with the second line of mutation strategies. In particular, we focus on enhancing antibody binding
affinity through sequence mutations, relying solely on the
antigen-antibody sequence.
Recognizing the crucial link between antibody structure
and function, it is essential to integrate structure into the
sequence mutation process. The recent release of AlphaFlow (Jing et al., 2024) builds a sequence-conditioned
generative model of protein structure, which opens pathways for structure-based optimization of antibody sequences.
Specifically, AlphaFlow repurposes AlphaFold (Jumper
et al., 2021) in a flow matching framework to generate diverse protein conformations.

1. Introduction
Natural antibodies protect organisms by specifically binding
to target antigens such as viruses and bacteria with high affinity (Murphy & Weaver, 2016), while therapeutic antibodies
bind various targets to inactivate them, recruit immune cells
to them, or deliver an attached drug compound (Chiu &
Gilliland, 2016). In vivo, antibodies undergo affinity maturation, where their target-binding capacity is incrementally

This motivates the proposal of an alternating optimization
framework, as illustrated in Figure 1: (1) We fix the sequence to guide noisy structures toward high-affinity clean
structures. Rather than re-training the entire AlphaFlow
model—a process that is inherently time-consuming—we
achieve guided structure generation through predictor guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Specifically, a trained
structure-based affinity predictor is integrated into the AlphaFlow sampling process to direct coordinate denoising.

1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute (work done during an Amazon
internship) 2 Amazon. Correspondence to: Can (Sam) Chen
<can.chen@mila.quebec or chencan421@gmail.com>, Marcus
Collins <collmr@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

