CombiMOTS: Combinatorial Multi-Objective Tree Search
for Dual-Target Molecule Generation

Thibaud Southiratn 1 Bonil Koo 2 3 Yijingxiu Lu 1 Sun Kim 1 2 3 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Complex diseases and disorders such as cancers are generally caused by intricate interacting pathways. To treat them,
traditional therapies focused on the single-target paradigm
by developing drugs selective towards a unique mechanism,
therefore “blind to other processes” yet equally involved in
biological systems (Medina-Franco et al., 2013). Singletarget drugs are prone to resistance and can risk the activation of unwanted compensatory signaling pathways (Yang
et al., 2024b). To overcome this limitation, a rising field
of study aims to develop treatments which exhibit better
efficacy by interacting with multiple related targets. An
intuitive approach known as combination therapy (Kummar et al., 2010; Foucquier & Guedj, 2015) consists in administering various synergetic single-target medications to
address distinct but related pathogenic mechanisms. However, these approaches often risk adverse effects or poor
treatment adherence (Ye et al., 2023). As promising alternatives, dual-target drugs are increasingly drawing attention, demonstrated by a trend in FDA-approved drugs (Li
et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2017; Layman et al., 2024). They
involve one agent simultaneously interacting with two targets with better pharmacokinetics and safety profiles, thus
avoiding undesirable drug-drug interactions (Hopkins et al.,
2006). This inevitably imposes new challenges: (1) The
Structure-Activity Relationship (SAR) profile of considered compounds must consider different biological targets
(Morphy & Harris, 2012; Raghavendra et al., 2018). (2)
The identified compounds have to be synthesizable through
known experimental protocols.

Dual-target molecule generation, which focuses
on discovering compounds capable of interacting with two target proteins, has garnered significant attention due to its potential for improving therapeutic efficiency, safety and resistance
mitigation. Existing approaches face two critical challenges. First, by simplifying the complex dual-target optimization problem to scalarized combinations of individual objectives, they
fail to capture important trade-offs between target engagement and molecular properties. Second, they typically do not integrate synthetic
planning into the generative process. This highlights a need for more appropriate objective function design and synthesis-aware methodologies
tailored to the dual-target molecule generation
task. In this work, we propose CombiMOTS,
a Pareto Monte Carlo Tree Search (PMCTS)
framework that generates dual-target molecules.
CombiMOTS is designed to explore a synthesizable fragment space while employing vectorized optimization constraints to encapsulate
target affinity and physicochemical properties.
Extensive experiments on real-world databases
demonstrate that CombiMOTS produces novel
dual-target molecules with high docking scores,
enhanced diversity, and balanced pharmacological characteristics, showcasing its potential as
a powerful tool for dual-target drug discovery.
The code and data is accessible through https:
//github.com/Tibogoss/CombiMOTS.

In the past few years, deep generative models (Zeng et al.,
2022) and geometric deep learning (Powers et al., 2023)
tackled SAR for single-target drug design, but the data
scarcity and expensive computational cost limit their application on the dual-target setting. Recently, machine
learning models allowed to bridge the gap between predictive and intuitive dual-target drug design (Feldmann et al.,
2021). Notably, great efforts were made in Fragment-Based
Drug Discovery (FBDD) by leveraging property predictors
and oracles to extract, combine and autoregressively complete molecular substructures, supposedly responsible for
the bioactivity of known compounds on both given targets

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Interdisciplinary
Program in Bioinformatics, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 3 AIGENDRUG Co., Ltd., Seoul, Republic of
Korea 4 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Sun Kim <sunkim.bioinfo@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

