Compositional Risk Minimization

Divyat Mahajan 1 2 ⋆ Mohammad Pezeshki 1 Charles Arnal 1 Ioannis Mitliagkas 2
Kartik Ahuja 1 † Pascal Vincent 1 2 ⋆ †

Abstract

have never seen before, such as “a blue elephant riding a bicycle on the Moon.” While most works on compositionality
have focused on its generative aspect, i.e., imagination, as
seen in diffusion models (Yang et al., 2023a), compositionality is equally important in discriminative tasks. In these
tasks, the goal is to make predictions in novel circumstances
that are best described as combinations of circumstances
seen before. In this work, we dive into this less-explored
realm of compositionality in discriminative tasks.

Compositional generalization is a crucial step towards developing data-efficient intelligent machines that generalize in human-like ways. In
this work, we tackle a challenging form of distribution shift, termed compositional shift, where
some attribute combinations are completely absent at training but present in the test distribution.
This shift tests the model’s ability to generalize
compositionally to novel attribute combinations
in discriminative tasks. We model the data with
flexible additive energy distributions, where each
energy term represents an attribute, and derive a
simple alternative to empirical risk minimization
termed compositional risk minimization (CRM).
We first train an additive energy classifier to predict the multiple attributes and then adjust this
classifier to tackle compositional shifts. We provide an extensive theoretical analysis of CRM,
where we show that our proposal extrapolates to
special affine hulls of seen attribute combinations.
Empirical evaluations on benchmark datasets confirms the improved robustness of CRM compared
to other methods from the literature designed to
tackle various forms of subpopulation shifts.

We work with multi-attribute data, where each input (e.g.,
an image) is associated with multiple categorical attributes,
and the task is to predict an attribute or multiple attributes.
During training, we observe inputs from only a subset of all
possible combinations of individual attributes, and during
test we will see novel combinations of attributes never seen
at training. Following Liu et al. (2023), we refer to this
distribution shift as compositional shift. Towards the goal
of tackling these compositional shifts, we develop an adaptation of naive discriminative Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) tailored for multi-attribute data under compositional
shifts. We term our approach Compositional Risk Minimization (CRM). The foundations of CRM are built on
additive energy distributions that are studied in generative
compositionality (Liu et al., 2022a), where each energy term
represents one attribute. In CRM, we first train an additive
energy classifier to predict all the attributes jointly, and then
we adjust this classifier for compositional shifts.

1. Introduction

Our main contributions are as follows:

The ability to make sense of the rich complexity of the sensory world by decomposing it into sets of elementary factors
and recomposing these factors in new ways is a hallmark of
human intelligence. This capability is typically grouped under the umbrella term compositionality (Fodor & Pylyshyn,
1988; Montague, 1970). Compositionality underlies both
semantic understanding and the imaginative prowess of humans, enabling robust generalization and extrapolation. For
instance, human language allows us to imagine situations we

• Theory of discriminative compositional shifts: For the
family of additive energy distributions, we prove that
additive energy classifiers generalize compositionally
to novel combinations of attributes represented by a
special mathematical object, which we call discrete
affine hull. Our characterization of extrapolation is
sharp, i.e., we show that it is not possible to generalize
beyond discrete affine hull. We show that the volume
of discrete affine hull grows very fast in the number
of training attribute combinations thus generalizing to
many attribute combinations. The proof techniques
developed in this work are very different from existing works on distribution shifts and hence may be of
independent interest.

Work done at Meta † Joint last author 1 Meta FAIR 2 Mila, Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: Divyat Mahajan <divyat.mahajan@mila.quebec>.
⋆

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

