R*: Efficient Reward Design via Reward Structure Evolution and
Parameter Alignment Optimization with Large Language Models

Pengyi Li 1 Jianye Hao 1 Hongyao Tang 1 Yifu Yuan 1 Jinbin Qiao 1 Zibin Dong 1 Yan Zheng 1

Abstract

mann et al., 2023a), robotic locomotion (Radosavovic et al.,
2024), manipulation (Aguinaco et al., 2023; Yuan et al.,
2025), navigation (Zhu & Zhang, 2021), and protein structure design (Lutz et al., 2023). Although these achievements
demonstrate the potential of DRL, its learning process often suffers from instability, leading to suboptimal policies
or even policy collapse (Arulkumaran et al., 2017). A key
factor for this problem is the low quality of reward signals (Hare, 2019; Silver et al., 2021; Eschmann, 2021),
which are often sparse and deceptive. Designing highquality reward signals typically requires extensive domainspecific knowledge, resulting in significant design costs (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Even with carefully hand-crafted reward functions, it remains difficult to guarantee efficient
guidance for policy learning (Booth et al., 2023a). How
to provide high-quality reward signal guidance remains an
open challenge (Menell et al., 2017; Icarte et al., 2022).

Reward functions are crucial for policy learning.
Large Language Models (LLMs), with strong coding capabilities and valuable domain knowledge,
provide an automated solution for high-quality
reward design. However, code-based reward functions require precise guiding logic and parameter
configurations within a vast design space, leading to low optimization efficiency. To address the
challenges, we propose an efficient automated reward design framework, called R*, which decomposes reward design into two parts: reward structure evolution and parameter alignment optimization. To design high-quality reward structures, R*
maintains a reward function population and modularizes the functional components. LLMs are
employed as the mutation operator, and modulelevel crossover is proposed to facilitate efficient
exploration and exploitation. To design more efficient reward parameters, R* first leverages LLMs
to generate multiple critic functions for trajectory
comparison and annotation. Based on these critics, a voting mechanism is employed to collect the
trajectory segments with high-confidence labels.
These labeled segments are then used to refine
the reward function parameters through preference learning. Experiments on diverse robotic
control tasks demonstrate that R* outperforms
strong baselines in both reward design efficiency
and quality, surpassing human-designed reward
functions.

To address the challenge of reward design, many methods are proposed from different perspectives, which can be
broadly classified into three categories: Inverse RL (Arora
& Doshi, 2021), RL from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Kaufmann et al., 2023b), Reward Function Generation (Ma et al.,
2024). Inverse RL begins by collecting expert demonstrations and then learns the reward function based on these
demonstrations. This approach relies heavily on the coverage and quality of the expert data (Ng & Russell, 2000;
Ho & Ermon, 2016). RLHF-related methods incorporate
human feedback into RL by comparing trajectories, assigning preference labels, and training a reward model (Lee
et al., 2021). This process typically requires the continuous involvement of human experts to provide preference
annotations (Lee et al., 2024). The final category focuses
on directly constructing reward function codes. The most
straightforward approach is to manually design reward functions through trial-and-error (Booth et al., 2023b; Knox
et al., 2023). Some early methods employ Evolutionary
Algorithms (EAs) (Bäck & Schwefel, 1993; Bäck, 1996;
Vikhar, 2016; Zheng et al., 2019) with manually designed
operators for reward function design (Niekum et al., 2010;
Faust et al., 2019). However, these methods still heavily
depend on expert priors.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) (Sutton & Barto,
1998) has shown remarkable success in various sequential decision-making problems, such as drone racing (Kauf1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
China. Correspondence to: Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-

1

