Prices, Bids, Values: One ML-Powered Combinatorial Auction to Rule Them All

Ermis Soumalias * 1 2 Jakob Heiss * 2 3 4 Jakob Weissteiner 1 2 5 Sven Seuken 1 2

Abstract

pression of value. CAs have enjoyed widespread adoption
in practice, with their applications ranging from allocating
spectrum licenses (Cramton, 2013) to TV ad slots (Goetzendorff et al., 2015) and airport landing/take-off slots (Rassenti
et al., 1982).

We study the design of iterative combinatorial
auctions (ICAs). The main challenge in this domain is that the bundle space grows exponentially
in the number of items. To address this, recent
work has proposed machine learning (ML)-based
preference elicitation algorithms that aim to elicit
only the most critical information from bidders to
maximize efficiency. However, while the SOTA
ML-based algorithms elicit bidders’ preferences
via value queries, ICAs that are used in practice
elicit information via demand queries. In this
paper, we introduce a novel ML algorithm that
provably makes use of the full information from
both value and demand queries, and we show via
experiments that combining both query types results in significantly better learning performance
in practice. Building on these insights, we present
MLHCA, a new ML-powered auction that uses
value and demand queries. MLHCA significantly
outperforms the previous SOTA, reducing efficiency loss by up to a factor 10, with up to 58%
fewer queries. Thus, MLHCA achieves large efficiency improvements while also reducing bidders’ cognitive load, establishing a new benchmark for both practicability and efficiency. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
marketdesignresearch/MLHCA.

The key challenge in CAs is that the bundle space grows exponentially in the number of items, making it impossible for
bidders to report their full value function in all but the smallest domains. Moreover, Nisan & Segal (2006) showed that,
for arbitrary value functions, CAs require an exponential
number of bids to guarantee full efficiency. Thus, practical CA mechanisms cannot provide efficiency guarantees
in real world settings with more than a modest number of
items. Instead, the focus has shifted towards iterative combinatorial auctions (ICAs), where bidders interact with the
auctioneer over a series of rounds, providing only a limited
(i.e., practically feasible) amount of information, with the
aim to maximize the efficiency of the final allocation.
The most established ICA following this interaction
paradigm is the combinatorial clock auction (CCA)
(Ausubel et al., 2006). Extensively used for allocating spectrum licenses, the CCA generated over USD 20 billion in
revenue between 2012 and 2014 alone (Ausubel & Baranov,
2017). However, a key challenge for any ICA, including
the CCA, is balancing speed of convergence with efficiency.
Each bidding round involves significant computational costs
and complex business modeling for participants (Kwasnica
et al., 2005; Milgrom & Segal, 2017; Bichler et al., 2017),
making faster convergence highly desirable.
Large spectrum auctions conducted under the CCA format
can require over 100 bidding rounds, prompting practitioners to adopt aggressive price update rules to reduce the number of rounds. For example, prices may be increased by up
to 10% per round, but such approaches come at the expense
of efficiency (Ausubel & Baranov, 2017). This trade-off
highlights the ongoing challenge of designing ICAs that
achieve both high efficiency and rapid convergence. Given
the value of resources allocated in these auctions, even a
one-percentage-point improvement in efficiency translates
to welfare gains of hundreds of millions of dollars.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial auctions (CAs) are used to allocate multiple
items among several bidders who may view those items as
complements or substitutes. CAs allow bidders to place
bids on entire bundles of items, enabling more nuanced ex*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Informatics, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 2 ETH AI Center, Zurich, Switzerland
3
Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
4
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, USA
5
UBS, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ermis Soumalias
<ermis@ifi.uzh.ch>, Jakob Heiss <jakob.heiss@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

