Control and Realism: Best of Both Worlds in Layout-to-Image without Training

Bonan Li * 1 2 Yinhan Hu * 1 Songhua Liu 2 Xinchao Wang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Text-to-Image (T2I) generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023) have profoundly revolutionized the vision landscape, facilitating the synthesis
of highly authentic assets from textual prompts, e.g., textdriven Image-to-Image translation (Tumanyan et al., 2023;
Parmar et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024; Tosi
et al., 2025) and video generation (Wu et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Qing et al., 2024; Kwon et al.,
2025). Nevertheless, designing comprehensive prompts to
meticulously control every aspect of an image can be both
labor-intensive and time-consuming, posing challenges for
efficient generation workflows. As a remedy, Layout-toImage (L2I) models (Xue et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2024a) have been developed,
guiding the process in a desired direction by incorporating
user-provided inputs, such as bounding boxes.

Layout-to-Image generation aims to create complex scenes with precise control over the placement and arrangement of subjects. Existing works
have demonstrated that pre-trained Text-to-Image
diffusion models can achieve this goal without
training on any specific data; however, they often
face challenges with imprecise localization and
unrealistic artifacts. Focusing on these drawbacks,
we propose a novel training-free method, WinWinLay. At its core, WinWinLay presents two
key strategies—Non-local Attention Energy Function and Adaptive Update—that collaboratively
enhance control precision and realism. On one
hand, we theoretically demonstrate that the commonly used attention energy function introduces
inherent spatial distribution biases, hindering objects from being uniformly aligned with layout
instructions. To overcome this issue, non-local
attention prior is explored to redistribute attention
scores, facilitating objects to better conform to the
specified spatial conditions. On the other hand,
we identify that the vanilla backpropagation update rule can cause deviations from the pre-trained
domain, leading to out-of-distribution artifacts.
We accordingly introduce a Langevin dynamicsbased adaptive update scheme as a remedy that
promotes in-domain updating while respecting
layout constraints. Extensive experiments demonstrate that WinWinLay excels in controlling element placement and achieving photorealistic visual fidelity, outperforming the current state-ofthe-art methods.

To acquire L2I models, an intuitive framework is to finetune powerful T2I models with with spatial conditioning.
However, these approaches (Li et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024)
incurs expensive training cost and faces challenges when
collecting resource-intensive paired data. To overcome the
aforementioned limitations, existing methods (Couairon
et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023) have explored the incorporation
of layout guidance during the sampling phase, establishing
the training-free paradigm for L2I. Among them, backward
guidance (Chen et al., 2024d), which combines attention
redistribution and backpropagation update rules, has been
demonstrated as a promising scheme (Liu et al., 2024a;
Chen et al., 2024b). Specifically, attention redistribution
encourages cross-attention activation at designated positions
via the energy function, while the backpropagation rule directly updates feature maps using corresponding gradients
to match the specified layout. However, while these works
offer higher efficiency, they fall short of training-based approaches in terms of spatial fidelity and image quality.
To bridge this gap, we initiate our exploration with an indepth analysis of existing mechanisms and demonstrate that,
although effective, they are still prone to suboptimal results
in terms of control capabilities and visual realism. Firstly,
we theoretically verify that the attention energy function
tends to favor patches with higher initial attention within
the bounding box during the optimization process, lead-

*

1
Equal contribution
University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Xinchao Wang <xinchao@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

