BlockDialect: Block-wise Fine-grained Mixed Format Quantization
for Energy-Efficient LLM Inference

Wonsuk Jang 1 Thierry Tambe 1

The rapidly increasing size of large language
models (LLMs) presents significant challenges in
memory usage and computational costs. Quantizing both weights and activations can address these
issues, with hardware-supported fine-grained scaling emerging as a promising solution to mitigate outliers. However, existing methods struggle to capture nuanced block data distributions.
We propose BlockDialect, a block-wise finegrained mixed format technique that assigns a
per-block optimal number format from a formatbook for better data representation. Additionally,
we introduce DialectFP4, a formatbook of FP4
variants (akin to dialects) that adapt to diverse
data distributions. To leverage this efficiently,
we propose a two-stage approach for online DialectFP4 activation quantization. Importantly, DialectFP4 ensures energy efficiency by selecting
representable values as scaled integers compatible
with low-precision integer arithmetic. BlockDialect achieves 10.78 % (7.48 %) accuracy gain
on the LLaMA3-8B (LLaMA2-7B) model compared to MXFP4 format with lower bit usage per
data, while being only 5.45% (2.69%) below full
precision even when quantizing full-path matrix
multiplication. Focusing on how to represent over
how to scale, our work presents a promising path
for energy-efficient LLM inference.

Dialect Dialect
1
2

…

…

Dialect Dialect
3
3

FormatBook
Dialect 1
Dialect 2
Dialect 3
Dialect 4

Dialect Dialect
3
1

Assign the best dialect
(standard format variant)

Activation
(Online quantization)

X

…

Dialect Dialect
3
1

…

Fine-grained block

…

Abstract

Weight
(Offline quantization)

Figure 1. Overview of BlockDialect technique workflow.

lami et al., 2024) and increased computational costs (Xiao
et al., 2023). By reducing numerical precision, quantization effectively reduces memory usage and data movement
overhead (Kim et al., 2023). Additionally, leveraging lowprecision operation results in improvements in inference
speed, area, and energy efficiency (Xiao et al., 2023; Cao
et al., 2024; Rouhani et al., 2023a). A key challenge in LLM
quantization lies in handling outliers - elements with much
larger magnitudes compared to the rest (Dettmers et al.,
2022). Outliers skew the scaling factor, diminishing the
representation capacity for the majority of the elements (Liu
et al., 2023). To counter this issue, block-wise quantization
has been adopted as a common solution (Frantar et al., 2022;
Dettmers et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024; Sheng et al., 2023).
By partitioning the tensor into smaller blocks and quantizing
each block separately, this method effectively mitigates the
influence of outliers within localized areas.
While smaller blocks encapsulate outliers better, they introduce overhead in managing high-precision scaling factors (Rouhani et al., 2023a). To balance this, recent advancements have focused on hardware support for fine-grained
block-wise quantization (e.g., block size 32) (Rouhani et al.,
2023a; Dai et al., 2021; Rouhani et al., 2023b). In line
with this progress, Open Compute Project, backed by leading tech companies, has established the Microscaling (MX)
format specification 1 . This format enhances performance
and hardware efficiency via fine-grained blocks and powerof-two scaling factors, and has been adopted by recent AI

1. Introduction
Quantization is a crucial technique (Gholami et al., 2022)
to address the challenges posed by the exponential growth
in Large Language Models (LLMs), including memory bottlenecks (Frantar et al., 2022; Alizadeh et al., 2023; Gho1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Thierry Tambe
<ttambe@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
https://www.opencompute.org/documents/ocp-microscalingformats-mx-v1-0-spec-final-pdf

1

