Understanding the Unfairness in Network Quantization

Bing Liu 1 2 3 Wenjun Miao 1 Boyu Zhang 1 Qiankun Zhang B 1 2 3 Bin Yuan 1 3 4 5 Jing Wang 6 Shenghao Liu 1
Xianjun Deng 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the advancements in computer performance and the maturation of data processing technologies,
deep neural networks have made significant strides in fields
such as computer vision and natural language processing,
achieving impressive results. However, high computational
time consumption and large memory overheads pose significant challenges to the efficient implementation of deep
neural networks on resource-limited devices. To address
these challenges, neural network quantization (Huang et al.,
2024; Jha et al., 2024; Gholami et al., 2022) is one of the
highly effective methods to reduce the power and latency of
neural network inference.

Network quantization, one of the most widely
studied model compression methods, effectively
quantizes a floating-point model to obtain a fixedpoint one with negligible accuracy loss. Although
great success was achieved in reducing the model
size, it may exacerbate the unfairness in model
accuracy across different groups of datasets. This
paper considers two widely used algorithms: PostTraining Quantization (PTQ) and QuantizationAware Training (QAT), with an attempt to understand how they cause this critical issue. Theoretical analysis with empirical verifications reveals
two responsible factors, as well as how they influence a metric of fairness in depth. A comparison between PTQ and QAT is then made, explaining an observation that QAT behaves even
worse than PTQ in fairness, although it often preserves a higher accuracy at lower bit-widths in
quantization. Finally, the paper finds out that
several simple data augmentation methods can
be adopted to alleviate the disparate impacts of
quantization, based on a further observation that
class imbalance produces distinct values of the
aforementioned factors among different attribute
classes. We experiment on either imbalanced
(UTK-Face and FER2013) or balanced (CIFAR10 and MNIST) datasets using ResNet and VGG
models for empirical evaluation.

To achieve these savings, quantization stores weights and
activation tensors as low-bit fixed-point numbers (e.g. 4 or
8-bit) instead of original 32-bit floating-point representation.
This greatly reduces data storage requirements, as well as
the size and energy consumption of MAC operations, speeding up network execution. There are generally two main
classes of algorithms: Post-Training Quantization (PTQ)
(He et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2022) and Quantization-Aware
Training (QAT) (Xie et al., 2024; Nagel et al., 2022). While
PTQ quantizes the model after training and requires no retraining, QAT requires fine-tuning and access to training
data. Notably, Nagel et al. (2021) show that both methods
do not suffer significantly in terms of model accuracy when
compared to their original floating-point counterparts.
Although quantization causes little degradation to overall
accuracy on a test set, previous studies (Hooker et al., 2019;
2020) observe that disproportionately high errors may appear among different groups of datasets. As a first glimpse,
we experiment on a facial recognition task with UTK-Face
dataset (Zhang et al., 2017) and VGG19 model (Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2014), focusing on the accuracy of quantized
models by PTQ and QAT from 32-bit to 4-bit.

1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 Key Laboratory
of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education, Zhengzhou, China
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Wuhan,
China 4 Songshan Laboratory, Zhengzhou, China 5 Visiting researcher with the Lion Rock Labs of Cyberspace Security, CTlHE,
Hong Kong, China 6 School of Software Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Qiankun Zhang <qiankun@hust.edu.cn>.

We summarize our key observations in Figure 1 as follows:
• While models are unfair in accuracy before quantization among different groups of individuals, quantization exacerbates such unfairness as bit-widths get lower.
For example, 4-bit QAT barely decreases accuracy in
group White, but group Others suffers a dramatic drop.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

