An Online Adaptive Sampling Algorithm for Stochastic Difference-of-convex
Optimization with Time-varying Distributions

Yuhan Ye 1 Ying Cui 2 Jingyi Wang 3
where C ⊂ Rp is a convex set, ξ, ζ ⊂ Ω are random vectors
with probability measures Pξ , Pζ , respectively, and G, H :
(Rp , Ω) → R are Carathéodory functions, i.e., they are
continuous in x for all ξ, ζ ∈ Ω and Borel measurable in ξ
and ζ for all x ∈ C. In addition, we assume G and H are
convex in x (though not necessarily smooth), making f a
difference-of-convex (DC) function.

Abstract
We propose an online adaptive sampling algorithm for solving stochastic nonsmooth differenceof-convex (DC) problems under time-varying distributions. At each iteration, the algorithm relies
solely on data generated from the current distribution and employs distinct adaptive sampling rates
for the convex and concave components of the DC
function, a novel design guided by our theoretical
analysis. We show that, under proper conditions
on the convergence of distributions, the algorithm
converges subsequentially to DC critical points
almost surely. Furthermore, the sample size requirement of our proposed algorithm matches the
results achieved in the smooth case or when a
measurable subgradient selector is available, both
under static distributions. A key elementp
of this
analysis is the derivation of a novel O( p/n)
pointwise convergence rate (modulo logarithmic
factors) for the sample average approximation of
subdifferential mappings, where p is the dimension of the variable and n is the sample size – a
result of independent interest. Numerical experiments show that the algorithm is efficient for addressing online stochastic nonsmooth problems.

When functions g and h are fully accessible, problem
(1) can be solved via the classical DC algorithm (DCA).
At each iteration, a convex subproblem is solved by linearizing h via theh subgradient at the previous point,i i.e.,
µ
xt+1 = argmin g(x) − ytT (x − xt ) + ∥x − xt ∥2 for
2
x∈C
some yt ∈ ∂h(xt ) and µ > 0. Due to the convexity of
h, it can be shown that the objective sequence {f (xt )} is
non-increasing, and the iterates asymptotically converge to
a so-called DC critical point of problem (1).
However, in many applications, functions g and h are not
fully known and can only be estimated from sampled data.
This challenge is compounded when the underlying datagenerating distribution is time-varying, as in the case of
fluctuating demand. The convergence analysis of stochastic DCA is, therefore, significantly more complex than its
deterministic counterpart, as it must account for the sample
average approximation (SAA) error in both the convex component and the linearized concave component. The latter, in
particular, is closely tied to the convergence rate of the SAA
error for subdifferential mappings when H is nonsmooth in
x, introducing additional difficulty in the analysis.

1. Introduction
We consider the class of stochastic nonsmooth nonconvex
optimization problems in the form of

In this paper, we propose an online adaptive sampling algorithm to solve problem (1). At each iteration, new data
from the current distribution is used to construct a stochastic
approximation of the linearized DC function, while previous samples are discarded. Unlike stochastic DCAs that
aggregate past samples to compute current solutions, our
method is more robust to distributional shifts occurring during the data generations along the iterations. The algorithm
dynamically determines the sample sizes needed to estimate
g and ∂h, adapting to the optimization path throughout the
process. Specifically, when the current iterate is far from
critical points, less precise yet computationally inexpensive
function values and subgradient estimates suffice. However,

minimize f (x) ≜ Eξ∼Pξ [G(x, ξ)] − Eζ∼Pζ [H(x, ζ)],
x∈C
{z
} |
{z
}
|
≜g(x)

≜h(x)

(1)
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United
States 3 Center for Applied Scientific Computing, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, United States. Correspondence to: Yuhan Ye <yyh03@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

