In-Context Deep Learning via Transformer Models

Weimin Wu * 1 2 Maojiang Su * 1 2 Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 2 Zhao Song 3 Han Liu 1 2 4

Abstract

other hand, the high cost of pretraining these models often
makes them prohibitive outside certain industrial labs (Jiang
et al., 2024; Bi et al., 2024; Achiam et al., 2023). In this
work, we aim to advance the “one-for-many” modeling philosophy of foundation model paradigm (Bommasani et al.,
2021) by considering the following research problem:

We investigate the transformer’s capability for incontext learning (ICL) to simulate the training
process of deep models. Our key contribution
is providing a positive example of using a transformer to train a deep neural network by gradient
descent in an implicit fashion via ICL. Specifically, we provide an explicit construction of a
(2N + 4)L-layer transformer capable of simulating L gradient descent steps of an N -layer ReLU
network through ICL. We also give the theoretical
guarantees for the approximation within any given
error and the convergence of the ICL gradient descent. Additionally, we extend our analysis to the
more practical setting using Softmax-based transformers. We validate our findings on synthetic
datasets for 3-layer, 4-layer, and 6-layer neural
networks. The results show that ICL performance
matches that of direct training.

1

Question 1. Is it possible to train one deep model with
the ICL of another foundation model?
The implication of Question 1 is profound: if true, one
foundation model could lead to many others without pertaining. In this work, we provide an affirmative example for
Question 1. Specifically, we show that transformers are capable of simulating the training of a deep ReLU-based feedforward neural network with provable guarantees through
ICL. Our analysis assumes that we have well-pretrained
the transformer using the data generated by the deep network. We require the deep network to maintain consistent
hyperparameters (e.g., model width and depth) during the
pretraining and testing. However, during the testing, we
vary the parameter distribution and input data distribution
of the deep network to generate data for the transformer.

Introduction

In ICL, the models learn to solve new tasks during inference
by using task-specific examples provided as part of the input
prompt, rather than through parameter updates (Shi et al.,
2023b; Bubeck et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Bai et al.,
2023; Min et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2022). Unlike standard
supervised learning, ICL enables models to adapt to new
tasks during inference using only the provided examples.
In this work, the new task of our interest is algorithmic
approximation via ICL (Bai et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024). Specifically, we aim to use transformer’s
ICL capability to replace/simulate the standard supervised
training algorithms for N -layer networks. To be concrete,
we formalize the learning problem of how transformers learn
(i) a given function and (ii) a machine learning algorithm
(e.g., gradient descent) via ICL, following (Bai et al., 2023).

We study transformers’ ability to simulate the training process of deep models. This analysis is not only practical but
also timely. On one hand, transformers and deep models
(Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019) are so powerful,
popular and form a new machine learning paradigm — foundation models. These large-scale machine learning models,
trained on vast data, provide a general-purpose foundation
for various tasks with minimal supervision (Team et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022). On the
*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Foundation Models and
Generative AI, Northwestern University, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, Northwestern University, USA 3 University
of California Berkeley, USA 4 Department of Statistics and
Data Science, Northwestern University, USA. Correspondence
to: Weimin Wu <wwm@u.northwestern.edu>, Maojiang Su <maojiangsu2030@u.northwestern.edu>,
Jerry Yao-Cheih Hu <jhu@u.northwestern.edu>,
Zhao Song <magic.linuxkde@gmail.com>, Han Liu
<hanliu@northwestern.edu>.

(i) ICL for Function f . Let f : Rd → R be the function of our interest. Suppose we have a dataset Dn :=
{(xi , yi )}i∈[n] , where {xi }i∈[n] ⊆ Rd and {yi }i∈[n] ⊆ R
are the input and output of f , respectively. Let xn+1 be the
test input. The goal of ICL is to use a transformer, denoted
by T , to predict yn+1 based on the test input and the incontext dataset autoregresively: ybn+1 ∼ T (Dn , xn+1 ). The

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
Full version and future updates are on arXiv.

1

