Directed Graph Grammars for Sequence-based Learning

Michael Sun 1 Orion Foo 2 Gang Liu 3 Wojciech Matusik 1 Jie Chen 4

Abstract

graphs are still lacking. For example, current methods propose decoding a graph autoregressively by adding nodes
and edges, or fragments and connections, at every time step
according to some arbitrary ordering (Kusner et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Thost & Chen, 2021). However, these methods lack rigor and suffer from combinatorial
intractability because there can be an exponential number
of possible decoding orders. On the other hand, graph grammars, which represent graphs as derivations over a formal
language that views subgraphs as “words”, have shown enhanced modeling (Jin et al., 2018) and data efficiency (Guo
et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2024), but their decoding ability
remains limited, lacking behind the progress of generative
models for sequential data like natural language. The heart
of this issue lies in the absence of a rigorous mapping between the space of graphs and the space of sequences. Given
an ideal tokenization strategy, graph modeling reduces to
sequence modeling, where innovations like Transformers
(Vaswani, 2017) and generative pretraining (Achiam et al.,
2023) have made significant progress.

Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are a class of
graphs commonly used in practice, with examples that include electronic circuits, Bayesian networks, and neural architectures. While many effective encoders exist for DAGs, it remains challenging to decode them in a principled manner,
because the nodes of a DAG can have many different topological orders. In this work, we propose a
grammar-based approach to constructing a principled, compact and equivalent sequential representation of a DAG. Specifically, we view a graph as
derivations over an unambiguous grammar, where
the DAG corresponds to a unique sequence of
production rules. Equivalently, the procedure to
construct such a description can be viewed as
a lossless compression of the data. Such a representation has many uses, including building a
generative model for graph generation, learning a
latent space for property prediction, and leveraging the sequence representational continuity
for Bayesian Optimization over structured data.
Code is available at https://github.com/
shiningsunnyday/induction.

In this work, we propose a novel and faithful mapping that
respects several key properties: it is (1) one-to-one and (2)
onto over the observed data, (3) deterministic, (4) valid,
and (5) strives for Occam’s Razor. Our key insight is to
parse graphs according to a context-free graph grammar
that is constrained to exhibit linear parse trees, producing
a sequence of graph rewrite rules that serves as an equivalent, lossless sequential representation for the graph. We
implement this mapping for DAGs, using properties specific
to DAGs to make the realization of this ideal mapping efficient in practice. Our method, DIrected Graph Grammar
Embedded Derivations (DIGGED) seeks to compress a
dataset of given DAGs into parse sequences, incrementally
constructing the underlying graph grammar and invoking
the principle of Minimum Description Length (MDL). Our
contributions include:

1. Introduction
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) underlie many applications
in computer science and engineering, from neural architectures (Hutter et al., 2019), Bayesian networks (Koller, 2009),
analog circuits, financial transactions, to linearized representations of molecules (Weininger, 1988). Recently, specialized generative models for graphs have been proposed
(Li et al., 2018; Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018; De Cao
& Kipf, 2018; Ma et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2018b; You et al., 2018a; Bojchevski et al., 2018), with wellmotivated encoding schemes that respect graph-specific
invariances. However, principled solutions for decoding

• Definitions of the properties for an ideal mapping between
DAGs and sequences;
• Novel grammar induction algorithm which respects these
properties, with theoretical guarantees;
• Integration within an autoencoder framework for generation, prediction and optimization;
• Comprehensive experiments on real-world applications
in neural architectures, Bayesian Networks, and circuits,

1

MIT CSAIL 2 MIT 3 University of Notre Dame 4 MIT-IBM
Watson AI Lab, IBM Research. Correspondence to: Michael Sun
<msun415@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

