When Will It Fail?: Anomaly to Prompt
for Forecasting Future Anomalies in Time Series

Min-Yeong Park * 1 Won-Jeong Lee * 2 Seong Tae Kim 1 Gyeong-Moon Park 2

Abstract
Recently, forecasting future abnormal events has
emerged as an important scenario to tackle realworld necessities. However, the solution of predicting specific future time points when anomalies will occur, known as Anomaly Prediction
(AP), remains under-explored. Existing methods dealing with time series data fail in AP, focusing only on immediate anomalies or failing
to provide precise predictions for future anomalies. To address the AP task, we propose a novel
framework called Anomaly to Prompt (A2P),
comprised of Anomaly-Aware Forecasting (AAF)
and Synthetic Anomaly Prompting (SAP). To enable the forecasting model to forecast abnormal
time points, we adopt a strategy to learn the relationships of anomalies. For the robust detection of anomalies, our proposed SAP introduces
a learnable Anomaly Prompt Pool (APP) that
simulates diverse anomaly patterns using signaladaptive prompt. Comprehensive experiments on
multiple real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of A2P over state-of-the-art methods,
showcasing its ability to predict future anomalies. Our implementation code is available at
https://github.com/KU-VGI/AP.

Figure 1: Comparison among different scenarios of existing time
series anomaly detection, forecasting, and a newly proposed
anomaly prediction.

(Jhin et al., 2023) and (You et al., 2024), aiming to enhance
preparedness for potential abnormal events in real-world
scenarios. For example, it is greatly helpful for medical
doctors to predict potential abnormalities based on patients’
biomedical data because they can make decisions about their
health in advance. Another example case can be the maintenance of industrial systems where a prediction of future
abnormal events is crucial, since companies or users can
minimize costs from abrupt system failure.
The illustration of three different scenarios about time series forecasting, time series anomaly detection (AD), and
Anomaly Prediction (AP) is depicted in Figure 1. In time
series forecasting, a model should predict how future signals will look like, while in anomaly detection, a model
should detect abnormal time points from the given signal.
In Anomaly Prediction, a model should detect anomalies in
the predicted signal. This is a more realistic and challenging
scenario, in which we are interested in this paper.

1. Introduction
As deep learning methods have evolved rapidly, their application to time series analysis has gained significant attention
due to their critical importance in real-world scenarios. As
part of this, recently, forecasting future abnormal events
has been newly proposed in time series analysis, such as in
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Artificial Intelligence,
Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea 2 Department
of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. Correspondence to: Seong Tae Kim <st.kim@khu.ac.kr>,
Gyeong-Moon Park <gm-park@korea.ac.kr>.

Although there have been some recent attempts to define
the AP scenario in which a model should predict future
anomalies as in (Jhin et al., 2023) and (You et al., 2024),
they cannot meet the demands of the real world. (Jhin et al.,
2023) can only detect if an anomaly is likely to occur in
the very near future, while failing to provide information on
exact abnormal time points. In the real world, it is crucial

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

