Preference-CFR: Beyond Nash Equilibrium for Better Game Strategies

Qi Ju 1 2 Thomas Tellier 3 Meng Sun 1 2 Zhemei Fang 1 2 Yunfeng Luo 1 2

Abstract

Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2018), StarCraft (Vinyals et al.,
2019), and Texas Hold’em (Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Bowling
et al., 2015; Brown & Sandholm, 2019b) have significantly
influenced both academic research and public interest.

Artificial intelligence (AI) has surpassed top human players in a variety of games. In imperfect
information games, these achievements have primarily been driven by Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) and its variants for computing
Nash equilibrium. However, most existing research has focused on maximizing payoff, while
largely neglecting the importance of strategic diversity and the need for varied play styles, thereby
limiting AI’s adaptability to different user preferences.

Traditionally, research has focused primarily on identifying
the Nash Equilibrium (NE), as it guarantees that no player
can improve their expected payoff by unilaterally deviating from their strategy. From the perspective of expected
payoffs, this guarantee makes the NE considered the optimal solution in a game. Consequently, many studies treat a
game problem as resolved once its NE is identified. However, maximizing expected payoffs is not the sole criterion
for evaluating strategy quality.

To address this gap, we propose Preference-CFR
(Pref-CFR), a novel method that incorporates two
key parameters: preference degree and vulnerability degree. These parameters enable the AI to adjust its strategic distribution within an acceptable
performance loss threshold, thereby enhancing its
adaptability to a wider range of strategic demands.
In our experiments with Texas Hold’em, PrefCFR successfully trained Aggressive and Loose
Passive styles that not only match original CFRbased strategies in performance but also display
clearly distinct behavioral patterns. Notably, for
certain hand scenarios, Pref-CFR produces strategies that diverge significantly from both conventional expert heuristics and original CFR outputs,
potentially offering novel insights for professional
players.

First, many practical problems feature multiple NEs. In economics, understanding the diversity of NE often holds more
value than simply identifying one. For example, Schelling’s
work on predicting specific NE, which earned him the 2005
Nobel Prize in Economics, exemplifies this significance.
Second, state-of-the-art game-playing AIs (e.g., AlphaGo
and Pluribus) have already surpassed top human players.
However, strategies with maximizing expected payoffs as
the sole objective are typically overly rational, lack diversity, and are difficult for humans to master. For instance,
Lee Sedol, a top human Go expert who competed against
AlphaGo, chose to retire and said, “I can no longer enjoy the game.” (Wakabayashi & Young, 2024) This highlights that competition is not the sole purpose of gameplay;
games should also provide entertainment and spiritual fulfillment. Additionally, strategies that incur minor payoff
losses against top AIs may still perform well against human opponents. For example, in chess, professional players
are highly familiar with common openings recommended
by AI, often resulting in drawn games. To overcome this,
top players deliberately choose unconventional strategies to
lead the game into unexplored scenarios, leveraging their
superior skills to gain an advantage.

1. Introduction
In machine learning, complex gaming problems are important benchmarks for assessing artificial intelligence (AI).
Prominent games such as Chess (Campbell et al., 2002),
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology 2 National Key Laboratory
of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing 3 GTOKing. Correspondence to: Qi Ju <juqi@hust.edu.cn>,
Thomas Tellier <thomas@gtoking.com>, Zhemei Fang <zmfang2018@hust.edu.cn>.

To the best of our knowledge, algorithms for incompleteinformation games have not considered the importance of
identifying diverse NEs, nor have they explored how strategy ranges change when some payoff is sacrificed. To address these limitations, we propose a novel algorithm called
Preference Counterfactual Regret Minimization (Pref-CFR).
This algorithm introduces two parameters for strategy selec-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

