Mitigating Object Hallucination in Large Vision-Language Models
via Image-Grounded Guidance

Linxi Zhao * 1 Yihe Deng * 2 Weitong Zhang 3 Quanquan Gu 2

1

Abstract

Introduction

The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has motivated advancements in extending their remarkable capabilities to multimodal data. Grounded in the development of
pre-trained vision-language models (Radford et al., 2021;
Jia et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022) that align visual and
textual embedding spaces, Large Vision Language Models
(LVLMs) have gained substantial attention in both architectural development (Liu et al., 2023d; Zhu et al., 2023;
Ye et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023a; Gao et al., 2023), alignment (Yu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024)
and benchmarking datasets (Xu et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024a). However, similar to the hallucination
issues in textual LLMs (Ji et al., 2023), where irrelevant content is generated with input prompts, LVLMs face a specific
challenge known as object hallucination: generating nonexisting objects for a given image (Li et al., 2023b; Wang
et al., 2023b; Zhou et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023; Lovenia
et al., 2023; Jing et al., 2023). Such a problem is particularly
concerning as it compromises the model’s accuracy and reliability, especially considering the growing application of
LVLMs to safety-critical downstream tasks such as medical
imaging (Chambon et al., 2022; Bazi et al., 2023).
In response to the pressing issue of object hallucinations in
LVLMs, early attempts (Liu et al., 2023a;b; Gunjal et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023a) focused on addressing the bias by
curating high-quality datasets for fine-tuning or leveraging
advanced GPT queries (Yin et al., 2023), such as GPT-4, to
post-process the generated captions. However, these methods can be infeasible to implement. For instance, creating
extensive, high-quality datasets for fine-tuning LVLMs is
costly and requires significant human annotation. Additionally, relying on advanced GPT models for post-processing is
expensive and can raise privacy concerns, especially in sensitive fields like medical imaging. Most importantly, these
approaches do not address the intrinsic causes of object
hallucination in LVLMs.
In this paper, we investigate the intrinsic causes of object
hallucination in LVLMs. Specifically, these deficiencies
may stem from the three main components of the LVLMs:
1) insufficient visual context provided by the visual encoder (Zhang et al., 2023b), 2) distortion or loss of visual
information during the projection from vision to text space,

The advancement of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) has increasingly highlighted the
critical issue of their tendency to hallucinate
non-existing objects in the images. To address
this issue, previous works focused on using specially curated datasets or powerful LLMs to rectify the outputs of LVLMs. However, these approaches require either costly training or finetuning, or API access to proprietary LLMs for
post-generation correction. In response to these
limitations, we propose Mitigating hallucinAtion
via image-gRounded guIdaNcE (MARINE), a
framework that is both training-free and API-free.
MARINE effectively and efficiently reduces object hallucinations during inference by introducing image-grounded guidance to LVLMs. This is
achieved by leveraging open-source vision models to extract object-level information, thereby
enhancing the precision of LVLM-generated content. Our framework’s flexibility further allows
for the integration of multiple vision models,
enabling more reliable and robust object-level
guidance. Through comprehensive evaluations
across 5 popular LVLMs with diverse evaluation metrics and benchmarks, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of MARINE, which even outperforms existing fine-tuning-based methods. Remarkably, it reduces hallucinations consistently
in GPT-4V-assisted evaluation while maintaining the detailedness of LVLMs’ generations. We
release our code at https://github.com/
Linxi-ZHAO/MARINE.

*

Equal contribution . 1 Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 3 School of
Data Science and Society, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

