Enhancing Logits Distillation with Plug&Play Kendall’s τ Ranking Loss

Yuchen Guan * 1 Runxi Cheng * 1 Kang Liu 1 Chun Yuan 1

Abstract

Wrong Prediction: wolf ×
True Prediction: dog √
<
𝓛𝑲𝑳 = 0.0688
𝓛𝑲𝑳 = 0.1222

Soft Label: dog

Knowledge distillation typically minimizes the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between
teacher and student logits. However, optimizing the KL divergence can be challenging for
the student and often leads to sub-optimal solutions. We further show that gradients induced
by KL divergence scale with the magnitude of
the teacher logits, thereby diminishing updates on
low-probability channels. This imbalance weakens the transfer of inter-class information and in
turn limits the performance improvements achievable by the student. To mitigate this issue, we
propose a plug-and-play auxiliary ranking loss
based on Kendall’s τ coefficient that can be seamlessly integrated into any logit-based distillation
framework. It supplies inter-class relational information while rebalancing gradients toward lowprobability channels. We demonstrate that the
proposed ranking loss is largely invariant to channel scaling and optimizes an objective aligned
with that of KL divergence, making it a natural complement rather than a replacement. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-100, ImageNet,
and COCO datasets, as well as various CNN
and ViT teacher-student architecture combinations, demonstrate that our plug-and-play ranking loss consistently boosts the performance of
multiple distillation baselines. Code is available
at https://github.com/OvernighTea/
RankingLoss-KD

0.4

0.57

0.4
0.35
0.3

0.21

0.13
0.09

fox

cat

0.08

dog

wolf

𝑇𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟

tiger

0.06

fox

0.09

0.08

0.16
0.04

cat

dog

wolf

tiger

fox

cat

𝑆𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡1

0.02
dog

wolf

tiger

𝑆𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡2

Figure 1. Suboptimal Case of the KL Divergence.

storage costs associated with complex networks limite their
applicability. To address this, knowledge distillation (KD)
has been proposed to obtain performant lightweight models. Typically, knowledge distillation involves a well-trained
heavy teacher model and an untrained lightweight student
model. The same data is fed to both the teacher and the
student, with the teacher’s outputs serving as soft labels
for training the student. By constraining the student to produce predictions that match the soft labels, the knowledge
in the teacher model is transferred to the lightweight student
model.
Most logit-based KD methods adhere to the paradigm introduced by Hinton (Hinton et al., 2015), employing the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Kullback & Leibler,
1951) to align the logits output by the student and teacher
models:
LKL (q t ∥ q s ) =

1. Introduction
The recent advancements in deep neural networks (DNN)
have significantly enhanced performance in the field of computer vision. However, the heightened computational and

C
X

qt
qit · log( si ).
qi
i=1

(1)

Where qt , qs ∈ R1×C is the prediction vectors of teacher
and student. The optimization goal of KL divergence is to
achieve identical outputs between the student and teacher,
thereby transferring as much knowledge as possible from the
teacher to the student. However, the optimization process
of KL divergence is not easy, as it is prone to suboptimal
points, which can hinder further improvement in student
performance. As illustrated in Fig. 1, compared to Student 2,
Student 1 exhibits a smaller KL divergence with the teacher;
however, Student 2 achieves the correct classification result

*
Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Kang Liu <liuk22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Chun Yuan
<yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

