Differentiable Solver Search for Fast Diffusion Sampling

Shuai Wang 1 Zexian Li 2 Qipeng Zhang 2 Tianhui Song 1 Xubin Li 2
Tiezheng Ge 2 Bo Zheng 2 Limin Wang 1 3

Figure 1: Visualization of the searched solver parameters of DDPM/VP and Rectified Flow. We limit the order of solver
coefficients of the last two steps for 5/6 NFE. The left images show the absolute value of searched coefficients {cji }. The right image
shows the searched timesteps of different NFE and the fitted curves.

Abstract

with only 10 steps. Notably, our searched solver
significantly outperforms the traditional solvers,
even for some distillation-based methods. Moreover, our searched solver demonstrates generality
across various model architectures, resolutions,
and model sizes.

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable
generation quality, but at the cost of numerous function evaluations. Advanced ODE-based
solvers have recently been developed to mitigate the substantial computational demands of
reverse-diffusion solving under limited sampling
steps. However, these solvers, heavily inspired
by Adams-like multi-step methods, rely solely
on t-related Lagrange interpolation. We show
that t-related Lagrange interpolation is suboptimal for diffusion models and define a compact
search space comprised of time steps and solver
coefficients. Based on our analysis, we propose
a new differentiable solver search algorithm to
find a more optimal solver. Equipped with the
searched solver, rectified-flow models, e.g., SiTXL/2 and FlowDCN-XL/2, achieve FID scores
of 2.40 and 2.35, respectively, on ImageNet256×256 with only 10 steps. Meanwhile, DDPM
model of DiT-XL/2 reaches a FID score of 2.33

1. Introduction
Image generation is a fundamental task in computer vision,
which aims at capturing the inherent data distribution of original image datasets and generating high-quality synthetic images through distribution sampling. Diffusion models (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b; Karras et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2022; Lipman et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2025) have
recently emerged as highly promising solutions to learn
the underlying data distribution in image generation, outperforming GAN-based models (Brock et al., 2018; Sauer et al.,
2022) and Auto-Regressive models (Chang et al., 2022) by
a significant margin.
However, diffusion models necessitate numerous denoising
steps during inference, which incur a substantial computational cost, thereby limiting their widespread deployment.
The existing studies have explored two distinct approaches
to achieve fast diffusion sampling. Training-based techniques by distilling the fast ODE trajectory into the model
parameters, thereby circumventing redundant refinement
steps. In addition, solver-based methods (Lu et al., 2023;

1

State Key Lab of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. 2 Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba,
Hangzhou, China. 3 Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China.. Correspondence to: Limin Wang <lmwang@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

