Causal-PIK:
Causality-based Physical Reasoning with a Physics-Informed Kernel

Carlota Parés-Morlans 1 Michelle Yi 1 Claire Chen 1 Sarah A. Wu 2 Rika Antonova 1 3 Tobias Gerstenberg 2
Jeannette Bohg 1

Abstract

2023). These models encode our causal understanding of the
domain – our beliefs about how one event leads to another.

Tasks that involve complex interactions between
objects with unknown dynamics make planning
before execution difficult. These tasks require
agents to iteratively improve their actions after
actively exploring causes and effects in the environment. For these type of tasks, we propose
Causal-PIK, a method that leverages Bayesian
optimization to reason about causal interactions
via a Physics-Informed Kernel to help guide efficient search for the best next action. Experimental results on Virtual Tools and PHYRE physical
reasoning benchmarks show that Causal-PIK outperforms state-of-the-art results, requiring fewer
actions to reach the goal. We also compare CausalPIK to human studies, including results from a
new user study we conducted on the PHYRE
benchmark. We find that Causal-PIK remains
competitive on tasks that are very challenging,
even for human problem-solvers.

While predicting the exact sequence of events is difficult,
our physical intuition allows us to estimate the immediate
causal effects of our actions, such as which object will move
and in which direction. In addition, we rapidly learn from
the outcomes of previous actions (Allen et al., 2020). If
the red ball almost landed in the goal region, we would
slightly change our action and try again. If it was way off,
we might try something completely different. Inspired by
people’s rapid learning in such tasks, we develop a method
that leverages physical intuitions to efficiently solve physical
reasoning tasks.
Researchers have developed several benchmarks for evaluating the physical reasoning capabilities of AI agents (Melnik
et al., 2023). These benchmarks range from predicting the
stability of a stack of blocks from an image to recognizing
violations of physical principles. In this work, we focus
on single-intervention physical reasoning tasks, where an
agent chooses what action to take at the beginning of an
episode and then observes the action’s effects on the environment. We focus on the Virtual Tools (Allen et al., 2020)
and PHYRE (Bakhtin et al., 2019) benchmarks, which despite looking deceivingly simple in their 2D form, are very
hard to solve even for humans (Allen et al., 2020). These
tasks involve complex physical interactions between objects,
which without complete information about the environment
dynamics make it impossible for agents to plan the exact
solution without active exploration. Agents must interact
with the environment to actively obtain information about
the object dynamics. The main challenge is to reason about
the causal consequences of one’s actions, to leverage this
knowledge in order to make effective decisions about what
actions to try, and to rapidly learn from previous attempts.

1. Introduction
Consider trying to solve a physical reasoning puzzle from
the Virtual Tools benchmark, like those shown in Figure 1.
Your goal is to have the red ball end up in the green region.
To make that happen, you need to choose one of the three
objects from the top left, place it somewhere in the scene,
and let gravity and causality do the rest. Which object would
you choose and where would you place it? Research in
cognitive science suggests that humans solve tasks like these
by building internal models of the physical world (Battaglia
et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2018; Ota et al., 2021; Zhou et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, CA,
USA 2 Department of Psychology, Stanford University, CA, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Carlota ParésMorlans <cpares@stanford.edu>.

We propose Causal-PIK, a method that leverages physical
intuition and causality to solve single-intervention physical
reasoning tasks in as few trials as possible. Our method
uses Bayesian optimization to reason about causality via a
Physics-Informed Kernel to obtain an expressive posterior
distribution over the environment dynamics. This allows an
agent to efficiently explore the search space and intelligently

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

