FlexControl: Computation-Aware Conditional Control with Differentiable
Router for Text-to-Image Generation

Zheng Fang * 1 Lichuan Xiang * 1 2 Xu Cai 2 Kaicheng Zhou 2 Hongkai Wen 1

Figure 1. Dynamically inject conditional controls for image generation based on timestep and task-specific sample. (a) The
architecture of conventional controllable generative model — ControlNet. (b) The architecture of the proposed FlexControl. (c) Statistics
on the number of activated control blocks of the FlexControl at each denoising step. Here, “∼50% spasity” indicates that the number of
floating-point operations (FLOPs) of activated blocks is limited to 50% of the trainable branch.

Abstract

with computation-aware training loss in an endto-end training manner. Through comprehensive
experiments on both UNet and DiT architectures
on different control methods, we show that our
method can upgrade existing controllable generative models in certain key aspects of interest.
As evidenced by both quantitative and qualitative
evaluations, FlexControl preserves or enhances
image fidelity while also reducing computational
overhead by selectively activating the most relevant blocks to control. These results underscore
the potential of a flexible, data-driven approach
for controlled diffusion and open new avenues for
efficient generative model design. The code will
soon be available at https://github.com/
Daryu-Fan/FlexControl.

Spatial conditioning control offers a powerful
way to guide diffusion-based generative models. Yet, most implementations (e.g., ControlNet) rely on ad-hoc heuristics to choose which
network blocks to control — an approach that
varies unpredictably with different tasks. To address this gap, we propose FlexControl, a novel
framework that equips all diffusion blocks with
control signals during training and employs a
trainable gating mechanism to dynamically select
which control signal to activate at each denoising step. By introducing a computation-aware
loss, we can encourage the control signal to activate only when it benefits the generation quality. By eliminating manual control unit selection, FlexControl enhances adaptability across
diverse tasks and streamlines the design pipeline

1. Introduction

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK 2 Collov Labs. Correspondence to:
Hongkai Wen <hongkai.wen@warwick.ac.uk>.

Diffusion-based image generative models have recently
gained widespread acceptance in the art and design community. Not only for their high-quality, photo-realistic image
generation, but also due to the transformative capabilities
of controllable unit like ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023b),
T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2024), OminiControl(Tan et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

