Detecting Strategic Deception with Linear Probes

Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill 1 Bilal Chughtai 1 Stefan Heimersheim 1 Marius Hobbhahn 1

Abstract

inger, 2024; Scheurer et al., 2023), to achieve goals given
in-context (Meinke et al., 2024), or even when the model
has conflicting goals with the developer (Greenblatt et al.,
2024). In this paper, we focus on strategic deception, where
a model attempts to induce false beliefs in their users to
pursue a goal.

AI models might use deceptive strategies as part
of scheming or misaligned behaviour. Monitoring outputs alone is insufficient, since the AI
might produce seemingly benign outputs while
its internal reasoning is misaligned. We thus
evaluate if linear probes can robustly detect deception by monitoring model activations. We
test two probe-training datasets, one with contrasting instructions to be honest or deceptive
(following Zou et al. (2023)) and one of responses to simple roleplaying scenarios. We
test whether these probes generalize to realistic
settings where Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct behaves
deceptively, such as concealing insider trading
(Scheurer et al., 2023) and purposely underperforming on safety evaluations (Benton et al.,
2024). We find that our probe distinguishes honest and deceptive responses with AUROCs between 0.96 and 0.999 on our evaluation datasets.
If we set the decision threshold to have a 1% false
positive rate on chat data not related to deception, our probe catches 95-99% of the deceptive
responses. Overall we think white-box probes
are promising for future monitoring systems, but
current performance is insufficient as a robust defence against deception. Our probes’ outputs can
be viewed at data.apolloresearch.ai/dd/ and our
code at github.com/ApolloResearch/deceptiondetection.

Deception becomes increasingly concerning as model capabilities advance. A particular safety concern is that AI
agents might covertly pursue misaligned goals, hiding their
true capabilities and objectives, also known as “scheming.”
For instance, they may choose to sandbag safety evaluations
(van der Weij et al., 2024) or falsely pretend to be aligned
and corrigible (Greenblatt et al., 2024; Carlsmith, 2023).
One guard against scheming would be to reliably detect
strategic deception; this serves as an important component
of an AI Control approach (Greenblatt et al., 2023). Monitoring for deception presents unique challenges compared to
other undesired behaviours (e.g. harmful outputs). Deceptive models will purposefully craft outputs to appear honest,
for example by obfuscating backdoors in code or justifying
incorrect answers with plausible reasoning. Given this challenge, we focus on “white-box” techniques that analyse the
model internals, rather than just examining outputs.
The models we test are not yet capable of the sort of sophisticated deception we ultimately worry about; their deceptive
actions are generally obvious from reading the complete
transcript. Thus, our experiments do not attempt to prove
that white-box monitors can achieve this ambitious goal,
but only validate and benchmark performance in simpler
settings.
While prior work (Zou et al., 2023; Burns et al., 2022; Marks
& Tegmark, 2023) has explored using probes to detect falsehoods, these works generally (1) focus on factual domains,
(2) evaluate “off-policy” human-written responses instead
of model-generated ones, and (3) do not consider multi-turn
agent settings where safety techniques may not generalise
(Andriushchenko et al., 2024; Lermen et al., 2024; Kumar
et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Language models occasionally act deceptively, even when
trained to be honest (Park et al., 2023). This can occur
without explicit instruction to deceive users. For example, models have been found to act deceptively in order
to conceal previous unethical actions (Järviniemi & Hub1
Apollo Research, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence
to: Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill <nix@apolloresearch.ai>.

Our contributions are as follows.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. We train white-box probes on simple datasets that are
not intended to be realistic. In particular, we use a set
1

