Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a
Social Science Measurement Challenge

Hanna Wallach 1 Meera Desai 2 A. Feder Cooper 1 Angelina Wang 3 Chad Atalla 1 Solon Barocas 1
Su Lin Blodgett 1 Alexandra Chouldechova 1 Emily Corvi 1 P. Alex Dow 1 Jean Garcia-Gathright 1
Alexandra Olteanu 1 Nicholas Pangakis 1 Stefanie Reed 1 Emily Sheng 1 Dan Vann 1
Jennifer Wortman Vaughan 1 Matthew Vogel 1 Hannah Washington 1 Abigail Z. Jacobs 2

Abstract

deployed in a particular context, or even whether it should
be redesigned. The process of evaluation2 necessarily
requires information about the system’s capabilities (like its
mathematical reasoning skills), behaviors (like regurgitating
pieces of its training data), and impacts (like causing its
users to feel harmed). Often, this information takes the form
of measurements on nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio
scales (Hand, 2004), where each measurement reflects the
amount of some concept of interest exhibited by that system
(related to its capabilities, behaviors, or impacts) in some
context of interest. Such measurements are obtained via
the process of measurement, which uses measurement instruments3 (e.g., datasets, classifiers, annotation guidelines,
scoring rubrics, and aggregation functions) that instantiate a
particular measurement approach (e.g., benchmarking, automated red teaming, real-world evaluations, and user studies).

The measurement tasks involved in evaluating
generative AI (GenAI) systems lack sufficient scientific rigor, leading to what has been described as
“a tangle of sloppy tests [and] apples-to-oranges
comparisons” (Roose, 2024). In this position
paper, we argue that the ML community would
benefit from learning from and drawing on the
social sciences when developing and using measurement instruments for evaluating GenAI systems. Specifically, our position is that evaluating
GenAI systems is a social science measurement
challenge. We present a four-level framework,
grounded in measurement theory from the social
sciences, for measuring concepts related to the
capabilities, behaviors, and impacts of GenAI
systems. This framework has two important
implications: First, it can broaden the expertise involved in evaluating GenAI systems by enabling
stakeholders with different perspectives to participate in conceptual debates. Second, it brings rigor
to both conceptual and operational debates by
offering a set of lenses for interrogating validity.

Across academia, industry, and government (e.g., National
Institute for Standards and Technology, 2024; Cooper et al.,
2023; Perez et al., 2022; Weidinger et al., 2023), there is an
increasing awareness that the measurement tasks involved
in evaluating GenAI systems are more difficult than those
involved in evaluating traditional ML systems. This is because GenAI systems accept a variety of inputs, produce
diverse outputs, support a wide range of use cases, and have
potential impacts on people and society that range from
mundane to catastrophic. As a result, concepts related to the
capabilities, behaviors, and impacts of GenAI systems—the
concepts to be measured when evaluating GenAI systems—
are often abstract and deeply intertwined with people and
society. Abstract concepts cannot be directly measured and
must therefore be indirectly measured from other observable
phenomena. In addition, their meanings and understandings are often contested (e.g., Mulligan et al., 2016; 2019)
across—and within—use cases, cultures, and languages.

1. Evaluating GenAI Systems
Evaluating a generative AI (GenAI) system1 —i.e., making
and justifying evaluative claims about that system—is
critical for making decisions about whether it should
be used for a particular purpose, whether it should be
1

Microsoft Research 2 University of Michigan
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Hanna Wallach
<wallach@microsoft.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
We use the term “GenAI system” to refer to either 1) a single
GenAI model or 2) one or more integrated software components,
where at least one component is an GenAI model. When we wish
to refer to a single GenAI model, we use the term “GenAI model.”

Although ML researchers and practitioners have proposed
myriad measurement instruments for evaluating GenAI
2

We provide definitions for italicized terms in Appendix A.
We note that measurement instruments can be qualitative or quantitative, but must collectively result in measurements.
3

1

