HEAP: Hyper Extended A-PDHG Operator for Constrained High-dim PDEs

Mingquan Feng * 1 Weixin Liao * 1 Yixin Huang 1 Yifan Fu 1 Qifu Zheng 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

To tackle the dimensionality challenge, recent advances
in learning-based solvers often try to leverage the specific
structure of PDE (Han et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2022; Yu
et al., 2018) and develop memory-efficient training techniques (Hu et al., 2024; Shang et al., 2023). These methods
have shown empirical success on a variety of PDEs. However, they are designed to handle specific instances, meaning
that they require expensive retraining from scratch whenever there are changes in the initial or boundary conditions.
Neural operators (Gaby et al., 2024; Gaby & Ye, 2024) overcome these issues by learning the evolution operator of the
solution function. The training is solely based on the PDE
residual loss, no needing spatial discretization or solving the
PDE directly. Once trained, the model (ideally) generalizes
to new initial conditions with a single inference pass.

Neural operators have emerged as a promising
approach for high-dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs). However, existing neural
operators often have difficulty in dealing with
constrained PDEs, which is a practical setting
where the solution must satisfy additional equality or inequality constraints beyond the governing equations. To close this gap, we propose a
novel neural operator, Hyper Extended Adaptive
PDHG (HEAP) for constrained high-dim PDEs,
where the learned operator evolves in the parameter space of PDEs. We first show that the evolution operator learning can be formulated as a
quadratic programming (QP) problem, then unroll the adaptive primal-dual hybrid gradient (APDHG) algorithm as a QP-solver into the neural
operator architecture. It allows to improve efficiency while retaining theoretical guarantees of
the constrained optimization. Empirical results
on a variety of high-dim PDEs show that HEAP
outperforms the state-of-the-art neural operator
model.

Despite such progress, a notable bottleneck (we also note
the early efforts date back to (Lagaris et al., 1998)) to neural
PDE solvers is the (in)equality constraints, which are common in both real-world scenarios and numerical modeling,
e.g. heat diffusion with temperature bounds and the Euler
equation with entropy conditions. Simple methods incorporating these constraints can result in unstable training,
slow convergence, and violation of the constraints (Wang
et al., 2021). While more advanced techniques have been
proposed to handle constraints in either soft penalty (Wang
et al., 2024) or hard encoding (Lu et al., 2021b), these
methods come with either significant computational costs
or network architecture restrictions and are limited to lowdimensional PDEs as discussed in (Feng et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are widely used across
various disciplines in science, engineering, economics, and
finance (Strauss, 2007; Folland, 2020). Since many PDEs
lack analytical solutions, numerical techniques like finite
element methods (Huebner et al., 2001) and recently neural
network-based solvers (Blechschmidt & Ernst, 2021) have
been developed. Although these approaches have witnessed
significant progress, they face the curse of dimensionality,
where the number of required data points grows exponentially as the dimension d of the independent variables increases (Bellman, 1966).

In this work, we propose a novel quadratic programmingbased neural operator, HEAP, for constrained highdimensional PDEs, which can efficiently handle constraints
in high-dimensional PDEs beyond existing SOTA neural
operators. We first show that the evolution operator in the
parameter space of constrained PDEs can be formulated as
a QP problem, where the QP constraints correspond to the
quadratic linear constraints in the original space. We then
unroll the adaptive primal-dual hybrid gradient (A-PDHG)
algorithm into the neural operator architecture to improve
computational efficiency. Moreover, we theoretically prove
the approximation capability of the proposed method and
provide empirical results on a variety of high-dim PDEs to
demonstrate that HEAP outperforms existing SOTA neural
operator model. The contributions are as follows:

*
Equal contribution 1 Sch. of Computer Science & Sch. of
Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>. This work
was partly supported by NSFC (62222607, 623B1009). Code available at GitHub.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

