FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for
Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch

Virginia Aglietti 1 Ira Ktena 1 Jessica Schrouff * 1 Eleni Sgouritsa 1
Francisco J. R. Ruiz 1 Alan Malek 1 Alexis Bellot 1 Silvia Chiappa 1

Abstract

in robotics (Calandra et al., 2016) and recommending new
molecules in drug design (Korovina et al., 2020). Two main
components lie at the heart of any BO algorithm: a surrogate model and an acquisition function (AF). The surrogate
model expresses assumptions about the objective function,
e.g., its smoothness, and it is often given by a Gaussian
Process (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). Based on the
surrogate model, the AF determines the sequential collection of function evaluations by assigning a score to potential
observation locations. BO’s success heavily depends on the
AF’s ability to efficiently balance exploitation (i.e. assigning
a high score to locations that are likely to yield optimal
function values) and exploration (i.e. assigning a high score
to regions with higher uncertainty about the objective function in order to inform future decisions), thus leading to the
identification of the optimum with the minimum number of
evaluations.

The sample efficiency of Bayesian optimization
algorithms depends on carefully crafted acquisition functions (AFs) guiding the sequential collection of function evaluations. The best-performing
AF s can vary significantly across optimization
problems, often requiring ad-hoc and problemspecific choices. This work tackles the challenge of designing novel AFs that perform well
across a variety of experimental settings. Based
on FunSearch, a recent work using Large Language Models (LLMs) for discovery in mathematical sciences, we propose FunBO, an LLM-based
method that can be used to learn new AFs written
in computer code by leveraging access to a number of evaluations for a limited set of objective
functions. We provide the analytic expression of
all discovered AFs and evaluate them on various
global optimization benchmarks and hyperparameter optimization tasks. We show how FunBO
identifies AFs that generalize well both in and out
of the training distribution of functions, thus outperforming established general-purpose AFs and
achieving competitive performance against AFs
that are customized to specific function types and
are learned via transfer-learning algorithms.

Existing AFs aim to provide either general-purpose optimization strategies or approaches tailored to specific objective types. For example, Expected Improvement (EI)
(Šaltanis, 1971; Mockus, 1974), Upper Confidence Bound
(UCB) (Lai & Robbins, 1985) and Probability of Improvement (PofI) (Kushner, 1962; 1964) are all widely adopted
general-purpose AFs that can be used out-of-the-box across
BO algorithms and objective functions. The performance
of these AFs varies significantly across different types of
black-box functions, making the AF choice an ad-hoc, empirically driven, decision. There exists an extensive literature
on alternative AFs outperforming EI, UCB and PofI, for instance entropy-based (Wang & Jegelka, 2017) or knowledgegradient (Šaltanis, 1971; Frazier et al., 2008) optimizers, see
Garnett (2023, Chapter 7) for a review. However, while
these functions are often interpretable, they are generally
hard to implement and expensive to evaluate, partly defeating the purpose of replacing the expensive original optimization with the optimization of a much cheaper and faster to
evaluate AF. In order to avoid the limitations of current
AF s, several works have proposed self-adjusting the hyperparameters of known AFs in a data driven way throughout
the optimization process (Benjamins et al., 2023; Ding et al.,
2022), combining different AFs in a portfolio and selecting
them via an online multi-armed bandit strategy (Hoffman

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Kushner, 1962; 1964; Mockus,
1974; Jones et al., 1998) is a methodology for optimizing
complex and expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions that
emerge in many scientific disciplines. BO has been used
across a wide variety of applications ranging from hyperparameter tuning in machine learning (Bergstra et al., 2011;
Snoek et al., 2012; Cho et al., 2020) to designing policies
*
Now at GlaxoSmithKline. 1 Google DeepMind, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Virginia Aglietti <aglietti@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

