Bayesian Basis Function Approximation for Scalable Gaussian Process Priors in
Deep Generative Models

Mehmet Yiğit Balık 1 Maksim Sinelnikov 1 Priscilla Ong 1 Harri Lähdesmäki 1

Abstract

healthcare domain. By studying the associations between
covariates and samples (i.e., measurements), it is possible to
model temporal dynamics, such as disease progression, and
impute missing values in the data (Diggle, 2002). However,
analysis is challenged by factors such as high dimensionality, non-trivial correlations within and across subjects,
time-varying covariates, and missing values and observations (Ramchandran et al., 2021).

High-dimensional time-series datasets are common in domains such as healthcare and economics.
Variational autoencoder (VAE) models, where latent variables are modeled with a Gaussian process (GP) prior, have become a prominent model
class to analyze such correlated datasets. However, their applications are challenged by the inherent cubic time complexity that requires specific GP approximation techniques, as well as
the general challenge of modeling both shared
and individual-specific correlations across time.
Though inducing points enhance GP prior VAE
scalability, optimizing them remains challenging, especially since discrete covariates resist
gradient-based methods. In this work, we propose a scalable basis function approximation technique for GP prior VAEs that mitigates these challenges and results in linear time complexity, with
a global parametrization that eliminates the need
for amortized variational inference and the associated amortization gap, making it well-suited
for conditional generation tasks where accuracy
and efficiency are crucial. Empirical evaluations
on synthetic and real-world benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our approach not only improves
scalability and interpretability but also drastically
enhances predictive performance.

Several machine learning methods have been developed
to address these challenges, with variational autoencoders
(VAEs) emerging as an established class of models for
representation learning and generative tasks (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). VAEs can learn both
an expressive neural network parameterized model for highdimensional data generation as well as an efficient amortized variational approximation of sample-specific latent
variables. However, standard VAEs assume that each data
point is independent and identically distributed (iid), which
limits their ability to capture correlations between samples
in temporal datasets.
VAEs can be enhanced to model correlations between samples. Among these enhancements, VAEs equipped with a
Gaussian process (GP) prior for latent variables have proven
to be particularly effective for capturing time dependencies
and correlations between samples and achieve impressive
performance improvements (Casale et al., 2018). However,
this powerful approach comes with a cost of computational
complexity that scales cubically with the size of the dataset
(Quinonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Bauer et al., 2016)
that limits its scalability for large datasets. There have been
efforts to tackle these challenges by incorporating inducing
points (Titsias, 2009) and stochastic gradient-based optimization with mini-batching (Hensman et al., 2013). Optimizing inducing point locations becomes non-trivial with
discrete covariates as their non-continuous kernels preclude
gradient-based updates. To our knowledge, no efficient
general solution for discrete covariates in GP prior VAEs
has been proposed. Finally, their variational posterior commonly uses a mean-field approximation with parameters
tied by a shared encoder, which limits performance and
introduces an unavoidable amortization gap (Cremer et al.,
2018; Margossian & Blei, 2024).

1. Introduction
High-dimensional time-series datasets are common in various domains, including social sciences, economics, and
healthcare. These longitudinal datasets contain repeated
measurements of subjects over time along with auxiliary
covariate information, such as time, age, and gender, in the
1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland.
Correspondence to: Mehmet Yiğit Balık
<mehmet.balik@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

