Minimum Width for Universal Approximation
using Squashable Activation Functions

Jonghyun Shin 1 Namjun Kim 2 Geonho Hwang 3 Sejun Park 2

Abstract

The minimum size of networks that can universally approximate or memorize has also been studied. For example, classical results show that the minimum depth for both universal
approximation and memorization is exactly two (Pinkus,
1999; Baum, 1988). The minimum number of parameters
depends on the depth of networks. For universal approximation using R E LU networks, it is known that shallow
wide architectures require more parameters than deep narrow ones (Yarotsky, 2018), where similar results are also
known for memorization (Park et al., 2021a; Vardi et al.,
2022). While these results show the benefits of depth, they
also imply the existence of the minimum width enabling
universal approximation and memorization.

The exact minimum width that allows for universal approximation of unbounded-depth networks
is known only for R E LU and its variants. In this
work, we study the minimum width of networks
using general activation functions. Specifically,
we focus on squashable functions that can approximate the identity function and binary step
function by alternatively composing with affine
transformations. We show that for networks using a squashable activation function to universally approximate Lp functions from [0, 1]dx to
Rdy , the minimum width is max{dx , dy , 2} unless dx = dy = 1; the same bound holds for
dx = dy = 1 if the activation function is monotone. We then provide sufficient conditions for
squashability and show that all non-affine analytic
functions and a class of piecewise functions are
squashable, i.e., our minimum width result holds
for those general classes of activation functions.

There have been extensive research efforts to characterize
such a minimum width. The minimum width for memorization is constantly bounded (i.e., independent of the input
dimension) since any finite set of inputs can be mapped
to distinct scalar values by projecting them (Park et al.,
2021a). Intriguingly, the minimum width for universal approximation depends on the input dimension dx and the
output dimension dy . Several works have shown that the
minimum width lies between dx and dx + dy + α where
α ≥ 0 is some constant depending on the activation function and target functions space; however, the exact minimum
width is known only for approximating Lp functions when
the activation function is R E LU or its variants (Park et al.,
2021b; Cai, 2023; Kim et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Understanding what neural networks can or cannot do is
a fundamental problem in deep learning theory. The classical universal theorem states that two-layer networks can
approximate any continuous function if an activation function is non-polynomial (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989;
Leshno et al., 1993; Pinkus, 1999). Likewise, several studies
on memorization show that neural networks can fit arbitrary
finite training dataset (Baum, 1988; Huang and Babri, 1998).
These results guarantee the existence of networks that can
perform tasks in various practical applications such as computer vision (He et al., 2016), natural language processing
(Vaswani, 2017; Brown et al., 2020), and science (Jumper
et al., 2021).

1.1. Related works
The minimum width for universal approximation has been
studied for two function spaces C(X , Y) and Lp (X , Y):
C(X , Y) denotes the space of continuous functions from X
to Y endowed with the supremum norm supx∈X ∥f (x)∥∞
and Lp (X , Y) denotes the space of Lp functions
from X
to
1/p
R
Y endowed with the Lp -norm ∥f ∥Lp ≜ X ∥f ∥pp dµdx
for p ≥ 1. Recent studies on the minimum width (say
wmin ) was initiated by Lu et al. (2017). They show that
dx + 1 ≤ wmin ≤ dx + 4 for universally approximating L1 (Rdx , R) using R E LU networks. Hanin and Sellke
(2017) consider universally approximating C([0, 1]dx , Rdy )
using R E LU networks and prove dx + 1 ≤ wmin ≤ dx + dy .
Johnson (2019) proves the lower bound wmin ≥ dx + 1 for

1
Department of Mathematics Education, Korea University 2 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, GIST. Correspondence to:
Sejun Park <sejun.park000@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

