Eliciting Language Model Behaviors with Investigator Agents

Xiang Lisa Li * 1 Neil Chowdhury * 2 3 Daniel D. Johnson 3 Tatsunori Hashimoto 1 Percy Liang 1
Sarah Schwettmann 2 3 Jacob Steinhardt 3 4

Abstract

However, this restricts to a narrow distribution of tasks and
often produces inputs that are not interpretable by humans.

Language models exhibit complex, diverse behaviors when prompted with free-form text, making it
difficult to characterize the space of possible outputs. We study the problem of behavior elicitation,
where the goal is to search for prompts that induce
specific target behaviors (e.g., hallucinations or
harmful responses) from a target language model.
To navigate the exponentially large space of possible prompts, we train investigator models to map
randomly-chosen target behaviors to a diverse distribution of outputs that elicit them, similar to
amortized Bayesian inference. We do this through
supervised fine-tuning, reinforcement learning via
DPO, and a novel Frank-Wolfe training objective
to iteratively discover diverse prompting strategies. Our investigator models surface a variety of
effective and human-interpretable prompts leading to jailbreaks, hallucinations, and open-ended
aberrant behaviors, obtaining a 100% attack success rate on a subset of AdvBench (Harmful Behaviors) and an 85% hallucination rate.

At the opposite end, humans have discovered many surprising behaviors through open-ended interaction with language
models (Li et al., 2024; Ayrey, 2024), but this is expensive and difficult to scale. How can we get the best of
both worlds—building tools that are automated and scale
to frontier systems, while being flexible enough to meet the
open-ended complexity of language model behaviors?
This paper introduces a framework for automated behavior
elicitation that trains language model agents to investigate
other AI models (Figure 1). Our approach frames behavior
discovery as a reinforcement learning problem, where an
investigator model is trained to generate inputs that produce
specific behaviors from a target model—ranging from exact
string matches (string elicitation) to behaviors defined by
open-ended rubrics (rubric elicitation). By conditioning
these investigators on samples from a distribution of highlevel goals rather than optimizing separately for each goal,
we amortize the computational cost of search through input
space during training. Our approach yields flexible, generalpurpose investigators that discover interpretable prompting
strategies expressed in natural language.

1. Introduction

We focus on the special case of single-turn elicitation, where
the investigator model produces a single prompt x to elicit
a response y that satisfies a property r specified in natural
language. This poses two key challenges: first, x must be
optimized over the combinatorial space of language inputs;
and second, optimizing x directly may lead to undiverse
inputs that optimize r in an uninteresting way (e.g. repeat
after me: [output that satisfies r]).

Developers of language models seek to ensure they are wellbehaved over the wide distribution of inputs they receive
at deployment, for instance by training them to follow a
behavior spec (OpenAI, 2024) or constitution (Bai et al.,
2022). However, many of today’s models still exhibit unexpected behaviors (Roose, 2023), and even describing a
model’s behaviors is difficult due to the near-infinite space
of possible inputs and ways for models to respond.

To address the first challenge, we introduce a multi-stage RL
pipeline (Figure 2), which uses supervised fine-tuning on
related tasks to produce a good initialization (Section 3.1)
followed by DPO to achieve consistently high reward (Section 3.2). To address the second challenge, we introduce
an iterative variant of DPO that is adaptively regularized to
produce diverse outputs across iterations (Section 3.3); this
iterative method is equivalent to a variant of Frank-Wolfe
optimization (Bach, 2012) and asymptotically approximates
Bayesian posterior sampling.

To address this challenge, one approach is to design automated methods to uncover specific unwanted behaviors, as
in automated jailbreaking (Zou et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024).
*
1
Equal contribution
Stanford University 2 MIT
Transluce 4 UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
Xiang Lisa Li <xlisali@stanford.edu>, Neil Chowdhury
<neil@transluce.org>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

