Better to Teach than to Give: Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation via
Agent Queries with Diffusion Model Guidance

Fan Li 1 Xuan Wang 1 Min Qi 1 Zhaoxiang Zhang 1 Yuelei Xu 1

Abstract
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation
(DGSS) trains a model on a labeled source domain to generalize to unseen target domains with
consistent contextual distribution and varying visual appearance. Most existing methods rely
on domain randomization or data generation but
struggle to capture the underlying scene distribution, resulting in the loss of useful semantic
information. Inspired by the diffusion model’s
capability to generate diverse variations within
a given scene context, we consider harnessing
its rich prior knowledge of scene distribution to
tackle the challenging DGSS task. In this paper,
we propose a novel agent Query-driven learning
framework based on Diffusion model guidance
for DGSS, named QueryDiff. Our recipe comprises three key ingredients: (1) generating agent
queries from segmentation features to aggregate
semantic information about instances within the
scene; (2) learning the inherent semantic distribution of the scene through agent queries guided
by diffusion features; (3) refining segmentation
features using optimized agent queries for robust
mask predictions. Extensive experiments across
various settings demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods. Notably, it enhances the model’s ability
to generalize effectively to extreme domains, such
as cubist art styles. Code is available at https:
//github.com/FanLiHub/QueryDiff.

Figure 1. (a) The segmentation results are predicted by our method
and previous SOTA approach in extreme domains, including cubist
art and post-impressionist styles generated by ChatGPT. (b) Previous methods use the diffusion model as a data generator, which
struggles to cover all variations in the target domain, resulting in
limited performance. Our method employs agent queries to learn
scene distribution knowledge from the diffusion model, capitalizing on the inherent consistency of this distribution across domains
to improve segmentation model generalization.

1. Introduction
2020; Cheng et al., 2022). However, it experiences considerable performance degradation when there is a gap between
the training data and the test data. This has sparked interest in Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS)
(Zhao et al., 2022; Jia et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023). DGSS
aims to train a model to learn generalizable features from
the source domain, enabling it to perform well on a variety of unseen target domains with consistent contextual
distribution but significantly varying visual appearances.

Semantic segmentation, a fundamental task in computer
vision, has seen significant progress in recent years (Long
et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2019; Zhong et al.,
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China. Correspondence to: Yuelei Xu <xuyuelei@nwpu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

