Robust Spatio-Temporal Centralized Interaction for OOD Learning

Jiaming Ma 1 Binwu Wang * 1 2 Pengkun Wang 1 2 Zhengyang Zhou 1 2 Xu Wang 1 2 Yang Wang * 1 2

Abstract
Recently, spatio-temporal graph convolutional
networks have achieved dominant performance in
spatio-temporal prediction tasks. However, most
models relying on node-to-node messaging interaction exhibit sensitivity to spatio-temporal
shifts, encountering out-of-distribution (OOD)
challenges. To address these issues, we introduce Spatio-Temporal OOD Processor (STOP),
which employs a centralized messaging mechanism along with a message perturbation mechanism to facilitate robust spatio-temporal interactions. Specifically, the centralized messaging
mechanism integrates Context-Aware Units for
coarse-grained spatio-temporal feature interactions with nodes, effectively blocking traditional
node-to-node messages. We also implement a
message perturbation mechanism to disrupt this
messaging process, compelling the model to extract generalizable contextual features from generated variant environments. Finally, we customize
a spatio-temporal distributionally robust optimization approach that exposes the model to challenging environments, thereby further enhancing its
generalization capabilities. Compared with 14
baselines across six datasets, STOP achieves up
to 17.01% improvement in generalization performance and 18.44% improvement in inductive
learning performance. The code is available at
https://github.com/PoorOtterBob/STOP.

Changed nodes

New nodes

Removed nodes

Inaccurate nodes

Figure 1. Subfigure (a) (upper half) illustrates the predictive performance of STGNNs in various scenarios and subfigure (b) (lower
half) demonstrates the sensitivity of the node-to-node messaging
mechanism to spatio-temporal shift.

sis (Xia et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2023; Miao et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a). Currently, spatiotemporal graph convolutional networks (STGNNs) have
emerged as the primary tools in this field. These models
generalize spatio-temporal graph dependencies and employ
node-to-node messaging mechanism (such as GCN or Transformer) for feature interaction. Finally, the generated unique
representation is fed into a decoder to generate prediction.
However, the encouraging success of STGNNs is predicated
on the independent and identically distributed (IID) assumption. In reality, the distributional characteristics (such as
mean and variance) or graph structures of spatio-temporal
data evolve over time, presenting out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization challenges for STGNNs.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal prediction is a critical task in urban computing with positive effects for various applications including
traffic management, energy control, and atmospheric analy-

With the LargeST-SD dataset (Liu et al., 2023b) as an example, we report the performance of advanced STGNNs in
both IID and OOD scenarios, as shown in Figure 1 (a). The
results indicate that their performance rapidly deteriorates
when facing spatio-temporal OOD challenges, particularly
in structural shift (S-OOD) scenario. Embarrassingly, the
models’ reliance on node-to-node messaging appears to hinder their effectiveness. Ablation experiments (as shown in
Table 2) further support this: for some advanced STGNNs,
variants without node-to-node messaging mechanism per-

1

University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei,
China 2 Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, Suzhou,
China. First author mail: JiamingMa@mail.ustc.edu.cn. Correspondence to: Binwu Wang and Yang Wang as corresponding
authors <wbw2024@ustc.edu.cn and angyan@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

