Determining Layer-wise Sparsity for Large Language Models
Through a Theoretical Perspective

Weizhong Huang 1 Yuxin Zhang 1 Xiawu Zheng 1 2 3 Fei Chao 1 Rongrong Ji 1 2

Abstract

ers speedups of 2.63× and 2.23× on CPU and
GPU, respectively. Code is available at https:
//github.com/wzhuang-xmu/ATP.

In this paper, we address the challenge of determining the layer-wise sparsity rates of large
language models (LLMs) through a theoretical
perspective. Specifically, we identify a critical
issue of “reconstruction error explosion” in existing LLMs sparsification methods. This refers
to the cumulative effect of reconstruction errors
throughout the sparsification process, where errors from earlier layers propagate and amplify in
subsequent layers. As a result, the overall reconstruction error increases significantly, leading to
a substantial degradation in model performance.
Through theoretical analysis, we derive a simple
yet effective approach to layer-wise sparsity allocation that mitigates this issue. Our method uses
a monotonically increasing arithmetic progression, reducing the process of determining sparsity
rates for multiple layers to the determination of
a single common difference hyperparameter. Remarkably, this allows for the optimal layer-wise
sparsity rates to be identified with just a few trials.
Both our theoretical analysis and experimental
results demonstrate that this sparsity allocation
scheme is near optimal. Extensive experiments
show that our method significantly improves the
performance of sparse LLMs across various architectures, outperforming existing layer-wise
sparsity methods. Furthermore, it enhances the
performance of various compression techniques
and is applicable to vision and multimodal models. Notably, our method achieves a reduction of
52.10 in perplexity for the 70% sparse LLaMA27B model obtained via Wanda, improves average zero-shot accuracy by 10.50%, and deliv-

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated outstanding capabilities in various natural language processing
tasks (Meta, 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a).
However, their vast number of parameters and high computational demands present significant challenges to model
deployment, impeding further applications (Zhu et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024). Network sparsity (Rao et al., 2021;
Paul et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2025b) methods remove less
important parameters from LLMs, enabling model compression without sacrificing performance. This can reduce the
model’s memory footprint and computational complexity
(Li et al., 2024a; An et al., 2024). Existing sparsity methods
for LLMs, such as SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023)
and Wanda (Sun et al., 2023), adopt a post-training approach
which prune all weights in one-shot and can obtain sparse
LLMs without the need for additional fine-tuning.
However, these sparsity methods set a uniform layer-wise
sparsity rate for different layers, without considering the
varying importance of each layer, which harms the accuracy
of sparse LLMs. To address the above issue, many studies
have proposed various methods to determine the layer-wise
sparsity rate of LLMs. Based on their methodological designs, we categorize these methods into two main groups:
Metric based methods. These methods determine the importance of each layer of LLMs through hand-crafted metrics, thereby obtaining the sparsity rate of each layer. For example, OWL (Yin et al., 2023) proposes an outlier weighted
layer importance metric. By setting the sparsity rate to be
inversely proportional to the outlier ratio, it effectively protects the layers with a higher ratio of outliers. AlphaPruning
(Lu et al., 2024) utilizes the heavy-tailed self- regularization
theory (Martin & Mahoney, 2019), especially the shape of
the empirical spectral density (Martin et al., 2021) of the
weight matrix, to determine the importance of each layer of
LLMs. ALS (Li et al., 2024c) proposes an importance metric based on mutual information (Tschannen et al., 2019),

1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China. 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Xiamen University. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to: Rongrong Ji <rrji@xmu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

