Dimension-Independent Rates for Structured Neural Density Estimation

Robert A. Vandermeulen Wai Ming Tai Bryon Aragam

Abstract

the mass of the density is heavily concentrated around a
lower-dimensional subset of that space, such as an embedded manifold. As we will show later, for complex data types
of significant interest—images, video, sound, and text—this
assumption is intimately linked to spatio-temporal locality.
For instance, in data such as images, video, sound, and text,
spatio-temporal locality implies that nearby covariates—e.g.
pixel intensities at adjacent positions in an image—tend to
be strongly dependent, suggesting that the data is effectively
constrained to a lower-dimensional subspace.

We show that deep neural networks can achieve
dimension-independent rates of convergence for
learning structured densities typical of image, audio, video, and text data. For example, in images,
where each pixel becomes independent of the rest
of the image when conditioned on pixels at most
t steps away, a simple L2 -minimizing neural net2
work can attain a rate of n−1/((t+1) +4) , where
t is independent of the ambient dimension d, i.e.
the total number of pixels. We further provide empirical evidence that, in real-world applications, t
is often a small constant, thus effectively circumventing the curse of dimensionality. Moreover,
for sequential data (e.g., audio or text) exhibiting
a similar local dependence structure, our analysis shows a rate of n−1/(t+5) , offering further
evidence of dimension independence in practical
scenarios.

This paper investigates the benefits of leveraging the converse structure: The independence of spatio-temporally distant covariates. Covariates that are spatio-temporally distant
often exhibit near-independence, particularly after conditioning on nearby covariates. Consider a sound recording:
two one-second segments separated by a minute might share
common elements, such as the same speaker. However,
given the intervening minute of audio, these segments become effectively independent. The minute-long interval
contains sufficient information to render the separated segments mutually uninformative. This principle of conditional
independence extends to various data types, including images, where pixels far apart tend to be independent when
conditioned on the surrounding region.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has emerged as a remarkably effective approach to numerous statistical problems that were historically extremely challenging, especially in high-dimensional
settings. Deep generative models, for example, can approximate densities with thousands or millions of dimensions
using merely a few million data points (Oussidi & Elhassouny, 2018; Ho et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2024). This stands
in stark contrast to standard density estimation theory, which
would demand astronomical sample sizes due to the curse
of dimensionality. At the same time, it is known that if a
density satisfies certain assumptions such as monotonicity,
convexity, sparsity, mixtures, or additivity, the curse of dimensionality can be mitigated. Perhaps the most widely
accepted explanation for deep learning’s ability to circumvent this curse is the manifold hypothesis (Bengio et al.,
2013; Brahma et al., 2016). This hypothesis posits that, despite a distribution’s ambient space being high-dimensional,
.
Correspondence to:
Robert A.
<robert.anton.vandermeulen@gmail.com>.

For spatial data—focusing on images for concreteness—it
is well known that a pixel becomes independent of the rest
of the image when conditioned on all pixels within a certain
distance t, following an argument similar to the one made
for sound segments above. We show that, under this assumption, density estimation using a neural network with a
simple L2 -minimizing loss achieves a rate of approximately
2
n−1/((t+1) +4) . In contrast the standard rate in nonparametric density estimation for the same class of densities is
n−1/(2+d) , where d represents the total number of covariates. This implies that the effective dimension is of order
t2 instead of d. For comparison, in images, t is typically
on the order of 3-8 (see Section 3), whereas d is the full
image dimensionality given by width times height, which
would be substantially larger than t in practice. For example, consider simple benchmark datasets like MNIST
(28 × 28, d = 784) or CelebA (256 × 256, d = 65 536).
Similarly, for sequential data, a dimension-independent rate
of n−1/(t+5) is achieved.

Vandermeulen

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

