Accurate Identification of Communication
Between Multiple Interacting Neural Populations

Belle Liu 1 Jacob Sacks 2 Matthew D. Golub 2

Abstract

et al., 2018; Stringer et al., 2019; Musall et al., 2019; Allen
et al., 2019; Jia et al., 2022). Consequently, there has been
growing interest in the design of data-driven communication models that seek to infer the pathways and content of
communication between the recorded regions.

Neural recording technologies now enable simultaneous recording of population activity across
many brain regions, motivating the development
of data-driven models of communication between
brain regions. However, existing models can
struggle to disentangle the sources that influence
recorded neural populations, leading to inaccurate portraits of inter-regional communication.
Here, we introduce Multi-Region Latent Factor
Analysis via Dynamical Systems (MR-LFADS),
a sequential variational autoencoder designed to
disentangle inter-regional communication, inputs
from unobserved regions, and local neural population dynamics. We show that MR-LFADS
outperforms existing approaches at identifying
communication across dozens of simulations of
task-trained multi-region networks. When applied
to large-scale electrophysiology, MR-LFADS predicts brain-wide effects of circuit perturbations
that were held out during model fitting. These validations on synthetic and real neural data position
MR-LFADS as a promising tool for discovering
principles of brain-wide information processing.

Accurately identifying inter-regional communication is challenging for at least four reasons (Biswas et al., 2020; Kang
& Druckmann, 2020; Keeley et al., 2020; Perich & Rajan,
2020; Semedo et al., 2020; Kass et al., 2023). First, communication signals are not directly observed in multi-region
recordings. Although some recorded neurons might project
to other recorded regions, the identity and targets of these
projection neurons are typically unknown. Second, models
may need to account for inputs to the recorded brain regions
from other regions that were not recorded during the experiment. Third, models should faithfully reconstruct activity
within each recorded region by accounting for communication between recorded regions, inputs from unrecorded
regions, and local neural population dynamics—capturing
complex features such as structured trial-to-trial variability (Goris et al., 2014) and nonlinear, nonstationary, and
state-dependent population dynamics (Shenoy et al., 2013;
Vyas et al., 2020; Duncker & Sahani, 2021; Durstewitz
et al., 2023). Fourth, accurate reconstruction of the recorded
data does not guarantee accurate inference of the underlying
communication. Many different models may sufficiently explain the recorded data, leading to ambiguities about which,
if any, should be trusted for scientific interpretation.

1. Introduction
Large-scale neural recording technologies, such as highdensity electrophysiology (Steinmetz et al., 2019; Siegle
et al., 2021; IBL et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Bennett
et al., 2024) and calcium imaging (Sofroniew et al., 2016;
Song et al., 2017; Allen et al., 2017), now enable simultaneous recording of neural population activity across many
brain regions. These advances have revealed that many
sensory, cognitive, and motor processes engage spatially
distributed networks in the brain (Makino et al., 2017; Gilad

In this work, we introduce Multi-Region Latent Factor Analysis via Dynamical Systems (MR-LFADS), a multi-region
communication model that directly addresses all of the challenges outlined above. MR-LFADS is a probabilistic model
that represents each recorded region with a distinct set of
stacked recurrent neural networks (RNNs) that capture the
region’s potentially nonlinear and nonstationary population
dynamics. MR-LFADS represents communication between
observed regions and inputs from unobserved regions as
disentangled sets of latent variables. Structured information bottlenecks encourage the model to infer inputs from
unobserved regions only when their effects cannot be explained by communication among the recorded regions.
MR-LFADS infers single-trial initial conditions and time-

1
Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Washington; 2 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Matthew Golub
<mgolub@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

