(How) Can Transformers Predict Pseudo-Random Numbers?

Tao Tao * 1 Darshil Doshi * 1 Dayal Singh Kalra * 2 Tianyu He * 1 Maissam Barkeshli 1 3
{tao2021, ddoshi, dayal, tianyuh, maissam}@umd.edu

1. Introduction

Abstract
Transformers excel at discovering patterns in sequential data, yet their fundamental limitations
and learning mechanisms remain crucial topics
of investigation. In this paper, we study the ability of Transformers to learn pseudo-random number sequences from linear congruential generators (LCGs), defined by the recurrence relation
xt+1 = axt + c mod m. We find that with
sufficient architectural capacity and training data
variety, Transformers can perform in-context prediction of LCG sequences with unseen moduli
(m) and parameters (a, c). By analyzing the embedding layers and attention patterns, we uncover
how Transformers develop algorithmic structures
to learn these sequences in two scenarios of increasing complexity. First, we investigate how
Transformers learn LCG sequences with unseen
(a, c) but fixed modulus; and demonstrate successful learning up to m = 232 . We find that
models learn to factorize m and utilize digit-wise
number representations to make sequential predictions. In the second, more challenging scenario
of unseen moduli, we show that Transformers can
generalize to unseen moduli up to mtest = 216 .
In this case, the model employs a two-step strategy: first estimating the unknown modulus from
the context, then utilizing prime factorizations to
generate predictions. For this task, we observe a
sharp transition in the accuracy at a critical depth
d = 3. We also find that the number of in-context
sequence elements needed to reach high accuracy
scales sublinearly with the modulus.†

Transformer-based language models have proven to be extremely powerful sequence generative models. With copious amounts of training data and computational resources,
they can identify and learn complex patterns from training corpora, resulting in numerous remarkable capabilities
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Recent research has demonstrated that these models, when provided
with sufficient context and inference compute, can acquire
new patterns and capabilities without additional training
through techniques such as in-context learning (Radford
et al., 2019) and chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei et al.,
2023). While these models have achieved unprecedented
success, understanding what underlying patterns are learned
and how they learn them remains a significant challenge.
Pseudo-Random Number Generators (PRNGs) represent an
interesting test case for exploring these challenges. These
algorithms, which are fundamental to modern cryptography
and computer science, are designed to produce outputs that
pass statistical tests for randomness, but nevertheless arise
from mathematical patterns that could potentially be learned
by sufficiently powerful sequence models.
This intersection between Transformer models’ patternlearning capabilities and the structured yet obfuscated nature
of PRNG outputs raises intriguing questions about both the
capabilities and limitations of these models. Can Transformers learn to predict PRNG outputs given sufficient training
data, model capacity, and context? If so, what implications
does this have for our understanding of both Transformer
architectures and PRNGs? Do the Transformers learn the
underlying generating algorithm or merely detect shortcuts
and spurious patterns? What effect do model capacity, data
variety, training methodologies, and context length have on
the capabilities of Transformers?

*

Equal contribution – authors listed in pseudo-random order.
Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, USA 3 Joint Quantum Institute, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Maissam Barkeshli
<maissam@umd.edu>.

1

This work aims to answer these questions by focusing on
learning sequences obtained from linear congruential generators (LCGs) using GPT-style autoregressive Transformers. We demonstrate how Transformers can successfully
learn LCGs with moduli up to m = 232 . We perform interpretability analyses, uncovering emergent structures in

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
†
We open source the code to reproduce our results: https://

github.com/dayal-kalra/transformer-prng.git

1

