EQ-VAE: Equivariance Regularized Latent Space for
Improved Generative Image Modeling

Theodoros Kouzelis 1 2 Ioannis Kakogeorgiou 1 Spyros Gidaris 3 Nikos Komodakis 1 4 5

Abstract

images into a lower-dimensional latent space, which can
be continuous (e.g., SD-VAE for diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022)) or discrete (e.g., VQ-GAN for autoregressive (Esser
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022b) and masked generative modeling (Chang et al., 2022)). This latent space retains essential
semantic and structural information while discarding highfrequency details. Second, a generative model learns to
model the distribution of these latent representations, enabling the synthesis of visually coherent images. At inference time, the generative model first samples a latent code,
which is then decoded back into the image space by the
autoencoder. While much research has focused on improving the generative phase—through advances in architectures
(Peebles & Xie, 2023), objectives (Ma et al., 2024), and optimization techniques (Yao et al., 2024)—the autoencoder’s
role in shaping the latent space remains equally critical to
overall performance.

Latent generative models have emerged as a leading approach for high-quality image synthesis.
These models rely on an autoencoder to compress
images into a latent space, followed by a generative model to learn the latent distribution. We
identify that existing autoencoders lack equivariance to semantic-preserving transformations like
scaling and rotation, resulting in complex latent
spaces that hinder generative performance. To
address this, we propose EQ-VAE, a simple regularization approach that enforces equivariance in
the latent space, reducing its complexity without degrading reconstruction quality. By finetuning pre-trained autoencoders with EQ-VAE,
we enhance the performance of several state-ofthe-art generative models, including DiT, SiT,
REPA and MaskGIT, achieving a ×7 speedup
on DiT-XL/2 with only five epochs of SD-VAE
fine-tuning. EQ-VAE is compatible with both
continuous and discrete autoencoders, thus offering a versatile enhancement for a wide range of
latent generative models. Project page and code:
https://eq-vae.github.io/.

In fact, the quality of the latent space is pivotal, influencing
both computational efficiency (by reducing dimensionality
and accelerating convergence in the generative phase) and
the model’s ability to produce high-fidelity outputs (Rombach et al., 2022). In diffusion models, most state-of-theart approaches—such as DiT (Peebles & Xie, 2023), SiT
(Ma et al., 2024), PixArt (Chen et al., 2024), SD3 (Esser
et al., 2024), and Flux (Black Forest Labs, 2023)—rely on
autoencoders with architectures and training objectives similar to the SD-VAE introduced in Latent Diffusion Models
(LDM) (Rombach et al., 2022). LDM explores two widely
adopted regularization strategies: a continuous variational
approach and a discrete codebook framework. The variational approach uses a KL divergence term to align the latent
distribution with a Gaussian prior, promoting a smooth and
structured latent space (Kingma & Welling, 2014). Alternatively, the discrete codebook framework constrains the
latent space to a finite set of learned embeddings, limiting its
complexity and providing a different form of regularization
(Esser et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Latent generative models (Rombach et al., 2022) have become a dominant framework for high-fidelity image synthesis, achieving state-of-the-art results across diffusion models
(Rombach et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2024),
masked generative modeling (Chang et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023), and autoregressive models (Esser et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2024). These models operate in two
phases. First, an autoencoder compresses high-dimensional
1
Archimedes,Athena Reaserch Center, Greece 2 National Technical University of Athens, Greece 3 valeo.ai, France 4 University
of Crete, Greece 5 IACM-Forth, Greece. Correspondence to:
Theodoros Kouzelis <theodoros.kouzelis@athenarc.gr>.

These regularization strategies inherently introduce a tradeoff. Stronger regularization, such as increasing the weight
of the KL divergence term, produces a smoother and more
learnable latent space for the generative model in the second
phase (Tschannen et al., 2025). However, it also reduces the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

