Scaffold with Stochastic Gradients: New Analysis with Linear Speed-Up

Paul Mangold 1 Alain Durmus 1 Aymeric Dieuleveut 1 Eric Moulines 1

Abstract

communications in certain settings, client heterogeneity can
significantly hinder its convergence. When the number of
local iterations increases, clients lean towards their local
minimums, which differ from the global one due to heterogeneity. This phenomenon, called client drift, can induce
bias in F EDAVG. To control this bias, clients must communicate frequently, requiring at least Ω(1/ϵ) communication
rounds to reach a mean squared error of ϵ2 when objective
functions are strongly-convex (Karimireddy et al., 2020).

This paper proposes a novel analysis for the Scaffold algorithm, a popular method for dealing with
data heterogeneity in federated learning. While
its convergence in deterministic settings—where
local control variates mitigate client drift—is well
established, the impact of stochastic gradient updates on its performance is less understood. To
address this problem, we first show that its global
parameters and control variates define a Markov
chain that converges to a stationary distribution in
the Wasserstein distance. Leveraging this result,
we prove that Scaffold achieves linear speed-up
in the number of clients up to higher-order terms
in the step size. Nevertheless, our analysis reveals
that Scaffold retains a higher-order bias, similar
to FedAvg, that does not decrease as the number
of clients increases. This highlights opportunities for developing improved stochastic federated
learning algorithms.

A key method for mitigating client drift is S CAFFOLD
(Karimireddy et al., 2020). In this algorithm, each client
updates its local model by performing gradient updates, adjusted using local control variates. After each aggregation
step, clients update their local control variates based on the
global model received from the server, effectively removing
heterogeneity bias. S CAFFOLD was first theoretically studied by Karimireddy et al. (2020), reducing communications
from O(1/ϵ) to O(log(1/ϵ)) for strongly-convex objectives,
where ϵ > 0 is a precision target. Later, Mishchenko et al.
(2022); Hu & Huang (2023) proved that (a variant of) S CAF FOLD reaches O(log(1/ϵ)) communication cost with an
improved dependence on the problem’s condition number.
Unfortunately, in all these results, the number of gradients
computed by each client does not decrease with the number of clients.1 Yet, a fundamental promise of federated
learning is to reduce training cost through collaboration, a
phenomenon called linear speed-up (Yu et al., 2019a).

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on the federated optimization, in which
N agents collaborate to solve a problem of the form
N

θ⋆ ∈ arg min f (θ) =
θ∈Rd

1 X
f(c) (θ) ,
N c=1

(1)

In this paper, we show for the first time, to our knowledge,
that SCAFFOLD achieves linear speed-up. To this end, we
develop a novel point of view on S CAFFOLD, showing that
its global iterates and control variates jointly form a Markov
chain, similarly to SGD (Dieuleveut et al., 2020) and F E DAVG (Mangold et al., 2025). For strongly-convex and
smooth objectives, we show that this Markov chain converges geometrically to a unique stationary distribution. A
careful examination of the pairwise covariances of the global
parameters and control variate reveals that, in this stationary
distribution, S CAFFOLD’s global parameters’ variance reduces linearly with the number of clients, up to a maximum
number of clients. We then leverage this result to give a new

Z

where for each c ∈ {1, . . . , N }, f(c) (θ) = E[F(c)(c) (θ)]
is a local risk function of agent c for some function
z
(z(c) , θ) 7→ F(c)(c) (θ) and local observation Z(c) with distribution ν(c) over a measurable space (Z, Z).
One of the most popular methods for solving (1) is F EDAVG
(McMahan et al., 2017), where clients perform multiple
local stochastic gradient updates, and send their updated
parameters to a central server, that aggregates them. Although F EDAVG’s local training reduces the number of
1
Ecole Polytechnique, CMAP, UMR 7641, France. Correspondence to: Paul Mangold <paul.mangold@polytechnique.edu>.

1

We note that, although Karimireddy et al. (2020) obtain such
speed-up, they do using a global step size, which significantly
departs from common practice. See discussions in Remark 2.1.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

