Tensorized Multi-View Multi-Label Classification via Laplace Tensor Rank

Qiyu Zhong 1 Yi Shan 1 2 Haobo Wang 3 Zhen Yang 1 Gengyu Lyu 1

Abstract
In multi-view multi-label classification (MVML),
each object has multiple heterogeneous views and
is annotated with multiple labels. The key to deal
with such problem lies in how to capture crossview consistent correlations while excavate multilabel semantic relationships. Existing MVML
methods usually employ two independent components to address them separately, and ignores
their potential interaction relationships. To address this issue, we propose a novel Tensorized
MVML method named TMvML, which formulates an MVML tensor classifier to excavate comprehensive cross-view feature correlations while
characterize complete multi-label semantic relationships. Specifically, we first reconstruct the
MVML mapping matrices as an MVML tensor
classifier. Then, we rotate the tensor classifier and
introduce a low-rank tensor constraint to ensure
view-level feature consistency and label-level semantic co-occurrence simultaneously. To better
characterize the low-rank tensor structure, we design a new Laplace Tensor Rank (LTR), which
serves as a tighter surrogate of tensor rank to capture high-order fiber correlations within the tensor
space. By conducting the above operations, our
method can easily address the two key challenges
in MVML via a concise LTR tensor classifier and
achieve the extraction of both cross-view consistent correlations and multi-label semantic relationships simultaneously. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that TMvML significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. An example of MVML webpage classification.

1. Introduction
Multi-View Multi-Label Learning (MVML) aims to learn
from training data, where each sample is represented by several heterogeneous features while associated with multiple
semantic labels (Lyu et al., 2024). Different from singleview multi-label data, MVML data incorporates complementary information from various views, thereby providing
more comprehensive descriptions for objects. Such characteristic has naturally led to its extensive applications in many
complex data analysis tasks (Liu et al., 2024d; Fu et al.,
2024). For example, in news webpage classification (Figure
1), a news webpage can be characterized by text, image and
video features, and annotated with multiple class labels such
as Wukong, Sales and Steam. MVML provides an effective
framework to learn a desired multi-label classifier for bridging heterogeneous features with their corresponding labels
and make proper predictions for new webpages.
The key to learn from MVML data lies in how to efficiently integrate heterogeneous features while comprehensively characterize all relevant labels. For example, (Zhao
et al., 2023) propose an MVML method called LVSL, which
seeks cross-view correlations and multi-label relationships
by learning the contribution weights of different views and
applying label correlation matrix with low-rank constraint.
(Zhong et al., 2024) introduce a non-negative matrix factorization based MVML method called GNAM, which learns
individual and common information across different views
and leverages a dynamic label correlation matrix to enhance
recognition performance. Despite these MVML methods
have achieved competitive performance improvements, they
still face two main challenges: (1) On one hand, these meth-

1

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, China 2 Idealism Beijing Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China 3 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China. Correspondence to: Gengyu Lyu <lyugengyu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

