Scaling Laws for Task-Optimized Models of the Primate Visual Ventral Stream

Abdulkadir Gokce 1 Martin Schrimpf 1
a)

Abstract
When trained on large-scale object classification
datasets, certain artificial neural network models begin to approximate core object recognition
behaviors and neural response patterns in the primate brain. While recent machine learning advances suggest that scaling compute, model size,
and dataset size improves task performance, the
impact of scaling on brain alignment remains unclear. In this study, we explore scaling laws for
modeling the primate visual ventral stream by systematically evaluating over 600 models trained
under controlled conditions on benchmarks spanning V1, V2, V4, IT and behavior. We find that
while behavioral alignment continues to scale
with larger models, neural alignment saturates.
This observation remains true across model architectures and training datasets, even though models with stronger inductive biases and datasets
with higher-quality images are more computeefficient. Increased scaling is especially beneficial for higher-level visual areas, where small
models trained on few samples exhibit only poor
alignment. Our results suggest that while scaling
current architectures and datasets might suffice
for alignment with human core object recognition
behavior, it will not yield improved models of
the brain’s visual ventral stream, highlighting the
need for novel strategies in building brain models.

b)

Figure 1: a) For a given compute budget (C), we determine
the scaling laws for maximal neural and behavioral alignment to the primate visual ventral stream. b) We find consistent scaling laws for brain and behavioral alignment across
over 600 models. While we predict models to approach
perfect behavioral alignment at large scales, the effect of
scaling on brain alignment is already saturating.

tools for simulating the response patterns of neurons within
this stream (Yamins et al., 2014; Schrimpf et al., 2018).
These advanced models offer a precise computational account of how neural mechanisms in the brain give rise to
visual perception.

The advent of neural networks has revolutionized our understanding and modeling of complex neural processes. A
particularly active area of study is the ventral visual stream
in primates, a key pathway in the brain responsible for
processing visual information (Goodale & Milner, 1992;
Grill-Spector et al., 2001; Malach et al., 2002; Kriegeskorte
et al., 2008). Neural networks, when trained on extensive
datasets, have emerged as the most accurate quantitative

Recent developments in machine learning have emphasized
the significance of both the volume of training data and
the complexity of model architectures (Kaplan et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2022; Bahri et al., 2022;
Antonello et al., 2023; Muennighoff et al., 2023; Aghajanyan et al., 2023; Isik et al., 2024). These findings raise
the question: Can we build better models of the brain by
scaling up model architectures and dataset sizes? Recent
studies have found that in pre-trained models, the number
of parameters and dataset samples respectively seem to improve predictions of fMRI and behavioral measurements
(Antonello et al., 2023; Muttenthaler et al., 2023). With the

1
EPFL. Correspondence to: Abdulkadir Gokce <abdulkadir.gokce@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

