AutoML-Agent: A Multi-Agent LLM Framework for Full-Pipeline AutoML

Patara Trirat 1 Wonyong Jeong 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Automated machine learning (AutoML) accelerates AI development by automating tasks in the
development pipeline, such as optimal model
search and hyperparameter tuning. Existing AutoML systems often require technical expertise
to set up complex tools, which is in general timeconsuming and requires a large amount of human
effort. Therefore, recent works have started exploiting large language models (LLM) to lessen
such burden and increase the usability of AutoML
frameworks via a natural language interface, allowing non-expert users to build their data-driven
solutions. These methods, however, are usually
designed only for a particular process in the AI
development pipeline and do not efficiently use
the inherent capacity of the LLMs. This paper proposes AutoML-Agent, a novel multi-agent framework tailored for full-pipeline AutoML, i.e., from
data retrieval to model deployment. AutoMLAgent takes user’s task descriptions, facilitates
collaboration between specialized LLM agents,
and delivers deployment-ready models. Unlike existing work, instead of devising a single plan, we
introduce a retrieval-augmented planning strategy
to enhance exploration to search for more optimal
plans. We also decompose each plan into subtasks (e.g., data preprocessing and neural network
design) each of which is solved by a specialized
agent we build via prompting executing in parallel,
making the search process more efficient. Moreover, we propose a multi-stage verification to verify executed results and guide the code generation
LLM in implementing successful solutions. Extensive experiments on seven downstream tasks
using fourteen datasets show that AutoML-Agent
achieves a higher success rate in automating the
full AutoML process, yielding systems with good
performance throughout the diverse domains.

Automated machine learning (AutoML) has significantly
reduced the need for technical expertise and human labors
in developing effective data-driven solutions by automating
each process in the AI development pipeline (Yao et al.,
2018; Ren et al., 2020; He et al., 2021), such as feature
engineering, model selection, and hyperparameter optimization (HPO). However, current AutoML systems (Gijsbers
et al., 2024) often necessitate programming expertise to
configure complex tools and resources, potentially creating
barriers for a larger pool of users with limited skills and
knowledge, such as domain experts (Sun et al. (2023); §A).
To make AutoML frameworks more accessible to non-expert
users, many recent studies (Trirat et al., 2021; Viswanathan
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Hollmann et al., 2023b; Liu
et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024a; Hong et al., 2024a; Guo et al., 2024a; Yang
et al., 2025; Chi et al., 2024) have suggested to use natural
language interfaces with large language models (LLM) for
machine learning (ML) and data science (DS) tasks. Nevertheless, these previous LLM-based AutoML frameworks
only considered a limited number of tasks due to their restricted designs, either only for a process in the pipeline (e.g.,
feature engineering (Hollmann et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2024;
Malberg et al., 2024), HPO (Liu et al., 2024a; 2025; Zhang
et al., 2024a), and model selection (Zhang et al., 2023; Shen
et al., 2023)) or for a specific group of downstream tasks
(e.g., natural language processing (Viswanathan et al., 2023)
and computer vision (Yang et al., 2025)). In addition, most
methods overlook the inherent capability of LLMs to search
for promising models by performing actual training of the
candidate models during the search process, making it prohibitively costly and slow.
For an AutoML framework to be truly practical, it should
perform end-to-end AutoML, considering both the data
aspects (retrieval, preprocessing, and feature engineering)
and model aspects (selection, HPO, and deployment). This
is because a process in one aspect can affect subsequent
processes in the other, potentially leading to suboptimal solutions when combining results from different frameworks.
Meanwhile, the AutoML framework should be computationally efficient, using strategies to minimize the computational
overhead during search. However, there are two main challenges in building such a framework.

1
DeepAuto.ai 2 KAIST, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang@deepauto.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

