A Variational Framework for Improving Naturalness
in Generative Spoken Language Models

Li-Wei Chen 1 Takuya Higuchi 2 Zakaria Aldeneh 2 Ahmed Hussen Abdelaziz 2 Alexander Rudnicky 1

Abstract

and complex nature. As a result, previous works (Lakhotia
et al., 2021; Borsos et al., 2023; Maiti et al., 2024) tokenized
speech into simpler discrete units to enable the application
of language modeling techniques originally developed for
text. However, these semantic tokens are typically derived
by performing k-means clustering on features extracted
from self-supervised pre-trained speech models, such as
HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021). We use the term semantic tokens to distinguish them from acoustic tokens (Borsos et al.,
2023), which capture general acoustic information. These
models primarily capture the linguistic aspects of speech,
such as phonetic information, while often overlooking paralinguistic features, such as prosody (Weston et al., 2021).
As a result, training an autoregressive model solely with
such semantic tokens restricts the model’s ability to fully
capture and represent the diverse information encoded in
speech.

The success of large language models in text processing has inspired their adaptation to speech
modeling. However, since speech is continuous
and complex, it is often discretized for autoregressive modeling. Speech tokens derived from
self-supervised models (known as semantic tokens) typically focus on the linguistic aspects of
speech but neglect prosodic information. As a
result, models trained on these tokens can generate speech with reduced naturalness. Existing
approaches try to fix this by adding pitch features
to the semantic tokens. However, pitch alone
cannot fully represent the range of paralinguistic
attributes, and selecting the right features requires
careful hand-engineering. To overcome this, we
propose an end-to-end variational approach that
automatically learns to encode these continuous
speech attributes to enhance the semantic tokens.
Our approach eliminates the need for manual extraction and selection of paralinguistic features.
Moreover, it produces preferred speech continuations according to human raters. Code, samples
and models are available at https://github.
com/b04901014/vae-gslm.

To address the aforementioned limitation, Kharitonov et al.
(2022) augmented the tokens with extracted fundamental
frequency (F0 , or pitch) to enable prosody-aware modeling.
However, augmenting semantic tokens with manually defined paralinguistic attributes can be inherently suboptimal.
First, pitch alone cannot capture the full range of paralinguistic information encoded in speech. For instance, energyrelated (e.g., loudness, zero-crossing-rate) and spectralrelated (e.g., mel-frequency cepstral coefficients) features
are also important paralinguistic features (Schuller et al.,
2009; 2013; Eyben et al., 2015). Furthermore, training a
correct pitch tracker introduces additional complexity (Kim
et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved tremendous
success in text processing (OpenAI, 2024), offering new
ways to interact with machines. This progress has motivated
efforts to extend their capabilities to speech to enable more
natural spoken interactions with machines. However, modeling speech presents unique challenges due to its continuous

Instead of relying on hand-engineered paralinguistic features, we propose an approach to learning these features directly from the input signal, within an autoregressive framework. These learned features are optimized to both: 1)
reconstruct the input speech, and 2) enhance the autoregressive modeling process. Our approach allows the learned
features to complement semantic tokens, removing the need
for pre-extracted paralinguistic features as required in previous methods. As a result, our method generates more
natural-sounding speech compared to baseline models while
maintaining comparable meaningfulness of the syntheses.

1
Language Technology Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Apple.
Correspondence to:
LiWei Chen <liweiche@cs.cmu.edu>,
Takuya Higuchi
<takuya_higuchi@apple.com>,
Zakaria
Aldeneh
<zaldeneh@apple.com>, Ahmed Hussen Abdelaziz <ahussenabdelaziz@apple.com>, Alexander Rudnicky <air@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

