TMetaNet: Topological Meta-Learning Framework for Dynamic Link Prediction

Hao Li 1 Hao Wan 1 Yuzhou Chen 2 Dongsheng Ye 3 Yulia Gel 4 Hao Jiang 1

Abstract

ited by their training strategies and evaluation approaches,
rendering them inadequate for handling the unpredictability and rapid shifts in graph structure (You et al., 2022).
This has led to a growing interest in meta-learning, which
provides a powerful framework for dynamic graph tasks
by enabling models to quickly adapt to new changes with
minimal data. Meta-learning-based approaches have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in downstream tasks,
such as dynamic link prediction (You et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023b).

Dynamic graphs evolve continuously, presenting
challenges for traditional graph learning due to
their changing structures and temporal dependencies. Recent advancements have shown potential in addressing these challenges by developing suitable meta-learning-based dynamic graph
neural network models. However, most metalearning approaches for dynamic graphs rely on
fixed weight update parameters, neglecting the
essential intrinsic complex high-order topological information of dynamically evolving graphs.
We have designed Dowker Zigzag Persistence
(DZP), an efficient and stable dynamic graph persistent homology representation method based on
Dowker complex and zigzag persistence, to capture the high-order features of dynamic graphs.
Armed with the DZP ideas, we propose TMetaNet,
a new meta-learning parameter update model
based on dynamic topological features. By utilizing the distances between high-order topological features, TMetaNet enables more effective
adaptation across snapshots. Experiments on realworld datasets demonstrate TMetaNet’s state-ofthe-art performance and resilience to graph noise,
illustrating its high potential for meta-learning
and dynamic graph analysis. Our code is available at https://github.com/Lihaogx/
TMetaNet.

The core idea of meta-learning lies in updating the model
parameters across different tasks to enable adaptation to new
tasks (Gharoun et al., 2024; Vettoruzzo et al., 2024). For
a discrete-time dynamic graph GT = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT },
ROLAND (You et al., 2022) introduced a novel training
strategy called live update, which treats the task of predicting new links from Gt to Gt+1 as a separate task. This approach helps avoid the large memory consumption typically
associated with such tasks. Building on this, WinGNN (Zhu
et al., 2023b) removes explicit time encoding and incorporates temporal information into the graph neural network
model through the self-adaptive aggregation of model parameters across windows. Figures 1 (a) and (b) illustrate the
main training processes of ROLAND and WinGNN.
However, dynamic graph snapshots are not merely separate
tasks; they form part of a larger, continuously evolving
system. In this context, the way model parameters change
across tasks plays a crucial role in determining the success of
meta-learning. The aforementioned methods only account
for the impact of time on parameter changes, neglecting the
unique evolution of structures in dynamic graphs. Inspired
by task-aware meta-learning (Chen & Zhang, 2021; Peng &
Pan, 2023), it is crucial to find a representation of dynamic
graphs that can accurately measure the differences between
tasks and guide the parameter update process.

1. Introduction
The complexity of dynamic graph evolution, characterized
by continuous changes in nodes and edges, makes it difficult for existing graph learning algorithms to fully capture the temporal relationships and dynamics within these
graphs (Feng et al., 2024). Traditional methods are often lim-

Naturally, our attention turns to persistent homology (PH),
a tool from computational topology used to extract and
learn descriptors of the data’s “shape” (Carlsson & Gabrielsson, 2020; Pun et al., 2022). The persistent homology
method constructs topological features of a graph’s multiscale information, capturing both low-order and high-order
details. In recent years, PH has been widely combined with
graph neural networks (GNNs) and applied to various down-

*
Equal contribution 1 Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
University of California, Riverside, USA 3 Hubei University of
Automotive Technology, Shiyan, China 4 Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA. Correspondence to: Hao Jiang <jh@whu.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

