Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent for Non-Homogeneous Deep Networks

Yuhang Cai * 1 Kangjie Zhou * 2 Jingfeng Wu 1 Song Mei 1 Michael Lindsey 1 3 Peter L. Bartlett 1 4

Abstract

The implicit bias of GD is relatively well-understood when
the network is homogeneous (see Soudry et al., 2018; Ji &
Telgarsky, 2018; Lyu & Li, 2020; Ji & Telgarsky, 2020; Wu
et al., 2023, and references therein). For linear networks
trained on linearly separable data, GD diverges in norm
while converging in direction to the maximum margin solution (Soudry et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2018; Wu et al.,
2023). Similar results have been established for generic homogeneous networks that include a class of deep networks,
assuming that the network at initialization can separate the
training data. Specifically, Lyu & Li (2020) showed that the
normalized margin induced by GD increases nearly monotonically, and that the limiting direction of a subsequence
of the GD iterates satisfies the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)
condition of a margin maximization problem. Moreover,
if the network is definable in an o-minimal structure (see
Section 2, which is satisfied for most networks), Ji & Telgarsky (2020) showed that gradient flow (GF, that is, GD with
infinitesimal stepsizes) converges in direction and that the
limiting direction aligns with the direction of the gradient.

We establish the asymptotic implicit bias of gradient descent (GD) for generic non-homogeneous
deep networks under exponential loss. Specifically, we characterize three key properties of GD
iterates starting from a sufficiently small empirical
risk, where the threshold is determined by a measure of the network’s non-homogeneity. First, we
show that a normalized margin induced by the GD
iterates increases nearly monotonically. Second,
we prove that while the norm of the GD iterates diverges to infinity, the iterates themselves converge
in direction. Finally, we establish that this directional limit satisfies the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker
(KKT) conditions of a margin maximization problem. Prior works on implicit bias have focused
exclusively on homogeneous networks; in contrast, our results apply to a broad class of nonhomogeneous networks satisfying a mild nearhomogeneity condition. In particular, our results
apply to networks with residual connections and
non-homogeneous activation functions, thereby
resolving an open problem posed by Ji & Telgarsky (2020).

However, the implicit bias of GD remains largely unknown
when the network is non-homogeneous, an arguably more
common case in deep learning (there are a few exceptions,
which will be discussed later in Section 1.1). For instance,
networks with residual connections or non-homogeneous
activation functions are inherently non-homogeneous. As
posted as an open problem by Ji & Telgarsky (2020), it is
unclear whether the implicit bias results developed for homogeneous networks can be extended to non-homogeneous
networks.

1. Introduction
Deep networks often have an enormous amount of parameters and are theoretically capable of overfitting the training
data. However, in practice, deep networks trained via gradient descent (GD) or its variants often generalize well. This
is commonly attributed to the implicit bias of GD, in which
GD finds a certain solution that prevents overfitting (Zhang
et al., 2021; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Bartlett et al., 2021).
Understanding the implicit bias of GD is one of the central
topics in deep learning theory.

Contributions. In this work, we establish the implicit bias
of GD for a broad set of non-homogeneous but definable networks under exponential loss. Starting from the simpler case
of gradient flow (GF), we identify two natural conditions
of near-homogeneity and strong separability, respectively.
The former condition requires the homogeneous error to
grow slower than the output of the network, and the latter
condition requires GF to attain a sufficiently small empirical
risk depending on the homogeneous error of the network.
Under these two conditions, we prove the following implicit
bias results of GF for non-homogeneous networks:

*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley
Columbia University 3 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
4
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yuhang Cai <willcai@berkeley.edu>, Kangjie Zhou <kz2326@columbia.edu>,
Peter L. Bartlett <peter@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. GF induces a normalized margin that increases nearly
1

