Improved Lower Bounds for First-order
Stochastic Non-convex Optimization under Markov Sampling

Zhenyu Sun 1 Ermin Wei 1 2

Abstract

or sequential dependencies, naturally modeled by Markov
chains. For instance, in reinforcement learning, an agent
typically collects data by interacting with an environment
governed by a Markov decision process (MDP) (Sutton,
2018), leading to correlated samples. In online recommendation systems, user feedback often arrives sequentially in
a Markovian fashion, where each user’s response depends
on their previous engagements (Afsar et al., 2022). In timeseries analysis, measurements such as sensor data or stock
prices reflect underlying Markovian transitions (Hamilton,
2020; Esling & Agon, 2012). In the context of Bayesian
inference, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
generate correlated samples to approximate posterior distributions (Brooks, 1998; Nemeth & Fearnhead, 2021), which
in turn are used for high-dimensional parameter estimation.
Moreover, in the language models, transformers generate
next-token predictions via a Markov chain (Makkuva et al.,
2024). The above-mentioned practical applications highlight the importance of generalizing analysis from the i.i.d.
sampling to Markov sampling. Over the last few years, a
growing body of literature has begun addressing questions
involving Markov sampling given specific contexts, such as
reinforcement learning (Bhandari et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2021), distributed optimization (Sun et al., 2023; Even et al.,
2024), and federated learning (Sun et al., 2024). This triggers the need for a unified theory advance that captures the
intrinsic difficulty of dealing with Markovian dynamics.

Unlike its vanilla counterpart with i.i.d. samples,
stochastic optimization with Markovian sampling
allows the sampling scheme following a Markov
chain. This problem encompasses various applications that range from asynchronous distributed
optimization to reinforcement learning. In this
work, we lower bound the sample complexity of
finding ϵ-approximate critical solutions for any
first-order methods when sampling is Markovian.
We show that for samples drawn from stationary Markov processes with countable state space,
any algorithm that accesses smooth, non-convex
functions through queries to a stochastic gradient
oracle, requires at least Ω(ϵ−4 ) samples. Moreover, for finite Markov chains, we show a Ω(ϵ−2 )
lower bound and propose a new algorithm, called
MaC-SAGE, that is proved to (nearly) match our
lower bound.

1. Introduction
Stochastic optimization methods have become integral to
a wide array of machine learning and statistical modeling
tasks, with applications ranging from large-scale data analysis to reinforcement learning and control. Due to the prosperity in deep learning and large models, first-order optimization methods, meaning only gradient information is
leveraged for algorithm design, stand out due to their advantages of implementability and computational efficiency
(Achiam et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). In many realworld scenarios, however, data do not arrive independently
and identically distributed (i.i.d.). Instead, they are generated by underlying dynamical processes exhibiting temporal

Compared to the well-studied i.i.d. setting, analyses of firstorder optimization methods under Markov sampling are
faced with novel and substantial challenges posed by correlated data. In the i.i.d. scenario, each data point is drawn
independently from the same distribution and hence renders unbiased estimate of stochastic gradient, which allows
straightforward variance bounds and concentration inequalities to be applied (Nemirovski et al., 2009; Lan, 2012; Li
& Liu, 2022). In contrast, when samples follow a Markov
chain, neighboring data observations are correlated, which
complicates both the bias and variance characterizations of
stochastic gradient estimates. In fact, due to the Markovian
property, the gradient estimate is biased, prohibit direct generalization of analyses from the i.i.d. case (Bhandari et al.,
2018; Even, 2023; Roy et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Kim
et al., 2022).

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Zhenyu Sun
<zhenyusun2026@u.northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

