CoDy: Counterfactual Explainers for Dynamic Graphs

Zhan Qu * 1 2 3 Daniel Gomm * 4 5 Michael Färber 1 2

Abstract
Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs) are
widely used to model dynamic systems where
relationships and features evolve over time. Although TGNNs demonstrate strong predictive
capabilities in these domains, their complex architectures pose significant challenges for explainability. Counterfactual explanation methods provide a promising solution by illustrating how modifications to input graphs can influence model predictions. To address this challenge, we present CoDy—Counterfactual Explainer for Dynamic Graphs—a model-agnostic,
instance-level explanation approach that identifies counterfactual subgraphs to interpret TGNN
predictions. CoDy employs a search algorithm
that combines Monte Carlo Tree Search with
heuristic selection policies, efficiently exploring
a vast search space of potential explanatory subgraphs by leveraging spatial, temporal, and local event impact information. Extensive experiments against state-of-the-art factual and counterfactual baselines demonstrate CoDy’s effectiveness, with improvements of 16% in AUFSC+ over
the strongest baseline. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/daniel-gomm/CoDy

Figure 1. Bipartite dynamic graph of student posts on a university
social network. Edge colors represent their ages.

evolving temporal dependencies. Consequently, Temporal
Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs) have been specifically developed to leverage the rich spatial and temporal information
inherent in dynamic graphs (Zhao et al., 2019; Rossi et al.,
2020; Xu et al., 2020). However, as with many deep learning
models, TGNNs often function as ”black boxes”, offering
limited insight into their decision-making processes (Xia
et al., 2023; Chen & Ying, 2023).
Explainability methods for Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
aim to identify a small subset of nodes and edges that most
strongly influence a model’s prediction. However, most
existing methods are designed for static graphs and do not
generalize well to dynamic graphs, which involve complex
temporal interactions (He et al., 2022; Xia et al., 2023; Chen
& Ying, 2023). In temporal graphs, multiple events may
occur at the same timestamp and the same position, adding
complexity to the dependencies between interactions (Han
et al., 2020; He et al., 2022). The explanations for TGNNs
should be temporally approximate and spatially adjacent to
the target (Kovanen et al., 2011; Chen & Ying, 2023).

1. Introduction
Dynamic graphs are commonly used to model applications
with features that change over time, such as social networks,
e-commerce platforms, and collaborative online encyclopedias like Wikipedia (Huang et al., 2024; Longa et al., 2023;
Yu et al., 2023). In addition to the static topological graph
structure, dynamic graphs also capture the continuously
*
Equal contribution 1 TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
ScaDS.AI, Dresden, Germany 3 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 4 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands 5 Centrum Wiskunde en Informatica, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Daniel Gomm
<daniel.gomm@cwi.nl>, Zhan Qu <zhan.qu@tu-dresden.de>.

The few methods targeting TGNN models focus primarily
on factual explanations, which identify specific nodes and
edges contributing to a prediction (Xia et al., 2023; Chen &
Ying, 2023). They fall short of exploring how changes in
the input graph could lead to different outcomes. Counterfactual explanations, which illustrate how altering the graph
changes the prediction, are gaining popularity for their ability to establish causal relationships and highlight decision

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

