Value-Based Deep RL Scales Predictably

Oleh Rybkin 1 Michal Nauman 1 2 Preston Fu 1 Charlie Snell 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Sergey Levine 1 Aviral Kumar 3

Abstract

maximize the success of these large-scale runs, the trend in
the machine learning (ML) community has shifted toward
not just performant, but also more predictable algorithms
that scale reliably with more computation and training data
size, such that downstream performance can be predicted
from small-scale experiments, without actually running the
large-scale experiment (McCandlish et al., 2018; Kaplan
et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024).

Abstract: Scaling data and compute is critical
to the success of modern ML. However, scaling
demands predictability: we want methods to not
only perform well with more compute or data, but
also have their performance be predictable from
small-scale runs, without running the large-scale
experiment. In this paper, we show that valuebased off-policy RL methods are predictable despite community lore regarding their pathological
behavior. First, we show that data and compute
requirements to attain a given performance level
lie on a Pareto frontier, controlled by the updatesto-data (UTD) ratio. By estimating this frontier,
we can predict this data requirement when given
more compute, and this compute requirement
when given more data. Second, we determine
the optimal allocation of a total resource budget
across data and compute for a given performance
and use it to determine hyperparameters that maximize performance for a given budget. Third, this
scaling is enabled by first estimating predictable
relationships between hyperparameters, which is
used to manage effects of overfitting and plasticity loss unique to RL. We validate our approach
using three algorithms: SAC, BRO, and PQL on
DeepMind Control, OpenAI gym, and IsaacGym,
when extrapolating to higher levels of data, compute, budget, or performance.

In this paper, we study if deep reinforcement learning (RL)
is also amenable to such scaling and predictability benefits.
We focus on value-based methods that train value functions using temporal difference (TD) learning, which are
known to be performant at small scales (Mnih et al., 2015;
Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018). Compared to
policy gradient (Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017)
and search methods (Silver et al., 2016), value-based RL
can learn from arbitrary data and require less sampling or
search, which can be inefficient or infeasible for open-world
problems where environment interaction is costly.
We study scaling properties by predicting relationships between different resources required for training. Data
requirement D is the amount of data needed to attain a certain level of performance. Likewise, compute requirement
C refers to the amount of FLOPs or gradient steps needed
to attain a certain level of performance. In RL uniquely,
performance can be improved by increasing either available
data or compute (e.g., training multiple times on the same
data), which we capture via a budget requirement that combines data and compute F = C + δ · D, where δ is some
constant. An additive budget function is useful when the
cost of data and compute can be expressed in similar units,
such as wall-clock time or required finances.

1. Introduction
Many latest advances in various areas of machine learning
have emerged from training big models on large datasets.
In this scaling guided research landscape, successfully executing even one single training run often requires a large
amount of data, computational resources, and wall-clock
time, such as weeks or months (Achiam et al., 2023; Team
et al., 2023; Ramesh et al., 2022; Brooks et al., 2024). To

To establish scaling relationships, we first require a way
to predict the best hyperparameter settings at each scale.
We find that learning rate η, batch size B, and the updatesto-data (UTD) ratio σ are the most crucial hyperparameters for value-based RL. While supervised learning benefits
from abundant theory to establish optimal hyperparameters (Krizhevsky, 2014; McCandlish et al., 2018; Yang et al.,
2021), value-based RL often does not satisfy assumptions
typical of supervised learning. For example, value-based
RL needs to account for the non-i.i.d. nature of training data.
Distribution shift due to periodic changes in the data col-

1

UC Berkeley 2 University of Warsaw 3 CMU. Correspondence
to: Oleh Rybkin <oleh.rybkin@gmail.com>, Aviral Kumar <aviralku@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

