The Jailbreak Tax: How Useful are Your Jailbreak Outputs?

Kristina Nikolić 1 Luze Sun 2 Jie Zhang 1 Florian Tramèr 1

Abstract
80

84.8%

64.9%

Jailbreak Tax (%)

Jailbreak attacks bypass the guardrails of large
language models to produce harmful outputs. In
this paper, we ask whether the model outputs produced by existing jailbreaks are actually useful.
For example, when jailbreaking a model to give
instructions for building a bomb, does the jailbreak yield good instructions? Since the utility
of most unsafe answers (e.g., bomb instructions)
is hard to evaluate rigorously, we build new jailbreak evaluation sets with known ground truth
answers, by aligning models to refuse questions
related to benign and easy-to-evaluate topics (e.g.,
biology or math). Our evaluation of eight representative jailbreaks across five utility benchmarks
reveals a consistent drop in model utility in jailbroken responses, which we term the jailbreak
tax. For example, while all jailbreaks we tested
bypass guardrails in models aligned to refuse to
answer math, this comes at the expense of a drop
of up to 92% in accuracy. Overall, our work proposes the jailbreak tax as a new important metric in AI safety, and introduces benchmarks to
evaluate existing and future jailbreaks. We make
the benchmark available at https://github.
com/ethz-spylab/jailbreak-tax

91.9%

WMDP
GSM8K
MATH - Level 5

60
51.5%
41.1%

40

35.5%
23.4%

20
0

23.7%
12.5% 12.2%

1.3%

-3.1%

11.5%

10.1%

0.1%

Many-shot

GCG

MultiJail
(Swahili)

TAP

PAIR

Jailbreak Attack Type
Figure 1. Illustration of our results. We align a LLaMa 3.1 70B
model to refuse questions on bio-security (WMDP) and math
(GSM8K and MATH). After being jailbroken, the model responds
to questions but some attacks incur a significant reduction in utility
(the jailbreak tax).

How useful are the answers provided by a
jailbroken model?
For example, when jailbreaking a model to get “instructions
to build a bomb”, are the given instructions meaningful
and the best that the model could provide? The current
gold-standard for evaluating whether jailbreak responses are
harmful involves human evaluation (Wei et al., 2024a; Yong
et al., 2023), or an approximation thereof using an LLM
“judge” (Zheng et al., 2023; Souly et al., 2024; Chao et al.,
2024; Mazeika et al., 2024). Yet, these methodologies suffer
from two key limitations:

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed
with safety guardrails and alignment techniques to ensure
they remain helpful and harmless (Bai et al., 2022). However, these safety mechanisms can be circumvented through
various “jailbreak” attacks that aim to elicit unsafe responses (Wei et al., 2024a; Chao et al., 2023; Zou et al.,
2023). While numerous jailbreaking techniques have been
proposed, a critical question remains largely unexplored:

1. Determining if content is harmful (e.g., if a bomb design is good or not) requires significant expertise, making even human evaluation challenging.
2. Without a baseline of the unaligned model’s performance, we cannot quantify the degradation in capabilities that may occur due to jailbreaking (i.e., maybe an
unaligned model would give a better bomb design).

1

ETH Zurich 2 University of Pennsylvania - work done on a
ETH Student Research Fellowship. Correspondence to: Kristina
Nikolić <kristina.nikolic@ai.ethz.ch>.

In this paper, we propose a framework for rigorously measuring the utility of jailbroken models. To circumvent the two
issues above, our approach focuses on tasks where model
utility can be objectively evaluated, such as mathematics.
We then make models treat these objective tasks as harmful,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

