Clipped SGD Algorithms for Performative Prediction: Tight Bounds for
Stochastic Bias and Remedies
Qiang Li 1 Michal Yemini 2 Hoi-To Wai 1

Abstract

the training of prediction models under distribution shifts
(Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2022) where the data may ‘react’
to the changing prediction models. A common application scenario is that the training data involve human input
that responds strategically to the model (Hardt et al., 2016).
Distribution shifts affect the convergence of SGD-type algorithms and their efficacy as the distributions of gradient
estimates vary gradually. The modeling of such behavior has
led to the performative prediction problem (Perdomo et al.,
2020); see the recent overview (Hardt & Mendler-Dünner,
2023).

This paper studies the convergence of clipped
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms
with decision-dependent data distribution. Our
setting is motivated by privacy preserving optimization algorithms that interact with performative data where the prediction models can influence future outcomes. This challenging setting involves the non-smooth clipping operator and nongradient dynamics due to distribution shifts. We
make two contributions in pursuit for a performative stable solution using clipped SGD algorithms.
First, we characterize the clipping bias with projected clipped SGD (PCSGD) algorithm which
is caused by the clipping operator that prevents
PCSGD from reaching a stable solution. When
the loss function is strongly convex, we quantify
the lower and upper bounds for this clipping bias
and demonstrate a bias amplification phenomenon
with the sensitivity of data distribution. When the
loss function is non-convex, we bound the magnitude of stationarity bias. Second, we propose
remedies to mitigate the bias either by utilizing
an optimal step size design for PCSGD, or to apply the recent DiceSGD algorithm (Zhang et al.,
2024). Our analysis is also extended to show that
the latter algorithm is free from clipping bias in
the performative setting. Numerical experiments
verify our findings.

For the performative prediction problem, there is a growing
literature on developing stochastic algorithms to find a fixed
point solution of the repeated risk minimization procedure,
also known as the performative stable (PS) solution(s). In
the absence of knowledge of the distribution shift, the latter
is the natural solution obtained by stochastic approximation algorithms. In particular, most prior works have only
focused on settings when the loss function is strongly convex, e.g., (Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020; Drusvyatskiy &
Xiao, 2023; Brown et al., 2022; Li & Wai, 2022). When the
loss function is non-convex, the existing results are much
rarer. To list a few, (Mofakhami et al., 2023) assumes a
least-square like loss function; (Li & Wai, 2024) provided
guarantees for general non-convex performative prediction.
As an alternative, prior works also studied stochastic algorithms for finding performative optimal solutions by an extra
step that estimates the form of distribution shifts (Izzo et al.,
2021; Miller et al., 2021; Narang et al., 2023).
However, most of the existing works in the performative prediction literature have focused on analyzing SGD algorithms
admitting a smooth drift term. An open problem in the performative prediction literature is to analyze the behavior of
clipped SGD algorithms which limit the magnitude of the
stochastic gradient at every update step; this in turn distorts
the considered distribution shift compared with the nominal
dynamics with no clipping. Gradient clipping is used to
deal with multiple obstacles in learning algorithms such as
the need for privacy preservation (Abadi et al., 2016), dealing with gradient explosion in non-smooth learning (Shor,
2012) such as training neural networks (Mikolov et al., 2012;
Zhang et al., 2020a), solving quasi-convex problems (Hazan
et al., 2015), etc. Despite the difficulty with treating the non-

1. Introduction
A recent line of research in statistical learning is to analyze
the behavior of stochastic gradient (SGD) type algorithms
in tackling stochastic optimization problems with decisiondependent distributions. The latter can be motivated by
1
Department of System Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 Faculty
of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Israel. Correspondence to:
Hoi-To Wai <htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

