DLP: Dynamic Layerwise Pruning in Large Language Models

Yuli Chen 1 Bo Cheng 1 Jiale Han 2 Yingying Zhang 1 Yingting Li 1 Shuhao Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Pruning (Jaiswal et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Sun et al.,
2024; Muralidharan et al., 2024; Cai et al., 2024; Men et al.,
2024) has garnered significant attention in both academia
and industry due to its ability to substantially reduce the
parameter count of Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Dubey et al., 2024).
The core concept of pruning is to optimize resource utilization by eliminating redundant or less important parameters.
SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023) implements a layerby-layer and row-by-row greedy pruning strategy, ensuring
that local optimizations have minimal impact on global performance. Recent studies (Xiao et al., 2023; Lee et al.,
2023; Lin et al., 2024) highlight the pivotal role of outliers
in LLMs. Although outliers constitute a small fraction of
the model, they exert a disproportionately large influence on
predictive accuracy. Building on the emergence of outlier
features in LLMs (Puccetti et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023; Lin
et al., 2024), Wanda (Sun et al., 2024) introduces a novel
approach to evaluate weight importance by integrating the
absolute weight values with the norm of the corresponding
input activations.

Pruning has recently been widely adopted to reduce the parameter scale and improve the inference efficiency of Large Language Models
(LLMs). Mainstream pruning techniques often rely on uniform layerwise pruning strategies, which can lead to severe performance degradation at high sparsity levels. Recognizing
the varying contributions of different layers in
LLMs, recent studies have shifted their focus
toward non-uniform layerwise pruning. However, these approaches often rely on pre-defined
values, which can result in suboptimal performance. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel method called Dynamic Layerwise
Pruning (DLP). This approach adaptively determines the relative importance of each layer by
integrating model weights with input activation
information, assigning pruning rates accordingly.
Experimental results show that DLP effectively
preserves model performance at high sparsity levels across multiple LLMs. Specifically, at 70%
sparsity, DLP reduces the perplexity of LLaMA27B by 7.79 and improves the average accuracy by
2.7% compared to state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, DLP is compatible with various existing
LLM compression techniques and can be seamlessly integrated into Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT). We release the code1 to facilitate
future research.

Although previous works (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024) have achieved satisfactory
performance, they fail to account for the varying importance
of different layers within the model, instead assigning a
uniform sparsity rate to all layers. This limitation leads to
a significant performance drop under high sparsity conditions. Inspired by the presence of outliers, Outlier Weighed
Layerwise Sparsity (OWL) (Yin et al., 2024) introduces
a novel pruning paradigm that leverages the criticality of
layers with a higher proportion of outliers. Based on the
principle that layers with a higher proportion of outliers are
more critical, OWL assigns different sparsity rates to each
layer of LLMs. In comparison to uniform layerwise pruning
(Zhu & Gupta, 2018), OWL demonstrates superior performance in preserving model accuracy. However, OWL still
has certain limitations in practical applications. Its reliance
on predefined criteria for outlier selection not only limits
its adaptability to the dynamic needs of the model but also
hinders the achievement of optimal performance.

1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing, China 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Bo Cheng
<chengbo@bupt.edu.cn>, Jiale Han <jialehan@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The code is available at: https://github.com/
ironartisan/DLP.

To address the above issue, we compute the unimportance
of each layer from an inverse perspective, which is then
1

