Proposer-Agent-Evaluator (PAE):
Autonomous Skill Discovery for Foundation Model Internet Agents

Yifei Zhou * 1 Qianlan Yang * 2 Kaixiang Lin 3 Min Bai 3 Xiong Zhou 3 Yu-Xiong Wang 2 Sergey Levine 1
Erran Li 3

Abstract

also elucidate some of the deepest questions in AI. Recent
advancements in foundation models provide us with a compelling possibility for how this vision could be realized (OpenAI, 2024; GeminiTeam, 2024). Pre-trained foundation
models have been used to explore generalist agents (Liu
et al., 2023b) in real-world decision-making scenarios, such
as navigating websites to make travel plans (He et al., 2024a)
and solving real-world Github issues (Jimenez et al., 2024).
To succeed in these decision-making domains, goal-directed
post-training is often needed to elicit long-horizon rewardmaximizing behaviors such as information seeking (Hong
et al., 2023a) and recovery from mistakes (Bai et al., 2024),
instead of only imitating the most probable actions in the
pre-training corpus.

A generalist foundation model agent needs to have
a large and diverse skill repertoire, such as finding directions between two travel locations and
buying specific items from the Internet. If each
skill needs to be specified manually through a
fixed set of human-annotated instructions, the
agent’s skill repertoire will necessarily be limited
due to the scalability of human-annotated instructions. In this work, we address this challenge by
proposing Proposer-Agent-Evaluator (PAE), an
effective learning system that enables foundation
model agents to autonomously discover and practice skills in the wild. After a context-aware task
proposer generates instructions based on website
information, the agent policy attempts those tasks
in the real world with resulting trajectories evaluated by an autonomous VLM-based success evaluator. The success evaluation serves as the reward
signal for the agent to refine its policies through
RL. We validate PAE on challenging vision-based
web navigation, using both real-world and selfhosted websites from WebVoyager and WebArena.
Our results show that PAE significantly improves
the zero-shot generalization capability of VLM Internet agents (around 50% relative improvement)
to both unseen tasks and websites.

A crucial requirement for a successful post-training approach is to endow the generalist agent with a large and diverse goal-directed skill repertoire. This can include finding
directions between two travel locations and buying specific
items from the Internet, which the agent can then exploit to
solve real-world tasks proposed by users. However, manually specifying the skills (Deng et al., 2023) (i.e. through
a static set of human-annotated instruction templates such
as “Find the driving directions and estimated time to travel
from Location A to Location B”) will likely result in a limited skill repertoire. In particular, generating high-quality
human-annotated task templates can be expensive, making
it impractical to scale up. The use of a small set of task
templates fails to capture the range of skills an agent needs
for the full breadth of the real world, leading to distribution
shift problems when deployed at the test time. Therefore, it
naturally raises the research question: instead of requiring
users to manually define tasks for foundation model agents,
can these agents autonomously discover and practice potentially useful skills on their own?

1. Introduction
The vision of a broadly capable and goal-directed agent has
long captured the imagination: from agents that can browse
the web to fulfill user instructions to robots that could perform diverse tasks in the home, AI systems that can independently accomplish open-world goals would not only present
tremendous practical value, but their development would

To answer this question, we first note the observation of the
asymmetric capabilities of SOTA VLMs as skill proposers/evaluators and as agents (ablation experiment results in
Section 5) in many realistic task settings such as web agents.
Intuitively, VLMs are very good at conceiving common
tasks that people would like to perform on a shopping website (e.g. adding a specific product to cart) and confirming

*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 3 Amazon. Correspondence to: Yifei Zhou <yifei zhou@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

