Reward-Augmented Data Enhances Direct Preference Alignment of LLMs

Shenao Zhang * 1 Zhihan Liu * 1 Boyi Liu 2 Yufeng Zhang 2
Yingxiang Yang 2 Yongfei Liu 2 Liyu Chen 2 Tao Sun 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has recently seen remarkable success in aligning Large Language Models (LLMs) to follow instructions with human
intentions. In this approach, AI-generated feedback serves
as a stand-in for human preferences, assessing and ranking responses to prompts to construct a preference dataset.
This dataset is then utilized in preference optimization algorithms to fine-tune LLMs. Among them, direct preference
alignment (Rafailov et al., 2024b; Azar et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023; Ethayarajh et al., 2024) that bypasses the need
for an explicit reward model has garnered interest for its
simplicity and cost efficiency. However, these algorithms
mainly concern relative preferences and often overlook the
quality of responses and their gaps, leading to limitations in
their effectiveness.

Preference alignment in Large Language Models
(LLMs) has significantly improved their ability
to adhere to human instructions and intentions.
However, existing direct alignment algorithms
primarily focus on relative preferences and often
overlook the qualitative aspects of responses,
despite having access to preference data that
includes reward scores from judge models during
AI feedback. Striving to maximize the implicit
reward gap between the chosen and the slightly
inferior rejected responses can cause overfitting
and unnecessary unlearning of the high-quality
rejected responses. The unawareness of the
reward scores also drives the LLM to indiscriminately favor the low-quality chosen responses and
fail to generalize to optimal responses that are
sparse in data. To overcome these shortcomings,
our study introduces reward-conditioned LLM
policies that discern and learn from the entire
spectrum of response quality within the dataset,
helping extrapolate to more optimal regions. We
propose an effective yet simple data relabeling
method that conditions the preference pairs on
quality scores to construct a reward-augmented
dataset. The experiments across various benchmarks and diverse models demonstrate that
our approach consistently boosts DPO by a
considerable margin. Through comprehensive
ablation studies, we demonstrate that our method
not only maximizes the utility of preference
data but also mitigates the issue of unlearning,
demonstrating its broad effectiveness beyond
mere data expansion. Our code is available at
https://github.com/shenao-zhang/
reward-augmented-preference.

Specifically, direct alignment algorithms such as DPO
(Rafailov et al., 2024b) focus on maximizing the implicit
reward difference between accepted and rejected responses.
This approach can lead to overfitting, as high-quality but
rejected responses are unnecessarily unlearned (Adler et al.,
2024). Even worse, since the dataset provides only a sample estimate of true preferences, the rejected responses can
actually be more aligned with human preferences than the
accepted ones in expectation. Similarly, due to the unawareness of the responses’ qualities, direct alignment will also
result in the indiscriminate learning of the chosen responses,
even when they are of low quality. As a result, the directly
aligned LLMs often struggle to differentiate between responses of varying quality and fail to generalize effectively
to more optimal or the highest-reward responses that are
sparse in the preference data, which is another limitation.
To address these issues, we propose learning rewardconditioned policies as a straightforward fix. By optimizing
the LLM to generate responses conditioning on their qualities, the model is allowed to discern and leverage patterns
within responses of varied quality. As a result, learning
from both chosen and rejected responses alleviates the issue
of unlearning high-quality rejected responses; distinguishing between varying-quality chosen responses alleviates the
issue of indiscriminately accepting low-quality ones. By
identifying common patterns in responses of similar quality

1
Northwestern University 2 ByteDance. Correspondence to:
Shenao Zhang <shenao@u.northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

