Continual Reinforcement Learning by Planning with Online World Models

Zichen Liu * 1 2 Guoji Fu * 2 Chao Du 1 Wee Sun Lee 2 Min Lin 1

Abstract

this “multitask” view of CRL because task-specific components are constructed and used (e.g., separate weights,
task boundaries or IDs) (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Mallya
& Lazebnik, 2018; Chaudhry et al., 2019a; Kessler et al.,
2022; Gaya et al., 2023).

Continual reinforcement learning (CRL) refers to
a naturalistic setting where an agent needs to endlessly evolve, by trial and error, to solve multiple
tasks that are presented sequentially. One of the
largest obstacles to CRL is that the agent may
forget how to solve previous tasks when learning a new task, known as catastrophic forgetting. In this paper, we propose to address this
challenge by planning with online world models.
Specifically, we learn a Follow-The-Leader shallow model online to capture the world dynamics,
in which we plan using model predictive control
to solve a set of tasks specified by any reward
functions. The online world model is immune
to forgetting by p
construction with a proven regret bound of O( K 2 D log(T )) under mild assumptions. The planner searches actions solely
based on the latest online model, thus forming a
FTL Online Agent (OA) that updates incrementally. To assess OA, we further design Continual Bench, a dedicated environment for CRL,
and compare with several strong baselines under the same model-planning algorithmic framework. The empirical results show that OA learns
continuously to solve new tasks while not forgetting old skills, outperforming agents built on
deep world models with various continual learning techniques.

1

However, a more naturalistic scenario would involve a
learning agent that seamlessly interacts and learns in an environment where there is no clear cut tasks. To distinguish
with the above, we call such agent an Online Agent (OA).
We expect the solution of OA to contain learning components that are shared through out the agent’s lifetime, and
can be updated incrementally.
Existing CRL methods are not building towards online
agents because of two challenges. First, not all RL components have their online alternatives. For example, the value
function and policy are dependent on the reward function
defined by a task, thus it is innately not a learning component that can be shared across tasks. To alleviate this issue, prior works often learn them per-task (Chaudhry et al.,
2019a; Wołczyk et al., 2021). Second, for components that
can be shared, they should be learned incrementally without forgetting under severe data distributional shift. Huang
et al. (2021) has attempted this with model-based RL, but
they still rely on per-task buffer and embedding.
In this paper, we aim to develop an OA to tackle the CRL
problem. We first notice that a unified world dynamics
is the key component that can be shared across tasks and
should be learned, and planning with the learned model
gives us a RL agent that maximizes long-term rewards
(Garcia et al., 1989; Hutter, 2000). Since the planner usually has no trainable parameters (De Boer et al., 2005;
Williams et al., 2015), the goal of OA is to learn an online
world model with low regret incrementally. To this end, we
employ the recent Follow-The-Leader (FTL) shallow models (Liu et al., 2024) which permit efficient online updates
for world modelling, and plan with the learned models using cross-entropy method (CEM) for acting. Under mild
assumptions, we theoretically show the sparsely updating
models (Liu et al., 2024) are no-regret, providing a definitive answer for the design of OA. Consequently, OA’s every interaction with the real world brings new information
to learn a more accurate world model without forgetting,
which immediately benefits the planning at the next step.

Introduction

Continual reinforcement learning (CRL) (Khetarpal et al.,
2022; Abel et al., 2024) quests for agents that can continuously evolve to solve possibly infinite number of tasks that
are revealed sequentially to them. From a task-level definition, a very strong baseline is to just train a separate agent
for each task, and use the information of the task ID to select the agent. Many existing works more or less fall within
*
Equal contribution 1 Sea AI Lab 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Min Lin <linmin@sea.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

