Generalization and Robustness of the Tilted Empirical Risk

Gholamali Aminian 1 Amir R. Asadi 2 Tian Li 3 Ahmad Beirami 4 Gesine Reinert 1 5 Samuel N. Cohen 1 6

Abstract

mial linear regression and naive Bayes classifiers (Calafiore
et al., 2019; Murphy, 2012; Williams & Barber, 1998), Li
et al. (2021) propose the tilted empirical risk (TER) for supervised learning applications, such as classification and
regression problems. Li et al. (2021; 2023a) showed that
tilted empirical risk minimization (TERM) can handle class
imbalance, mitigate the effect of outliers, and enable fairness between subgroups. Different applications of TERM
have been explored, e.g., differential privacy (Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2021), semantic segmentation (Szabó et al., 2021),
noisy label self-correction (Zhou et al., 2020), and off-policy
learning and evaluation (Behnamnia et al., 2025).1 In this
paper, we corroborate the empirical success of the TERM
framework through statistical learning theory.

The generalization error (risk) of a supervised statistical learning algorithm quantifies its prediction
ability on previously unseen data. Inspired by
exponential tilting, Li et al. (2021) proposed the
tilted empirical risk (TER) as a non-linear risk
metric for machine learning applications such as
classification and regression problems. In this
work, we examine the generalization error of the
tilted empirical risk in the robustness regime under negative tilt. Our first contribution is to provide uniform and information-theoretic bounds on
the tilted generalization error, defined as the difference between the population risk and the tilted
empirical risk, under negative tilt for unbounded
loss function under bounded (1 + ϵ)-th moment
of loss function for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1] with a convergence rate of O(n−ϵ/(1+ϵ) ) where n is the number
of training samples, revealing a novel application
for TER under no distribution shift. Secondly, we
study the robustness of the tilted empirical risk
with respect to noisy outliers at training time and
provide theoretical guarantees under distribution
shift for the tilted empirical risk. We empirically
corroborate our findings in simple experimental
setups where we evaluate our bounds to select the
value of tilt in a data-driven manner.

A central concern in statistical learning theory is understanding the efficacy of a learning algorithm when applied
to test data. This evaluation is typically carried out by investigating the generalization error, which quantifies the
disparity between the performance of the algorithm on the
training dataset and its performance on previously unseen
data, drawn from the same underlying distribution, via a
risk function. Understanding the generalization behaviour
of learning algorithms is one of the most important objectives in statistical learning theory. Various approaches
have been developed for empirical risk (Rodrigues & Eldar, 2021), including VC dimension-based bounds (Vapnik, 1999), stability-based bounds (Bousquet & Elisseeff,
2002b), PAC Bayesian bounds (McAllester, 2003), and
information-theoretic bounds (Russo & Zou, 2019; Xu &
Raginsky, 2017). This paper focuses on the generalization
and robustness of the tilted empirical risk (tilted generalization error) of learning algorithms. Our contributions are:

1. Introduction
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a popular framework
in machine learning. The performance of the empirical risk
(ER) is affected when the data set is strongly imbalanced
or contains outliers. For these scenarios, inspired by the
log-sum-exponential operator with applications in multino-

• In Section 3, we provide upper and lower bounds on
the tilted generalization error under unbounded loss
functions for the negative tilt with a bound via uniform
and information-theoretical approaches and establish
the convergence rate of O(n−ϵ/(1+ϵ) ) for some ϵ ∈
(0, 1].

1
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 2 Statistical Laboratory,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 3 Computer Science
Department, University of Chicago, USA 4 Google DeepMind,
USA 5 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
6
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Gholamali Aminian <gaminian@turing.ac.uk>.

• In Section 4, we study the robustness of the tilted empirical risk under distribution shift induced by noise
or outliers for unbounded loss functions with bounded

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Behnamnia et al. (2025) use the term log-sum-exponential,
which is the same as the tilted empirical risk studied herein.

1

