A General Graph Spectral Wavelet Convolution via
Chebyshev Order Decomposition

Nian Liu 1 Xiaoxin He 1 Thomas Laurent 2 Francesco Di Giovanni 3 Michael M. Bronstein 3 4 Xavier Bresson 1

Abstract

of the convolution operation to graphs, as convolution for
grid-structured data, i.e. sequences and images, has demonstrated remarkable success (LeCun et al., 1998; Hinton et al.,
2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012). Significant research interests
in graph convolution revolve around two key factors: (1) designing diverse bases for spectral transform, and (2) parameterizing powerful graph kernel. For (1), the commonly used
graph Fourier basis, consisting of the eigenvectors of the
graph Laplacian (Shuman et al., 2013), stands as a prevalent
choice. However, graph wavelets (Hammond et al., 2011)
offer enhanced flexibility by constructing adaptable bases.
For (2), classic approaches involve diagonalizing the kernel
with fully free parameters (Bruna et al., 2013) or employing
various polynomial approximations such as Chebyshev (Defferrard et al., 2016) and Cayley (Levie et al., 2018) polynomials. Additionally, convolution with a tensor-valued kernel
serves as the spectral function of Transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017) under the shift-invariant condition (Li et al.,
2021; Guibas et al., 2021).

Spectral graph convolution, an important tool
of data filtering on graphs, relies on two essential decisions: selecting spectral bases for signal transformation and parameterizing the kernel for frequency analysis. While recent techniques mainly focus on standard Fourier transform and vector-valued spectral functions, they
fall short in flexibility to model signal distributions over large spatial ranges, and capacity of
spectral function. In this paper, we present a novel
wavelet-based graph convolution network, namely
WaveGC, which integrates multi-resolution spectral bases and a matrix-valued filter kernel. Theoretically, we establish that WaveGC can effectively capture and decouple short-range and longrange information, providing superior filtering
flexibility, surpassing existing graph wavelet neural networks. To instantiate WaveGC, we introduce a novel technique for learning general
graph wavelets by separately combining odd and
even terms of Chebyshev polynomials. This approach strictly satisfies wavelet admissibility criteria. Our numerical experiments showcase the
consistent improvements in both short-range and
long-range tasks. This underscores the effectiveness of the proposed model in handling different scenarios. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/liun-online/WaveGC.

Despite the existence of techniques in each aspect, the integration of these two lines into a unified framework remains
challenging, impeding the full potential of graph convolution. In an effort to unravel this challenge, we introduce
a novel operation — Wavelet-based Graph Convolution
(WaveGC), which seamlessly incorporates both spectral basis and kernel considerations. In terms of spectral basis
design, WaveGC is built upon graph wavelets, allowing it to
capture information across the entire graph through a multiresolution approach from highly adaptive construction of
multiple graph wavelet bases. For filter parameterization, we
opt for a matrix-valued spectral kernel with weight-sharing.
The matrix-valued kernel offers greater flexibility to filter
wavelet signals, thanks to its larger parameter space.

1. Introduction
Spectral graph theory (SGT) (Chung, 1997), which enables
analysis and learning on graph data, has firmly established
itself as a pivotal methodology in graph machine learning. A significant milestone in SGT is the generalization

To comprehensively explore WaveGC, we theoretically analyse and assess its information-capturing capabilities. In
contrast to the K-hop basic message-passing framework,
WaveGC is demonstrated to exhibit both significantly larger
and smaller receptive fields concurrently, achieved through
the manipulation of scales. Previous graph wavelet theory (Hammond et al., 2011) only verifies the localization in
small scale limit. Instead, our proof is complete as it covers
both extremely small and large scales from the perspective

1

National University of Singapore 2 Loyola Marymount University University of Oxford 4 AITHYRA, Austria. Correspondence
to: Nian Liu <nianliu@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

