Convex Markov Games: A New Frontier for Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning

Ian Gemp 1 Andreas Haupt 2 Luke Marris 1 Siqi Liu 1 Georgios Piliouras 1

Abstract

# of Agents

Linear Loss

Convex Loss (Concave u)

Behavioral diversity, expert imitation, fairness,
safety goals and others give rise to preferences in
sequential decision making domains that do not
decompose additively across time. We introduce
the class of convex Markov games that allow
general convex preferences over occupancy measures. Despite infinite time horizon and strictly
higher generality than Markov games, pure strategy Nash equilibria exist. Furthermore, equilibria can be approximated empirically by performing gradient descent on an upper bound of exploitability. Our experiments reveal novel solutions to classic repeated normal-form games,
find fair solutions in a repeated asymmetric coordination game, and prioritize safe long-term
behavior in a robot warehouse environment. In
the prisoner’s dilemma, our algorithm leverages
transient imitation to find a policy profile that deviates from observed human play only slightly,
yet achieves higher per-player utility while also
being three orders of magnitude less exploitable.

n=1

MDP [1]

convex MDP [2]

n>1

MG [3]

(Ours) convex MG

Table 1. We introduce the convex Markov Game (cMG) to fill a
gap at the intersection of multi-agent and reinforcement learning
research. We demonstrate how to use cMGs to model a variety of
utilities u for a linear reward function r: (a) Creativity, using an
entropy bonus, (b) Imitation, using a divergence from a reference
occupancy measure, (c) Fairness, using a state-wise penalty, and
(d) Safety, with a non-smooth loss. This paper establishes existence of equilibria for such utilities, proposes a (sub)differentiable
loss for its computation, and demonstrates its use in selecting desirable multi-agent behaviors in each setting, at times by tracing a
homotopy from a cMG back to an MG. References: [1] Bellman
(1966); [2] Zahavy et al. (2021); [3] Shapley (1953).

Mathematically, convex MDPs allow agent goals to be expressed as general convex functions of their long run occupancy measure (the frequency with which the agent takes
a given action in a given state). An exemplar is the goal
of maximizing the entropy of an agent’s occupancy measure to encourage exploration (Hazan et al., 2019); imitation, risk-aversion, robustness, and other goals are also
common (Mutti et al., 2022; Garcıa & Fernández, 2015).
In the case where the goal is expressed as a linear function
of the occupancy measure, cMDPs reduce to MDPs.

1. Introduction
Modern solutions to (perfect-information) multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) typically build upon the
Markov game (MG) model (Littman, 1994), a generalization of the classical single agent Markov decision process
(MDP) to the multi-agent setting (see Table 1, Linear Loss).

Naturally, MARL researchers have adopted this generalization empirically in their work, for example to encourage
agent curiosity and the discovery of new and interesting
strategies in games like Chess (Zahavy et al., 2023). We
remark (†) on the advantages of these more general objectives in selecting desireable equilibria in experiments.

Similarly, the MDP has provided the foundation for development of single agent RL research. However, modern
solutions to single agent RL now build upon the convex
MDP (cMDP), an extension of the MDP that allows for
more expressive preferences over agent behavior that do
not decompose additively across time (Zhang et al., 2020).
Google DeepMind, London, UK 2 College of Computing,
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Ian Gemp
<imgemp@google.com>.

However, there has yet to be a formal definition of a framework extending cMDPs to the multi-agent setting (Table 1).
More troubling is the the lack of any analysis proving Nash
equilibria, the central solution concept in multi-agent and
game theory research, even exist in this setting.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we formally define the convex Markov game
(cMG) and prove the existence of pure Nash equilibria
by appealing to topological arguments. From a theoret-

1

1

