Bipartite Ranking From Multiple Labels: On Loss Versus Label Aggregation

Michal Lukasik * 1 Lin Chen * 1 Harikrishna Narasimhan * 1 Aditya Krishna Menon * 1 Wittawat Jitkrittum 1
Felix X. Yu 1 Sashank J. Reddi 1 Gang Fu 1 Mohammadhossein Bateni 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract

Bipartite ranking conventionally assumes the existence of
a single binary label denoting whether or not an instance
is “positive”. However, in practice, there may be multiple
binary labels, each identifying a different set of “positive”
instances. For example, in information retrieval, it is common for there to be distinct label sources (e.g., whether
or not a user clicks on a document, whether or not a human rater deems a document to be relevant) (Svore et al.,
2011). Similar challenges arise in applications including
medical diagnosis (e.g., balancing opinions from multiple
experts as to the presence of a certain condition (Verma
et al., 2023)), recommendation systems (e.g., balancing
click probability with diversity), and computational advertising (e.g., balancing click-through rates with conversion
rates); see Appendix E for more discussion of problems
involving synthesizing multiple label sources.

Bipartite ranking is a fundamental supervised
learning problem, with the goal of learning a ranking over instances with maximal area under the
ROC curve (AUC) against a single binary target
label. However, one may often observe multiple binary target labels, e.g., from distinct human
annotators. How can one synthesize such labels
into a single coherent ranking? In this work, we
formally analyze two approaches to this problem
— loss aggregation and label aggregation — by
characterizing their Bayes-optimal solutions. We
show that while both approaches can yield Paretooptimal solutions, loss aggregation can exhibit
label dictatorship: one can inadvertently (and
undesirably) favor one label over others. This suggests that label aggregation can be preferable to
loss aggregation, which we empirically verify.

Given multiple binary labels, can one produce a single coherent ranking over instances? Addressing this requires formalising the goal of such a ranking, and then specifying the mechanics of achieving this goal. The multi-objective learning
to rank literature provides guidance on both points (Svore
et al., 2011). Typically, the goal here is to find Pareto optimal solutions, i.e., solutions that are not dominated across
all objectives (Ribeiro et al., 2015). Towards achieving this,
previous works have considered two primary approaches:
(1) loss aggregation (also known as linear scalarization, or
weighted sum), where the objective is a weighted combination of per-label objectives (Lin et al., 2019); (2) label
aggregation, where the objective is formulated on a single
target formed from suitable aggregation of the multiple labels, such as a weighted combination (Carmel et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Bipartite ranking is a fundamental supervised learning problem (Freund et al., 2003; Cortes & Mohri, 2003; Agarwal
et al., 2005; Clémençon et al., 2008; Kotłowski et al., 2011;
Menon & Williamson, 2016), wherein the goal is to learn
a ranker that orders “positive” instances over “negative”
instances. This is formalized as learning a ranker with maximal area under the ROC curve (AUC) (Cortes & Mohri,
2003; Agarwal et al., 2005; Krzanowski & Hand, 2009),
and is arguably the simplest instantiation of learning to
rank (Liu, 2009). Bipartite ranking has seen applications in
practical problems ranging from medical diagnosis (Swets,
1988; Pepe, 2003) to information retrieval (Ng & Kantor,
2000; Macskassy & Provost, 2001), and is the basis for
several other supervised learning problems (Narasimhan &
Agarwal, 2013; Reddi et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2022).

Empirically, both loss and label aggregation have proven
successful for multi-objective ranking problems. Theoretically, however, there has been limited analysis providing
guidance on the following natural question: are there reasons to favor label over loss aggregation, or vice-versa?
In this work, we study this question in the context of bipartite ranking. We study the Bayes-optimal scorers for
both aggregation approaches, which represent the theoretical minimizers given full access to the underlying statistical
distributions. We find that both methods broadly yield comparable optimal rankings, which furthermore are Pareto op-

*

1
Lead authors.
Google Research.
Correspondence
to: Michal Lukasik <mlukasik@google.com>, Lin Chen
<linche@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

