One Diffusion Step to Real-World Super-Resolution via
Flow Trajectory Distillation

Jianze Li * 1 Jiezhang Cao * 2 Yong Guo 3 Wenbo Li 4 Yulun Zhang† 1

LR

SinSR-s1

OSEDiff-s1

AddSR-s1

TSD-SR-s1

FluxSR-s1 (ours)

LR

DiffBIR-s50

SeeSR-s50

ResShift-s15

AddSR-s4

FluxSR-s1 (ours)

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of different Real-ISR methods. Top: Comparison between FluxSR and state-of-the-art
one-step diffusion methods. Bottom: Comparison between FluxSR and state-of-the-art multi-step diffusion methods. Our
proposed FluxSR generates more realistic images with high-frequency details.

Abstract

facts. To address this limitation, we propose
FluxSR, a novel one-step diffusion Real-ISR technique based on flow matching models. We use
the state-of-the-art diffusion model FLUX.1-dev
as both the teacher model and the base model.
First, we introduce Flow Trajectory Distillation
(FTD) to distill a multi-step flow matching model
into a one-step Real-ISR. Second, to improve
image realism and address high-frequency artifact issues in generated images, we propose TVLPIPS as a perceptual loss and introduce Attention Diversification Loss (ADL) as a regularization term to reduce token similarity in transformer, thereby eliminating high-frequency artifacts. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that our method outperforms existing one-step
diffusion-based Real-ISR methods. The code and
model will be released at https://github.
com/JianzeLi-114/FluxSR.

Diffusion models (DMs) have significantly advanced the development of real-world image
super-resolution (Real-ISR), but the computational cost of multi-step diffusion models limits their application. One-step diffusion models generate high-quality images in a one sampling step, greatly reducing computational overhead and inference latency. However, most existing one-step diffusion methods are constrained
by the performance of the teacher model, where
poor teacher performance results in image arti*
1
Equal contribution
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Harvard University 3 Huawei Consumer Business Group 4 Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Yulun Zhang† <yulun100@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

