An analytic theory of creativity in convolutional diffusion models

Mason Kamb 1 Surya Ganguli 1

Abstract
We obtain an analytic, interpretable and predictive theory of creativity in convolutional diffusion
models. Indeed, score-matching diffusion models can generate highly original images that lie
far from their training data. However, optimal
score-matching theory suggests that these models
should only be able to produce memorized training examples. To reconcile this theory-experiment
gap, we identify two simple inductive biases, locality and equivariance, that: (1) induce a form
of combinatorial creativity by preventing optimal
score-matching; (2) result in fully analytic, completely mechanistically interpretable, local score
(LS) and equivariant local score (ELS) machines
that, (3) after calibrating a single time-dependent
hyperparameter can quantitatively predict the outputs of trained convolution only diffusion models (like ResNets and UNets) with high accuracy
(median r2 of 0.95, 0.94, 0.94, 0.96 for our top
model on CIFAR10, FashionMNIST, MNIST, and
CelebA). Our model reveals a locally consistent
patch mosaic mechanism of creativity, in which
diffusion models create exponentially many novel
images by mixing and matching different local
training set patches at different scales and image
locations. Our theory also partially predicts the
outputs of pre-trained self-attention enabled UNets (median r2 ∼ 0.77 on CIFAR10), revealing
an intriguing role for attention in carving out semantic coherence from local patch mosaics.

Figure 1. Our analytic theory (left columns) can accurately predict
on a case by case basis the outputs of convolutional diffusion
models (right columns), with UNet or ResNet architectures trained
on MNIST, CIFAR10, FashionMNIST, and CelebA (left to right),
even when these outputs are highly original and far from the training data. See Fig. 5, App. C, Fig. 10 and Table 2, and App. D,
Fig. 13 to Fig. 24 for many more successful theory-experiment
comparisons.

nonetheless clearly original, exhibiting novel combinations
of attributes that are represented across disparate training
examples. What is the nature and origin of this creativity,
and how precisely is it generated from a finite training set?
We answer these questions for small convolutional diffusion
models of images by deriving an analytic and interpretable
theory of their behavior that can accurately predict their
outputs on a case-by-case basis (Fig. 1), and explain how
they are created out of locally consistent patch mosaics of
the training data.

1. Introduction and related work
A deep puzzle of generative AI lies in understanding how
it produces apparently creative output: outputs that possess a meaningful relationship to their training data, but are

Denoising probabilistic diffusion models (DDPMs) were
established in Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) and Ho et al.
(2020), and then unified with score-matching (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020b). Denoising diffusion implicit
models (DDIMs), an alternative deterministic parameterization which we primarily use in this paper, were established
in Song et al. (2020a). Diffusion models now play an important role not only in image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022), but also
video generation (Ho et al., 2022a;b; Blattmann et al., 2023),

1
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University,
California, United States.
Correspondence to: Mason
Kamb <kambm@stanford.edu>, Surya Ganguli <sganguli@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

