You Get What You Give: Reciprocally Fair Federated Learning

Aniket Murhekar 1 Jiaxin Song 2 Parnian Shahkar 3 Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury 1 2 Ruta Mehta 1

Abstract

effective training. However, data sharing is often costly due
to factors such as acquisition costs (Tu et al., 2022), computational expenses, and privacy concerns (Chen et al., 2020).
As a result, agents may act strategically and reduce their
data contributions, particularly if they bear high data sharing costs. This can lead to undesirable outcomes in terms of
both fairness – where agents receive benefits disproportionate to their data contributions – and efficiency – resulting
in low data sharing, reduced total welfare, and suboptimal
learning outcomes. To address these challenges, it is crucial
to design mechanisms for federated learning that incentivize
participation from strategic agents and also ensure fairness
and efficiency at stable solutions (like a Nash equilibrium).

Federated learning (FL) is a popular collaborative
learning paradigm, whereby agents with individual datasets can jointly train an ML model. While
higher data sharing improves model accuracy and
leads to higher payoffs, it also raises costs associated with data acquisition or loss of privacy,
causing agents to be strategic about their data contribution. This leads to undesirable behavior at
a Nash equilibrium (NE) such as free-riding, resulting in sub-optimal fairness, data sharing, and
welfare. To address this, we design MShap , a
budget-balanced payment mechanism for FL, that
admits Nash equilibria under mild conditions, and
achieves reciprocal fairness: where each agent’s
payoff equals her contribution to the collaboration,
as measured by the Shapley share. In addition to
fairness, we show that the NE under MShap has
desirable guarantees in terms of accuracy, welfare,
and total data collected. We validate our theoretical results through experiments, demonstrating
that MShap outperforms baselines in terms of
fairness and efficiency.

To this end, (Karimireddy et al., 2022) introduce the data
sharing incentivization framework in FL, where each federating agent’s net utility can be measured as the difference
between the accuracy gained in the federation and the cost
of data-sharing, and the agents are strategic about data contributions. (Karimireddy et al., 2022) then consider a mechanism based on contract theory, where each agent receives
a personalized model whose accuracy is tuned based on
data contribution of the agent to the training (data-share
maximizing mechanism). In a similar spirit, (Murhekar et al.,
2023) study a mechanism in the same framework with payments, where agents may be charged/rewarded with money,
such that any Nash equilibrium (NE) achieves the maximum
utilitarian welfare possible under the mechanism (welfare
maximizing mechanism). Observe that both the foregoing
guarantees at NE are efficiency guarantees: they ensure maximal data gain or maximal welfare gain out of the federation.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) provides an effective distributed
learning paradigm where a group of agents holding local
data samples can train a joint machine learning model. The
paradigm has extensive applications, including autonomous
vehicles (Elbir et al., 2020) and digital healthcare (Dayan
et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021a).

In this paper, we investigate mechanisms for FL, which
are fair in addition to being efficient. Our notion of fairness is reciprocity: a mechanism is considered reciprocally
fair if each agent is guaranteed a “reciprocal” final utility
commensurate with her contribution to the learning process.
Naturally, a reciprocal mechanism incentivizes participation
from agents holding valuable data, which is in line with the
goals of a mechanism designer for FL. Empirical evidence
from behavioral economics (Fehr & Schmidt, 2006) further
shows that in contrast to the self-interest hypothesis1 , users
seem to trust reciprocal mechanisms, especially in bargaining and co-operative environments (like FL), and this trust

The success of federated learning hinges on the availability
of diverse, high-quality data from a variety of agents for
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA 2 Department of Industrial Systems Engineering, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, USA. Correspondence to: Bhaskar
Ray Chaudhury <braycha@illinois.edu>, Ruta Mehta <rutamehta@cs.illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Only material self-interest motivates all user participation

