HybridGS: High-Efficiency Gaussian Splatting Data Compression using
Dual-Channel Sparse Representation and Point Cloud Encoder

Qi Yang 1 Le Yang 2 Geert Van Der Auwera 3 Zhu Li 1

Abstract
Most existing 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
compression schemes focus on producing compact 3DGS representation via implicit data embedding. They have long encoding and decoding
times and highly customized data format, making it difficult for widespread deployment. This
paper presents a new 3DGS compression framework called HybridGS, which takes advantage of
both compact generation and standardized point
cloud data encoding. HybridGS first generates
compact and explicit 3DGS data. A dual-channel
sparse representation is introduced to supervise
the primitive position and feature bit depth. It
then utilizes a canonical point cloud encoder to
carry out further data compression and form standard output bitstreams. A simple and effective
rate control scheme is proposed to pivot the interpretable data compression scheme. HybridGS
does not include any modules aimed at improving 3DGS quality during generation. But experiment results show that it still provides comparable
reconstruction performance against state-of-theart methods, with evidently faster encoding and
decoding speed. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/Qi-Yangsjtu/
HybridGS.

Current
Strategy

Different Data Format
Complex Neural Network

Multiview
Image

Compact
Representation
Training

Training

Synthesized
View

Bitrate
Encoding

Standardized Point
Cloud Data Format

Slow

Decoding

Point Cloud Codec

Explicit,
Compact
Representation

Multiview
Image

Synthesized
View

Bitrate
Encoding

Sparse
Representation

Proposed
Strategy

Highly Customized
Processing

Fast

Decoding

Standardized Point Cloud
Compression Processing

Compatible Various
Standard Codec

Figure 1. Existing generative compression frameworks and the
proposed HybridGS.

However, due to the use of the explicit data format and primitive densification strategy, 3DGS has a huge data volume,
which is challenging for storage and transmission. 3DGS
compression has attracted considerable attention from both
industry and academia, which is also the focus of this paper.
In the recent 148-th Moving Picture Expert Group (MPEG)
meeting (Liao et al., 2024c), experts from Video Coding
(WG4) and Coding of 3D Graphics and Haptics (WG7)
reached two consensuses. 1) The generation process of
3DGS has significant room for optimization such as using less primitive, since 3DGS is surjective: two or more
distinctly different 3DGS samples may correspond to perceptually close content and quality. This direction will be
pursued by WG4 to achieve the compact 3DGS representation, where the input and output can be ground-truth and
synthetic views with 3DGS or its variants as intermediate
results. 2) Vanilla 3DGS shares the same data format with
3D point clouds. It is reasonable to extend existing point
cloud encoders such as the Geometry-based Point Cloud
Compression (GPCC) to support the compression of 3DGS
data. WG7 suggested that in this case, both the input and
output should be 3DGS data. We shall refer to the above
two approaches as generative compression methods and
traditional compression methods.

1. Introduction
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al., 2023) exhibits
exceptional capabilities in 3D scene reconstruction, overcoming limitations that previously hindered the practical
deployment of real-time radiance field rendering methods.
1

School of Science and Engineering, University of MissouriKansas City, Kansas, US 2 Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
3
Qualcomm, San Diego, US. Correspondence to: Qi Yang
<qiyang@umkc.edu>.

In literature, most research efforts have been put into generative compression methods and already achieved impressive
compression ratios (Chen et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2024;
Niedermayr et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024). Meanwhile, traditional compression methods have also been considered
in some work (Yang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025; Chen

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

