High Probability Bound for Cross-Learning Contextual Bandits with Unknown
Context Distributions
Ruiyuan Huang 1 Zengfeng Huang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the contextual bandits problem, a learner repeatedly observes a context, chooses an action, and incurs a loss specific
to that action. The goal of the learner is to minimize the
cumulative loss over the time horizon. The contextual bandits problem is a fundamental problem in online learning
having broad applications in fields like online advertising,
personalized recommendations, and clinical trials (Li et al.,
2010; Kale et al., 2010; Villar et al., 2015).

Motivated by applications in online bidding and
sleeping bandits, we examine the problem of contextual bandits with cross learning, where the
learner observes the loss associated with the action across all possible contexts, not just the current round’s context. Our focus is on a setting
where losses are chosen adversarially, and contexts are sampled i.i.d. from a specific distribution.
This problem was first studied by Balseiro et al.
(2019), who proposed an algorithm that achieves
near-optimal regret under the assumption that the
context distribution is known in advance. However, this assumption is often unrealistic. To address this issue, Schneider & Zimmert (2023) recently proposed a new algorithm that achieves
nearly optimal expected regret. It is well-known
that expected regret can be significantly weaker
than high-probability bounds. In this paper, we
present a novel, in-depth analysis of their algorithm and demonstrate that it actually achieves
near-optimal regret with high probability. There
are steps in the original analysis by Schneider
& Zimmert (2023) that lead only to an expected
bound by nature. In our analysis, we introduce
several new insights. Specifically, we make extensive use of the weak dependency structure between different epochs, which was overlooked in
previous analyses. Additionally, standard martingale inequalities are not directly applicable, so
we refine martingale inequalities to complete our
analysis.

We consider the cross-learning contextual bandits problem.
In this setting, the learner not only observes the loss for the
current action under the current context, but also observes
the loss for the current action under all other contexts. This
problem models many interesting scenarios. One such example is the problem of learning to bid in first-price auctions.
In this problem the context is the bidder’s private value for
the item, while the action is the bid. The cross-learning
structure comes from the fact that the bidder can deduce the
utility of the bid under all contexts (i.e., the utility of the
bid under different private valuations for the item). Other
examples include multi-armed bandits with exogenous costs,
dynamic pricing with variable costs, and learning to play in
Bayesian games (Balseiro et al., 2019).
Technically, the most interesting setting for the crosslearning contextual bandits problem is when the losses are
chosen adversarially but the contexts are i.i.d. samples from
an unknown distribution ν. Recently, Schneider & Zimmert
√ (2023) gave an algorithm achieving nearly optimal
e
O( KT ) expected regret in this scenario.
Schneider & Zimmert (2023) designed a sophisticated
algorithm that operates over multiple epochs to achieve
near-optimal regret. A key technique in their analysis is
to sidestep high-probability bounds and instead focus on
bounding the expected summation to improve their results.
As a consequence, their analysis only provides a bound that
holds in expectation. It is not immediately clear whether
this is due to limitations in the analysis or if the algorithm
is inherently suboptimal. In any case, if we aim for a highprobability bound, fundamentally new insights are required.

1

School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Innovation Institute. Correspondence to: Zengfeng
Huang <huangzf@fudan.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we show
√ that the algorithm indeed achieves
e KT ) regret with high-probability. The
nearly optimal O(
1

