Inference-Time Alignment of Diffusion Models with Direct Noise Optimization

Zhiwei Tang 1 2 Jiangweizhi Peng 3 Jiasheng Tang 2 4 Mingyi Hong 3 Fan Wang 2 4 Tsung-Hui Chang 1 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Diffusion models work by learning to reverse the process
of diffusing the data distribution p(x) into noise, which can
be described by a stochastic differential equation (SDE)
(Song et al., 2020b; Karras et al., 2022): dxt = f (t)xt dt +
g(t)dwt , where dwt is the standard Wiener process, and f (t)
and g(t) are the drift and diffusion coefficients, respectively.
def.
The reverse process relies on the score function ϵ(xt , t) =
∇x log pt (x) where pt denotes the p.d.f of noisy data xt ,
and its closed-form can be expressed either as an ODE or as
an SDE: (Song et al., 2020b):

In this work, we focus on the alignment problem of diffusion models with a continuous reward function, which represents specific objectives for downstream tasks, such as increasing
darkness or improving the aesthetics of images.
The central goal of the alignment problem is to
adjust the distribution learned by diffusion models such that the generated samples maximize the
target reward function. We propose a novel alignment approach, named Direct Noise Optimization
(DNO), that optimizes the injected noise during
the sampling process of diffusion models. By design, DNO operates at inference-time, and thus is
tuning-free and prompt-agnostic, with the alignment occurring in an online fashion during generation. We rigorously study the theoretical properties of DNO and also propose variants to deal with
non-differentiable reward functions. Furthermore,
we identify that naive implementation of DNO
occasionally suffers from the out-of-distribution
reward hacking problem, where optimized samples have high rewards but are no longer in the
support of the pretrained distribution. To remedy
this issue, we leverage classical high-dimensional
statistics theory to an effective probability regularization technique. We conduct extensive experiments on several important reward functions
and demonstrate that the proposed DNO approach
can achieve state-of-the-art reward scores within
a reasonable time budget for generation.




1
f (t)xt − g 2 (t)ϵ(xt , t) dt,
(1)
2

SDE: dxt = f (t)xt − g 2 (t)ϵ(xt , t) dt + g(t)dwt . (2)
ODE: dxt =

With the capability to evaluate ϵ(xt , t), it becomes possible
to generate samples from noise by numerically solving either the ODE (1) or the SDE (2). The training process, therefore, involves learning a parameterized surrogate ϵθ (xt , t)
to approximate ϵ(xt , t), following a denoising score matching framework as described in (Song et al., 2020b; Karras
et al., 2022). Despite the effectiveness of diffusion models
in modeling continuous distributions, when deploying these
generative models for specific tasks, it is not suitable to sample from the original learned distribution directly, because
this distribution has not been aligned with the task-specific
objective. For instance, in image generation, users may
wish to produce images that are aesthetically pleasing rather
than mediocre, or generate images with enhanced brightness, darkness, or compressibility. Recently, the alignment
problem has drawn considerable interest in the context of
diffusion models, as evidenced by a series of studies such
as (Yuan et al., 2024; Song et al., 2023a; Dong et al., 2023;
Prabhudesai et al., 2023; Black et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023).

1
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, USA 4 Hupan Lab, Zhejiang Province, China
5
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data. Correspondence to:
Zhiwei Tang <zhiweitang1@link.cuhk.edu.cn>.

Alignment Problem for Diffusion Models. Given a diffusion model characterized by parameters θ and its associated
distribution pθ (x), as well as a reward function r(x) that can
assign real-valued scores to generated samples, the central
goal of the alignment problem is to adjust the distribution
pθ (x) such that the generated samples maximize the reward
from r(x). In this work, we consider the reward functions

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

