Position: It Is Time We Test Neural Computation In Vitro

Frithjof Gressmann 1 Ashley Chen 1 Lily Hexuan Xie 1 Nancy M. Amato 1 Lawrence Rauchwerger 1

Abstract

ural biological context (Smirnova et al., 2023). Together,
these advances present, as we will argue, a novel synergistic opportunity. Historically, the neuroscientific study of
the brain has served as a source of inspiration in developing artificially intelligent systems. As neuroscientific study
sets out to uncover working principles of perception, behavior, learning, memory, and reasoning (Finger, 1994),
AI research made progress engineering such capabilities in
silicon-based artificial systems. With the advancement of
both iPSC technology and large-scale data-driven ML, it
is now possible to consider an intersection of these efforts,
namely a “reverse engineering” of neural computation using living cells. Concretely, this means developing enough
practical understanding of cultured in vitro neurons1 so that
they can be modeled and controlled to elicit or reproduce
cognitive abilities much like their artificial deep learning
counterparts. Notably, we construe neural computation as
systematic transformation of information encoded in neural
activity patterns that can be functionally characterized as a
task performed by the in vitro system (see Figure 1).

Recent advances in bioengineering have enabled
the creation of biological neural networks in vitro,
significantly reducing the cost, ethical hurdles,
and complexity of experimentation with genuine
biological neural computation. In this position
paper, we argue that this trend offers a unique
and timely opportunity to put our understanding
of neural computation to the test. By designing
artificial neural networks that can interact and control living neural systems, it is becoming possible
to validate computational models beyond simulation and gain empirical insights to help unlock
more robust and energy-efficient next-generation
AI systems. We provide an overview of key technologies, challenges, and principles behind this
development and describe strategies and opportunities for novel machine learning research in this
emerging field. We also discuss implications and
fundamental questions that could be answered
as this technology advances, exemplifying the
longer-term impact of increasingly sophisticated
in vitro neural networks.

1.1. In vitro neural networks as a testbed for neural
computation models
The idea of reverse engineering biological neural processing
to abstract the underlying principles is, of course, not new
and presents a long-standing priority of NeuroAI (Zador
et al., 2023). However, we contend that the engineering
and experimental interaction with stem cell-derived neurons presents a novel and unique opportunity for at least
three reasons. First, although in vitro cell cultures recapitulate many structural and functional aspects of brain tissue,
they are simpler and much smaller, reducing the complexity of the system (Zhao et al., 2022). Secondly, in vitro
experiments greatly enhance the possibilities of causal intervention to validate experimental hypotheses about the
system (Takebe & Wells, 2019). Specifically, it is possible
to control environmental conditions, repeat procedures with
multiple cell cultures, and manipulate and observe in ways
that would be impossible or unethical with in vivo subjects.
Finally, the technology has matured to the point where open

1. Introduction
In recent years, two mutually influential fields, artificial
intelligence (AI) and neuroscience, have witnessed revolutionary developments. The remarkable success of largescale neural networks in machine learning (ML) has enabled
the effective modeling of complex data patterns and relationships across a wide variety of domains (Bommasani
et al., 2022). In bioengineering, groundbreaking work on induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology has enabled
the conversion of ordinary cells to stem cells (Takahashi
et al., 2007), facilitating the in vitro cultivation of neural
cell cultures for study and application outside of their nat1
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Frithjof Gressmann <fg14@illinois.edu>, Lawrence
Rauchwerger <rwerger@illinois.edu>.

1

Throughout this paper, in vitro neurons refers specifically to
neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), not
neurons obtained from other sources such as primary cultures or
neuroblastoma cell lines.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

