Differentiable Structure Learning with Ancestral Constraints

Taiyu Ban 1 Changxin Rong 1 Xiangyu Wang 1 Lyuzhou Chen 1 Xin Wang 1 Derui Lyu 1 Qinrui Zhu 1
Huanhuan Chen 1

Abstract

In practice, it is common to have prior knowledge about the
presence or absence of causal relationships, which must be
incorporated into structure learning to accurately recover the
underlying causal mechanisms (Constantinou et al., 2023;
Amirkhani et al., 2016). When prior knowledge is abstract
and does not directly identify a specific causal interaction in
the data, ancestral constraints, which specify the existence
or absence of either edges or indirect paths, provide a robust
way to encode such abstract knowledge (Li & Beek, 2018).

Differentiable structure learning of causal directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) is an emerging field
in causal discovery, leveraging powerful neural
learners. However, the incorporation of ancestral constraints, essential for representing abstract
prior causal knowledge, remains an open research
challenge. This paper addresses this gap by introducing a generalized framework for integrating
ancestral constraints. Specifically, we identify
two key issues: the non-equivalence of relaxed
characterizations for representing path existence
and order violations among paths during optimization. In response, we propose a binary-masked
characterization method and an order-guided optimization strategy, tailored to address these challenges. We provide theoretical justification for
the correctness of our approach, complemented
by experimental evaluations on both synthetic and
real-world datasets.

For traditional structure learning methods based on scoreand-search, ancestral constraints can be incorporated by
verifying path presence conditions in a graph and eliminating graphs that violate the constraints (Chen et al., 2016), or
by re-scoring graphs with additional bonuses for adherence
to prior knowledge (O’Donnell et al., 2006).
In contrast, differentiable structure learning of causal DAGs
relies on gradient-based optimization, which demands a
smooth characterization that equivalently represents path
presence conditions. Furthermore, the optimization process must be effectively guided toward favorable optima
under continuous ancestral constraints, avoiding the risk of
convergence to suboptimal points. These two distinctive
requirements pose significant challenges to the integration
of ancestral constraints in differentiable structure learning,
leaving it an open research question in the field.

1. Introduction
Structure learning of causal DAGs is a fundamental task for
uncovering causal relationships among variables from data
(Pearl, 2000). Recent advances have reformulated this task
as a continuous optimization problem by representing the
discrete acyclicity constraint of the graph as a smooth equality, a technique known as differentiable structure learning
(Zheng et al., 2018). This approach facilitates the use of
powerful neural learners and gradient-based optimization
methods to model complex causal mechanisms (Zheng et al.,
2020; Yu et al., 2019), significantly advancing the fields of
causal discovery and trustworthy AI (Zhang et al., 2021;
Dai & Chen, 2022; Ruan et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022).

To address this research gap, we propose a generalized
framework for integrating ancestral constraints into differentiable structure learning. First, we identify the issue of
non-equivalence in continuous relaxed characterizations for
representing path existence and propose a binary-masked
characterization that accurately and equivalently represents
path existence. Next, we address the order-violating issue
among individual paths specified in the constraints, which
can result in incomplete adherence to the constraints and
lead to suboptimal optimization. To guide the optimization
process toward a favorable optima, we propose an orderguided optimization strategy. It begins by enforcing partial
order constraints implied by path existence, deriving a DAG
that satisfies all specified path orders. The resulting orderconsistent DAG is then used as the initial adjacency matrix
to optimize the path existence-constrained problem.

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence to: Xiangyu Wang <sa312@ustc.edu.cn>, Huanhuan Chen
<hchen@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We provide the necessary theoretical analysis and compre1

