Agent-Centric Actor-Critic for Asynchronous Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning

Whiyoung Jung * 1 Sunghoon Hong * 1 Deunsol Yoon * 1 Kanghoon Lee 1 Woohyung Lim 1

Abstract

Overcooked
200
Return

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
struggles with coordination in sparse reward environments. Macro-actions —sequences of actions
executed as single decisions— facilitate longterm planning but introduce asynchrony, complicating Centralized Training with Decentralized
Execution (CTDE). Existing CTDE methods use
padding to handle asynchrony, risking misaligned
asynchronous experiences and spurious correlations. We propose the Agent-Centric Actor-Critic
(ACAC) algorithm to manage asynchrony without padding. ACAC uses agent-centric encoders
for independent trajectory processing, with an
attention-based aggregation module integrating
these histories into a centralized critic for improved temporal abstractions. The proposed structure is trained via a PPO-based algorithm with a
modified Generalized Advantage Estimation for
asynchronous environments. Experiments show
ACAC accelerates convergence and enhances performance over baselines in complex MARL tasks.

ACAC (macro)
MAPPO (micro)

100
0

0 4 8 12 16 20
Environment steps (1M)
Figure 1. (Left) An example of Overcooked problem. (Right) Comparison of the learning efficiency when using micro-actions (dotted) versus macro-actions (solid).
Go to Tomato
Go to 

Lettuce

Go to Knife 1

Go to Knife 2

Go to Onion

Chop
Chop
Go to Plate 1
Timesteps

Observation 

& Decision Time

Macro-action

Figure 2. An example trajectory of asynchronous decisions.

treat a well-defined sequence of actions1 —referred to as a
macro-action—as a single high-level decision (Xiao et al.,
2020a;b). By selecting macro-actions, agents adopt longterm strategies that significantly enhance learning efficiency
compared to relying solely on low-level (micro-)actions.
An illustrative example of such an environment is the Overcooked problem, shown in the left side of Figure 1. In this
setting, macro-actions like G O TO T OMATO each comprise
a sequence of micro-actions aimed at completing a subtask. As depicted in the right side of Figure 1, using these
macro-actions can significantly enhance learning efficiency.

1. Introduction
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has achieved
significant progress (Omidshafiei et al., 2017; Foerster et al.,
2018; Lowe et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2018; Yu et al.,
2022; Kuba et al., 2022), enabling distributed agents to learn
coordinated strategies efficiently. Despite these advances,
many real-world tasks remain notoriously challenging due
to sparse rewards, where feedback signals are infrequent
and less informative. In such environments, agents struggle
to infer how their individual actions influence collective
performance, often requiring extensive exploration.

However, employing macro-actions also causes the agents’
action-selection timesteps to become asynchronous, as
shown in Figure 2. In this figure, for instance, when the blue
agent selects G O TO T OMATO, it spends four timesteps executing the macro-action before finally acquiring the tomato.
After finishing a macro-action, each agent receives a new

One promising approach to address sparse rewards is to
*
Equal contribution 1 LG AI Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Woohyung Lim <w.lim@lgresearch.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Macro-actions are not fixed sequences of micro-actions; see
Section 2.3 for further details.

1

