Stochastic Poisson Surface Reconstruction with One Solve
using Geometric Gaussian Processes

Sidhanth Holalkere 1 David S. Bindel 1 Silvia Sellán 2 3 Alexander Terenin 1
world three-dimensional scans are captured—into other
downstream-usable formats, such as meshes or other surface
representations. Such algorithms are a key computational
primitive used in computer graphics pipelines.

Abstract
Poisson Surface Reconstruction is a widely-used
algorithm for reconstructing a surface from an oriented point cloud. To facilitate applications where
only partial surface information is available, or
scanning is performed sequentially, a recent line
of work proposes to incorporate uncertainty into
the reconstructed surface via Gaussian process
models. The resulting algorithms first perform
Gaussian process interpolation, then solve a set
of volumetric partial differential equations globally in space, resulting in a computationally expensive two-stage procedure. In this work, we
apply recently-developed techniques from geometric Gaussian processes to combine interpolation and surface reconstruction into a single
stage, requiring only one linear solve per sample. The resulting reconstructed surface samples
can be queried locally in space, without the use of
problem-dependent volumetric meshes or grids.
These capabilities enable one to (a) perform probabilistic collision detection locally around the region of interest, (b) perform ray casting without
evaluating points not on the ray’s trajectory, and
(c) perform next-view planning on a per-ray basis. They also do not requiring one to approximate kernel matrix inverses with diagonal matrices as part of intermediate computations, unlike
prior methods. Results show that our approach
provides a cleaner, more-principled, and moreflexible stochastic surface reconstruction pipeline.

The most widely-used approach is Poisson Surface Reconstruction [17, 16]. It works by solving a partial differential
equation to compute an implicit surface representation—a
function where positive (resp. negative) values denote locations inside (resp. outside) the surface, with zeroes denoting
the surface. Its computation relies on standard numerical
techniques—most commonly the finite element method—
making it simple, reliable, and efficient on compute devices
well-suited to sparse linear algebra.
Real-world scans are necessarily imperfect: they involve
noise, measurement error, and may even need to gracefully
handle situations where parts of the object are occluded or
otherwise not observed by the camera. As a consequence,
surface reconstruction algorithms must both interpolate and
extrapolate from noisy and potentially incomplete data as
part of their computations. Poisson surface reconstruction
typically does this by blurring the data using a smooth kernel: while simple and effective, this process does not quantify uncertainty about interpolation or extrapolation.
To provide a richer characterization of the information contained in a scan, a recent line of work proposes Stochastic
Poisson Surface Reconstruction [27]—a Bayesian formalism which incorporates uncertainty about the scan through
the use of Gaussian process priors. The implicit surface
representation is then recovered by applying Bayes’ Rule
in the solution space of the respective Poisson equation’s
stochastic analog. This approach not only quantifies uncertainty, it provides a potential path for selecting optimal
scan directions in a technically principled manner, mirroring data acquisition techniques from areas such as Bayesian
optimization [11] and probabilistic numerics [13].

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction algorithms are used to process
point cloud data—the most-common format in which real-

A key challenge in stochastic Poisson surface reconstruction is that it requires more complex computations than its
non-stochastic analogs. The simplest approach, proposed by
Sellán and Jacobson [27], is to first condition the Gaussian
process on point-cloud observations, then solve the required
Poisson equation to obtain the surface representation. Un-

Code: HTTPS :// GITHUB . COM / SHOLALKERE /G EO SPSR.
1
Cornell University 2 Columbia University 3 MIT. Correspondence to: Sidhanth Holalkere <sh844@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

