Gradient-based Explanations for Deep Learning Survival Models

Sophie Hanna Langbein * 1 2 Niklas Koenen * 1 2 Marvin N. Wright 1 2 3

Abstract
Outcome:
6 months, deceased

Force Plot: GradSHAP(t)

Instance ID: 157

Deep learning survival models often outperform
classical methods in time-to-event predictions,
particularly in personalized medicine, but their
“black box” nature hinders broader adoption. We
propose a framework for gradient-based explanation methods tailored to survival neural networks,
extending their use beyond regression and classification. We analyze the implications of their
theoretical assumptions for time-dependent explanations in the survival setting and propose effective visualizations incorporating the temporal
dimension. Experiments on synthetic data show
that gradient-based methods capture the magnitude and direction of local and global feature
effects, including time dependencies. We introduce GradSHAP(t), a gradient-based counterpart
to SurvSHAP(t), which outperforms SurvSHAP(t)
and SurvLIME in a computational speed vs. accuracy trade-off. Finally, we apply these methods to
medical data with multi-modal inputs, revealing
relevant tabular features and visual patterns, as
well as their temporal dynamics.

0.2

0.08

0.1

0.09

0.08
0.07

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.07

0

Novel gradient-based local XAI
methods for survival deep learning

0.04
0.03
0.04

0.01
0.01

0.0

0.01
−0.01

−0.01

5

0.03

0.03
0.03

0.03
0.03

−0.02

−0.02

−0.02

10

15

Time

Feature
Effects
Sex: male
Age: 43
IDH Mutation:
1p/19q Codeletion:

Tabular data

Biopsy
images

Survival
Probability

1p19q Codeletion (no)

IDH Mutation (mutant)

Image (sum)

Age (43)

Sex (male)

Time-dependent explainability
for multi-modal data, including
images

SG(t)

Efficient visualizations capturing
temporal dynamics

GradSHAP(t)

Faster computation while
maintaining local accuracy

Gradient Computation
Feature Selection,
RoI Identification

Feature

Data
Preprocessing

Survival CNN
Survival
Prediction
Model Training

Figure 1. Overview of our workflow for generating timedependent post-hoc explanations using gradient-based methods
by the example of overall brain cancer survival prediction. The
approach utilizes a survival deep learning model with multi-modal
input data, providing insights into the temporal dynamics of feature
effects through tailored visualizations for different feature types.
(images: Flaticon.com)

cal research and evidence-based medicine. Deep learning
methods hold significant potential for advancing survival
analysis by framing pathogenic identification as a datadriven problem, uncovering correlations between patient
profiles and disease phenotypes, and seamlessly learning
from unstructured or high-dimensional data such as images,
text, or omics, thereby revealing hidden and complex patterns undetectable by classical approaches (Zhang et al.,
2019). While machine learning models show great promise
for survival analysis, their inherent opacity raises legitimate
concerns, as in fields like life sciences, interpretability is
crucial to support sensitive decision-making, mitigate biases,
promote equity, and ensure compliance with regulatory standards (Rahman & Purushotham, 2022; Vellido, 2020). In
recent years, several post-hoc eXplainable AI (XAI) methods for population-wide (global) and individual (local) insights into the decision-making process of machine learning
survival models have been proposed (Langbein et al., 2024).
For personalized medicine, the local model-agnostic approaches SurvLIME (Kovalev et al., 2020), an extension of
LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), and SurvSHAP(t) (Krzyziński
et al., 2023), a generalization of SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), have prevailed.
However, no methods specifically targeted at or practical to

1. Introduction
As medical databases expand to include patients’ detailed
medical history and genetic information, healthcare is shifting from population-based models and traditional statistical
approaches targeting the “average” patient to more complex
personalized medicine, which tailors diagnoses to individual patient characteristics. Survival analysis is fundamental
to medical data analysis, modeling time-to-event outcomes
while accounting for censoring, enabling personalized risk
predictions, and assessing treatment effects to advance clini*
Equal contribution 1 Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research
and Epidemiology – BIPS, Bremen, Germany 2 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen, Germany
3
Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Marvin N. Wright <wright@leibnizbips.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

