LaMAGIC2: Advanced Circuit Formulations
for Language Model-Based Analog Topology Generation

Chen-Chia Chang 1 Wan-Hsuan Lin 2 Yikang Shen 3 Yiran Chen 1 Xin Zhang 3 4
Analog topology generation

Abstract

Power converter
Specifications
Available devices:
VIN
LM
two switches, a capacitor, …
Voltage conversion ratio: 0.18887
VOUT
Efficiency: 0.95544
Duty cycle: 0.5

Automation of analog topology design is crucial
due to customized requirements of modern applications with heavily manual engineering efforts.
The state-of-the-art work applies a sequence-tosequence approach and supervised finetuning on
language models to generate topologies given user
specifications. However, its circuit formulation
is inefficient due to O(|V |2 ) token length and
suffers from low precision sensitivity to numeric
inputs. In this work, we introduce LaMAGIC2,
a succinct float-input canonical formulation with
identifier (SFCI) for language model-based analog topology generation. SFCI addresses these
challenges by improving component-type recognition through identifier-based representations, reducing token length complexity to O(|V |), and
enhancing numeric precision sensitivity for better performance under tight tolerances. Our experiments demonstrate that LaMAGIC2 achieves
34% higher success rates under a tight tolerance
of 0.01 and 10X lower MSEs compared to a prior
method. LaMAGIC2 also exhibits better transferability for circuits with more vertices with up to
58.5% improvement. These advancements establish LaMAGIC2 as a robust framework for analog
topology generation. Code available at https:
//github.com/turtleben/LaMAGIC.

LaMAGIC’s analysis
Input with float embeddings:
Duty cycle options 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 voltage … 0.9554
Embedding (E)

Linear layer (L)

E

L

Low success rates in strict tolerances
Adjacency-matrix circuit formulation:
Duty cycle: … Connections: VIN <no_edge> <no_edge> …
VOUT … GND … Sa … Sb … C … L … <sep>

Token lengths with complexity 𝑂( 𝑉 ! )

Finetune with 120k 3, 4, 5-comp circuits:
Then finetune with 1k 6-comp circuits:

PM
PM

FM
FM

Figure 1. Analog topology generation and the analysis of a stateof-the-art work LaMAGIC (Chang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

different power supply requirements, e.g., voltage conversion ratio and power efficiency, often requires varied topologies. However, traditional topology design relies heavily
on manual processes, which demand large engineering efforts and prolong the time-to-market period for new designs.
Thus, automating analog topology design has become crucial to accelerate circuit development.

With the rise of diverse electronic systems, the need for
different analog circuit functionalities increases. Thus, the
demand for analog topology customization has largely increased. For example, the power converter application with
1
Duke University 2 University of California, Los Angeles 3 MITIBM Watson AI Lab 4 IBM T. J. Watson Research Center. Correspondence to: Chen-Chia Chang <chenchia.chang@duke.edu>,
Xin Zhang <xzhang@us.ibm.com>.

Early efforts (Fan et al., 2021; Zhao & Zhang, 2022; Lu et al.,
2023) have focused on search-based approaches, which
explore vast design spaces guided by simulation rewards.
However, they are inefficient and are not suitable to generate circuits for diverse specifications. The work (Fan et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

