KinDEL: DNA-Encoded Library Dataset for Kinase Inhibitors

Benson Chen * 1 Tomasz Danel * 1 Gabriel H. S. Dreiman 1 Patrick J. McEnaney 1 Nikhil Jain 1 Kirill Novikov 1
Spurti Umesh Akki 1 Joshua L. Turnbull 1 Virja Atul Pandya 1 Boris P. Belotserkovskii 1 Jared Bryce Weaver 1
Ankita Biswas 1 Dat Nguyen 1 Kent Gorday 1 Mohammad Sultan 1 Nathaniel Stanley 1 Daniel M Whalen 1
Divya Kanichar 1 Christoph Klein 1 Emily Fox 1 R. Edward Watts 1

Abstract
Step A

DNA-Encoded Libraries (DELs) represent a transformative technology in drug discovery, facilitating the high-throughput exploration of vast chemical spaces. Despite their potential, the scarcity
of publicly available DEL datasets presents a bottleneck for the advancement of machine learning
methodologies in this domain. To address this
gap, we introduce KinDEL, one of the largest
publicly accessible DEL datasets and the first
one that includes binding poses from molecular
docking experiments. Focused on two kinases,
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 14 (MAPK14)
and Discoidin Domain Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
1 (DDR1), KinDEL includes 81 million compounds, offering a rich resource for computational
exploration. Additionally, we provide comprehensive biophysical assay validation data, encompassing both on-DNA and off-DNA measurements,
which we use to evaluate a suite of machine learning techniques, including novel structure-based
probabilistic models. We hope that our benchmark, encompassing both 2D and 3D structures,
will help advance the development of machine
learning models for data-driven hit identification
using DELs.

Step B

Step C

Figure 1: (Top) DELs are synthesized in a sequential manner; at every step, the DNA codon specifies the next building
block (synthon) to be attached. (Bottom) An example of a
fully synthesized DEL molecule, with the building blocks
and codons colored-coded for visualizability. Typically,
there is also a linker that connects the molecule to the DNA,
which here is a 6-carbon chain.

synthesis of chemical building blocks, or synthons, with
each resulting molecule being assigned a DNA barcode (see
Figure 1). DELs are then used in selection experiments
where they are mixed with proteins of interest bound to a
matrix. Multiple rounds of washing are conducted to remove any weak binders, and the DNA tags of surviving
molecules are sequenced as a measure of binding affinity.
Data generated through these experiments are intrinsically
noisy with various sources of bias arising from the DEL
synthesis and selection processes, suggesting that modern
machine learning methods may be needed to learn signal
from the data. Unfortunately, there is still a lack of large,
publicly available DEL datasets and benchmarking tasks to
drive this important research area.

1. Introduction
DNA-Encoded Libraries (DEL) have emerged as a powerful
tool in drug discovery, enabling highly efficient screens of
small molecule libraries against therapeutically relevant targets (Yuen & Franzini, 2017; Gironda-Martı́nez et al., 2021;
Kunig et al., 2021; Peterson & Liu, 2023). These massive
libraries are efficiently constructed through combinatorial

The growing interest in utilizing DEL data for modeling is
evidenced by the many recent efforts to advance this area
(Iqbal et al., 2024; Blevins et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024).
One of the primary reasons for this interest is that selection
experiments using DELs alleviate some of the data limitations typical of the field; most chemistry problems in the
machine learning domain lack consistent and sufficiently

*

Equal contribution 1 Insitro, South San Francisco, CA 94080,
USA. Correspondence to: Benson Chen <benatorc@gmail.com>,
Tomasz Danel <tomek@insitro.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

