A Sub-Problem Quantum Alternating Operator Ansatz for Correlation
Clustering

Lucas Fabian Naumann 1 Jannik Irmai 1 Bjoern Andres 1 2

Abstract

computers, as these are limited both by their number of
qubits and the number of operations that can be performed
on a qubit before its state is too corrupted by noise (circuit
depth). These current quantum computers are also referred
to as Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices
(Preskill, 2018).

The Quantum Alternating Operator Ansatz
(QAOA) is a hybrid quantum-classical variational
algorithm for approximately solving combinatorial optimization problems on Noisy IntermediateScale Quantum (NISQ) devices. Although it has
been successfully applied to a variety of problems,
there is only limited work on correlation clustering due to the difficulty of modelling the problem
constraints with the ansatz. Motivated by this, we
present a generalization of QAOA that is more
suitable for this problem. In particular, we modify QAOA in two ways: Firstly, we use nucleus
sampling for the computation of the expected cost.
Secondly, we split the problem into sub-problems,
solving each individually with QAOA. We call
this generalization the Sub-Problem Quantum Alternating Operator Ansatz (SQAOA) and show
theoretically that optimal solutions to correlation
clustering instances can be obtained with certainty
when the depth of the ansatz tends to infinity.
Further, we show experimentally that SQAOA
achieves better approximation ratios than QAOA
for correlation clustering, while using only one
qubit per node of the respective problem instance
and reducing the runtime (of simulations).

Variational quantum algorithms (Cerezo et al., 2021) have
emerged as a promising paradigm to achieve quantum
supremacy for practical problems on NISQ devices. These
algorithms combine quantum and classical computing by
using parameterized quantum circuits with few qubits and
low depth, whose parameters are learned in a classical optimization loop. The Quantum Alternating Operator Ansatz
(QAOA) (Hadfield et al., 2019) is such a variational algorithm designed for approximately solving combinatorial
optimization problems. In particular, it alternately applies
a parameterized phase-separation operator, which changes
the phase of states depending on their cost, and a mixing
operator, which enables transitions between states and thus
constructive or destructive interference based on their phase
difference. The number of times p these operators are applied alternately is called the ansatz depth. For p → ∞, and
under the conditions given by Binkowski et al. (2024), there
exist parameters for each problem instance such that QAOA
returns an optimal solution with certainty. QAOA has been
applied to a variety of problems (Cook et al., 2020; Saleem,
2020; Tabi et al., 2020; Fuchs et al., 2021), including correlation clustering (Weggemans, 2020; Weggemans et al.,
2022).

1. Introduction

Correlation clustering (Bansal et al., 2004) is a special clustering formulation in which objects are represented by the
nodes of a graph, (dis-)similarities between them by edges
with corresponding costs, and the goal is to cluster the nodes
of the graph such that a cost function is optimized. In prominent difference to other formulations, the number of clusters
is not fixed in advance, but learned from the data. This
unsupervised clustering of objects based solely on pairwise
(dis-)similarities finds application in various domains, such
as computational biology (D’haeseleer, 2005; Erola et al.,
2020), data analysis (Benjelloun et al., 2009; Abbas & Swoboda, 2023) and image segmentation (Yarkony et al., 2012;
Beier et al., 2015; Keuper et al., 2015).

The term “quantum supremacy” (Preskill, 2012) refers to
the ability of quantum computers to perform tasks efficiently
that classical computers cannot. From a theoretical point
of view, algorithms achieving this supremacy for problems
of practical interest have long been established. However,
applying these algorithms to problem instances of classically intractable sizes is not possible on current quantum
1

Faculty of Computer Science, TU Dresden 2 Center for Scalable Data Analytics and AI, Dresden/Leipzig. Correspondence to:
Bjoern Andres <bjoern.andres@tu-dresden.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

