Reinforcement Learning for Quantum Control under Physical Constraints

Jan Ole Ernst * 1 Aniket Chatterjee * 1 Tim Franzmeyer * 2 Axel Kuhn 1

Abstract

(laser pulses, microwaves etc.) to a quantum system, to
realise a desired time evolution (Glaser et al., 2015; Koch,
2016; Koch et al., 2022; Mahesh et al., 2022). Examples
of such tasks include system initialisation, (quantum) state
preparation, gate operation, state population transfer or state
measurement. Quantum control enables performing such
tasks with low error rates, which is particularly important for
the realisation of fault tolerant quantum computing (Terhal,
2015). Isolated quantum systems exhibit unitary dynamics
(i.e. reversible) which are comparatively easy to model
for modest system sizes. Yet all real quantum systems are
open, subject to some interaction with the environment and
require the addition of irreversible non-unitary dynamics to
realistically capture their evolution (Breuer & Petruccione,
2002).

Quantum control is concerned with the realisation
of desired dynamics in quantum systems, serving
as a linchpin for advancing quantum technologies
and fundamental research. Analytic approaches
and standard optimisation algorithms do not yield
satisfactory solutions for more complex quantum
systems, and especially not for real world quantum systems which are open and noisy. We devise
a physics-constrained Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithm that restricts the space of possible
solutions. We incorporate priors about the desired
time scales of the quantum state dynamics – as
well as realistic control signal limitations – as constraints to the RL algorithm. These constraints
improve solution quality and enhance computational scaleability. We evaluate our method on
three broadly relevant quantum systems and incorporate real-world complications, arising from
dissipation and control signal perturbations. We
achieve both higher fidelities – which exceed
0.999 across all systems – and better robustness
to time-dependent perturbations and experimental
imperfections than previous methods. Lastly, we
demonstrate that incorporating multi-step feedback can yield solutions robust even to strong perturbations. Our implementation can be found at
https://github.com/jan-o-e/RL4qcWpc.

Motivated by such real-world experimental setups, we tackle
quantum control with physically realistic models. The combined unitary and non-unitary evolution of quantum systems
is typically modelled by a master equation (Davies, 1974;
Dirr et al., 2009), a first-order linear ODE also known as
a quantum Liouvillian or Lindbladian. Solving the master
equation and controlling larger quantum systems is computationally expensive, growing quadratically with the quantum
system size, limiting the use of standard optimisation methods. While stochastic methods (Mølmer et al., 1993) can
reduce the quadratic scaling to a linear one, they require a
large number of trajectories for high numerical accuracies.
For large systems the only feasible option is to sample directly from a quantum device. Experimental imperfections
and noise – arising from, e.g., signal distortion or attenuation in optical and electronic setups, or due to inherent
system imperfections (Burkard, 2009) – pose additional
challenges which existing approaches fail to address. In
this work, we present a novel approach for controlling realworld open quantum systems, posing quantum control as
a Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem subject to physical constraints. Specifically, we learn a control policy that
maximises the fidelity of the quantum control task, while removing control signals which result in overly fast quantum
state dynamics from the space of possible solutions. A majority of quantum control tasks, including those considered
in this work, are concerned with adiabatically transferring
population between quantum states (Král et al., 2007), such
that the time evolution of the system is slow compared to the

1. Introduction
The optimal control of quantum systems is important for
enabling the development of quantum technologies such
as computing, sensing, and communication, and similarly
plays an important role for quantum chemistry (Brif et al.,
2010) and solid state physics (Glaser et al., 2015). Quantum
control requires the application of time-dependent signals
*
Equal contribution 1 Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jan Ole
Ernst <jan.ernst@physics.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

