Projection Optimization: A General Framework for Multi-Objective and
Multi-Group RLHF

Nuoya Xiong 1 Aarti Singh 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, there has been considerable effort to finetune a machine learning model, particularly Large Language
Model (LLM), to perform better on particular tasks. RLHF
is a popular fine-tuning approach, which receives the human’s preference feedback and aligns the LLM model with
human values using fine-tuning. Standard RLHF exploits human preference feedback between two outputs to maximize
the expectation of the implicit or explicit reward function.

Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) is a widely used fine-tuning approach
that aligns machine learning model, particularly
Language Model (LM) with human preferences.
There are typically multiple objectives driving the
preference, hence humans find it easier to express
per-objective comparisons rather than a global
preference between two choices. Multi-Objective
RLHF aims to use per-objective preference feedback and achieve Pareto optimality among these
objectives by aggregating them into a single unified objective for optimization. However, nearly
all prior works rely on linear aggregation, which
rules out policies that favor specific objectives
such as the worst one. The only existing approach
using non-linear aggregation is computationally
expensive due to its reward-based nature and the
need for retraining whenever the aggregation parameters change. In this work, we address this
limitation by transforming the non-linear aggregation maximization problem into a series of subproblems. Each sub-problem involves only linear
aggregation, making it computationally efficient
to solve. We further extend our framework to handle multi-group scenarios, where each group has
distinct weights for the objectives. Our method
enables achieving consensus or maximizing the
aggregated objective across all groups. Theoretically, we demonstrate that our algorithmic framework achieves sublinear regret and can be easily
adapted to a reward-free algorithm. Empirically,
leveraging our theoretical insights, we propose a
nearly training-free algorithm once the optimal
policies for individual objectives are obtained.

However, there are two main challenges for the application
of RLHF in the real world. First, standard RLHF only maximizes a single reward function. However, people often find
it hard to evaluate choices in an overall sense as, in reality,
there are often multiple objectives. For example, comparing
two papers or essays overall is harder than comparing them
on specific objectives such as novelty, clarity, correctness etc.
Similarly, recommending a city for vacation is harder than
comparing cities on food options, nightlife, safety, etc. Each
objective has its own implicit or explicit reward function,
and the LLM needs to achieve a Pareto optimal trade-off
between them by, for example, maximizing an aggregation
of these reward function. Second, there are multiple groups
of users in the real world who may prefer different aggregations of the objectives. For example, groups with different
genders, political views, marital status, etc. This requires
that the LLM either (a) satisfies the requirements of all the
groups simultaneously, or (b) optimizes some aggregation
across multiple groups.
Multi-Objective Problem There are some works (Rame
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024) that consider balancing the utilities of multiple objectives to get
the Pareto optimal point or maximize the average expectation. Some works (Zhong et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024)
consider multi-party problem in which each reward represents a group, which can also be regarded as a multiobjective problem. We assume that we have m different
objectives, and each objective has its own reward function
ri (x, y)(1 ≤ i ≤ m). Each reward corresponds to an
objective of the response y like safety or helpfulness of
the LLM, and the expected rewards Ex∼ρ,y∼π(·|x) [ri (x, y)]
evaluate the LLM on these objectives respectively, where
ρ is the distribution of the prompt. Nearly all of the

1
Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Aarti Singh <aarti@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

