Mitigating over-exploration in latent space optimization using LES

Omer Ronen 1 Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun 2 Richard Baraniuk 2 Randall Balestriero 3 Bin Yu 1

Abstract
We develop Latent Exploration Score (LES) to
mitigate over-exploration in Latent Space Optimization (LSO), a popular method for solving black-box discrete optimization problems.
LSO utilizes continuous optimization within
the latent space of a Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) and is known to be susceptible to overexploration, which manifests in unrealistic solutions that reduce its practicality. LES leverages
the trained decoder’s approximation of the data
distribution, and can be employed with any VAE
decoder–including pretrained ones–without additional training, architectural changes or access
to the training data. Our evaluation across five
LSO benchmark tasks and twenty-two VAE models demonstrates that LES always enhances the
quality of the solutions while maintaining high
objective values, leading to improvements over existing solutions in most cases. We believe that new
avenues to LSO will be opened by LES’ ability to
identify out of distribution areas, differentiability,
and computational tractability.

Figure 1. Incorporating LES promotes valid solutions. We consider the task of approximating the expression 1/3 + x +
sin(x * x), using LSO. Optimization trajectories with (blue)
and without (red) LES constraint in the latent space of a VAE
are projected onto a two-dimensional subspace that contains the
starting point and the end-points obtained after 10 gradient ascent
steps. In the left panel, we show the LES score for latent vectors
on the two-dimensional subspace, with darker shades corresponding to lower LES. In the right panel, we show the validity of the
decoder outputs for each latent vector, with orange denoting invalid generations. High LES values correlate with valid areas, and
incorporating LES in LSO produce an expression that adheres to
the grammatical rules of Example 1.1.

et al., 2018). LSO transfers the optimization problem to
the domain of the latent space of a VAE, which can be efficiently explored using continuous optimization methods.
However, ensuring that LSO solutions respect the structure
of the original space remains a challenge. To illustrate this
issue, we provide some examples.

1. Introduction
Many important tasks in scientific fields, such as small
molecule discovery and protein engineering, can be framed
as discrete black-box optimization problems. In contrast to conditional sampling-based approaches, including
GFlowNet (Bengio et al., 2023) and Diffusion (Corso et al.,
2022; Igashov et al., 2024), which are better suited for applications like linker design (Du et al., 2024), optimization is
particularly effective when the goal is to improve a specific
property, such as enhancing a drug’s safety.

Example 1.1 (Arithmetic expressions). An expression built
up using numbers, arithmetic operators and parentheses
is called an arithmetic expression. However, not every sequence of the above elements correspond to a valid expression. For instance, the expression ”sin(x) + x” is a
valid expression while ”sin(xxx” is not.
Example 1.2 (Simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES)). SMILES provides a syntax to describe
molecules using short ASCII strings. Atoms are represented
by letters (e.g., water:”O”), bonds are represented by symbols (e.g., triple: ”#”, double: ”=”, . . . ), branches are
represented in parentheses and cyclic structures are represented by inserting numbers at the beginning and the end.
Like the arithmetic expressions case, not every combination of the elements described above corresponds to a valid
molecule. For example, while ”C1CCCCC1” is valid, both
”C1CCCCC2” and ”C1CCCCC)” are not.

LSO was recently developed to enhance the sample efficiency of discrete optimization algorithms, such as genetic
algorithms, in the black-box setting (Gómez-Bombarelli
1
UC Berkeley 2 Rice Univeristy 3 Brown University. Correspondence to: Omer Ronen <omer ronen@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

