Quantum Algorithms for Finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes

Bin Luo 1 Yuwen Huang 1 Jonathan Allcock 2 Xiaojun Lin 1 Shengyu Zhang 2 John C.S. Lui 1

Abstract

MDPs have been applied in fields such as networks, robotics,
and operations research (Alsheikh et al., 2015; Matignon
et al., 2012). Despite their wide applicability, MDPs often
face significant computational challenges in practice. A key
issue arises when the number of possible states or actions
in the system becomes very large. In particular, this ”curse
of dimensionality” makes solving MDPs computationally
infeasible in many practical scenarios (Powell, 2007).

In this work, we design quantum algorithms that
are more efficient than classical algorithms to
solve time-dependent and finite-horizon Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) in two distinct settings: (1) In the exact dynamics setting, where
the agent has full knowledge of the environment’s
dynamics (i.e., transition probabilities), we prove
that our Quantum Value Iteration (QVI) algorithm QVI-1 achieves a quadratic speedup in the
size of the action space (A) compared with the
classical value iteration algorithm for computing
the optimal policy (π ∗ ) and the optimal V-value
function (V0∗ ). Furthermore, our algorithm QVI2 provides an additional speedup in the size of
the state space (S) when obtaining near-optimal
policies and V-value functions. Both QVI-1 and
QVI-2 achieve quantum query complexities that
provably improve upon classical lower bounds,
particularly in their dependences on S and A. (2)
In the generative model setting, where samples
from the environment are accessible in quantum
superposition, we prove that our algorithms QVI3 and QVI-4 achieve improvements in sample
complexity over the state-of-the-art (SOTA) classical algorithm in terms of A, estimation error
(ϵ), and time horizon (H). More importantly, we
prove quantum lower bounds to show that QVI-3
and QVI-4 are asymptotically optimal, up to logarithmic factors, assuming a constant time horizon.

Quantum computing is a new computing paradigm that harnesses the laws of quantum mechanics. For certain classes
of problems, such as unstructured search (Grover, 1996),
prime number factoring (Shor, 1994), optimization (Sidford
& Zhang, 2023; Jordan, 2005; Liu et al., 2024) and online
learning (He et al., 2024; 2022; Wan et al., 2023), quantum
computing demonstrates significant speedups over classical computing. Recent advancements in quantum hardware
(Arute et al., 2019; AI et al., 2024) indicate that practical
quantum computers can be a reality in the near future.
Given the importance of MDPs and the advancement in
quantum computing, researchers have explored various
quantum algorithms to reduce the time complexity of solving MDPs. In the stochastic control domain, (Naguleswaran
& White, 2005) suggested two quantum techniques that
can potentially be used to accelerate classical algorithms
for finite-horizon MDPs (Puterman, 2014). However, this
work only focused on problem formulation and did not provide a concrete quantum algorithm for finite-horizon MDPs
with performance guarantee. (Naguleswaran et al., 2006)
applied quantum walk (Magniez et al., 2007) to efficiently
solve a specific class of MDPs, namely deterministic shortest path problems. However, the quantum algorithm and
analysis there cannot be applied to general finite-horizon
MDPs. For RL, researchers proposed to replace subroutines of existing RL frameworks by quantum algorithms.
For example, (Wiedemann et al., 2022) proposed to use a
quantum Monte Carlo (MC) (Montanaro, 2015) to replace
the classical MC method on policy evaluation. However,
their algorithm is inefficient as its quantum sample complexity is exponential with respect to S in both time-dependent
and time-independent settings for obtaining near-optimal
policies. Improved sample-complexity results that do not
increase exponentially in S have been obtained for infinitehorizon MDPs. For example, (Cherrat et al., 2023) utilized
a quantum linear system solver (Chakraborty et al., 2019) to

1. Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) provide a mathematical framework for modeling decision-making problems
in uncertain environments. They are an important framework to model discrete-time stochastic control and reinforcement learning (RL) (Puterman, 2014; Agarwal et al., 2019).
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
Tencent Quantum Laboratory, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Yuwen Huang <yuwen.huang@link.cuhk.edu.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

