Randomized Dimensionality Reduction for Euclidean Maximization and
Diversity Measures

Jie Gao 1 Rajesh Jayaram 2 Benedikt Kolbe 3 Shay Sapir 4 Chris Schwiegelshohn 5 Sandeep Silwal 6
Erik Waingarten 7

1. Introduction

Abstract

Dimensionality reduction is a key technique in data science and machine learning that allows one to transform a
dataset of n points in a d-dimensional space into a dataset
where each point now lies in a much smaller t-dimensional
space. This reduction in dimensionality occurs while (approximately) preserving the dataset’s essential properties.
The benefits of such reduction are apparent—the total storage of a d-dimensional dataset is O(nd). After dimension
reduction, the total storage is O(nt).

Randomized dimensionality reduction is a widelyused algorithmic technique for speeding up largescale Euclidean optimization problems. In this paper, we study dimension reduction for a variety of
maximization problems, including max-matching,
max-spanning tree, max TSP, as well as various
measures for dataset diversity. For these problems,
we show that the effect of dimension reduction is
intimately tied to the doubling dimension λX of
the underlying dataset X—a quantity measuring
intrinsic dimensionality of point sets. Specifically,
we prove that a target dimension of O(λX ) suffices to approximately preserve the value of any
near-optimal solution, which we also show is necessary for some of these problems. This is in
contrast to classical dimension reduction results,
whose dependence increases with the dataset size
|X|. We also provide empirical results validating the quality of solutions found in the projected
space, as well as speedups due to dimensionality
reduction.

Another aspect is running time. After a dimension reduction, we may replace dependencies on d with a dependency
on t. This seemingly addresses the curse of dimensionality
which is used to describe the phenomenon that algorithms
scale poorly in high dimensions. Initially this seems very
promising, as many problems admit a polynomial time approximation scheme (PTAS) in a low-dimensional setting
(Bartal & Gottlieb, 2021; Cevallos et al., 2019; Kolliopoulos
& Rao, 2007). However, these algorithms typically have
severe dependency on the dimension d (e.g., could be doubly exponential). We are thus interested in reducing the
dimension as much as possible, ideally even to constants.
Problems for which efficient algorithms are known to exist in low-dimensions, but are not known to exist in highdimensions, include network design problems, such as the
traveling salesperson (Arora, 1997; Kolliopoulos & Rao,
2007; Shenmaier, 2022), and diversity maximization problems (Cevallos et al., 2019; 2018), both of which are staples
of data analysis and operations research. However, this
discrepancy between low- and high-dimensional data exists primarily in the worst case. One can consider a beyond
worst-case analysis by attempting to identify tractable inputs
to the problem which are not necessarily low dimensional
(Awasthi et al., 2010; Ostrovsky et al., 2012). One way of
utilizing such properties is to design a dimension reduction
to uncover such structures that might not be easily used in
the original high dimension, see (Awasthi & Sheffet, 2012;
Cohen-Addad & Schwiegelshohn, 2017).

∗

Authors listed alphabetically. 1 Department of Computer
Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA 2 Google
Research, NYC, USA 3 Hausdorff Center for Mathematics,
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, University of Bonn, Germany 4 Department of Computer
Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel 5 Department of
Computer Science, Aarhus University, Denmark 6 Department
of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA
7
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Jie Gao <jg1555@cs.rutgers.edu>, Rajesh Jayaram
<rkjayaram@google.com>, Benedikt Kolbe <bkolbe@unibonn.de>, Shay Sapir <shay.sapir@weizmann.ac.il>, Chris
Schwiegelshohn <cschwiegelshohn@gmail.com>, Sandeep
Silwal <silwal@cs.wisc.edu>, Erik Waingarten <ewaingar@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Dimensionality reduction techniques can be broadly categorized into two distinct types: data-dependent and data1

