LSCD: Lomb–Scargle Conditioned Diffusion
for Time series Imputation

Elizabeth Fons * 1 Alejandro Sztrajman * 2 Yousef El-Laham 1 Luciana Ferrer 3 4 Svitlana Vyetrenko 1
Manuela Veloso 1

Abstract

computation. However, such pre-processing can distort the
underlying data distribution, leading to spurious or attenuated frequency estimates.

Time series with missing or irregularly sampled
data are a persistent challenge in machine learning. Many methods operate on the frequencydomain, relying on the Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) which assumes uniform sampling, therefore
requiring prior interpolation that can distort the
spectra. To address this limitation, we introduce
a differentiable Lomb–Scargle layer that enables
a reliable computation of the power spectrum of
irregularly sampled data. We integrate this layer
into a novel score-based diffusion model (LSCD)
for time series imputation conditioned on the entire signal spectrum. Experiments on synthetic
and real-world benchmarks demonstrate that our
method recovers missing data more accurately
than purely time-domain baselines, while simultaneously producing consistent frequency estimates.
Crucially, our method can be easily integrated
into learning frameworks, enabling broader adoption of spectral guidance in machine learning approaches involving incomplete or irregular data.

By contrast, the Lomb–Scargle periodogram (Lomb, 1976;
Scargle, 1982) can estimate power spectra without assuming
uniform sampling. It does not require an imputation step to
compute frequency components, making it far more reliable
in the presence of irregular or missing data. Despite its
advantages, Lomb–Scargle remains under-explored in the
broader machine learning community.
In this paper, we introduce a Lomb–Scargle Conditioned Diffusion (LSCD) approach for time series imputation. Inspired
by score-based diffusion methods (Song & Ermon, 2019),
we develop a diffusion model that operates in the time domain, but is conditioned on a Lomb–Scargle-based spectral
representation. By leveraging the full Lomb–Scargle periodogram as an additional input, our model effectively captures underlying frequency structures and imposes greater
consistency between the final time-domain imputation and
the original spectral content.
We evaluate our approach on both synthetic and real datasets,
introducing varying degrees of missingness (up to 90%). We
show that our conditioning on the Lomb–Scargle spectrum
consistently improves time-series imputation metrics such as
MAE and CRPS compared to purely time-domain baselines.
Crucially, the method produces PSD estimates closer to
the ground truth, demonstrating improved consistency of
frequency recovery.

1. Introduction
Time series data often exhibit missing observations or irregular sampling intervals, creating challenges for machine
learning tasks such as imputation, forecasting, classification,
and anomaly detection (Yang et al., 2024b). Many methods
operate in the frequency domain (Alaa et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2024a; Wu et al., 2023; Crabbé et al., 2024) using
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), which requires data to
be uniformly sampled on a regular grid. To address this
requirement, these methods typically handle missing values by interpolating or zero-filling the gaps prior to FFT

Our main contributions are:
1. We introduce a diffusion-based time-series imputation framework that directly conditions on the
Lomb–Scargle spectrum, thereby eliminating the need
for interpolation or zero-filling in the frequency domain. To further enhance performance with high rates
of missing data, we propose a consistency loss that
refines the alignment between the time-domain signal
and its Lomb–Scargle representation.

*

Equal contribution 1 J.P. Morgan AI Research 2 University of
Cambridge 3 University of Buenos Aires 4 CONICET. Correspondence to: Elizabeth Fons <elizabeth.fons@jpmorgan.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2. We provide a differentiable implementation of Lomb–
Scargle and show how it can be seamlessly integrated
1

