Latent Variable Causal Discovery under Selection Bias

Haoyue Dai 1 2 Yiwen Qiu 1 Ignavier Ng 1 Xinshuai Dong 1 Peter Spirtes 1 Kun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

whether involving latent variables or not, is the data being randomly sampled from the underlying population. In
practice, however, this is often violated due to selection
bias—preferential inclusion of data points based on unknown mechanisms (Heckman, 1977). Returning to the earlier examples, individuals with certain traits may be more
willing to take a psychological survey, and methods like
mail or phone used to recruit respondents can systematically
skew groups based on factors like economic and education
level. Ignoring such bias can severely distort the inferred
causal structures. Moreover, uncovering the selection mechanisms is also crucial for understanding the data. Hence,
there is a pressing need for methods of latent variable causal
discovery that can address selection bias.

Addressing selection bias in latent variable causal
discovery is important yet underexplored, largely
due to a lack of suitable statistical tools: While
various tools beyond basic conditional independencies have been developed to handle latent variables, none have been adapted for selection bias.
We make an attempt by studying rank constraints,
which, as a generalization to conditional independence constraints, exploits the ranks of covariance submatrices in linear Gaussian models.
We show that although selection can significantly
complicate the joint distribution, interestingly, the
ranks in the biased covariance matrices still preserve meaningful information about both causal
structures and selection mechanisms. We provide
a graph-theoretic characterization of such rank
constraints. Using this tool, we demonstrate that
the one-factor model, a classical latent variable
model, can be identified under selection bias. Simulations and real-world experiments confirm the
effectiveness of using our rank constraints.

1

Despite its importance, addressing selection bias in latent
variable causal discovery remains almost unexplored, to the
best of our knowledge. One may first recall the Fast Causal
Inference (FCI) algorithm (Spirtes et al., 1999), which indeed exploits the conditional independence (CI) constraints
in data under both hidden confounding and selection bias.
However, FCI is typically not regarded as a method of latent
variable causal discovery, as it focuses solely on causal
relations among observed variables, with no intension
or capability to identify those among latent variables. In
short, though FCI can handle both hidden confounding and
selection bias, and is already maximally informative under
nonparametric CI constraints (Richardson & Spirtes, 2002;
Zhang, 2008), it is still not informative enough for latent
variable causal discovery. Therefore, new statistical tools
that go beyond CI constraints must be developed.

Introduction

At the core of understanding complex systems lies causal
discovery, the identification of causal relations from observational data (Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 2009). In many
real-world scenarios, the variables of interest are latent
constructs that cannot be directly observed or quantized,
while the observed variables serve merely as indirect
measurements. For instance, in psychological or politicaleconomic surveys, measured responses serve as proxies for
latent personality traits or political orientations. Recovering
the causal structure among these latent variables—referred
to as latent variable causal discovery—is essential for understanding and reasoning, yet remains a challenging task.

Many new tools beyond CI constraints have thus been developed, typically by imposing additional parametric assumptions. These include rank constraints (Sullivant et al., 2010),
equality constraints (Drton, 2018), high-order moment constraints (Xie et al., 2020; Adams et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2024), constraints based on matrix decomposition (Anandkumar et al., 2013), copula models (Cui et al.,
2018), and mixture oracles (Kivva et al., 2021). A detailed
review of these tools and the latent variable causal discovery
algorithms based on them is provided in Appendix B.

Furthermore, a typical assumption in causal discovery,
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University
of Artificial Intelligence.

However, all these new tools were developed for latent variables solely, with none adapted to selection bias. While various parametric models for selection were also studied, their

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

