One Arrow, Two Hawks: Sharpness-aware Minimization for Federated Learning
via Global Model Trajectory

Yuhang Li 1 Tong Liu 1 Yangguang Cui 1 Ming Hu 2 Xiaoqiang Li 1

Abstract

pate in the FL process and train the local models in multiple
intervals with their own datasets within one communication round (Wahab et al., 2021). Due to data heterogeneity
(i.e., non-IID), partial client participation, and multiple local
training, a significant issue arises known as the “client drift”
problem (Karimireddy et al., 2020), which means clients’ local objectives converging towards inconsistent local optima,
which leads to the aggregated global model may not be the
optimum of the global objective. Larger data heterogeneity
may enlarge the objective inconsistency, thereby not only
degrading generalization performance but also escalating
computation and communication overhead.

Federated learning (FL) presents a promising strategy for distributed and privacy-preserving learning, yet struggles with performance issues in the
presence of heterogeneous data distributions. Recently, a series of works based on sharpness-aware
minimization (SAM) have emerged to improve
local learning generality, proving to be effective
in mitigating data heterogeneity effects. However,
most SAM-based methods do not directly consider the global objective and require two backward pass per iteration, resulting in diminished
effectiveness. To overcome these two bottlenecks,
we leverage the global model trajectory to directly
measure sharpness for the global objective, requiring only a single backward pass. We further
propose a novel and general algorithm FedGMT
to overcome data heterogeneity and the pitfalls of
previous SAM-based methods. We analyze the
convergence of FedGMT and conduct extensive
experiments on visual and text datasets in a variety of scenarios, demonstrating that FedGMT
achieves competitive accuracy with state-of-theart FL methods while minimizing computation
and communication overhead. Code is available
at https://github.com/harrylee999/FL-SAM.

To tackle the client drift problem, most previous works (Li
et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020b;
Acar et al., 2021) involve enforcing regularization in local optimization with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM).
However, ERM-based training often falls into a sharp valley
in the loss landscape (Chaudhari et al., 2019), resulting in
a biased regularization term (e.g., the global model), especially in a highly heterogeneous dataset (Sun et al., 2023a).
This bias makes the trained local model more inclined towards a similar tendency, rendering the entire training process unstable and significantly undermining performance.
Instead, recent studies (Qu et al., 2022; Caldarola et al.,
2022; Sun et al., 2023b; An et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023)
have focused on improving the local generality in FL to alleviate the objective inconsistency, which has achieved new
state-of-the-art performance among current FL algorithms.
These methods aim to seek flat minima during local learning
by employing the recently proposed Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2020) as the local optimizer.
SAM is built on the findings that emphasize the advantages
of a smooth loss landscape for better generalization (Dinh
et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2019). By enhancing local generality, these methods mitigate inconsistency among local
objectives, thereby contributing to the overall smoothness
of the aggregated global model.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) leverages distributed client (i.e.,
edge device) data to preserve privacy through an iterative
process: downloading models, training models locally, uploading the updated models by clients and aggregating models on the server (McMahan et al., 2017). Due to the limited
communication resources, only a subset of clients partici1
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China 2 School of Computing and Information
Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Tong Liu <tong liu@shu.edu.cn>.

Unfortunately, SAM-based methods have following short1 The computational cost of SAM’s sharpness
comings. ⃝
measure is twice that of the base optimizer, typically stochastic gradient descent (SGD). In the process of FL, most of the
computation is performed by client devices. This prohibits

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

