Dynamic Mixture of Curriculum LoRA Experts
for Continual Multimodal Instruction Tuning

Chendi Ge 1 Xin Wang 1 Zeyang Zhang 1 Hong Chen 1 Jiapei Fan 2 Longtao Huang 2 Hui Xue 2 Wenwu Zhu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Continual multimodal instruction tuning is crucial
for adapting Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) to evolving tasks. However, most existing methods adopt a fixed architecture, struggling
with adapting to new tasks due to static model
capacity. We propose to evolve the architecture
under parameter budgets for dynamic task adaptation, which remains unexplored and imposes two
challenges: 1) task architecture conflict, where
different tasks require varying layer-wise adaptations, and 2) modality imbalance, where different
tasks rely unevenly on modalities, leading to unbalanced updates. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel Dynamic Mixture of Curriculum LoRA Experts (D-MoLE) method, which
automatically evolves MLLM’s architecture with
controlled parameter budgets to continually adapt
to new tasks while retaining previously learned
knowledge. Specifically, we propose a dynamic
layer-wise expert allocator, which automatically
allocates LoRA experts across layers to resolve architecture conflicts, and routes instructions layerwisely to facilitate knowledge sharing among experts. Then, we propose a gradient-based intermodal continual curriculum, which adjusts the
update ratio of each module in MLLM based on
the difficulty of each modality within the task to
alleviate the modality imbalance problem. Extensive experiments show that D-MoLE significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving
a 15% average improvement over the best baseline. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study of continual learning for MLLMs from an
architectural perspective.

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) (Dai et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025),
which extend conventional LLMs through integration with
modality-specific encoders (e.g., vision, audio), have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in processing heterogeneous
multimodal data. However, in real-world scenarios, pretrained MLLMs will inevitably encounter new data as users’
instructions and demands shift. To handle these new tasks,
MLLMs need to be adapted, but this adaptation process
can lead to catastrophic forgetting, where the model loses
previously learned knowledge. As a result, Continual Multimodal Instruction Tuning (CMIT) has recently received
considerable attention (Chen et al., 2024a), with the goal of
efficiently adapting MLLMs to new tasks while preserving
previously learned knowledge.
Despite recent progress, most existing methods adopt a
fixed architecture, which limits model capacity and flexibility for both past and future tasks in continual learning.
Common approaches include replay-based methods (Wang
et al., 2024b; Song et al., 2023) and parameter regularization methods (Wang et al., 2023a; Xiang et al., 2023), both
originally designed for smaller unimodal models with simpler input structures. However, MLLMs are structurally
different: they consist of modality-specific encoders, projectors, and language models, forming a heterogeneous and
layered architecture. The reliance on each component varies
significantly across tasks, resulting in task-specific sensitivity across both layers and modalities. As a result, fixedarchitecture MLLMs face increased difficulty in balancing
knowledge retention and adaptation. These observations motivate us to move beyond static designs and explore dynamic
architectural adaptation for CMIT.
To bridge this gap, in this paper, we propose to continually
evolve the architecture under given parameter budgets in
CMIT, aiming to adapt to new tasks with dynamic capacity
while maintaining the previous knowledge, without significantly increasing computational resources. The problem,
remaining unexplored in the literature, is highly non-trivial
with the following key challenges:

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology,
BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Alibaba
Group, Hangzhou, China.
Correspondence to:
Xin
Wang
<xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Wenwu
Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

(1) Task architecture conflict. In CMIT, different tasks ex1

