Branches: Efficiently Seeking Optimal Sparse Decision Trees via AO*

Ayman Chaouki 1 Jesse Read 1 Albert Bifet 2 3

Abstract

simple decision rules (splits). However, this interpretability
weakens as the number of splits increases, which makes the
joint optimisation of accuracy and sparsity (minimising the
number of splits) a fundamental problem in Interpretable
Machine Learning. We refer to this problem as the sparsity
problem. This optimisation task is particularly difficult due
to its NP-completeness (Hyafil & Rivest, 1976). Consequently, greedy approaches, such as C4.5 (Quinlan, 2014)
and CART (Breiman et al., 1984), have been historically
favoured. While these methods are fast and scalable, their
greedy nature often yields suboptimal and overly complex
DTs.

Decision Tree (DT) Learning is a fundamental
problem in Interpretable Machine Learning, yet it
poses a formidable optimisation challenge. Practical algorithms have recently emerged, primarily
leveraging Dynamic Programming and Branch &
Bound. However, most of these approaches rely
on a Depth-First-Search strategy, which is inefficient when searching for DTs at high depths and
requires the definition of a maximum depth hyperparameter. Best-First-Search was also employed
by other methods to circumvent these issues. The
downside of this strategy is its higher memory
consumption, as such, it has to be designed in a
fully efficient manner that takes full advantage of
the problem’s structure. We formulate the problem within an AND/OR graph search framework
and we solve it with a novel AO*-type algorithm
called B RANCHES. We prove both optimality and
complexity guarantees for B RANCHES and we
show that it is more efficient than the state of
the art theoretically and on a variety of experiments. Furthermore, B RANCHES supports nonbinary features unlike the other methods, we show
that this property can further induce larger gains
in computational efficiency.

This issue spurred a large research effort into investigating
alternatives, mainly focusing on Mathematical Programming (Bennett, 1992; 1994; Bennett & Blue, 1996; Bessiere
et al., 2009; Norouzi et al., 2015; Bertsimas & Dunn, 2017;
Narodytska et al., 2018; Verwer & Zhang, 2019; Hu et al.,
2020; Blanquero et al., 2021; Günlük et al., 2021). However,
the number of variables in these Mathematical Programs
depends strongly on the dataset size and thus induces poor
scalability. Moreover, these methods often fix the DT structure and only optimise the internal splits and leaf predictions,
overlooking the sparsity portion of the problem.
Recently, Dynamic Programming (DP) (Bellman & Dreyfus,
2015) and Branch & Bound (B&B) (Lawler & Wood, 1966)
led to breakthroughs in runtimes, with most approaches
employing a Depth-First-Search (DFS) strategy (Nijssen &
Fromont, 2007; 2010; Aglin et al., 2020; Demirović et al.,
2022; van der Linden et al., 2023). While DFS is appealing from a storage economy perspective, its uninformed
nature makes it inefficient for large problems (Pearl, 1984,
p.36). On the other hand, informed strategies were also used
through Best-First-Search (BFS) (Hu et al., 2019; Lin et al.,
2020), albeit in a sub-efficient manner that does not take full
advantage of the problem’s AND/OR structure.

1. Introduction
Black-box models are ill-suited for contexts where decisions
carry substantial ramifications. In healthcare for example,
misdiagnoses can delay crucial treatments and lead to severe
outcomes. Likewise, in the criminal justice system, blackbox models can obscure biases and result in discriminatory
rulings. Such risks highlight the necessity of adopting interpretable models in sensitive domains.

Montanari et al. (1975) showed that DP problems can be
formulated within an AND/OR graph search framework, in
which they can be solved efficiently with powerful heuristic
search algorithms (Pearl, 1984). We follow this approach
because the sparsity problem can be framed within DP,
then upon defining an adequate heuristic, which we call
the Purification Bound, we solve the AND/OR graph search
problem with the celebrated AO* approach (Nilsson, 2014;

Decision Trees (DTs) are highly interpretable due to their
1

LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris 2 AI Institute, University
of Waikato 3 LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris. Correspondence to:
Ayman Chaouki <chaoukiayman2@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

