WAVE: Weighted Autoregressive Varying Gate for Time Series Forecasting

Jiecheng Lu 1 Xu Han 2 Yan Sun 1 Shihao Yang 1

Abstract

Liu et al., 2024a), and audio (Borsos et al., 2023). This
structure is well-suited for various sequential generation
and prediction tasks. However, in typical sequence modeling tasks like time series forecasting (TSF), there has been
less exploration of this architecture compared to other structures. Most of the best-performing recent TSF models are
encoder-only Transformers (Liu et al., 2024b; Nie et al.,
2022), MLPs (Das et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024), or even
linear models (Zeng et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). The few
relevant discussions mainly focus on using pretrained autoregressive LLMs or similar structures for few-shot and
zero-shot prediction (Gruver et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024;
Das et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024c), with little research directly evaluating their TSF performance in end-to-end training. Therefore, this paper will first briefly demonstrate that
with appropriate tokenization and training methods, a basic
AR Transformer is enough to achieve results comparable to
the state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines, as shown in Fig. 1.

We propose a Weighted Autoregressive Varying
gatE (WAVE) attention mechanism equipped with
both Autoregressive (AR) and Moving-average
(MA) components. It can adapt to various attention mechanisms, enhancing and decoupling their
ability to capture long-range and local temporal
patterns in time series data. In this paper, we
first demonstrate that, for the time series forecasting (TSF) task, the previously overlooked
decoder-only autoregressive Transformer model
can achieve results comparable to the best baselines when appropriate tokenization and training
methods are applied. Moreover, inspired by the
ARMA model from statistics and recent advances
in linear attention, we introduce the full ARMA
structure into existing autoregressive attention
mechanisms. By using an indirect MA weight
generation method, we incorporate the MA term
while maintaining the time complexity and parameter size of the underlying efficient attention
models. We further explore how indirect parameter generation can produce implicit MA weights
that align with the modeling requirements for local temporal impacts. Experimental results show
that WAVE attention that incorporates the ARMA
structure consistently improves the performance
of various AR attentions on TSF tasks, achieving
state-of-the-art results. The code implementation
is available at the following link.

Recently, efficient linear autoregressive attention variants
have been explored and developed (Katharopoulos et al.,
2020; Hua et al., 2022), reducing the time complexity of
standard softmax attention from O(N 2 ) to O(N ). Researchers have found that adding a gating decay factor or a
similar exponential moving average (EMA) structure to AR
structure, as in gated linear attention (Ma et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2024), enhances linear attention’s ability to model local patterns and improves performance. The success of these
approaches inspired us to introduce a more comprehensive
full autoregressive moving-average (ARMA) structure into
existing AR attention mechanisms and explore the performance of these Transformers in TSF.

1. Introduction

In TSF models, EMA, connecting back to the historic work
of Holt-Winters (Winters, 1960; Holt, 2004), focuses on
smoothed local data, which improves the modeling of shortterm fluctuations but reduces the ability to capture longterm information. In contrast, ARMA, connecting back
to the historic work of Box-Jenkins (Box et al., 1974), a
classic structure in TSF, considers both historical data and
the cumulative impact of prediction errors. This allows it
to handle and decouple long-term and short-term effects,
significantly improving forecasting performance on data
with complicated temporal patterns.

In recent years, autoregressive (AR) decoder-only
Transformer-based models (Vaswani, 2017; Radford, 2018)
have been widely used in sequence modeling tasks across
fields such as NLP (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023),
CV (Chen et al., 2020; Esser et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022;
1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 AWS. Correspondence
to: Jiecheng Lu <jlu414@gatech.edu>, Shihao Yang <shihao.yang@isye.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We propose the Weighted Autoregressive Varying gatE

1

