Zero-Inflated Bandits
Haoyu Wei * 1 Runzhe Wan * 2 Lei Shi 2 Rui Song 2

Abstract
Upper Confidence Bound

1.2

Frequency

Many real-world bandit applications are characterized by sparse rewards, which can significantly
hinder learning efficiency. Leveraging problemspecific structures for careful distribution modeling is recognized as essential for improving estimation efficiency in statistics. However, this approach remains under-explored in the context of
bandits. To address this gap, we initiate the study
of zero-inflated bandits, where the reward is modeled using a classic semi-parametric distribution
known as the zero-inflated distribution. We develop algorithms based on the Upper Confidence
Bound and Thompson Sampling frameworks for
this specific structure. The superior empirical
performance of these methods is demonstrated
through extensive numerical studies.

Monte Carlo quantile
non−zero part based UCB
variance based UCB
estimated proxy based UCB
product based UCB (ours)
true proxy based UCB

1.6

150000

100000

0.8

50000

0.4

0
0

10

20

Reward Value

(a)

30

25

50

Round

75

100

(b)

Figure 1. Results from a real personalized pricing dataset detailed
in Section 5. (a) Histogram of rewards, with zero represented in
orange. (b) Comparison of 1 − δ upper confidence bounds across
different methods. We use Monte Carlo to approximate the true
quantile (the tightest valid upper confidence bound). All methods
are validated as their curves lie above the Monte Carlo baseline.
Our proposed method (green) achieves the tightest bound quickly,
demonstrating effective utilization of the zero-inflated structure.
The other bounds correspond to UCB baselines detailed in Appendix D.1. Notably, applying existing concentration inequalities
directly on the reward (yellow), even when knowing the true size
parameter but without utilizing the ZI structure, results in significantly looser bounds.

1. Introduction
Bandit algorithms have been widely applied in areas such
as clinical trials (Durand et al., 2018), finance (Shen et al.,
2015), recommendation systems (Zhou et al., 2017), among
others. Accurate uncertainty quantification is key to addressing the exploration-exploitation trade-off and typically
requires on certain reward distribution assumptions. Existing assumptions can be roughly classified into two groups:

• Non-parametric: the reward distributions need to
satisfy certain characteristics, such as having subGaussian tails (Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017; Jin et al.,
2021; Zhu & Tan, 2020) or being bounded (Kveton
et al., 2019; 2020; Kalvit & Zeevi, 2021). In some
cases, such an approach can achieve regret rates comparable to those of parametric methods (Urteaga &
Wiggins, 2018; Kalvit & Zeevi, 2021; Jin et al., 2021).
However, in general, these weaker assumptions sacrifice statistical efficiency by ignoring structural information. Even when the rates are the same, there may still
be a significant empirical performance gap between
the two approaches when the parametric distribution
is correctly specified (see Chapter 9 in Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020).

• Parametric: the reward distribution is assumed to belong to a parameterized family, such as Gaussian or
Bernoulli distributions (Audibert et al., 2010; Krause
& Ong, 2011; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012). The strong
assumption typically ensures clean algorithmic design
and nice theoretical results. However, when misspecified, it may lead to over- or under-exploration.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Economics, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, USA 2 Amazon, Seattle, USA.
This work does not relate to the positions at Amazon. Correspondence to: Haoyu Wei <h8wei@ucsd.edu>, Rui Song
<songray@gmail.com>.

As in many statistics and machine learning areas, using
problem-specific structures to focus on a more detailed distribution family, if correctly specified, can improve the efficiency of estimation or uncertainty quantification. This
leads to lower regrets in bandits. However, as discussed
above, compared to the vast statistical literature on univari-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

