LADA: Scalable Label-Specific CLIP Adapter for Continual Learning

Mao-Lin Luo 1 2 Zi-Hao Zhou 1 2 Tong Wei 1 2 Min-Ling Zhang 1 2

Abstract

fine-tuning (Gao et al., 2024; Wortsman et al., 2022a; Zhang
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2024; Gan & Wei, 2024; Shi et al.,
2024). However, adapting CLIP representations using only
task-specific data can severely impair the “general” knowledge encoded in the pre-trained CLIP parameters (Luo et al.,
2023). This challenge is particularly problematic in continual learning settings, where the model must not only learn
incrementally from a series of tasks, but also retain its previously acquired knowledge. As the model adapts to new
tasks, the performance of previously learned knowledge
often declines, a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (French, 1999; McCloskey & Cohen, 1989). This
issue highlights the trade-off between memory stability
and learning plasticity: too much focus on the former can
interfere with the latter, and vice versa (Wang et al., 2024b).

Continual learning with vision-language models
like CLIP offers a pathway toward scalable machine learning systems by leveraging its transferable representations. Existing CLIP-based methods adapt the pre-trained image encoder by adding
multiple sets of learnable parameters, with each
task using a partial set of parameters. This requires selecting the expected parameters for input
images during inference, which is prone to error that degrades performance. To address this
problem, we introduce LADA (Label-specific
ADApter). Instead of partitioning parameters
across tasks, LADA appends lightweight, labelspecific memory units to the frozen CLIP image
encoder, enabling discriminative feature generation by aggregating task-agnostic knowledge.
To prevent catastrophic forgetting, LADA employs feature distillation for seen classes, preventing their features from being interfered with
by new classes. Positioned after the image encoder, LADA prevents gradient flow to the frozen
CLIP parameters, ensuring efficient training. Extensive results show that LADA achieves stateof-the-art performance in continual learning settings. The implementation code is available at
https://github.com/MaolinLuo/LADA.

Stability in continual learning is closely related to catastrophic forgetting and can be divided into two aspects: forgetting newly learned tasks and forgetting pre-trained general knowledge. This dual forgetting phenomenon is characterized by forward forgetting, where the general knowledge
in the pre-trained model degrades when making predictions
on unseen tasks, and backward forgetting, where previously
learned knowledge of seen tasks is lost (Tang et al., 2024).
Although backward forgetting has been effectively mitigated
through techniques such as regularization (Ahn et al., 2019;
Zenke et al., 2017), prototype augmentation (Zhu et al.,
2021; McDonnell et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2024), and replay (Rolnick et al., 2019; Rebuffi et al.,
2017), addressing forward forgetting remains a significant
challenge due to the unavailability of pre-training data. To
mitigate forward forgetting, ZSCL (Zheng et al., 2023) distills knowledge from a vanilla zero-shot CLIP model as
a teacher into a fine-tuned CLIP model, using regularization to reduce forward forgetting. However, this approach
still struggles to preserve the pre-trained knowledge due to
potential updates to pre-trained parameters. Furthermore,
many methods (Yu et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2023) rely on
external reference datasets, such as ImageNet and Conceptual Captions, to maintain generalization on general tasks.
However, this is often impractical in real-world scenarios
(Tang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Pre-trained vision-language models, such as CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021), have become natural continual learners due to
their ability to transfer representations across diverse tasks.
Recently, several fine-tuning approaches for CLIP have been
proposed to improve performance in downstream tasks, including full parameter fine-tuning and parameter-efficient
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Tong Wei
<weit@seu.edu.cn>.

For plasticity, full-parameter tuning methods, such as
ZSCL (Zheng et al., 2023), distill features from vanilla
CLIP to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. However, such

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

