Sample-Specific Noise Injection For Diffusion-Based Adversarial Purification

Yuhao Sun * 1 Jiacheng Zhang * 1 Zesheng Ye * 1 Chaowei Xiao 2 Feng Liu 1

Abstract

predictions by adding imperceptible adversarial noise to
clean examples, which pose a significant security threat in
critical applications (Dong et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2021;
Jing et al., 2021; Han et al., 2025). To defend against adversarial examples, adversarial purification (AP) stands out
as a representative defensive mechanism, by leveraging pretrained generative models to purify adversarial examples
back towards their natural counterparts before feeding into
a pre-trained classifier (Yoon et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2022).
Notably, AP methods benefit from their modularity, as the
purifier operates independently of the downstream classifier,
which facilitates seamless integration into existing systems
and positions AP as a practical approach to improve the
adversarial robustness of DNN-based classifiers.

Diffusion-based purification (DBP) methods aim
to remove adversarial noise from the input sample
by first injecting Gaussian noise through a forward diffusion process, and then recovering the
clean example through a reverse generative process. In the above process, how much Gaussian
noise is injected to the input sample is key to the
success of DBP methods, which is controlled by a
constant noise level t∗ for all samples in existing
methods. In this paper, we discover that an optimal t∗ for each sample indeed could be different.
Intuitively, the cleaner a sample is, the less the
noise it should be injected, and vice versa. Motivated by this finding, we propose a new framework, called Sample-specific Score-aware Noise
Injection (SSNI). Specifically, SSNI uses a pretrained score network to estimate how much a
data point deviates from the clean data distribution (i.e., score norms). Then, based on the magnitude of score norms, SSNI applies a reweighting
function to adaptively adjust t∗ for each sample,
achieving sample-specific noise injections. Empirically, incorporating our framework with existing
DBP methods results in a notable improvement in
both accuracy and robustness on CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet-1K, highlighting the necessity to allocate distinct noise levels to different samples in
DBP methods. Our code is available at: https:
//github.com/tmlr-group/SSNI.

Recently, diffusion-based purification (DBP) methods have
gained much attention as a promising framework in AP,
which leverage the denoising nature of diffusion models
to mitigate adversarial noise (Nie et al., 2022; Xiao et al.,
2023; Lee & Kim, 2023). Generally, diffusion models train a
forward process that maps from data distributions to simple
distributions, e.g., Gaussian, and reverse this mapping via
a reverse generative process (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021b). When applied in DBP methods, the forward process
gradually injects Gaussian noise into the input sample, while
the reverse process gradually purify noisy sample to recover
the clean sample. The quality of the purified sample heavily
depends on the amount of Gaussian noise added to the input
during the forward process, which can be controlled by a
noise level parameter t∗ . Existing DBP methods (Nie et al.,
2022; Xiao et al., 2023; Lee & Kim, 2023) manually select
a constant t∗ for all samples.
However, we find that using a sample-shared t∗ may overlook the fact that an optimal t∗ indeed could be different
at sample-level, as demonstrated in Figure 1. For example, in Figure 1a, t∗ = 100 is too small, resulting in the
adversarial noise not being sufficiently removed by the diffusion models. This is because diffusion models are good
at denoising samples that have been sufficiently corrupted
by Gaussian noise through the forward process (Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021b). With a small t∗ , the sample remains insufficiently corrupted, which limits the denoising
capability in the reverse process and thereby compromising
the robustness against adversarial examples. On the other
hand, in Figure 1b and 1c, t∗ = 100 is too large, resulting

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples, which is a longstanding problem in deep learning
(Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015). Adversarial examples aim to mislead DNNs into making erroneous
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne 2 University
of Wisconsin, Madison.
Correspondence to: Feng Liu
<fengliu.ml@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

