X-Transfer Attacks: Towards Super Transferable Adversarial Attacks on CLIP

Hanxun Huang 1 Sarah Erfani 1 Yige Li 2 Xingjun Ma 3 James Bailey 1

Abstract

ing (Radford et al., 2021). Pre-trained on web-scale
datasets, CLIP encoders have been extensively used to enhance performance across a variety of downstream applications, particularly in large Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
(Awadalla et al., 2023; Koh et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a;
Bai et al., 2023; Karamcheti et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024),
where they form the backbone of visual capabilities. Models
such as Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), LLaVA (Liu et al.,
2023a), BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023a), and MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al.,
2024) integrate CLIP image encoders with Large Language
Models (LLMs) (Zhang et al., 2022b; Hoffmann et al., 2022;
Chiang et al., 2023). The widespread adoption of CLIP in
VLMs is primarily driven by its pre-training paradigm utilising text supervision (Tong et al., 2024). While its strong
generalisation capabilities solidify its role as a cornerstone
for VLMs, they also make CLIP an ideal target for generating highly transferable adversarial perturbations, thereby
introducing new safety risks.

As Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
(CLIP) models are increasingly adopted for diverse downstream tasks and integrated into large
vision-language models (VLMs), their susceptibility to adversarial perturbations has emerged
as a critical concern. In this work, we introduce
X-Transfer, a novel attack method that exposes
a universal adversarial vulnerability in CLIP. XTransfer generates a Universal Adversarial Perturbation (UAP) capable of deceiving various CLIP
encoders and downstream VLMs across different samples, tasks, and domains. We refer to
this property as super transferability—a single
perturbation achieving cross-data, cross-domain,
cross-model, and cross-task adversarial transferability simultaneously. This is achieved through
surrogate scaling, a key innovation of our approach. Unlike existing methods that rely on fixed
surrogate models, which are computationally intensive to scale, X-Transfer employs an efficient
surrogate scaling strategy that dynamically selects
a small subset of suitable surrogates from a large
search space. Extensive evaluations demonstrate
that X-Transfer significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art UAP methods, establishing
a new benchmark for adversarial transferability
across CLIP models. The code is publicly available in our GitHub repository.

Deep neural networks are widely recognised for their susceptibility to Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs)
(Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023b; 2024; Zhang et al., 2025c; Song et al., 2025),
where a perturbation generated using a specific dataset can
transfer to images within the same domain, causing erroneous classifications by image classifiers. Recent studies
(Fang et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024) have demonstrated
that UAPs are also effective against CLIP encoders. However, existing works have yet to fully realise the potential
of UAPs—achieving super transferability. Ensemble techniques are a well-established strategy for enhancing crossmodel adversarial transferability (Liu et al., 2017; Dong
et al., 2018; Xiong et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024a) for
sample-specific perturbations, but they leave significant gaps
in the applicability of UAPs to broader transfer scenarios.
Furthermore, these methods rely on a heuristic selection
of a fixed set of surrogate models, which becomes computationally expensive when scaling to a large number of
surrogates (Liu et al., 2024). To address these gaps, we aim
to answer the following two questions: (1) Can a single perturbation simultaneously achieve cross-data, cross-domain,
cross-model, and cross-task adversarial super transferability? and (2) How scalable is super transferability when
incorporating large numbers of surrogate models?

1. Introduction
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) is a widely
adopted technique that learns aligned multi-modal representations from text-image pairs through contrastive learn1
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China. Correspondence to: Yige Li <yigeli@smu.edu.sg>, Xingjun Ma
<xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we propose the X-Transfer attack, a novel
1

