SAH-Drive: A Scenario-Aware Hybrid Planner for Closed-Loop Vehicle
Trajectory Generation

Yuqi Fan 1 2 Zhiyong Cui 1 2 3 Zhenning Li 4 Yilong Ren 1 2 Haiyang Yu 1 2

Abstract
Tracking

Reliable planning is crucial for achieving autonomous driving. Rule-based planners are efficient but lack generalization, while learning-based
planners excel in generalization yet have limitations in real-time performance and interpretability. In long-tail scenarios, these challenges make
planning particularly difficult. To leverage the
strengths of both rule-based and learning-based
planners, we proposed the Scenario-Aware Hybrid Planner (SAH-Drive) for closed-loop vehicle trajectory planning. Inspired by human driving behavior, SAH-Drive combines a lightweight
rule-based planner and a comprehensive learningbased planner, utilizing a dual-timescale decision
neuron to determine the final trajectory. To enhance the computational efficiency and robustness
of the hybrid planner, we also employed a diffusion proposal number regulator and a trajectory fusion module. The experimental results show that
the proposed method significantly improves the
generalization capability of the planning system,
achieving state-of-the-art performance in interPlan, while maintaining computational efficiency
without incurring substantial additional runtime.

High Frequency
Reference Trajectory

Rule-Based

Planned Trajectory

Low Frequency
Learning-Based

Rule-Based

Learning-Based

(a) Fast-Slow Hybrid Planner Paradigm

ShortTerm
Plasticity

LongTerm
Plasticity

Regular
Scenario

Long-Tail Planned Trajectory
Scenario
Dual-Timescale
Decision Neuron
(b) Scenario-Aware Hybrid Planner Paradigm

Figure 1: Comparison of the fast-slow hybrid and
scenario-aware hybrid planner paradigms. (a) The
learning-based planner handles low-frequency reference
trajectory planning, while the rule-based planner manages
high-frequency tracking. (b) The dual-timescale decision
neuron enables the rule-based planner to primarily handle
regular scenarios while using the learning-based planner to
focus on long-tail scenarios.

2000; Fan et al., 2018; Sadat et al., 2019; Hallgarten et al.,
2024). Rule-based algorithms, relying on human-crafted
rules, are proficient at handling scenarios within their defined scope but are significantly limited in their ability to
generalize to situations outside these predefined boundaries.
Learning-based algorithms have strong generalization capabilities but typically require the construction of large models
with many parameters, making real-time operation challenging and lacking interpretability. The characteristics of these
two types of planners reveal that rule-based planners are
well-suited for relatively simple, regular scenarios, as these
scenarios constitute the majority of the driving process and
can be effectively represented through predefined rules. In
contrast, learning-based planners excel in handling complex
long-tail scenarios (Cheng et al., 2024b), which are challenging to represent using rules and occur less frequently
during driving. As such, there is a clear need for a scenarioaware hybrid planner that leverages the strengths of both

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving trajectory planning primarily involves
two types of algorithms: learning-based algorithms (Codevilla et al., 2018; 2019; Rhinehart et al., 2019; Zeng et al.,
2019; Chitta et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024) and rule-based algorithms (Treiber et al.,
1

School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Transportation System, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Software Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing,
China 4 State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
University of Macau, Macao, China. Correspondence to: Zhiyong
Cui <zhiyongc@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

