Clone-Robust AI Alignment

Ariel D. Procaccia 1 Benjamin Schiffer 2 Shirley Zhang 1

Abstract

and results in a large dataset of pairwise comparisons. An
RLHF algorithm then takes the pairwise comparison dataset
as input and outputs a reward function that assigns values to
answers. One reason why RLHF is an appealing technique
is because of the ease of data elicitation, as it is simpler for
humans to pick a favorite between two answers than it is to
rank many answers or provide good ‘role model’ answers
for the LLM.

A key challenge in training Large Language Models (LLMs) is properly aligning them with human preferences. Reinforcement Learning with
Human Feedback (RLHF) uses pairwise comparisons from human annotators to train reward functions and has emerged as a popular alignment
method. However, input datasets in RLHF can
be unbalanced due to adversarial manipulation
or inadvertent repetition. Therefore, we want
RLHF algorithms to perform well even when the
set of alternatives is not uniformly distributed.
Drawing on insights from social choice theory,
we introduce robustness to approximate clones,
a desirable property of RLHF algorithms which
requires that adding near-duplicate alternatives
does not significantly change the learned reward
function. We first demonstrate that the standard
RLHF algorithm based on regularized maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) fails to satisfy this
property. We then propose the weighted MLE, a
new RLHF algorithm that modifies the standard
regularized MLE by weighting alternatives based
on their similarity to other alternatives. This new
algorithm guarantees robustness to approximate
clones while preserving desirable theoretical properties.

Fundamentally, the mandate of RLHF algorithms is to solve
a preference aggregation problem, where the goal is to find
a reward function that best aligns with the values of the
general population, given pairwise comparison data. This
goal is complicated by the fact that humans often have
diverse preferences, and may not agree on the best answer
to a question. Luckily, the study of how to aggregate diverse
preferences is not a new area in computer science, but one
that has been long explored by researchers in social choice
theory. Classic social choice considers settings with sets of
voters and sets of alternatives, where each voter provides a
ranking over alternatives. These rankings are then provided
as input to a voting rule, which outputs a summary of the
voters’ preferences (such as a single winner or an overall
ranking). Social choice studies the design and analysis of
such voting rules.

1
Department of Computer Science, Harvard University
Department of Statistics, Harvard University. Correspondence to:
Benjamin Schiffer <bschiffer1@g.harvard.edu>, Shirley Zhang
<szhang2@g.harvard.edu>.

In the RLHF setting, the ‘voters’ are the human annotators,
who provide pairwise preferences over the ‘alternatives’.
There are several reasonable choices for how to define an
‘alternative’ in RLHF. Perhaps the simplest definition is that
an alternative is just a single answer. However, many RLHF
datasets in practice contain answers to multiple questions.
Therefore, an alternative could also be a question-answer
pair. Finally, answers (and questions) are often generated
by various LLMs, so an alternative could also be viewed
as the LLM model which generated the answer. Whichever
the case, an RLHF algorithm would then be the ‘voting
rule’ which takes as input the preference data and outputs a
summary of the preferences – in this case, a single reward
function. The close relationship between RLHF and voting
theory means that we can take inspiration from past work in
social choice to both anticipate potential pitfalls in RLHF
and design better RLHF algorithms.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

One especially relevant potential pitfall is that input datasets
in RLHF are not necessarily balanced in the types of questions and answers that are included, whether due to random-

1. Introduction
As the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLMs) improve and as LLMs begin to play a larger role in
society, it is increasingly important for LLMs to be aligned
with human values. One common method used for AI alignment is Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF). In RLHF, a human annotator is typically shown
two answers to a prompt, and asked to report which answer
they prefer. This process is repeated across many annotators and potentially many types of questions and answers,
2

1

