A Model of Place Field Reorganization During Reward Maximization

M Ganesh Kumar 1 2 3 Blake Bordelon 1 2 3 Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth 2 4 Cengiz Pehlevan 1 2 3

Abstract

spatial receptive field such that the population activity can
describe an animal’s allocentric position within the environment (Moser et al., 2015). Ablation studies demonstrate
that the hippocampal representation is useful for learning
to navigate to new targets (Morris et al., 1982; Packard
& McGaugh, 1996; Steele & Morris, 1999). Importantly,
each field’s spatial selectivity evolves with experience in
a new environment before stabilizing in the later stages of
learning (Frank et al., 2004). Specifically, a high density of
place fields emerge at reward locations (Gauthier & Tank,
2018; Lee et al., 2020; Sosa et al., 2023), place fields elongate backward against the trajectory (Mehta et al., 1997;
Priestley et al., 2022), and individual field’s spatial selectivity continues to change or “drift” even when animals
demonstrate stable behavior (Geva et al., 2023; Krishnan &
Sheffield, 2023; Kentros et al., 2004; Mankin et al., 2012;
Ziv et al., 2013). Although disparate mechanisms have
been proposed to model these phenomena, a framework that
can unify these phenomena and clarify their computational
role remains elusive. Here, we propose a single normative
model for spatial representation learning , based on the hippocampal CA1 given its role in representing salient spatial
information (Dong et al., 2021; Dupret et al., 2010). Our
key contributions are:

When rodents learn to navigate in a novel environment, a high density of place fields emerges
at reward locations, fields elongate against the
trajectory, and individual fields change spatial
selectivity while demonstrating stable behavior.
Why place fields demonstrate these characteristic
phenomena during learning remains elusive. We
develop a normative framework using a reward
maximization objective, whereby the temporal
difference (TD) error drives place field reorganization to improve policy learning. Place fields
are modeled using Gaussian radial basis functions to represent states in an environment, and
directly synapse to an actor-critic for policy learning. Each field’s amplitude, center, and width, as
well as downstream weights, are updated online at
each time step to maximize rewards. We demonstrate that this framework unifies three disparate
phenomena observed in navigation experiments.
Furthermore, we show that these place field phenomena improve policy convergence when learning to navigate to a single target and relearning
multiple new targets. To conclude, we develop a
simple normative model that recapitulates several
aspects of hippocampal place field learning dynamics and unifies mechanisms to offer testable
predictions for future experiments.

• We develop a two-layered reinforcement learning model
to study spatial representation learning by place fields
(Fig.1A). The first layer is a population of Gaussian radial
basis functions that transform continuous spatial information into a relevant representational substrate or “state”,
which feed into an actor-critic network in the second layer
that uses these representations to learn actions that maximize cumulative discounted reward. Besides the actor
and critic weights, each place field’s amplitude, center
and width is optimized by the Temporal Difference error.

1. Introduction
A place field is canonically described as a localized region
in an environment where a hippocampal neuron’s firing rate
is maximal and robust across trials (O’Keefe & Dostrovsky,
1971; O’Keefe, 1978). Classically, each neuron has a unique

• Our model recapitulates three experimentally-observed
neural phenomena during task learning: (1) the emergence
of high place field density at rewards, (2) elongation of
fields against the trajectory, and (3) drifting fields that do
not affect task performance.

1

The John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University 2 Center for Brain Science, Harvard University 3 The Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University 4 Society of Fellows, Harvard
University. Correspondence to: M Ganesh Kumar <mganeshkumar@seas.harvard.edu>.

• We analyze the factors that influence these representational changes: a low number of fields drives greater
spatial representation learning, the mean population firing rate reflects the value of that location, and increasing

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

