Understanding Input Selectivity in Mamba:
Impact on Approximation Power, Memorization, and Associative Recall Capacity

Ningyuan Huang 1 2 Miguel Sarabia 3 Abhinav Moudgil 1 4 Pau Rodrı́guez 3 Luca Zappella 3 Federico Danieli 3

Abstract

ers, and parallelizability compared to (nonlinear) Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs). In particular, Mamba (Gu & Dao,
2023; Dao & Gu, 2024) demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on various language modeling tasks, with smaller
model size and faster inference than Transformers. The success of Mamba has largely been attributed to the fact that
the parameters in its SSM layer (S6) are input-dependent,
leading to improved expressivity compared to its SSM predecessors (Cirone et al., 2024). The goal of this work is to
provide a more structural explanation for Mamba’s superior
performance. We do so by answering two questions: (i) how
does the S6 layer’s expressivity translate into its practical
performance? (ii) how can the S6 layer interact with the rest
of the Mamba block to solve concrete tasks?

State-Space Models (SSMs), and particularly
Mamba, have recently emerged as a promising
alternative to Transformers. Mamba introduces
input selectivity to its SSM layer (S6) and incorporates convolution and gating into its block
definition. While these modifications do improve
Mamba’s performance over its SSM predecessors, it remains largely unclear how Mamba leverages the additional functionalities provided by
input selectivity, and how these interact with the
other operations in the Mamba architecture. In
this work, we demystify the role of input selectivity in Mamba, investigating its impact on function
approximation power, long-term memorization,
and associative recall capabilities. In particular:
(i) we prove that the S6 layer of Mamba can represent projections onto Haar wavelets, providing an
edge over its Diagonal SSM (S4D) predecessor
in approximating discontinuous functions commonly arising in practice; (ii) we show how the S6
layer can dynamically counteract memory decay;
(iii) we provide analytical solutions to the MQAR
associative recall task using the Mamba architecture with different mixers — Mamba, Mamba-2,
and S4D. We demonstrate the tightness of our theoretical constructions with empirical results on
concrete tasks. Our findings offer a mechanistic
understanding of Mamba and reveal opportunities
for improvement.

We answer question (i) by providing a fine-grained analysis
of the S6 layer via the lens of function approximation and
long-term memory. We prove that the S6 layer can represent
projections onto Haar wavelets and thus efficiently model
discontinuous signals, which is relevant for solving practical
tasks. Moreover, we show that the S6 layer still suffers
from exponential memory decay, but highlight a mechanism
which allows it to dynamically counteract such decay.
Building on the understanding of the S6 layer, we then
investigate how S6 interacts with the other components
of the Mamba block (which also encompasses a shortconvolution and a gate branch, see Tab. 2) to tackle the
Multiple-Query Associative Recall (MQAR) task (Arora
et al., 2024a). We prove that 1-layer Mamba and Mamba-2
models can both solve MQAR, even without gating; we
describe how S6 and the convolution interact to achieve this,
and how Mamba-2 leverages its independent convolutions
to get more parameter-efficient solutions. We also show that
a 1-layer Mamba can solve MQAR exactly even without
input-dependence in its SSM: this (perhaps unexpected) result helps cementing the importance of convolution and gating in the Mamba architecture. This analysis further informs
us on how a variation to the functional form of Mamba,
and particularly to how the SSM state matrix is affected by
the input, can improve its performance on the I NDUCTION
H EADS task (Bietti et al., 2024; Sanford et al., 2024a).

1. Introduction
State Space Models (SSMs) have recently emerged as a
promising approach for long-range sequence modeling, due
to their computational efficiency compared to Transform1

Work done while at Apple 2 Flatiron Institute, New York, USA
Apple 4 Mila Research Institute, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: Ningyuan Huang <thuang@flatironinstitute.org>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We complement our theoretical findings with numerical experiments on synthetic sequence modeling tasks. For the S6
1

