Controllable Data Generation with Hierarchical Neural Representations

Sheyang Tang 1 Xiaoyu Xu

1

Abstract

Jiayan Qiu 2 Zhou Wang 1

You et al., 2024), offering compact and universal representations across diverse data modalities such as audio (Su et al.,
2022), images (Sitzmann et al., 2020; Dupont et al., 2021),
videos (Chen et al., 2021a; 2023), and 3D volumes (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022; Michalkiewicz et al.,
2019). By modeling data as functions fθ : X → F, with X
and F being the input (e.g., pixel coordinates) and output
(e.g., RGB values), INRs implicitly encode data as a hidden
manifold within the parameter space of θ, capturing the
underlying structure of the data. By modeling the distribution of parameters p(θ), generative INRs present promising potentials for universal data generation (Dupont et al.,
2022c;a; Bauer et al., 2023; You et al., 2024). Nevertheless,
two fundamental questions have long been overlooked:

Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) represent
data as continuous functions using the parameters of a neural network, where data information
is encoded in the parameter space. Therefore,
modeling the distribution of such parameters is
crucial for building generalizable INRs. Existing approaches learn a joint distribution of these
parameters via a latent vector to generate new
data, but such a flat latent often fails to capture
the inherent hierarchical structure of the parameter space, leading to entangled data semantics
and limited control over the generation process.
Here, we propose a Controllable Hierarchical
Implicit Neural Representation (CHINR) framework, which explicitly models conditional dependencies across layers in the parameter space.
Our method consists of two stages: In Stage-1,
we construct a Layers-of-Experts (LoE) network,
where each layer modulates distinct semantics
through a unique latent vector, enabling disentangled and expressive representations. In Stage-2,
we introduce a Hierarchical Conditional Diffusion
Model (HCDM) to capture conditional dependencies across layers, allowing for controllable and
hierarchical data generation at various semantic
granularities. Extensive experiments across different modalities demonstrate that CHINR improves
generalizability and offers flexible hierarchical
control over the generated content.

How are these parameters related to data semantics, and
hence how to control the parameters to generate expected
semantics?
Addressing this gap is critical for advancing the controllability of INR-based generative frameworks. Notably, we
observe that INRs (e.g., SIREN (Sitzmann et al., 2020))
naturally exhibit a hierarchical structure, where each layer
progressively expands the representational capacity of the
model (Yüce et al., 2022). This expansion is intrinsically
linked to the frequency basis of INRs: earlier layers capture coarse-grained features, while later layers progressively
refine fine-grained details (Section 2.2 provides detailed
analysis). As shown in Fig. 1, this progression aligns with
the semantic abstraction hierarchy in data. For example, in
facial images, hierarchical semantics are reflected in progressively detailed facial attributes, such as overall facial shape,
expression, and shape of eyes. This connection between
INR’s hierarchical structure and data semantic abstraction
offers a natural pathway to achieve hierarchical control.

1. Introduction
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) are powerful tools
to represent complex data as continuous functions with neural networks (Tancik et al., 2020; Mildenhall et al., 2021;

However, existing generative INR approaches (Dupont et al.,
2022a; Bauer et al., 2023; You et al., 2024) overlook this
hierarchy, instead modeling the joint distribution of flattened INR parameters, either directly as p(θ) or through
the distribution of condensed latents. It ignores the correspondence between the INRs’ expanded representation
capacity and the hierarchical semantics in the data. This
misalignment brings two challenges: (1) Control over the
generated content is limited. While generative models, such
as latent diffusion, are employed with INRs to generate new

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kindom. Correspondence to: Xiaoyu Xu
<x423xu@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

