Provable Zero-Shot Generalization in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Zhiyong Wang 1 Chen Yang 2 John C.S. Lui 1 Dongruo Zhou 2

Abstract

been studied in online RL(Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Machado
et al., 2018; Justesen et al., 2018; Packer et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2018a;b), as the agent receives no training data from
the environments it is tested on.

In this work, we study offline reinforcement learning (RL) with zero-shot generalization property
(ZSG), where the agent has access to an offline
dataset including experiences from different environments, and the goal of the agent is to train a
policy over the training environments which performs well on test environments without further
interaction. Existing work showed that classical
offline RL fails to generalize to new, unseen environments. We propose pessimistic empirical risk
minimization (PERM) and pessimistic proximal
policy optimization (PPPO), which leverage pessimistic policy evaluation to guide policy learning
and enhance generalization. We show that both
PERM and PPPO are capable of finding a nearoptimal policy with ZSG. Our result serves as a
first step in understanding the foundation of the
generalization phenomenon in offline reinforcement learning.

A number of recent empirical studies (Mediratta et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2023; Mazoure et al., 2022) have recognized
this challenge and introduced various offline RL methodologies that are capable of ZSG. Notwithstanding the lack of
theoretical backing, these methods are somewhat restrictive;
for instance, some are only effective for environments that
vary solely in observations(Mazoure et al., 2022), while
others are confined to the realm of imitation learning(Yang
et al., 2023), thus limiting their applicability to a comprehensive framework of offline RL with ZSG capabilities.
Concurrently, theoretical advancements (Bose et al., 2024;
Ishfaq et al., 2024) in this domain have explored multi-task
offline RL by focusing on representation learning. These
approaches endeavor to derive a low-rank representation
of states and actions, which inherently requires additional
interactions with the downstream tasks to effectively formulate policies based on these representations. Therefore, we
raise a natural question:

1. Introduction
Can we design provable offline RL with zero-shot
generalization ability?

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) has become increasingly significant in modern RL because it eliminates the
need for direct interaction between the agent and the environment; instead, it relies solely on learning from an offline training dataset. However, in practical applications,
the offline training dataset often originates from a different
environment than the one of interest. This discrepancy necessitates evaluating RL agents in a generalization setting,
where the training involves a finite number of environments
drawn from a specific distribution, and the testing is conducted on a distinct set of environments from the same or
different distribution. This scenario is commonly referred to
as the zero-shot generalization (ZSG) challenge which has

We propose novel offline RL frameworks that achieve ZSG
to address this question affirmatively. Our contributions are
listed as follows.
• We first analyze when existing offline RL approaches
fail to generalize without further algorithm modifications.
Specifically, we prove that if the offline dataset does not
contain context information, then it is impossible for
vanilla RL that equips a Markovian policy to achieve
a ZSG property. We show that the offline dataset from
a contextual Markov Decision Process (MDP) is not distinguishable from a vanilla MDP which is the average
of contextual Markov Decision Process over all contexts.
Such an analysis verifies the necessity of new RL methods
with ZSG property.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University Bloomington, Bloomington, USA. Correspondence to: Dongruo Zhou
<dz13@iu.edu>.

• We propose two meta-algorithms called pessimistic empirical risk minimization (PERM) and pessimistic proximal
policy optimization (PPPO) that enable ZSG for offline

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

