Automated Red Teaming with GOAT: the Generative Offensive Agent Tester

Maya Pavlova * 1 Erik Brinkman * 2 Krithika Iyer 1 Vı́tor Albiero 1 Joanna Bitton 1 Hailey Nguyen 1
Cristian Canton Ferrer 1 Ivan Evtimov * 1 Aaron Grattafiori * 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have become a cornerstone
of modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications, revolutionizing the way we interact with information, generate
creative content, and automate tasks. However, as LLMs
become increasingly pervasive, they also pose significant
risks to individuals and society, such as spreading harmful content, perpetuating biases, or facilitating malicious
activities. Thus, it is important to take appropriate steps
to deploy these systems in a safe and secure manner. To
incorporate safety-in-design, model developers train LLMs
to natively refuse providing responses that are considered
harmful, unethical, or violating per internal and external
policies. This is often done by means of supervised fine
tuning (SFT), reinforcement learning, or through direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024) with data
selected to steer the model away from providing such “unsafe” responses. Within this development life cycle, “red
teaming” has been adopted as a common practice to test the
boundaries of the built-in model safety under anticipated
adversarial conditions. This pushes models to be more safe
when the vulnerabilities discovered are mitigated. Red teaming practices are not standardized across the field; however,
they commonly include manual testing of models by subject matter experts complemented with more automated or
“scaled” approaches to inform on model safety.

Red teaming aims to assess how large language
models (LLMs) can produce content that violates
norms, policies, and rules set forth during their
safety training. However, most existing automated methods in the literature are not representative of the way common users exploit the multiturn conversational nature of AI models. While
manual testing addresses this gap, it is an inefficient and often expensive process. To address
these limitations, we introduce the Generative
Offensive Agent Tester (GOAT), an automated
agentic red teaming system that simulates plain
language adversarial conversations while leveraging multiple adversarial prompting techniques to
identify vulnerabilities in LLMs. We instantiate
GOAT with seven red teaming attacks by prompting a general-purpose model in a way that encourages reasoning through the choices of methods
available, the current target model’s response, and
the next steps. Our approach is designed to be
extensible and efficient, allowing human testers
to focus on exploring new areas of risk while
automation covers the scaled adversarial stresstesting of known risk territory. We present the
design and evaluation of GOAT, demonstrating
its effectiveness in identifying vulnerabilities in
state-of-the-art LLMs, with an ASR@10 of 96%
against smaller models such as Llama 3.1 8B, and
91% against Llama 3.1 70B and 94% for GPT4o when evaluated against larger models on the
JailbreakBench dataset.

Red teaming efforts have uncovered a diverse array of model
prompting techniques that can elicit violating responses
from language models, commonly known as “jailbreaks.”
This has led to the emergence of a burgeoning academic
and security-minded research community focused on developing such jailbreaking techniques. Common among
most adversarial prompting research so far is the search
for a single or universal adversarial prompt that gets the
model to respond in a desired way. For example, previous works such as (Chao et al., 2025) and (Mehrotra et al.,
2023) employ chain-of-thought reasoning and tree search
along with multiple queries to the target model to arrive at
a single adversarial prompt that causes an unsafe response.
Other approaches in the field exploit open box access to
model weights to use gradient information in crafting an
adversarial suffix to a prompt soliciting violations. (Zou
et al., 2023) However, we believe that this overlooks an

Disclaimer: Red teaming examples included in
the paper contain potentially harmful and offensive language, reader discretion is recommended.
*

Equal contribution 1 Meta 2 Work done while at Meta. Correspondence to: Maya Pavlova <mayapavlova@meta.com>, Ivan
Evtimov <ivanevtimov@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

