Model Swarms: Collaborative Search to Adapt
LLM Experts via Swarm Intelligence

Shangbin Feng 1 Zifeng Wang 2 Yike Wang 1 Sayna Ebrahimi 3 Hamid Palangi 2 Lesly Miculicich 2
Achin Kulshrestha 4 Nathalie Rauschmayr 4 Yejin Choi 5 Yulia Tsvetkov 1 Chen-Yu Lee 2 Tomas Pfister 2

Abstract

et al., 2023) that shares parameters across all languages
and tasks, recent work has increasingly recognized the importance of modularity through multi-LLM collaboration,
where diverse models interact and complement each other
in various ways (Shen et al., 2024c; Feng et al., 2024a;
Chan et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024). For example, mixtureof-experts (MoE) relies on the routing of queries to various
neural sub-components, leveraging the specialized expertise
of one model (Masoudnia & Ebrahimpour, 2014; Roller
et al., 2021; Pfeiffer et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2024). Routing to domain-specific experts demonstrates great potential,
while no new model/expert is produced in the MoE process. However, challenging real-world tasks often require
flexible composition and adaptation to new domains and/or
capabilities that go beyond the scope of an existing expert.

We propose M ODEL S WARMS, a collaborative
search algorithm to adapt LLMs via swarm intelligence, the collective behavior guiding individual systems. Specifically, M ODEL S WARMS
starts with a pool of LLM experts and a utility function. Guided by the best-found checkpoints across models, diverse LLM experts collaboratively move in the weight space and optimize a utility function representing model adaptation objectives. Compared to existing model
composition approaches, M ODEL S WARMS offers tuning-free model adaptation, works in lowdata regimes with as few as 200 examples, and
does not require assumptions about specific experts in the swarm or how they should be composed. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
M ODEL S WARMS could flexibly adapt LLM experts to a single task, multi-task domains, reward
models, as well as diverse human interests, improving over 12 model composition baselines by
up to 21.0% across tasks and contexts. Further
analysis reveals that LLM experts discover previously unseen capabilities in initial checkpoints
and that M ODEL S WARMS enable the weak-tostrong transition of experts through the collaborative search process. Code and data available at
https://github.com/BunsenFeng/model swarm.

Two lines of work aim to extend multi-LLM collaboration
beyond routing to compose and produce new adapted models. 1) Learn-to-fuse designs trainable components to “glue”
experts together into a merged model, then fine-tunes the
model with supervised objectives to produce compositional
experts (Jiang et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2024b; Bansal
et al., 2024). These approaches often rely on large training
sets to tune the learnable parts from scratch and hardly offer the modularity of seamlessly adding/removing experts.
2) Model arithmetic composes LLM experts by conducting arithmetic operations on model weights and/or token
probabilities (Ilharco et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024; Yadav
et al., 2024; Mavromatis et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024). These
approaches often come with strong assumptions about the
available experts and how the desired adaptation should
be decomposed (e.g., lion indoors = lion outdoors + (dog
indoors - dog outdoors) (Ilharco et al., 2023)). As such, a
flexible approach that does not rely on excessive tuning data
or strong assumptions about existing models is crucial for
adapting diverse LLM experts for wide-ranging purposes.

1. Introduction
Advancing beyond efforts to train a single, universal large
language model (LLM) (Brown et al., 2020; Gemini Team
1

University of Washington 2 Google Cloud AI Research
Google DeepMind 4 Google 5 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Shangbin Feng <shangbin@cs.washington.edu>,
Zifeng Wang <zifengw@google.com>, Chen-Yu Lee
<chenyulee@google.com>.
3

To this end, we propose M ODEL S WARMS, where multiple LLM experts collaboratively search for new adapted
models in the weight space. Inspired by Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995), M ODEL
S WARMS views each LLM expert as a “particle” and defines
LLM adaptation as the collaborative movement of particles

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

