Statistical Query Hardness of Multiclass Linear Classification
with Random Classification Noise
Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Mingchen Ma * 1 Lisheng Ren * 1 Christos Tzamos * 2

Abstract

all i ∈ [k]. (If the maximum is achieved by more than one
indices, the tie is broken by taking the smallest index.). Multiclass Linear Classification (MLC)—the task of learning an
unknown linear classifier from random labeled examples—
is a textbook machine learning problem (Shalev-Shwartz
& Ben-David, 2014), which has been extensively studied
both theoretically and empirically (Platt et al., 1999; Hsu
& Lin, 2002; Aly, 2005; Duan & Keerthi, 2005; Tewari
& Bartlett, 2007; Kakade et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2011;
Beygelzimer et al., 2019). MLC naturally arises in a range
of critical applications, including face recognition (Lihong
et al., 2009), cancer diagnosis (Panca & Rustam, 2017),
ecological indicators (Bourel & Segura, 2018) and more.
In all these settings, the number of labels is much larger
than two—hence they cannot be modeled by binary linear
classification. Moreover, MLC has important connections
with modern deep learning architectures; the last layer of
a neural network is typically a softmax function layer—a
natural extension of MLC.

We study the task of Multiclass Linear Classification (MLC) in the distribution-free PAC model
with Random Classification Noise (RCN). Specifically, the learner is given a set of labeled examples (x, y), where x is drawn from an unknown
distribution on Rd and the labels are generated
by a multiclass linear classifier corrupted with
RCN. That is, the label y is flipped from i to
j with probability Hij according to a known
noise matrix H with non-negative separation
σ := mini̸=j Hii − Hij . The goal is to compute a hypothesis with small 0-1 error. For the
special case of two labels, prior work has given
polynomial-time algorithms achieving the optimal
error. Surprisingly, little is known about the complexity of this task even for three labels. As our
main contribution, we show that the complexity of
MLC with RCN becomes drastically different in
the presence of three or more labels. Specifically,
we prove super-polynomial Statistical Query (SQ)
lower bounds for this problem. In more detail,
even for three labels and constant separation, we
give a super-polynomial lower bound on the complexity of any SQ algorithm achieving optimal
error. For a larger number of labels and smaller
separation, we show a super-polynomial SQ lower
bound even for the weaker goal of achieving any
constant factor approximation to the optimal loss
or even beating the trivial hypothesis.

The sample complexity of MLC is fairly well-understood
in the PAC model, even in the presence of noise. Specifically, standard arguments, see, e.g., (Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014), give that poly(d, k, 1/ϵ) samples informationtheoretically suffice to achieve 0-1 error opt + ϵ, where opt
is the optimal error achievable by any function in the class.
Yet the computational complexity of this task has remained
perplexing. In the realizable setting (i.e., in the presence of
clean labels), the sample complexity of MLC is Õ(dk/ϵ)
and the problem is solvable in polynomial-time via a reduction to linear programming (LP). Notably, the corresponding
LP can be solved efficiently in the Statistical Query (SQ)
model (Kearns, 1998), using a rescaled Perceptron algorithm (Dunagan & Vempala, 2004). Alas, the realizable
setting is highly idealized—in most practical applications,
some form of partial label contamination is unavoidable. It
is thus natural to ask what is algorithmically possible in the
presence of label noise.

1. Introduction
A multiclass linear classifier is any function f : Rd → [k] of
the form f (x) = argmaxi∈[k] (wi · x), where wi ∈ Rd for
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA 2 University of
Athens and Archimedes AI, Athens, Greece. Correspondence
to: Mingchen Ma <mingchen@cs.wisc.edu>, Lisheng Ren
<lren29@wisc.edu>.

If the label noise is adversarial (Haussler, 1992; Kearns
et al., 1994) or even semi-random (Massart & Nédélec,
2006), strong computational hardness results are known
even for binary linear classification, corresponding to k =
2 (Daniely, 2016; Diakonikolas et al., 2022; Diakonikolas
& Kane, 2022; Nasser & Tiegel, 2022; Diakonikolas et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

