Density Ratio Estimation with Conditional Probability Paths

Hanlin Yu 1 Arto Klami 1 Aapo Hyvärinen 1 Anna Korba 2 Omar Chehab 2

Abstract

x

x

5

Density ratio estimation in high dimensions can
be reframed as integrating a certain quantity, the
time score, over probability paths which interpolate between the two densities. In practice, the
time score has to be estimated based on samples
from the two densities. However, existing methods for this problem remain computationally expensive and can yield inaccurate estimates. Inspired by recent advances in generative modeling,
we introduce a novel framework for time score estimation, based on a conditioning variable. Choosing the conditioning variable judiciously enables
a closed-form objective function. We demonstrate
that, compared to previous approaches, our approach results in faster learning of the time score
and competitive or better estimation accuracies
of the density ratio on challenging tasks. Furthermore, we establish theoretical guarantees on the
error of the estimated density ratio.

50

t

1

0

t

1

Figure 1: Densities are shown in blue. Left: A bi-modal
probability path transitioning from a Gaussian distribution
(t = 0) to a mixture of Diracs (t = 1). This path is estimated using “time scores”, which are not available in closed
form in general; they are depicted by arrows, with magnitudes ranging from low (gray) to high (red). Right: A useful
decomposition of the probability path and time scores is
obtained by conditioning on a final data point. The ensuing
conditional density is Gaussian, and thus, the ensuing conditional time scores are analytically tractable. We propose
to use this decomposition to estimate the “time scores”.

1. Introduction
Estimating the ratio of two densities is a fundamental task
in machine learning, with diverse applications (Sugiyama
et al., 2010). For instance, by assuming that one of the
densities is tractable, often a standard Gaussian, we can
construct an estimator for the other density by estimating
their ratio (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2012; Gao et al., 2019;
Rhodes et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2022). It is also possible to
consider a scenario where both densities are not tractable.
As noted by previous works (Choi et al., 2022), density
ratio estimation finds broad applications across machine
learning, from mutual information estimation (Song & Ermon, 2020), generative modelling (Goodfellow et al., 2020),
importance sampling (Sinha et al., 2020), likelihood-free
inference (Izbicki et al., 2014) to domain adaptation (Wang
et al., 2023).

The seminal work by Gutmann & Hyvärinen (2012) proposed a learning objective for estimating the ratio of two
densities, by identifying from which density a sample is
drawn. This can be done by binary classification. However,
their estimator has a high variance when the densities have
little overlap, which makes it impractical for problems in
high dimensions (Lee et al., 2023; Chehab et al., 2023b).
To address this issue, Rhodes et al. (2020) proposed connecting the two densities with a probability path and estimating
density ratios between consecutive distributions. Since two
consecutive distributions are “close” to each other, the statistical efficiency may improve at the cost of increased computation, as there are multiple binary classification tasks
to solve. Choi et al. (2022) examined the limiting case
where the intermediate distributions become infinitesimally
close. In this limit, the density ratio converges to a quantity
known as the time score, which is learnt by optimizing a
Time Score Matching (TSM) objective. While this limiting
case leads to empirical improvements, the TSM objective
is computationally inefficient to optimize, and the resulting

1
University of Helsinki, Finland 2 ENSAE, CREST, IP Paris,
France. Correspondence to: Hanlin Yu <hanlin.yu@helsinki.fi>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

