Adjoint Sampling: Highly Scalable Diffusion Samplers via Adjoint Matching

Aaron Havens∗,†, 1 Benjamin Kurt Miller∗, 2 Bing Yan∗, 3 Carles Domingo-Enrich 4 Anuroop Sriram 2
Daniel Levine 2 Brandon Wood 2 Bin Hu 1 Brandon Amos 2 Brian Karrer 2 Xiang Fu∗, 2 Guan-Horng Liu∗, 2
Ricky T. Q. Chen∗, 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sampling from complex, high-dimensional distributions underlies many important problems in computational science,
with applications spanning molecular modeling, Bayesian
inference , and generative modeling. In particular, we are
interested in sampling from the target distribution with only
access to its unnormalized energy function E, which defines
the Boltzmann distribution

exp − τ1 E(x)
µ(x) =
,
(1)
Z

R
where Z = Rd exp − τ1 E(x) dx < ∞ is the unknown
normalization constant. The Boltzmann distribution describes the equilibrium state of many physical systems,
where E(x) denotes the energy of a configuration x, and
τ > 0 is a temperature parameter. Efficiently sampling
from such distributions remains challenging, especially for
high-dimensional systems with intricate energy landscapes.
Additionally many energy functions are extremely computationally expensive, e.g. requiring physics simulations.

We introduce Adjoint Sampling, a highly scalable
and efficient algorithm for learning diffusion
processes that sample from unnormalized
densities, or energy functions. It is the first
on-policy approach that allows significantly more
gradient updates than the number of energy
evaluations and model samples, allowing us
to scale to much larger problem settings than
previously explored by similar methods. Our
framework is theoretically grounded in stochastic
optimal control and shares the same theoretical
guarantees as Adjoint Matching, being able to
train without the need for corrective measures
that push samples towards the target distribution.
We show how to incorporate key symmetries, as
well as periodic boundary conditions, for modeling molecules in both cartesian and torsional
coordinates. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach through extensive experiments
on classical energy functions, and further scale
up to neural network-based energy models where
we perform amortized conformer generation
across many molecular systems. To encourage
further research in developing highly scalable
sampling methods, we plan to open source these
challenging benchmarks, where successful methods can directly impact progress in computational
chemistry. Code & and Benchmarks provided
at
github.com/facebookresearch/
adjoint sampling.

Traditional approaches, such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) and Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) using welldesigned Markov Chains (Neal, 2001; Neal et al., 2011;
Del Moral et al., 2006), provide asymptotically unbiased
samples but often suffer from slow mixing and poor scalability to high-dimensional settings. This necessitates the
design of better transition densities and smarter proposal distributions. Recent works try to address this by augmenting
sampling with learned proposal distribution (Albergo et al.,
2019; Arbel et al., 2021; Gabrié et al., 2022) via normalizing flows (Chen et al., 2018; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015).
It may seem natural to look towards the recent explosion of
diffusion and flow-based generative models (Song & Ermon,
2019; Ho et al., 2020; Lipman et al., 2023; Albergo et al.,
2023). However, a naı̈ve adaptation of these data-driven
generative modeling frameworks requires access to ground
truth data. This limitation is particularly significant in applications such as molecular simulations and physics-based
inference, where direct access to samples from the target distribution is often unavailable. As a result, prior attempts often require an augmentation with sequential Monte Carlo or

∗

Core Contributor,† Work done during internship at FAIR
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 FAIR at Meta 3 New
York University 4 Microsoft Research New England. Correspondence to: Aaron Havens <ahavens2@illinois.edu>, Ricky T.Q.
Chen <rtqichen@meta.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

