Position: LLMs Need a Bayesian Meta-Reasoning Framework
for More Robust and Generalizable Reasoning

Hanqi Yan * 1 Linhai Zhang 1 Jiazheng Li 1 Zhenyi Shen 1 Yulan He * 1 2

Abstract

generalizability (Wu et al., 2024d; Qin et al., 2023).

Large language models (LLMs) excel in many
reasoning tasks but continue to face significant
challenges, such as lack of robustness in reasoning, struggling with cross-task generalization, and
inefficiencies in scaling up reasoning capabilities.
Current training paradigms, including next-token
prediction and reinforcement learning from human feedback, often fall short in adaptability to diverse reasoning tasks. Existing approaches, such
as prompt optimization and iterative output refinement, offer performance improvement, but can be
inefficient and lack effective generalization. To
overcome these limitations, this position paper
argues for a transformative shift in how LLMs
approach reasoning. Drawing inspiration from
cognitive science, particularly meta-reasoning theories such as Dual-Process Theory and Metacognitive Reasoning, we propose a Bayesian metareasoning framework for LLMs. Our approach
integrates self-awareness, monitoring, evaluation,
regulation, and meta-reflection, to enhance LLMs’
ability to refine reasoning strategies and generalize across tasks. We revisit existing LLM reasoning methods, identify key challenges, and suggest
directions for future research. We provide a repository1 with the resources referenced in our paper.

To understand these limitations, we revisit the prevalent
approaches for LLM reasoning. Most LLMs are built on
the GPT backbone (Brown et al., 2020), which employs
the statistical next-token prediction pretraining paradigm.
As argued by McCoy et al. (2023), the sensitivity of LLMs
to task frequency, input perturbations, and output tendencies can be traced back to their reliance on language frequency patterns. Secondly, reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithm (Ouyang et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2024) with
reward models are applied during reasoning-specific posttraining. For verifiable tasks with clear answers, such as
math and coding, the stepwise or outcome-level accuracy
rewards are commonly used in the state-of-the-art models,
such as OpenAI-o1 and DeepSeek-R1. For free-form questions without fixed ground truth, reward models trained
on task-specific preference data are often used to provide
feedback (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024). However, these approaches depend on task-specific annotations, which limit
scalability and generalizability in tasks where preference
annotations are hard to obtain, such as causal reasoning (Chi
et al., 2024) and Scientific discovery (Bazgir et al., 2025; Xiang et al., 2025b). Beyond the trained reward models, LLMgenerated feedback is also used to iteratively refine model
outputs (Xie et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023b). However,
studies show that self-generated feedback is often unreliable (Yan et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2025a), and sample-wise
feedback fails to capture shared patterns underlying multiple
cases (Yang et al., 2024; 2025a).

1. Introduction

These limitations stem from LLMs being trained to solve
tasks individually, rather than to learn how to arrive at those
solutions. Ideally, they should develop the ability to recombine fundamental reasoning skills when faced with novel
problems, thereby achieving a better generalization to unseen tasks. To achieve this, we need to move beyond the existing autoregressive reasoning system. Instead, new learning paradigms are needed—ones that empower models to
actively engage in learning-to-reason or meta-reasoning
processes. It envisions reasoning as an adaptive process
in which models not only solve tasks but also learn to
improve their reasoning strategies over time.

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential in various reasoning tasks (Wei et al., 2022a;
Hao et al., 2023a; Shao et al., 2024). Despite these advancements, they still face significant limitations, including
the generation of hallucination with high confidence (Singh
et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2024), vulnerability in trivial input
perturbations (Wu et al., 2024a), and a lack of cross-task
1
Department of Informatics, King’s College London 2 The
Alan Turing Institute.
Correspondence to: Hanqi Yan
<hanqi.yan@kcl.ac.uk>, Yulan He <yulan.he@kcl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1

Emergent LLM meta-reasoning approaches largely rely on
LLM prompting, such as comparing multiple thought pro-

https://github.com/hanqi-qi/LLM_MetaReasoning

1

