On the Power of Learning-Augmented Search Trees

Jingbang Chen * 1 Xinyuan Cao * 2 Alicia Stepin 3 Li Chen 4

Abstract

lak & Zub, 2024; Lavastida et al., 2021), matching (Chen
et al., 2022a; Dinitz et al., 2021; Aamand et al., 2022),
spanning tree (Erlebach et al., 2022), and triangles/cycles
counting (Chen et al., 2022b), with the goal of obtaining
algorithms that get near-optimal performances when the
predictions are good, but also recover prediction-less worstcase behavior when predictions have large errors (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii, 2022).

We study learning-augmented binary search trees
(BSTs) via Treaps with carefully designed priorities. The result is a simple search tree in which the
depth of each item x is determined by its predicted
weight wx . Specifically, each item x is assigned a
composite priority of −⌊log log(1/wx )⌋+U (0, 1)
where U (0, 1) is the uniform random variable.
By choosing wx as the relative frequency of x,
the resulting search trees achieve static optimality. This approach generalizes the recent learningaugmented BSTs [Lin-Luo-Woodruff ICML ’22],
which only work for Zipfian distributions, by extending them to arbitrary input distributions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our method can
be generalized to a B-Tree data structure using
the B-Treap approach [Golovin ICALP ’09]. Our
search trees are also capable of leveraging localities in the access sequence through online selfreorganization, thereby achieving the working-set
property. Additionally, they are robust to prediction errors and support dynamic operations, such
as insertions, deletions, and prediction updates.
We complement our analysis with an empirical
study, demonstrating that our method outperforms
prior work and classic data structures.

The problem of using learning to accelerate search trees,
as in the original learned index question, has been widely
studied in the field of data structures, focusing on developing data structures optimal to the input sequence. Mehlhorn
(1975a) showed that a nearly optimal static tree can be
constructed in linear time when exact key frequencies are
provided. Extensive work on this topic culminated in the
study of dynamic optimality. Tango trees (Demaine et al.,
2007) achieve a competitive ratio of O(log log n) while
splay trees (Sleator & Tarjan, 1985) and Greedy BSTs (Lucas, 1988; Munro, 2000; Demaine et al., 2009) are conjectured to be within constant factors of optimal.
Treaps, introduced by Aragon & Seidel (1989), is a class of
balanced BSTs distinguished by its use of randomization to
maintain a low tree height. Each node in a Treap is assigned
not only a key but also a randomly generated priority value.
This design enables Treaps to satisfy the Heap property,
ensuring that every node has a lower priority than its parent.
In general, Treaps use randomness to ensure a low height
instead of balancing the tree preemptively. More recently,
Lin et al. (2022) introduced a learning-augmented Treap,
demonstrating stronger guarantees compared to traditional
Treaps. However, it relies on the strong assumption of the
Zipfian distribution.

1. Introduction
The development of machine learning has sparked significant interest in its potential to enhance traditional data structures. First proposed by Kraska et al. (2018), the notion of
learned index has gained much attention since then (Kraska
et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2020; Ferragina & Vinciguerra,
2020). Algorithms with predictions have also been developed for an increasingly wide range of problems, including shortest path (Chen et al., 2022a), network flow (Po-

Inspired by this line of work, our research is driven by a
series of critical questions.
• Whether a more general learning-augmented BST
exists and achieves static optimality?

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Waterloo 2 Georgia Institute
of Technology 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Independent; Part of
the work by Jingbang Chen and Li Chen was done while at Georgia
Tech. Correspondence to: Li Chen <lichenntu@gmail.com>.

• Can such BST also obtain good guarantees under the
dynamic settings?
• Are they robust to the errors caused by the prediction
oracles?

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

