Distributional Diffusion Models with Scoring Rules

Valentin De Bortoli * 1 Alexandre Galashov * 1 2 J. Swaroop Guntupalli 1 Guangyao Zhou 1 Kevin Murphy 1
Arthur Gretton 1 2 Arnaud Doucet 1

Abstract

ples, we sample from the time-reversed diffusion process,
leveraging the learned denoiser. Despite their impressive
capabilities, diffusion models often require a large number
of steps to faithfully approximate the time-reversal so as
to obtain high-fidelity samples. To overcome this limitation, different solutions have been explored. One approach
focuses on the development of improved numerical integrators (e.g. (Karras et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Zheng
et al., 2023)). Another common strategy involves the use
of distillation techniques (e.g. (Luhman & Luhman, 2021;
Song et al., 2023; Luo, 2023; Salimans et al., 2024)), which
requires training a smaller, more computationally efficient
model to emulate the behavior of a larger, pre-trained diffusion model. Finally, parallel simulation methods have also
been explored (e.g. (Shih et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024a))
and use more memory to avoid slow sequential processing.

Diffusion models generate high-quality synthetic
data. They operate by defining a continuous-time
forward process which gradually adds Gaussian
noise to data until fully corrupted. The corresponding reverse process progressively “denoises”
a Gaussian sample into a sample from the data distribution. However, generating high-quality outputs requires many discretization steps to obtain
a faithful approximation of the reverse process.
This is expensive and has motivated the development of many acceleration methods. We propose
to speed up sample generation by learning the
posterior distribution of clean data samples given
their noisy versions, instead of only the mean of
this distribution. This allows us to sample from
the probability transitions of the reverse process
on a coarse time scale, significantly accelerating
inference with minimal degradation of the quality
of the output. This is accomplished by replacing
the standard regression loss used to estimate conditional means with a scoring rule. We validate
our method on image and robot trajectory generation, where we consistently outperform standard
diffusion models at few discretization steps.

We depart from these earlier approaches in simply proposing to sample from the generative process on a coarser time
scale. However, naively using denoisers obtained from the
training of diffusion models significantly degrades the quality of the outputs, as these denoisers do not capture the
full posterior distribution of the clean data given its noisy
version, but rather its conditional mean. We review the
relevant background on diffusions and their limitations in
Section 2.1. In earlier works, Xiao et al. (2022); Xu et al.
(2024) proposed to use Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) to learn such conditional
distributions. We show here how to bypass adversarial training by relying on generalized scoring rules (Gneiting &
Raftery, 2007), which we describe in Section 2.2. This
yields a simple loss which interpolates between the classical
regression loss used in diffusion models and distributional
losses. We present our new class of Distributional Diffusion Models in Section 3, and provide theoretical grounding
for our choice of distributional loss, as well as details of the
interpolation to the regression loss, in Section 4. We review
related work in Section 5.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019;
Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) have demonstrated remarkable
success in synthesizing high-quality data across various domains, including images (Saharia et al., 2022b), videos (Ho
et al., 2022), and 3D (Poole et al., 2023). These models
proceed as follows: First, a forward diffusion process is
defined where Gaussian noise is progressively introduced
to corrupt the data. This allows us to learn a denoiser at
a continuum of noise levels. Next, to generate new sam-

Experiments in Section 6 demonstrate that our approach
produces high-quality samples with significantly fewer denoising steps. We observe substantial benefits across a range
of tasks, including image-generation tasks in both pixel and
latent spaces, and in robotics applications. All proofs are in
the supplementary and a table of notation is in Appendix A.

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 Gatsby UCL. Correspondence to: Valentin De Bortoli <vdebortoli@google.com>,
Alexandre Galashov <agalashov@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

