Overtrained Language Models Are Harder to Fine-Tune

Jacob Mitchell Springer 1 Sachin Goyal 1 Kaiyue Wen 2 Tanishq Kumar 3 Xiang Yue 1
Sadhika Malladi 4 Graham Neubig 1 Aditi Raghunathan 1

Abstract

Stage 1: Pre-train for
T tokens

Stage 2: Post-train
(instruction tuning)

Pre-training tokens
(Trillion)

Pre-training tokens
(Trillion)

LLM benchmark
performance

Large language models are pre-trained on evergrowing token budgets under the assumption that
better pre-training performance translates to improved downstream models. In this work, we
challenge this assumption and show that extended
pre-training can make models harder to fine-tune,
leading to degraded final performance. We term
this phenomenon catastrophic overtraining. For
example, the instruction-tuned OLMo-1B model
pre-trained on 3T tokens leads to over 2% worse
performance on multiple standard LLM benchmarks than its 2.3T token counterpart. Through
controlled experiments and theoretical analysis,
we show that catastrophic overtraining arises from
a systematic increase in the broad sensitivity of
pre-trained parameters to modifications, including
but not limited to fine-tuning. Our findings call
for a critical reassessment of pre-training design
that considers the downstream adaptability of the
model.

Figure 1. Language models with extensive pre-training can
exhibit catastrophic overtraining, where the performance of
post-trained models degrades as the pre-training stage is extended. We report the average performance of five common LLM
benchmarks (ARC-Easy, ARC-Challenge, PIQA, HellaSwag) for
OLMo-1B intermediate checkpoints before and after instruction
fine-tuning, with additional results in Section 2. We argue that
catastrophic overtraining arises as a result of a progressive increase throughout pre-training of model sensitivity to parameter
transformations, leading to greater forgetting of the capabilities
acquired during pre-training after fine-tuning (Section 3). Overall,
our results challenge the notion that scaling pre-training is strictly
beneficial.

1. Introduction
Language models have achieved widespread success following a two-stage paradigm: (1) pre-training on a vast corpus
of uncurated data, followed by (2) post-training on highquality task-specific data, often to confer targeted abilities
such as instruction-following, multi-modality, or reasoning. Under the maxim “more data is better”, there have
been massive investments in scaling both pre-training and
post-training.

mended ratio—and Llama-3-8B scaled this further to 15T
tokens. This trend is driven by consistent gains in zero-shot
performance (Gadre et al., 2024; Sardana et al., 2024), with
few exceptions where scaling up is not helpful (Wei et al.,
2022; McKenzie et al., 2022a;b; 2023).
In this paper, we demonstrate that the widely adopted strategy of scaling up language model pre-training does not
universally translate to better performance after posttraining. Through both theory and experiments, we uncover
a phenomenon we term catastrophic overtraining, where
longer pre-training harms final model performance after
instruction tuning or other forms of post-training (Figure 1).

Hoffmann et al. (2022) proposed a compute-optimal ratio of
roughly 20 tokens per model parameter, yet recent models
have far exceeded this. For example, Llama-2-7B (Touvron
et al., 2023) was trained on 1.8T tokens—13× the recom1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Stanford University 3 Harvard
University 4 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Jacob
Mitchell Springer <jspringer@cmu.edu>.

Catastrophic overtraining is not an isolated curiosity; rather
it emerges consistently across a range of models and tasks.
As shown in Section 2, extensive empirical evaluations
demonstrate the prevalence of this phenomenon in exist-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

