Latent Action Learning Requires Supervision in the Presence of Distractors

Alexander Nikulin 1 2 Ilya Zisman 1 3 4 Denis Tarasov 1 Nikita Lyubaykin 1 5 Andrei Polubarov 1 3 4
Igor Kiselev 6 Vladislav Kurenkov 1 5

Abstract

Normalized Return

Recently, latent action learning, pioneered by
Latent Action Policies (LAPO), have shown remarkable pre-training efficiency on observationonly data, offering potential for leveraging vast
amounts of video available on the web for embodied AI. However, prior work has focused on
distractor-free data, where changes between observations are primarily explained by ground-truth
actions. Unfortunately, real-world videos contain
action-correlated distractors that may hinder latent action learning. Using Distracting Control
Suite (DCS) we empirically investigate the effect of distractors on latent action learning and
demonstrate that LAPO struggle in such scenario.
We propose LAOM, a simple LAPO modification
that improves the quality of latent actions by 8x,
as measured by linear probing. Importantly, we
show that providing supervision with ground-truth
actions, as few as 2.5% of the full dataset, during latent action learning improves downstream
performance by 4.2x on average. Our findings
suggest that integrating supervision during Latent
Action Models (LAM) training is critical in the
presence of distractors, challenging the conventional pipeline of first learning LAM and only
then decoding from latent to ground-truth actions.

LAOM+supervision (ours)
LAOM (ours)
LAPO (original)
IDM
BC

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
2

4

8

16

32

Labeled trajectories

64

128

Figure 1. We show that in the presence of distractors, LAPO struggles to learn latent actions useful for pre-training and that simple
BC or IDM are more effective. We propose LAOM, a simple
modification that doubles the performance but still underperforms.
Thus, we propose to reuse available ground-truth action labels
to supervise latent action learning, which significantly improves
the performance, achieving normalized score of 0.44. It recovers
almost half the performance of BC with access to the full actionlabeled dataset, while having access to only 2.5%. Results are
averaged over four environments from Distracting Control Suite,
three random seeds each. We provide per-environment plots on
Figure 8. See Section 3 for the evaluation protocol, Sections 4
and 5 for method details.

els (LAM) infer latent actions between successive observations, effectively compressing observed changes. Under
certain conditions, latent actions can even rediscover the
ground truth action space (Schmidt & Jiang, 2023; Bruce
et al., 2024). After training, LAM can be utilized for imitation learning on latent actions to obtain useful behavioral
priors. For example, LAPA (Ye et al., 2024) showed that
latent action learning can be used to pre-train large model
on only human manipulation videos, and despite the huge
cross-embodiment gap, still outperform OpenVLA (Kim
et al., 2024b), which was pre-trained on expert in-domain
data with available action labels.

1. Introduction
Recently, a new wave of approaches based on latent action
learning has emerged (Edwards et al., 2019), demonstrating
superior pre-training efficiency on datasets without action
labels in large-scale robotics (Ye et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
2024b;a; Cui et al., 2024; Bruce et al., 2024) and reinforcement learning (Schmidt & Jiang, 2023). Latent Action Mod1
AIRI 2 MIPT 3 Skoltech 4 Research Center for Trusted Artificial
Intelligence, ISP RAS 5 Innopolis University 6 Accenture. Correspondence to: Alexander Nikulin <nikulin@airi.net>. Work done
by dunnolab.ai.

Despite the initial success and the promise of unlocking
vast amounts of video available on the web (Schmidt &
Jiang, 2023; Ye et al., 2024), there is a critical shortcoming of previous work – it uses distractor-free data, where

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

