Update Your Transformer to the Latest Release: Re-Basin of Task Vectors

Filippo Rinaldi * 1 Giacomo Capitani * 1 Lorenzo Bonicelli 1 Donato Crisostomi 2 Federico Bolelli 1
Elisa Ficarra 1 Emanuele Rodolà 2 Simone Calderara 1 Angelo Porrello 1

Abstract
Foundation models serve as the backbone for numerous specialized models developed through
fine-tuning. However, when the underlying pretrained model is updated or retrained (e.g., on
larger and more curated datasets), the fine-tuned
model becomes obsolete, losing its utility and requiring retraining. This raises the question: is it
possible to transfer fine-tuning to a new release
of the model? In this work, we investigate how
to transfer fine-tuning to a new checkpoint without having to re-train, in a data-free manner. To
do so, we draw principles from model re-basin
and provide a recipe based on weight permutations to re-base the modifications made to the
original base model, often called task vector. In
particular, our approach tailors model re-basin
for Transformer models, taking into account the
challenges of residual connections and multi-head
attention layers. Specifically, we propose a twolevel method rooted in spectral theory, initially
permuting the attention heads and subsequently
adjusting parameters within select pairs of heads.
Through extensive experiments on visual and textual tasks, we achieve the seamless transfer of
fine-tuned knowledge to new pre-trained backbones without relying on a single training step
or datapoint. Code is available at https://
github.com/aimagelab/TransFusion.

ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

𝜋 𝜃𝐴

𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠

𝜃𝐵

𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙

𝜃𝐴

𝜋 𝜏
𝑓𝑡

𝜏
𝑓𝑡

𝜋 ∙ 𝑟𝑒 − 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑛
𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑒 − 𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝜃𝐴
𝜃𝐴 + 𝜏

𝜃𝐵
𝜃𝐵 + 𝜋 𝜏

Figure 1: Transporting task vector τ from a fine-tuned base
ft
model θA
= θA + τ to a new release θB .
ably decreasing the amount of data and training time needed
to tailor models for specific downstream tasks. For this
reason, pre-trained backbones such as OpenAI’s CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) are being extensively utilized as base foundation models. As a result, the corresponding fine-tuned
versions play a crucial role in numerous real-world applications like medical imaging (Lu et al., 2024) and satellite
image analysis (Mall et al., 2024).
However, while these pre-trained backbones are widely
adopted, their evolution poses new challenges, with tech
companies and academic institutions frequently releasing
updated checkpoints. Often, these updates do not modify the
underlying architecture but simply consist of new weights,
trained on increasingly large datasets compared to their predecessors (Ilharco et al., 2021). Moreover, the additional
training data may be more curated or specifically tailored
to specialized domains, boosting their zero-shot capabilities
considerably.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a notable shift among researchers
and practitioners towards fine-tuning pre-trained models,
rather than building them from scratch. This method leverages backbones developed on large-scale datasets, consider-

To take advantage of newly released checkpoints, the typical approach is to retrain them on the downstream task.
This means fine-tuning the new checkpoint on the same data
already used to adapt the original model. Besides the considerable costs associated with re-training the new model, this
strategy is also unviable in certain scenarios. Indeed, the
data for the downstream task might be no longer available
due to compliance with privacy or storage constraints.

*

Equal contribution 1 AImageLab, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, Italy. 2 Sapienza, University of Rome, Italy. Correspondence to: Filippo Rinaldi <filippo.rinaldi@unimore.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

