On the Diversity of Adversarial Ensemble Learning

Jun-Qi Guo * 1 Meng-Zhang Qian * 1 Wei Gao 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract

2019b; Gowal et al., 2021; Pang et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2023; Peng et al., 2023; Bartoldson et al., 2024).

Diversity has been one of the most crucial factors
on the design of adversarial ensemble methods.
This work focuses on the fundamental problems:
How to define the diversity for the adversarial
ensemble, and how to correlate with algorithmic
performance. We first show that it is an NP-Hard
problem to precisely calculate the diversity of two
networks in adversarial ensemble learning, which
makes it different from prior diversity analysis.
We present the first diversity decomposition under
the first-order approximation for the adversarial
ensemble learning. Specifically, the adversarial
ensemble loss can be decomposed into average of
individual adversarial losses, gradient diversity,
prediction diversity and cross diversity. Hence, it
is not sufficient to merely consider the gradient
diversity on the characterization of diversity as
in previous adversarial ensemble methods. We
present diversity decomposition for classification
with cross-entropy loss similarly. Based on the
theoretical analysis, we develop new ensemble
method via orthogonal adversarial predictions to
simultaneously improve gradient diversity and
cross diversity. We finally conduct experiments
to validate the effectiveness of our method.

Ensemble learning combines multiple learners rather than
one single learner with better performance, which has been
paid much attention in the adversarial robustness learning.
Sequential robust ensemble has been constructed via the
boosting framework (Abernethy et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2019a; 2022; Guo et al., 2022), and parallel ensemble has
also developed for robust learning (Pinot et al., 2020; Sen
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021; 2022; Deng & Mu, 2024).
Diversity has always been one of the most crucial factors in
the design of ensemble methods (Zhou, 2012; Wood et al.,
2023). For adversarial ensemble learning, Pang et al. (2019)
took prediction disagreements of base learners as diversity,
while Yang et al. (2020) defined the diversity via losses of
base learners on exchanged adversarial examples. Another
idea is to consider the misalignment of gradient directions
for diversity (Kariyappa & Qureshi, 2019; Dabouei et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2021; Bogun et al., 2022).
There are some fundamental problems open for adversarial
ensemble learning. For example, how to formally define the
diversity of adversarial ensemble, and what’s more, how to
correlate diversity definition with algorithmic performance
from a theoretical view. This work studies fundamental
problems of diversity in the adversarial ensemble learning,
and the main contributions are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction

• We first show that it is an NP-Hard problem to precisely
calculate the diversity of two neural networks in the
adversarial ensemble, since diversity is heavily relevant
to intrinsic structures and output predictions of models
simultaneously. This challenge makes it different from
traditional diversity on output predictions (Zhou, 2012;
Wood et al., 2023). Sun & Zhou (2018) indicated the
importance of structure diversity for decision trees,
whereas it remains open for neural networks.

General machine learning models may be misled heavily
by examples with adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al.,
2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015), which raises some serious
concerns about reliability of models, particularly in highrisk applications such as healthcare, finance and autonomous
driving (Finlayson et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2021; Fursov
et al., 2021). Various robust methods have been developed
against adversarial examples in recent years (Zhang et al.,

• We present the first diversity decomposition under the
first-order approximation in the adversarial ensemble
learning. Specifically, the adversarial ensemble loss
is decomposed into average of individual adversarial
losses, prediction diversity, gradient diversity and cross
diversity. It is not sufficient to only consider gradient
diversity on the characterization of diversity as in prior

*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China; School of
Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Wei Gao <gaow@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

