Representation Preserving Multiclass Agnostic to Realizable Reduction

Steve Hanneke 1 Qinglin Meng 1 Amirreza Shaeiri 1

Abstract

a unified theory that underlies these equivalences? Even
more optimistically, could there exist a simple and elegant
unified theory, both in terms of the analysis and reduction
properties, that accounts for these equivalences?

We study the problem of multiclass classification
when the number of labels can be unbounded
within the PAC learning framework (Valiant,
1984). Our main contribution is a theory that
demonstrates a simple and elegant agnostic to
realizable reduction for this framework. This resolves an open problem raised by the recent work
of (Hopkins et al., 2022). Notably, our result is
the first representation preserving multiclass agnostic to realizable reduction, in contrast with
the compression based approach of the work of
(David et al., 2016). Furthermore, our main theorem is stated in an abstract framework, called
“Unified PAC Learning”, which encompasses a
range of frameworks, including multiclass PAC
learning, list PAC learning, and multilabel PAC
learning. In addition, we explore representation
preserving reductions to the realizable setting for
two noise models, namely Massart noise and Tsybakov noise, in the multiclass PAC learning framework. We believe our technique may find other
applications in ensuing studies of theoretical machine learning.

The seminal work of (David et al., 2016) provides a basis
for developing a unified theoretical framework. In fact, for
almost a decade, their sample compression scheme based approach, which involves boosting, serves as the only tool for
theorists to prove agnostic learnability in frameworks such
as partial PAC learning, multiclass PAC learning, and list
PAC learning, where the number of labels can be unbounded
in the latter two cases. However, this approach can produce
more complex functions than those outputted by a realizable learner due to its reliance on the boosting technique,
which combines multiple realizable learners. In particular,
consider the space of possible outputting functions in the
realizable setting. Then, in the agnostic setting, the resulting
functions based on this approach do not necessarily belong
to that space.
In addition to the mentioned reduction, the recent work of
(Hopkins et al., 2022) provides an affirmative answer to
the aforementioned questions across various frameworks.
More specifically, they introduced a three-line algorithm
accompanied by a relatively simple proof technique, which
effectively demonstrates the existence of reductions in many
frameworks. Moreover, their algorithm uncovers some previously unknown equivalences between realizable and agnostic learnability. However, despite these advancements,
their approach does not extend to important problems, such
as multiclass PAC leaning with possibly unbounded label
space framework. 1 We suggest readers refer to section 2 for
a detailed discussion on the significance of this setting. Consequently, they posed the following open question: Is there
a unifying yet still simple and elegant technique that can
also address multiclass PAC learning with possibly infinite
label space framework?

1. Introduction
In many frameworks within the field of statistical learning
theory, a surprising equivalence emerges between realizable and agnostic learnability, where both are characterized by the same quantity despite their inherent difference.
This phenomenon encompasses fundamental frameworks,
including binary PAC learning, multiclass PAC learning, list
PAC learning, binary online learning, and multiclass online
learning, among others. Nonetheless, the proof techniques
employed to establish the realizable and agnostic results
can differ significantly in many of these frameworks. This
observation raises an intriguing question: Do we possess

In this work, we provide POSITIVE ANSWER to their open
question. Specifically, we demonstrate that a clever modification of their three-line algorithm indeed effectively
reduces agnostic learnability to realizable learnability in
frameworks such as multiclass learning with potentially
unbounded label spaces.

1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Steve Hanneke
<steve.hanneke@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

This is discussed formally in Appendix A.

