Editable Noise Map Inversion: Encoding Target-image into Noise
For High-Fidelity Image Manipulation

Mingyu Kang 1 Yong Suk Choi 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Text-to-Image diffusion models have demonstrated impressive performance in high-quality image generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Podell et al., 2023). Building on this success, recent research has extended the capabilities to text-guided image
(Hertz et al., 2022; Brooks et al., 2023; Tumanyan et al.,
2023; Kawar et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023) and video editing (Wu et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024) by
leveraging these diffusion models. An important step in
text-driven image editing involves inverting a given image
into a sequence of noise vectors, termed noise maps. These
noise vectors are used for editing. The goal of inversion is
to produce editable noise maps that preserve the content of
the original image and exhibit high editability.

Text-to-image diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in generating high-quality and
diverse images. Building on these advancements,
diffusion models have also demonstrated exceptional performance in text-guided image editing.
A key strategy for effective image editing involves
inverting the source image into editable noise
maps associated with the target image. However,
previous inversion methods face challenges in adhering closely to the target text prompt. The limitation arises because inverted noise maps, while
enabling faithful reconstruction of the source image, restrict the flexibility needed for desired edits. To overcome this issue, we propose Editable
Noise Map Inversion (ENM Inversion), a novel inversion technique that searches for optimal noise
maps to ensure both content preservation and editability. We analyze the properties of noise maps
for enhanced editability. Based on this analysis,
our method introduces an editable noise refinement that aligns with the desired edits by minimizing the difference between the reconstructed
and edited noise maps. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that ENM Inversion outperforms existing approaches across a wide range of image
editing tasks in both preservation and edit fidelity
with target prompts. Our approach can also be
easily applied to video editing, enabling temporal consistency and content manipulation across
frames.

Source Image

PNPInv

Ours

“a parrot on a
leaf in the
garden”

“a single dried
rose in front of
an orange wall”

Figure 1. ENM Inversion for real image editing. PNP Inversion
(PNPInv) preserves the structure and content of the original image
but shows limited editing capability. Our method preserves the
details of source image and enables precise modification.

In practice, many inversion methods rely on Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) inversion (Song et al., 2020)
to obtain the latent noise representation of an image and
then apply their proposed editing process. However, DDIM
inversion often introduces approximation errors, resulting
in noticeable inconsistencies between the reconstructed and
original images. These errors are further amplified by the
use of Classifier-Free Guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022). To
address this challenge, Null-Text Inversion (NTI) (Mokady

1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Hanyang,
Seoul, Korea 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
Hanyang, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Yong Suk Choi
<cys@hanyang.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

