Reliable Algorithm Selection for Machine Learning-Guided Design

Clara Fannjiang 1 Ji Won Park 1

Abstract
Algorithms for machine learning-guided design,
or design algorithms, use machine learning-based
predictions to propose novel objects with desired
property values. Given a new design task—for example, to design novel proteins with high binding
affinity to a therapeutic target—one must choose
a design algorithm and specify any hyperparameters and predictive and/or generative models involved. How can these decisions be made such
that the resulting designs are successful? This paper proposes a method for design algorithm selection, which aims to select design algorithms that
will produce a distribution of design labels satisfying a user-specified success criterion—for example, that at least ten percent of designs’ labels exceed a threshold. It does so by combining designs’
predicted property values with held-out labeled
data to reliably forecast characteristics of the label
distributions produced by different design algorithms, building upon techniques from predictionpowered inference (Angelopoulos et al., 2023).
The method is guaranteed with high probability
to return design algorithms that yield successful
label distributions (or the null set if none exist), if
the density ratios between the design and labeled
data distributions are known. We demonstrate the
method’s effectiveness in simulated protein and
RNA design tasks, in settings with either known
or estimated density ratios.

1

Figure 1. Design algorithm selection. Different design algorithm
configurations (shown as robots) produce different distributions
of designs (e.g., biological sequences). Distributions of designs’
predicted property values (x-axis) and labels (y-axis) also differ
(blobs). Before the costly step of acquiring design labels, design
algorithm selection aims to choose design algorithm configurations
that will satisfy a success criterion—for example, that the average
design label surpasses a threshold (horizontal black line). This is
challenging because designs’ predictions can be misleading; true
labels can be low even if predictions are high (e.g., rightmost blob).

that efficiently catalyze reactions of interest (Greenhalgh
et al., 2021), photoreceptors with unprecedented light sensitivity for optogenetics (Bedbrook et al., 2019), and antibodies with enhanced binding affinity to therapeutic targets
(Gruver et al., 2023), among many other applications. The
methods used in such efforts, which we call design algorithms, are varied. Some entail sampling from a generative
model that upweights objects with promising predictions
(Brookes et al., 2019; Biswas et al., 2021); others start with
initial candidates and iteratively introduce modifications
that yield more desirable predictions (Bryant et al., 2021;
Thomas et al., 2025). To propose designs, one must choose
among these design algorithms. Many have consequential
hyperparameter(s) that must be set, such as those that navigate a trade-off between departing from training data to
achieve unprecedented predicted values and staying close
enough that those predictions can be trusted (Biswas et al.,
2021; Gruver et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024). One must also
specify the predictive model that the design algorithm consults, as well as any generative model it may involve. These
decisions collectively yield a design algorithm configuration, or configuration for short—for example, the design
algorithm AdaLead (Sinai et al., 2020) using the hyperpa-

Design Algorithm Selection

Machine learning-guided design aims to propose novel objects, or designs, that exhibit desired values of a property of
interest by consulting machine learning-based predictions of
the property in place of costly and time-consuming measurements. The approach has been used to design novel enzymes
1
Prescient Design, Genentech. Correspondence to: Clara Fannjiang <wong-fannjiang.clara@gene.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

