Targeted control of fast prototyping through domain-specific interface

Yu-Zhe Shi * 1 2 Mingchen Liu * 3 Hanlu Ma 4 Qiao Xu 1 Huamin Qu 2 4 Kun He 3
Lecheng Ruan 1 Qining Wang 1

Abstract

Using designer’s language

I want the lid to be slightly
raised, with a small round
knob for a simple finish.

Industrial designers have long sought a natural
and intuitive way to achieve the targeted control of prototype models—using simple natural language instructions to configure and adjust the models seamlessly according to their intentions, without relying on complex modeling
commands. While Large Language Models have
shown promise in this area, their potential for
controlling prototype models through language
remains partially underutilized. This limitation
stems from gaps between designers’ languages
and modeling languages, including mismatch in
abstraction levels, fluctuation in semantic precision, and divergence in lexical scopes. To bridge
these gaps, we propose an interface architecture that serves as a medium between the two
languages. Grounded in design principles derived from a systematic investigation of fast prototyping practices, we devise the interface’s operational mechanism and develop an algorithm
for its automated domain specification. Both
machine-based evaluations and human studies on
fast prototyping across various product design
domains demonstrate the interface’s potential to
function as an auxiliary module for Large Language Models, enabling precise and effective targeted control of prototype models.

the dome height to about 20% of the body’s
height. Add a small sphere (5% of the

Lid

he spo

t c

r

Main body

the main body using an elliptical
sphere. Apply a uniform scaling
modifier along the vertical axis
to flatten it slightly.

Spout

es

Extrude a cylindrical profile along the
S-shape path, tapering the diameter

, which

a better

body’s width) at the center top as the
knob, and align it perfectly with the lid.

Start by creating a base shape for

The body should look
smooth and soft, like a
flattened oval shape.
T
u u v gently in
an S-shape
starts
wider and end narrower
fl

Using modeling language

Create a slightly domed shape using a hemisphere. Raise

toward the tip. Attach the base of the

for

ow and balance.

spout to the body with a Boolean union, then
smooth the intersection using bevel or subdivision tools.

Figure 1. Designers’ language vs. modeling language for fast
prototyping. This comparison clearly demonstrates that the designers’ language for teapot design is significantly more intuitive
than its modeling counterpart, providing a focused creation flow.

1. Introduction
Creating physical prototypes of the target products in a
rapid iteration fashion, known as fast prototyping (Burns,
1993; Hallgrimsson, 2012), is one of the most critical processes in professional industrial design (Camburn et al.,
2017). It helps maintain project timelines, alleviates design fixation, and enables product testing against clear criteria. Unlike production-ready modeling conducted by engineers (Barnhill, 1992), which focuses on refining prototypes into master models for mass-production, fast prototyping emphasizes exploring possibilities, extremes, and
feasibility, providing essential references for final design
choices. During this process, industrial designers actively
and frequently make configurations and adjustments to prototype models, driven by their unpredictable intuitions,
insights, and inspirations. Limited by cognitive bandwidth (Lieder & Griffiths, 2020; Griffiths, 2020), industrial
designers expect immediate feedback on how their interventions affect the prototype’s appearance without the need
to switch attention to refining the current version of design (Monsell, 2003), such as manually tuning the parameters of the Computer-Aided Design (CAD) model through
the interactive Graphical User Interface (GUI) of modeling engines. Such interruptions may disturb their continuous flow of thinking and creation (Cross, 2023). Consequently, industrial designers have been on the quest of an
interface for the targeted control of prototype models—one

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Advanced Manufacturing
and Robotics, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
SAR 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 4 Division
of Emerging Interdisciplinary Areas, The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to:
Lecheng Ruan <ruanlecheng@ucla.edu>, Qining Wang <qiningwang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

