Cross-environment Cooperation Enables Zero-shot Multi-agent Coordination

Kunal Jha 1 Wilka Carvalho 2 Yancheng Liang 1 Simon S. Du 1 Max Kleiman-Weiner * 1 Natasha Jaques * 1

Abstract

1999; Kleiman-Weiner et al., 2016; Shum* et al., 2019; Wu*
et al., 2021). This ability to effectively represent collective
tasks allows cooperation to transfer across both partners and
environments. For instance, after mastering a family recipe
with their parents, a novice chef can easily cook the same
dish (and much more) at home with their spouse. These
cognitive mechanisms may be important for building AI
that coordinates in novel scenarios. However, current reinforcement learning (RL) methods have yet to address this
challenge (Wang et al., 2024). Cooperation across partners
on a single problem has been studied, but agents that can
zero-shot coordinate (ZSC) with new partners in unfamiliar
environments will unlock flexible, human-compatible AI
agents in a range of applications: household robots, adaptive
educational assistants, or autonomous vehicles (Ma et al.,
2023; Stone et al., 2010b; Atchley et al., 2024; Dinneweth
et al., 2022; Ribeiro et al., 2021).

Zero-shot coordination (ZSC), the ability to adapt
to a new partner in a cooperative task, is a critical component of human-compatible AI. While
prior work has focused on training agents to cooperate on a single task, these specialized models do not generalize to new tasks, even if they
are highly similar. Here, we study how reinforcement learning on a distribution of environments with a single partner enables learning
general cooperative skills that support ZSC with
many new partners on many new problems.
We introduce two Jax-based, procedural generators that create billions of solvable coordination
challenges. We develop a new paradigm called
Cross-Environment Cooperation (CEC), and
show that it outperforms competitive baselines
quantitatively and qualitatively when collaborating with real people. Our findings suggest that
learning to collaborate across many unique scenarios encourages agents to develop general norms,
which prove effective for collaboration with different partners. Together, our results suggest a
new route toward designing generalist cooperative agents capable of interacting with humans
without requiring human data. Code for environment, training, and testing scripts and more can
be found at https://kjha02.github.io/
publication/cross-env-coop.

Prior work on ZSC has mainly focused on the challenge of
adapting to novel partners, including novel human partners.
Typical RL approaches use methods like population-based
training (PBT) and variations on self-play (SP), approaches
which helped algorithms such as AlphaStar achieve superhuman performance in zero-sum games (Vinyals et al., 2019).
These approaches work by leveraging “partner diversity,”
during training time. They simulate diverse training partners with the idea that these varied experiences will be
sufficient for agents to generalize to human partners (Yan
et al., 2023; Carroll et al., 2020; Strouse et al., 2018; Sarkar
et al., 2023). Although agents trained under this paradigm
often do adapt to new partners, this adaptation is limited
to the single environment they are trained on. PBT, as it is
often deployed (and similar approaches), fails to generalize
when faced with even a slight variation of the same problem.
Thus, current PBT-based approaches must be retrained every
time there is a slight variation in the environment or task.
This is not a recipe which can scale well to the real world
(Yan et al., 2023). If agents can only successfully cooperate
with others on the specific environment they were trained
on, such as a household robot which can only interact with
people in one bedroom rather than the entire house, they
lack a more general notion of cooperation — the ability to
flexibly interact in a broad range of scenarios with many
people.

1. Introduction
Humans excel at ad-hoc cooperation, readily adapting to
new partners and environments by attending jointly to relevant objects, reasoning about shared intentions, and playing their role within an implicit collective plan (Tomasello,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 2 Kempner Institute for the
Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Correspondence to: Kunal Jha
<kjha@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we investigate the following question: how can
1

