Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment

Harrish Thasarathan 1 2 Julian Forsyth 1 Thomas Fel 3 Matthew Kowal 1 2 4 5 Konstantinos G. Derpanis 1 6 2 7

Figure 1. Overview of Universal Sparse Autoencoders. (A) We introduce Universal Sparse Autoencoders (USAEs), a method for
discovering common concepts across multiple different deep neural networks. USAEs are simultaneously trained on the activations of
multiple models and are constrained to share an aligned and interpretable dictionary of discovered concepts. (B) We also demonstrate one
immediate application of USAEs, Coordinated Activation Maximization, where optimizing the inputs of multiple models to activate the
same concepts reveals how different models encode the same concept. Visualization reveals interesting concepts at various levels of abstraction, such as ‘curves’ (top), ‘animal haunch’ (middle) and ‘the faces of crowds’ (bottom). Code: github.com/YorkUCVIL/UniversalSAE.

Abstract

jective, the learned dictionary captures common
factors of variation—concepts—across different
tasks, architectures, and datasets. We show that
USAEs discover semantically coherent and important universal concepts across vision models;
ranging from low-level features (e.g., colors and
textures) to higher-level structures (e.g., parts and
objects). Overall, USAEs provide a powerful new
method for interpretable cross-model analysis and
offers novel applications—such as coordinated
activation maximization—that open avenues for
deeper insights in multi-model AI systems.

We present Universal Sparse Autoencoders (USAEs), a framework for uncovering and aligning interpretable concepts spanning multiple pretrained
deep neural networks. Unlike existing conceptbased interpretability methods, which focus on
a single model, USAEs jointly learn a universal
concept space that can reconstruct and interpret
the internal activations of multiple models at once.
Our core insight is to train a single, overcomplete sparse autoencoder (SAE) that ingests activations from any model and decodes them to
approximate the activations of any other model
under consideration. By optimizing a shared ob-

1. Introduction
In this work, we focus on discovering interpretable concepts
shared among multiple pretrained deep neural networks
(DNNs). The goal is to learn a universal concept space
– a joint space of concepts – that provides a unified lens
into the hidden representations of diverse models. We define concepts as the abstractions each network captures that
transcend individual data points—spanning low-level features (e.g., colors and textures) to high-level attributes (e.g.,

1

York University, Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto,
Canada 3 Kempner Institute, Harvard University, Boston, USA
4
FAR.AI 5 Trajectory Labs, Toronto 6 University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada 7 Samsung AI Centre, Toronto. Correspondence
to: Harrish Thasarathan <harryt@yorku.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

