On the Resilience of LLM-Based Multi-Agent Collaboration with Faulty Agents

Jen-tse Huang 1 Jiaxu Zhou 1 Tailin Jin 2 Xuhui Zhou 3 Zixi Chen 4 Wenxuan Wang 5 Youliang Yuan 6
Michael R. Lyu 1 Maarten Sap 3

Abstract
(a) Linear

Large language model-based multi-agent systems
have shown great abilities across various tasks
due to the collaboration of expert agents, each
focusing on a specific domain. However, the impact of clumsy or even malicious agents—those
who frequently make errors in their tasks—on the
overall performance of the system remains underexplored. This paper investigates: (1) What is
the resilience of various system structures (e.g.,
A→B→C, A↔B↔C) under faulty agents, on different downstream tasks? (2) How can we increase system resilience to defend against these
agents? To simulate faulty agents, we propose
two approaches—AUTOT RANSFORM and AU TO I NJECT —which introduce mistakes into the
agents’ responses. Experiments on four downstream tasks using six systems show that the “hierarchical” structure, i.e., A→(B↔C), exhibits superior resilience with the lowest performance drop
of 5.5%, compared to 10.5% and 23.7% of other
two structures. To further improve resilience, we
introduce (1) Challenger, that introduces a mechanism for each agent to challenge others’ outputs, and (2) Inspector, an additional agent to
review and correct messages, recovering up to
96.4% errors made by faulty agents. Our code and
data are available at https://github.com/
CUHK-ARISE/MAS-Resilience.

(b) Flat

(c) Hierarchical

Consider how messages spread among agents.
Which structure performs the best when there is a
clumsy or malicious agent?

(I) Code Generation

(II) Math Problem Solving

(III) Translation

(IV) Evaluation

Which task is influenced the most when there is a
clumsy or malicious agent?

Figure 1. We focus on the overall impact of faulty agents on the
performance of diverse system structures across various tasks.

et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024), math problem solving (Lu
et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024), and text translation (Jiao
et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024a), by decomposing complex
tasks into smaller, specialized sub-tasks handled by expert
agents (Chen et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024). However, the
decentralized nature of multi-agent systems leaves them vulnerable to clumsy or malicious agents, which could undermine or destroy collaboration (Chen et al., 2025b). Consider
a scenario where companies specializing in different areas
produce expert agents, the lack of centralized control means
that the multi-agent system may contain agents from various
sources, some of which could be faulty. In a multi-agent
coding system like Camel (Li et al., 2023), a faulty coding
agent produces buggy code, causing severe errors or harmful
outputs when executed by other agents.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent systems have further boosted Large Language
Models’ (LLMs) already impressive performance across
various downstream tasks, including code generation (Liu
1

Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tsinghua University
Carnegie Mellon University 4 Peking University 5 Renmin University of China 6 Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen.
Correspondence to: Wenxuan Wang <jwxwang@gmail.com>,
Maarten Sap <maartensap@cmu.edu>.
3

Recent studies (Zhang et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2023;
Amayuelas et al., 2024; Ju et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024c) have
increasingly focused on safety issues within multi-agent systems. However, these studies mainly investigate attacks on
agents to induce toxicity in their outputs or misinformation
spread among all agents. While they assess malicious agent

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

