Test-Time Adaptation with Binary Feedback

Taeckyung Lee 1 Sorn Chottananurak 1 Junsu Kim 1 Jinwoo Shin 1 Taesik Gong 2 * Sung-Ju Lee 1 *

Abstract

conditions that differ from the training data (Sakaridis et al.,
2018).

Deep learning models perform poorly when domain shifts exist between training and test data.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) is a paradigm to mitigate this issue by adapting pre-trained models
using only unlabeled test samples. However, existing TTA methods can fail under severe domain
shifts, while recent active TTA approaches requiring full-class labels are impractical due to
high labeling costs. To address this issue, we introduce a new setting of TTA with binary feedback. This setting uses a few binary feedback
inputs from annotators to indicate whether model
predictions are correct, thereby significantly reducing the labeling burden of annotators. Under
the setting, we propose BiTTA, a novel dual-path
optimization framework that leverages reinforcement learning to balance binary feedback-guided
adaptation on uncertain samples with agreementbased self-adaptation on confident predictions.
Experiments show BiTTA achieves 13.3%p accuracy improvements over state-of-the-art baselines, demonstrating its effectiveness in handling
severe distribution shifts with minimal labeling
effort. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/taeckyung/BiTTA.

Test-time adaptation (TTA) (Wang et al., 2021) dynamically
adapts the pre-trained models in real time using only unlabeled test samples. Hence, it is a viable solution to domain
shifts. However, without ground-truth labels, existing TTA
methods are vulnerable to adaptation failures or suboptimal
accuracies in severe distribution shifts (Gong et al., 2022;
Niu et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2023b; Lee et al., 2024b; Press
et al., 2023). This is largely due to relying on self-supervised
metrics such as entropy or confidence (Wang et al., 2021;
Gong et al., 2023b) that could be unreliable when adaptation
fails (Lee et al., 2024b).
This limitation motivates the potential value of incorporating human feedback into the adaptation loop. In language models, reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022) has emphasized the
critical role of human feedback in aligning large language
models with human intent. The key challenge in TTA is
making human feedback practical and scalable. While full
labeling of test samples is prohibitively expensive (Joshi
et al., 2010), recent studies on language models have shown
that binary feedback (e.g., thumbs up/down) can effectively
guide model behaviors (Shankar et al., 2024).
Inspired by this, we introduce the TTA with binary feedback setting (Figure 1), which uses binary feedback on the
model prediction (correct or incorrect) to guide adaptation
while maintaining efficiency. Our binary-feedback approach
requires only minimal label information, significantly reducing labeling costs compared with full-class active TTA (Gui
et al., 2024), mitigating the interaction bottlenecks to enable
real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized various fields, including
computer vision (Deng et al., 2009), speech recognition (Gulati et al., 2020), and natural language processing (Brown
et al., 2020). However, deep models often suffer from domain shifts, where discrepancies between training and test
data distributions lead to significant performance degradation. For example, autonomous driving systems might
struggle with new types of vehicles or unexpected weather

As a solution, we propose BiTTA, a dual-path optimization
framework for TTA with binary feedback that incorporates
both binary feedback and unlabeled samples. Motivated by
the recent reinforcement learning studies that show effectiveness in incorporating human feedback in the optimization
process (Ouyang et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023; Black et al.,
2024), BiTTA leverages reinforcement learning to effectively balance two complementary adaptation strategies (Figure 3): Binary Feedback-guided Adaptation (BFA) on uncertain samples and Agreement-Based self-Adaptation (ABA)
on confident samples. Using Monte Carlo dropout (Gal &

∗

Corresponding authors. 1 KAIST 2 UNIST. Correspondence
to: Taesik Gong <taesik.gong@unist.ac.kr>, Sung-Ju Lee
<profsj@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

