Discrete Neural Algorithmic Reasoning

Gleb Rodionov 1 Liudmila Prokhorenkova 2

Abstract

cal guarantees of algorithms to work correctly on any input
of any size and distribution, this setting provides unlimited
challenges for out-of-distribution generalization of neural
networks. Prior work explored this setup using the CLRS-30
benchmark (Veličković et al., 2022), which covers classical
algorithms from the Introduction to Algorithms textbook
(Cormen et al., 2009) and uses graphs as a universal tool
to encode data of various types. Importantly, CLRS-30
also provides the decomposition of classical algorithms into
subroutines and simple transitions between consecutive execution steps, called hints, which can be used during training
in various forms.

Neural algorithmic reasoning aims to capture
computations with neural networks by training
models to imitate the execution of classical algorithms. While common architectures are expressive enough to contain the correct model in
the weight space, current neural reasoners struggle to generalize well on out-of-distribution data.
On the other hand, classical computations are not
affected by distributional shifts as they can be
described as transitions between discrete computational states. In this work, we propose to
force neural reasoners to maintain the execution
trajectory as a combination of finite predefined
states. To achieve this, we separate discrete and
continuous data flows and describe the interaction between them. Trained with supervision on
the algorithm’s state transitions, such models are
able to perfectly align with the original algorithm.
To show this, we evaluate our approach on multiple algorithmic problems and achieve perfect test
scores both in single-task and multitask setups.
Moreover, the proposed architectural choice allows us to prove the correctness of the learned
algorithms for any test data.

The core idea of the CLRS-30 benchmark is to understand
how neural reasoners generalize well beyond the training
distribution, namely on larger graphs. Classical algorithms
possess strong generalization due to the guarantee that correct execution steps never encounter ‘out-of-distribution’
states, as all state transitions are predefined by the algorithm. In contrast, when encountering inputs from distributions that significantly differ from the training data, neural
networks are usually not capable of robustly maintaining
internal calculations in the desired domain. Consequently,
due to the complexity and diversity of all possible data that
neural reasoners can be tested on, the generalization performance of such models may vary depending on particular
test distributions (Mahdavi et al., 2023). Given that, it is
becoming important to interpret internal computations of
neural reasoners to find errors or to prove the correctness of
the learned algorithms (Georgiev et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Learning to capture algorithmic dependencies in data and to
perform algorithmic-like computations with neural networks
is a core problem in machine learning, long studied using
various approaches (Khardon & Roth, 1997; Graves et al.,
2014; Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014; Reed & De Freitas, 2015;
Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015; Veličković et al., 2020b).

Interpretation methods have been actively developing recently due to various real-world applications of neural networks and the need to debug and maintain systems based
on them. Especially, the Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al., 2017) demonstrates state-of-the-art performance in
natural language processing and other modalities, representing a field for the development of interpretability methods
(Elhage et al., 2021; Weiss et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2024;
Lindner et al., 2023). Based on active research on a computational model behind the transformer architecture, recent
works propose a way to learn models that are fully interpretable by design (Friedman et al., 2023).

Neural algorithmic reasoning (Veličković & Blundell, 2021)
is a research area focusing on building models capable of
executing classical algorithms. Relying on strong theoreti1

Yandex Research, Moscow, Russia 2 Yandex Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Gleb Rodionov
<rodionovgleb@yandex-team.ru>.

We found the ability to design models that are interpretable
in a simple and formalized way to be crucial for neural

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

