Agent Reviewers: Domain-specific Multimodal Agents
with Shared Memory for Paper Review

Kai Lu * 1 2 Shixiong Xu * 1 2 Jinqiu Li * 1 2 Kun Ding 1 Gaofeng Meng 1 2 3

Abstract

TEXT info

Raw Paper
PDF
converter

Abstract: This paper proposes …
Introduction: Large language …

…

Feedback from peer review is essential to improve the quality of scientific articles. However,
at present, many manuscripts do not receive sufficient external feedback for refinement before or
during submission. Therefore, a system capable
of providing detailed and professional feedback is
crucial for enhancing research efficiency. In this
paper, we have compiled the largest dataset of paper reviews to date by collecting historical openaccess papers and their corresponding review comments and standardizing them using LLM. We
then developed a multi-agent system that mimics real human review processes, based on LLMs.
This system, named Agent Reviewers, includes
the innovative introduction of multimodal reviewers to provide feedback on the visual elements of
papers. Additionally, a shared memory pool that
stores historical papers’ metadata is preserved,
which supplies reviewer agents with background
knowledge from different fields. Our system is
evaluated using ICLR 2024 papers and achieves
superior performance compared to existing AIbased review systems. Comprehensive ablation
studies further demonstrate the effectiveness of
each module and agent in this system. Our code
and data are available at https://github.
com/AReviewers/AgentReviewers.

Conclusion: In this paper …

Thumbnail

Agent Reviewers

Domainspecific
Memory

Memory Retrieval
using Keywords

Shared Memory Pool








10, Strong accept
8, Accept
6, Weak accept
5, Weak reject
3, Reject
1, Strong reject

S1: An interesting …
S2: Good expression…
W1: The difference…
W2: The equation…
W3: In line 124-128…

Figure 1. Agent Reviewers: a paper review system comprises
domain-specific multimodal agents with shared memory. It leverages both paper text and thumbnails for evaluation, retrieving
domain-specific memory from a shared memory pool to deliver
decisions, scores, and insightful comments.

the growing number of researchers has led to an explosive
rise in annual paper submissions. For example, in artificial
intelligence, ICLR submissions surged from 490 in 2017
to 11,672 in 2025. However, the quantity and quality of
peer reviews have failed to keep pace, leaving many young
researchers, especially students, without the high-quality
feedback needed to refine their work (Stelmakh et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022; Fox et al., 2023). As a result, many
newcomers find themselves caught in an inefficient arms
race, prioritizing submission volume over research quality.
Fortunately, the emergence of Large Language Models
(LLMs) offers a promising solution to this prevalent issue. Many researchers have explored the use of LLMs to
provide feedback on academic papers. Existing researches
typically formulate automated peer review as a Supervised
Fine-Tuning (SFT) task (Gao et al., 2024) or a zero-shot
task based on LLMs (Yuan et al., 2022; Liu & Shah, 2023;
Liang et al., 2024). The former relies on the collection and
cleaning of real review data, while the latter depends on the
adjustment of model prompts.

1. Introduction
In academia, peer review is essential for validating research
findings and improving manuscript quality. In recent years,
*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China 3 The Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HK
Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence to: Gaofeng Meng <gfmeng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

However, review comments generated by these methods
often suffer from severe homogenization due to multiple
factors. First, the same paper may receive diverse opinions
from different reviewers, but a model fine-tuned on such
data risks collapsing into uniform review comments. Sec-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

