Deep Reinforcement Learning from Hierarchical Preference Design

Alexander Bukharin 1 Yixiao Li 2 Pengcheng He 3 Tuo Zhao 2

Abstract

we are unable to access to the ground-truth reward, or the
reward is sparse: we receive zero reward most of the time.
Therefore, designing a reward for the agent is necessary.

Reward design is a fundamental, yet challenging aspect of reinforcement learning (RL). Researchers typically utilize feedback signals from
the environment to handcraft a reward function,
but this process is not always effective due to the
varying scale and intricate dependencies of the
feedback signals. This paper shows by exploiting certain structures, one can ease the reward
design process. Specifically, we propose a hierarchical reward design framework – HERON
for scenarios: (I) The feedback signals naturally
present hierarchy; (II) The reward is sparse, but
with less important surrogate feedback to help
policy learning. Both scenarios allow us to design
a hierarchical decision tree induced by the importance ranking of the feedback signals to compare
RL trajectories. With such preference data, we
can then train a reward model for policy learning.
We apply HERON to several RL applications, and
we find that our framework can not only train
high performing agents on a variety of difficult
tasks, but also provide additional benefits such as
improved sample efficiency and robustness.

To construct the reward, practitioners often use multiple
feedback signals z1 , . . . , zm , each of which captures different facets of an agent’s behavior. In settings where the reward is inaccessible, the most common approach P
to utilizing
these signals is the linear combination, e.g., r = i ωi ∗ zi
(Booth et al., 2023; Le et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2019). The
hyperparameters ωi ’s are tuned to provide a comprehensive
description of the agent’s behavior, a process commonly
known as reward engineering (Fu et al., 2017; Wu et al.,
2021). Taking the traffic light control as an example, Zhang
et al. (2019) consider a weighted combination of vehicle
queue length, average waiting time and some other feedback signals as the reward. The hyperparameters ωi ’s are
determined by extensive tuning in Van der Pol & Oliehoek
(2016); Wu et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2019). In sparse
reward settings, the feedback signals are used to compose a
reward surrogate, which is then combined with the sparse
reward. Taking code generation as an example, Le et al.
(2022) design a piece-wise function where the region is
divided according to the feedback signals (e.g., compilation error, runtime error) and values are designed by human
experts.

1. Introduction

Although feedback signals may serve as useful criteria of
an agent’s behavior, reward engineering is not always an
effective way to ensemble these signals. This is because
feedback signals may have different scales as well as intricate dependencies with other feedback signals. In this case,
determining the weight by humans becomes challenging,
and multiple weights must be simultaneously tuned since
their respective feedback signals are often correlated. Moreover, in sparse reward settings, a piece-wise reward function
often requires massive trials to determine the value, and
dividing the region is also difficult because of the complex
relation among different feedback signals.

Over the past decade, significant advancements in deep
learning techniques, along with unprecedented growth in
computational power, have facilitated remarkable achievements in the field of deep reinforcement learning (RL) across
diverse domains, including finance, transportation, and automatic programming (Deng et al., 2016; Haydari & Yılmaz,
2020; Le et al., 2022). A key component of modern RL is the
reward function, which is typically predefined in benchmark
environments such as the OpenAI gym or games (Mnih et al.,
2013; Silver et al., 2016; Brockman et al., 2016). When
dealing with complex real-world environments, however,

How to address the aforementioned issues still remains unclear. While most existing works have focused on reward
engineering for specific applications (Liu et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2019), this paper proposes a novel reward design
framework for when feedback signals exhibit hierarchical
relations. This relation exists in many RL problems. For

*

Equal contribution 1 NVIDIA 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Zoom Communications. Correspondence to: Alexander Bukharin
<abukharin@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

