S PARSE - PIVOT: Dynamic correlation clustering for node insertions

Mina Dalirrooyfard * 1 Konstantin Makarychev * 2 Slobodan Mitrović * 3

Abstract

with the given edge set. An edge (u, v) disagrees with the
clustering if u and v are placed in different clusters, while a
non-edge (u, v) disagrees if u and v are placed in the same
cluster.

We present a new Correlation Clustering algorithm for a dynamic setting where nodes are added
one at a time. In this model, proposed by CohenAddad, Lattanzi, Maggiori, and Parotsidis (ICML
2024), the algorithm uses database queries to access the input graph and updates the clustering
as each new node is added. Our algorithm has
the amortized update time of Oε (logO(1) (n)). Its
approximation factor is 20 + ε, which is a substantial improvement over the approximation factor
of the algorithm by Cohen-Addad et al. We complement our theoretical findings by empirically
evaluating the approximation guarantee of our algorithm. The results show that it outperforms the
algorithm by Cohen-Addad et al. in practice.

The problem was introduced by Bansal, Blum, and Chawla
(2004). It can be easily solved if a disagreement-free clustering exists, as each cluster then corresponds to a connected
component of the similarity graph G. However, when the
classifier makes mistakes, and a disagreement-free solution
does not exist, the problem becomes NP-hard. In their original paper, Bansal, Blum, and Chawla proposed a constantfactor approximation, which was subsequently improved
in a series of works Charikar et al. (2005); Demaine et al.
(2006); Chawla et al. (2015); Cohen-Addad et al. (2022;
2023); Cao et al. (2024). In 2005, Ailon, Charikar, and
Newman introduced combinatorial and LP-based algorithms
with approximation factors of 3 and 2.5, respectively. The
best-known approximation factor for Correlation Clustering
with Complete Information is currently 1.437 (Cao, CohenAddad, Lee, Li, Newman, and Vogl, 2024). Nevertheless,
the combinatorial algorithm by Ailon et al. (2008), known
as P IVOT, remains one of the preferred choices in practice
due to its simplicity and good empirical performance.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we present a new dynamic algorithm with node
updates for the Correlation Clustering problem with complete information.1 Correlation Clustering is a well-studied
problem that seeks to partition a set of objects into clusters
based on their similarity. The problem is defined on a set of
items represented as nodes in a graph, with similarity information provided through a set of edges. We assume that all
pairs of nodes are classified as either “similar” or “dissimilar” by a noisy classifier. For every pair of similar nodes
u and v, there is an edge (u, v) between them (sometimes
referred to as a positive edge). For every pair of dissimilar
nodes u and v, no edge exists between them (such pairs are
sometimes called negative edges). The objective is to find
a clustering that minimizes the number of disagreements

Researchers have proposed various variants of P IVOT that
operate in parallel and streaming settings (Bonchi et al.,
2014; Chierichetti et al., 2014; Pan et al., 2015; CohenAddad et al., 2021; Cambus et al., 2022; Behnezhad
et al., 2022; 2023; Cambus et al., 2022; Chakrabarty &
Makarychev, 2023). Recently, there has been growing interest in algorithms that support dynamic updates. Consider a
scenario where similarity information is received over time,
requiring the clustering to be updated dynamically. Dalirrooyfard, Makarychev, and Mitrovic (2024) showed how to
maintain a (3 + ε)-approximation clustering with constant
update time per edge insertion or deletion (see also papers
by Behnezhad et al. (2019) and Chechik & Zhang (2019)).

*
1
Equal
contribution
Machine
Learning
Research, Morgan Stanley, Canada.
minad@mit.edu.
2
Northwestern
University,
Chicago,
USA.
3
konstantin@northwestern.edu.
University of
California, Davis, USA. smitrovic@ucdavis.edu. Correspondence to: Mina Dalirrooyfard <minad@mit.edu>.

Cohen-Addad, Lattanzi, Maggiori, and Parotsidis proposed
an algorithm designed for a setting where nodes and edges
are stored in a database. Over time, new nodes are added to
the database along with their incident edges. After nodes
are added, the dynamic algorithm updates the existing clustering. In this model, each edge is included in the database
immediately after both its endpoints are inserted; no ad-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
By complete information, it is meant that for each pair of
nodes there is information on their similarity.

1

