Self-Organizing Visual Prototypes for Non-Parametric Representation Learning

Thalles Silva 1 Helio Pedrini 1 Adı́n Ramı́rez Rivera 2

Abstract

80
ImageNet k-NN Top-1

We present Self-Organizing Visual Prototypes
(SOP), a new training technique for unsupervised
visual feature learning. Unlike existing prototypical self-supervised learning (SSL) methods that
rely on a single prototype to encode all relevant
features of a hidden cluster in the data, we propose the SOP strategy. In this strategy, a prototype
is represented by many semantically similar representations, or support embeddings (SEs), each
containing a complementary set of features that together better characterize their region in space and
maximize training performance. We reaffirm the
feasibility of non-parametric SSL by introducing
novel non-parametric adaptations of two loss functions that implement the SOP strategy. Notably,
we introduce the SOP Masked Image Modeling
(SOP-MIM) task, where masked representations
are reconstructed from the perspective of multiple
non-parametric local SEs. We comprehensively
evaluate the representations learned using the
SOP strategy on a range of benchmarks, including
retrieval, linear evaluation, fine-tuning, and object detection. Our pre-trained encoders achieve
state-of-the-art performance on many retrieval
benchmarks and demonstrate increasing performance gains with more complex encoders. Code:
https://github.com/sthalles/sop.

SOP
iBOT

78
MaSSL
DINO
76

74
25
50
100 200 400
Number of parameters (Millions)
Figure 1. k-NN top-1 accuracy on ImageNet.

of pre-defined prototypes that are presumed to represent
hidden clusters in the data. When presented with multiple
views as input, these methods assume that prototypes must
produce consistent predictions across views of the same
image during pre-training. To avoid ill-posed solutions,
methods enforce an equipartition constraint (Asano et al.,
2019) that uniformly assigns a batch of images to prototypes
using techniques such as centering (Caron et al., 2020) and
Sinkhorn-Knopp (Cuturi, 2013). If these regularizers are
removed, pre-training collapses to trivial solutions.

1. Introduction

Despite undeniable success, this framework places excessive importance on the prototypes’ representations, which
need to encode a comprehensive set of relevant features for
consistent and accurate predictions across views. Current
methods (Caron et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022; Caron et al.,
2021; Oquab et al., 2023) report their best performance
when the number of prototypes K ≫ C is much larger than
the number of actual classes C in the data. However, in addition to increased computational and memory requirements,
we argue that over-clustering is a suboptimal approach to
fully exploring the feature space under the weak supervision
of SSL pre-training. Specifically, a large K translates into
fewer images per prototype, facilitating the optimization
problem by biasing simpler features, which may limit the
complexity of the learned features.

State-of-the-art self-supervised learning (SSL) methods
(Zhou et al., 2022; Oquab et al., 2023) for computer vision rely on prototype learning with a multiview training
strategy using joint-embedding architectures (JEA). These
methods have a similar framework: they learn a large set
1

Institute of Computing, University of Campinas,
Campinas-SP, Brazil 2 Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Correspondence to: Thalles
Silva <thalles.silva@students.ic.unicamp.br>, Helio Pedrini
<helio@ic.unicamp.br>, Adı́n Ramı́rez Rivera <adinr@uio.no>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

