Strengthen Out-of-Distribution Detection Capability with
Progressive Self-Knowledge Distillation

Yang Yang 1 Haonan Xu 1
100
80

FPR95

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to ensure AI system reliability by rejecting inputs
outside the training distribution. Recent work
shows that memorizing atypical samples during later stages of training can hurt OOD detection, while strategies for forgetting them show
promising improvements. However, directly forgetting atypical samples sacrifices ID generalization and limits the model’s OOD detection
capability. To address this issue, we propose
Progressive Self-Knowledge Distillation (PSKD)
framework, which strengthens the OOD detection
capability by leveraging self-provided uncertaintyembedded targets. Specifically, PSKD adaptively
selects a self-teacher model from the training history using pseudo-outliers, facilitating the learning of uncertainty knowledge via multi-level distillation applied to features and responses. As a
result, PSKD achieves better ID generalization
and uncertainty estimation for OOD detection.
Moreover, PSKD is orthogonal to most existing
methods and can be integrated as a plugin to collaborate with them. Experimental results from
multiple OOD scenarios verify the effectiveness
and general applicability of PSKD.

100

ID: Test accuracy
Near-OOD: CIFAR-100
Far-OOD: SVHN
Far-OOD: Textures

60

80

Accuracy

Abstract

60

40

40

20

20
0

20

40

60

Epochs

80

Method

Typical
samples

Atypical
samples

Vanilla

learning

memorizing

Unleashing Mask

learning

forgetting

Ours

learning

learning

100
ID

OOD

Figure 1: Upper: The FPR95 (lower values indicate better
OOD detection) curves for various OOD datasets and the
ID test accuracy curve, tracked when CIFAR-10 is used as
the ID dataset for training. Lower: Comparisons of existing
methods and our PSKD for handling atypical samples.

This highlights the necessity of OOD detection to ensure AI
system reliability by enabling models to identify and reject
predictions for OOD inputs.
Up to now, many efforts have been made in pursuing reliable detection methods. Early methods, represented by
MSP (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017), ODIN (Liang et al.,
2018) and Energy (Liu et al., 2020), focus on developing
suitable scoring functions for OOD uncertainty estimation.
However, having a well-trained model with a solid basis
for OOD detection is an essential prerequisite. To this end,
a series of studies delve into training-time regularization
methods, which can be categorized into two main areas
(Zhang et al., 2023b). The first involves exploring alternative training strategies to train stronger models with better
discriminative representations (DeVries & Taylor, 2018; Sehwag et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; Pei, 2024). The second
involves introducing realistic outliers to help OOD detectors
learn more robust decision boundaries (Hendrycks et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024).
Despite the promising performance achieved by these methods, limited attention is given to the models’ intrinsic OOD
detection capabilities, which constrains their full potential.

1. Introduction
In real-world scenarios, deep learning models are inevitably
exposed to unseen classes of samples that lie outside the
training distribution (Yang et al., 2021), known as OOD
data. Persisting in classifying OOD data into one of the
predefined training classes is meaningless. Such unreliable
behavior could lead to disastrous consequences, particularly
in safety-critical fields like autonomous driving (Geiger
et al., 2012) and medical diagnosis (Litjens et al., 2017).
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Yang Yang <yyang@njust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

