Retrieval Augmented Zero-Shot Enzyme Generation for Specified Substrate

Jiahe Du 1 Kaixiong Zhou 2 Xinyu Hong 3 Zhaozhuo Xu 4 Jinbo Xu 3 Xiao Huang 1

Abstract

& Nielsen, 2013; Paraschiv et al., 2022; Nam et al., 2024).
Taking the artificial compound of 1,2,3-trichloropropane
(TCP) as an example, it is extensively utilized as a chemical
intermediate and solvent despite its toxicity and resistance to
biodegradation (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, 2021; Cheremisinoff & Rosenfeld, 2011), which
leads to persistent groundwater contaminant. Researchers
are actively engaged in discovering or engineering enzymes
capable of biodegrading TCP (Bogale et al., 2020; Samin &
Janssen, 2012). Since there is no existing natural enzymes
for TCP, the synthesis paradigm only relies on the expertise
of replicating molecular structure of other natural hemeproteins (Zambrano et al., 2022) and lacks the efficiency
to discover novel and effective enzymes for the specific
substrate.

Generating novel enzymes for target molecules
in zero-shot scenarios is a fundamental challenge
in biomaterial synthesis and chemical production.
Without known enzymes for a target molecule,
training generative models becomes difficult due
to the lack of direct supervision. To address
this, we propose a retrieval-augmented generation
method that uses existing enzyme-substrate data
to guide enzyme design. Our method retrieves
enzymes with substrates that share structural similarities with the target molecule, leveraging functional similarities in catalytic activity. Since none
of the retrieved enzymes directly catalyze the target molecule, we use a conditioned discrete diffusion model to generate new enzymes based on
the retrieved examples. An enzyme-substrate relationship classifier guides the generation process
to ensure optimal protein sequence distributions.
We evaluate our model on enzyme design tasks
with diverse real-world substrates and show that it
outperforms existing protein generation methods
in catalytic capability, foldability, and docking
accuracy. Additionally, we define the zero-shot
substrate-specified enzyme generation task and
introduce a dataset with evaluation benchmarks.

The recent emergence of deep learning based protein generation shows great potential for enzyme design due to their
unprecedented accuracy in structure and function prediction.
A portion of these methods falls under the category of unconditional generation, such as ProGen2 (Nijkamp et al., 2023)
and ProtGPT2 (Ferruz et al., 2022), possessing the capability to generate protein sequences that fold into stable and
functional structures and resemble real proteins, without relying on the predefined substrate. The other subset of these
methods is characterized by conditional generation, consisting of ligand-conditioned sequence design and structure
generation. The ligand-conditioned sequence design models (Gruver et al., 2023; Martinkus et al., 2023) are proposed
to synthesize therapeutic antibodies treating well to the antigen ligands. On the other hand, the ligand-conditioned
structure generation methods, like LigandMPNN (Dauparas
et al., 2025) and RFdiffusionAA (Krishna et al., 2024), generate proteins structurally docking to a given target. By
ensuring spatial compatibility, these methods generate effective proteins associated with enhanced biological function
and stability in complex cellular environments.

1. Introduction
Substrate-specified enzyme generation aims to design new
proteins that catalyze reactions to specific new molecules
and benefits a wide array of scientific fields, including
biomaterials synthesis and chemical production innovation (Meghwanshi et al., 2020; Robinson, 2015; Jegannathan
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong SAR, China 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA 3 Beijing MoleculeMind Co.,Ltd., Beijing,
China 4 Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of
Technology, Hoboken, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Huang
<xiao.huang@polyu.edu.hk>.

While the unconditional approaches fail to match requirements, existing work of conditional generation cannot be repurposed directly to generate desired enzymes that catalyze
specific substrates represented as small molecules. Particularly, the ligand condition of these models is amino acid
sequences of antigens but our substrates are small molecules.
The enzyme substrates exhibit a vast chemical space with
high structural diversity, including variations in functional

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

