ERICT: Enhancing Robustness by Identifying Concept Tokens
in Zero-Shot Vision Language Models

Xinpeng Dong * 1 Min Zhang * 2 Didi Zhu 1 Junjian Ye 3 Keli Zhang 3 Aimin Zhou 2 Fei Wu 1 Kun Kuang † 1

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) have
revolutionized the field of machine learning,
demonstrating exceptional performance across a
wide range of tasks. However, their robustness remains vulnerable to the spurious-correlation problem. Existing works often involve fine-tuning
the model with labeled data or relying on large
language models (LLMs) to generate more complex prompts. Although effective to some extent, these methods introduce new challenges, including additional computational costs and dependence on the quality of prompts without fully
utilizing the vision modality. To address these limitations, we propose a novel method named ERICT to Enhance model Robustness by Identifying
Concept Tokens. ERICT mitigates spurious correlation directly in the inference stage and comprises two key steps: (1) Identify concept tokens capturing invariant features through auxiliary
prompts to generate a token-level mask. (2) Apply
the mask to the attention weights of the CLS token
in the vision encoder to help the model focus on
the relevant image region. Extensive experiments
show that ERICT significantly improves the overall performance, including that of the worst group,
and achieves new state-of-the-art results.

Tree-related
token

Attention heatmap

Token-focus image

Bird-related
token

Attention heatmap

Token-focus image

Attention heatmap

Token-focus image

Raw image

Tourist-related
token

Figure 1: Token attention visualization. We selected three
tokens with distinct semantics from the original image and
visualized their attention heatmaps, highlighting their corresponding regions in the image. The experiment reveals
that the attention of tokens effectively captures semantic
information related to specific areas within the image.
(CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) or similar strategies, leveraging vast amounts of web-scraped data for pretraining. By
mapping images and text into a unified representation space,
VLMs effectively break the modality barrier between the
two. These models can infer the most probable answers
by comparing similarities between text and images, demonstrating exceptional zero-shot generalization capabilities.
The success of VLMs has introduced a groundbreaking
paradigm for modern vision-language model research.

1. Introduction
Vision language models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable
success across various multimodal downstream tasks (Radford et al., 2021; Dehdashtian et al., 2024; Lin et al.,
2024; An et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023). These models are
typically built on contrastive language-image pretraining

While VLMs have introduced a groundbreaking research
paradigm, recent studies (Izmailov et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2024; Ye et al., 2024a) have revealed their vulnerability to
spurious correlations (Sagawa et al., 2019). Specifically,
these models may rely on spurious features (e.g., backgrounds) for predictions, leading to performance degradation on samples where spurious information changes. In
recent years, a few studies have attempted to address the
issue of spurious correlations in VLMs (Yang et al., 2023;
Dehdashtian et al., 2024; Zhang & Ré, 2022; Phan et al.,
2024). These approaches mitigate spurious correlation by
fine-tuning pre-trained VLMs using group-labeled data, sig-

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 East China
Normal University 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to:
Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

