Exploring Representations and Interventions in Time Series Foundation Models

Michał Wiliński 1 Mononito Goswami 1 Willa Potosnak * 1 Nina Żukowska * 1 Artur Dubrawski 1

Abstract

Time series foundation models (TSFMs) have shown promising performance on multiple modeling tasks such as forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and imputation,
across a wide range of domains, and in settings with varying
amounts of data and supervision. However, the underlying
mechanisms and learned representations of TSFMs remain
largely unexplored. The nature of learned representations in
TSFMs remains largely unknown, including (1) their organizational structure, (2) the human-interpretable concepts
they encode and their locations, and (3) how they can be manipulated to integrate prior knowledge for more informed
predictions. Gaining deeper insight into the inner workings of TSFMs is key to improving their performance and
trustworthiness.

Time series foundation models (TSFMs) promise
to be powerful tools for a wide range of applications. However, their internal representations
and learned concepts are still not well understood. In this study, we investigate the structure
and redundancy of representations across various
TSFMs, examining the self-similarity of model
layers within and across different model sizes.
This analysis reveals block-like redundancy in
the representations, which can be utilized for informed pruning to improve inference speed and efficiency. We also explore the concepts learned by
these models, such as periodicity and trends. We
demonstrate how conceptual priors can be derived
from TSFM representations and leveraged to steer
its outputs toward concept-informed predictions.
Our work bridges representational analysis from
language and vision models to TSFMs, offering
new methods for building more computationally
efficient and transparent TSFMs.

We address each of these knowledge gaps by proposing approaches to systematically analyze, probe, and intervene in
TSFMs through their learned representations. To address
the first gap, we explore the fundamental question: Do different TSFMs learn and organize knowledge in a similar
manner? This analysis is crucial for understanding how
knowledge is organized in different models and whether representations are redundant across groups of layers, which
can be potentially leveraged to improve inference efficiency.
Next, we address the second gap by investigating: What
human-interpretable concepts can TSFMs learn, and
where do these concepts emerge within the latent representations of the model? Building on our layer-wise
representation analysis, we propose new methods to identify and localize these concepts across layers. Finally, we
tackle the third gap by asking: Is it possible to intervene
in TSFMs during inference by applying conceptual priors to steer time series predictions? Through a novel
approach, we demonstrate how to steer learned concepts by
adjusting representations across layers, allowing the model
to generate concept-informed predictions.

1. Introduction
Foundation models have taken significant strides in modeling both textual (Brown et al., 2020) and visual (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020) data, and have made complex language and
image processing accessible to non-experts. These models are pretrained on massive internet-scale datasets and
can be used to solve multiple tasks across a variety of domains, with little to no adaptation. Recently, a growing body
of work (Garza & Mergenthaler-Canseco, 2023; Goswami
et al., 2024; Rasul et al., 2024; Das et al., 2024; Woo et al.,
2024; Ansari et al., 2024) has extended the benefits of this
paradigm to time series data, a modality prevalent in fields
such as finance (Taylor, 2008), healthcare (Goswami et al.,
2021), and climate science (Schneider & Dickinson, 1974).

The main contributions of this paper are:
(i) TSFM Representation Similarity Analysis and
Pruning. We translate prior work on vision transformers and convolutional neural networks to quantify
the representation similarity in TSFMs. Our analysis
reveals that model size substantially influences how
representations are organized. In larger models, we
observe high CKA similarity across groups of layers,

*

Equal contribution 1 Auton Lab, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Michał Wiliński
<mwilinsk@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

