Synthesizing Images on Perceptual Boundaries of ANNs for Uncovering and
Manipulating Human Perceptual Variability

Chen Wei * 1 2 Chi Zhang * 1 Jiachen Zou 1 Haotian Deng 1 Dietmar Heinke 2 Quanying Liu 1

Abstract

3

Cat

Human decision-making in cognitive tasks and
daily life exhibits considerable variability, shaped
by factors such as task difficulty, individual preferences, and personal experiences. Understanding this variability across individuals is essential for uncovering the perceptual and decisionmaking mechanisms that humans rely on when
faced with uncertainty and ambiguity. We propose a systematic Boundary Alignment Manipulation (BAM) framework for studying human
perceptual variability through image generation.
BAM combines perceptual boundary sampling in
ANNs and human behavioral experiments to systematically investigate this phenomenon. Our perceptual boundary sampling algorithm generates
stimuli along ANN perceptual boundaries that
intrinsically induce significant perceptual variability. The efficacy of these stimuli is empirically
validated through large-scale behavioral experiments involving 246 participants across 116,715
trials, culminating in the variMNIST dataset containing 19,943 systematically annotated images.
Through personalized model alignment and adversarial generation, we establish a reliable method
for simultaneously predicting and manipulating
the divergent perceptual decisions of pairs of participants. This work bridges the gap between
computational models and human individual difference research, providing new tools for personalized perception analysis. Code and data for this
work are publicly available.

5

Bird

Figure 1. Human perceptual variability. For the same set of
stimuli, individuals often exhibit varied responses, highlighting
differences in their visual perception. For instance, the digit on the
left may be interpreted as a ”3” by some and as a ”5” by others.
Similarly, the image on the right might be initially perceived as a
cat by some individuals, while others may perceive it as a bird.

1. Introduction

Equal contribution 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China 2 Department of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. Correspondence to: Quanying Liu <liuqy@sustech.edu.cn>.

A core goal of cognitive science is to establish models that
reflect the relationship between external stimuli and human
internal experiences. The development of ANNs has significantly contributed to this goal, particularly through the
latent representations of ANNs that have shown a strong
correlation with human psychological representations ((Wei
et al., 2024a;b; Muttenthaler et al., 2022a; Mahner et al.,
2024; Zheng et al., 2019; Hebart et al., 2020; Muttenthaler
et al., 2022b)). Current studies focus on the phenomenon
that even with identical physical stimuli, individuals may exhibit significant differences in their perceptual experiences.
While such perceptual variability has been extensively documented in complex cognitive tasks (e.g., aesthetic or moral
judgments), studies on simple visual decision tasks (e.g.,
handwritten digit classification) often neglect such interindividual differences. As shown in Figure 1, the stimulus
on the left may be recognized as either a ”3” or a ”5”. This
high perceptual variability in human perception has been
inadequately explored in current research into human visual perception. Inspired by the similarity between ANNs
and humans, we hypothesize that the perceptual boundaries of ANNs are also related to inter-individual variability in human perception and that images generated along
these boundaries can evoke divergent perceptual experiences
across individuals.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Recent advances in using ANNs as perceptual models have
revealed novel relationships between stimuli and human
experiences. (Veerabadran et al., 2023; Zhou & Firestone,

*

1

