Sounding that Object: Interactive Object-Aware Image to Audio Generation

Tingle Li 1 Baihe Huang 1 Xiaobin Zhuang 2 Dongya Jia 2 Jiawei Chen 2 Yuping Wang 2 Zhuo Chen 2
Gopala Anumanchipalli 1 Yuxuan Wang 2

Abstract

(e.g., crowd noise and wind) even when only one is intended,
leading to inaccurate sound textures (McDermott & Simoncelli, 2011).

Generating accurate sounds for complex audiovisual scenes is challenging, especially in the presence of multiple objects and sound sources. In
this paper, we propose an interactive object-aware
audio generation model that grounds sound generation in user-selected visual objects within images.
Our method integrates object-centric learning into
a conditional latent diffusion model, which learns
to associate image regions with their corresponding sounds through multi-modal attention. At test
time, our model employs image segmentation to
allow users to interactively generate sounds at
the object level. We theoretically validate that
our attention mechanism functionally approximates test-time segmentation masks, ensuring
the generated audio aligns with selected objects.
Quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that
our model outperforms baselines, achieving better alignment between objects and their associated sounds. Project site: https://tinglok.
netlify.app/files/avobject/.

Recent progress in vision-based models (Sheffer & Adi,
2023) relies on analyzing the entire visual scene to produce a single soundtrack, but this broad perspective may
overlook subtle yet important sound sources. Text-based
models (Liu et al., 2023), on the other hand, face difficulties when a prompt represents multiple events, either
omitting certain sounds or conflating them with others due
to entangled feature correlations (Wu et al., 2023). While
manually reweighting individual sound events in the diffusion latent (Xue et al., 2024) can mitigate these issues,
it remains labor-intensive and impractical for large-scale
applications. Fundamentally, these challenges arise because
real-world sounds are often imbalanced and confounding in
complex scenes, making it difficult to disentangle distinct
sound sources.
To overcome these limitations, we propose an interactive
object-aware audio generation model that grounds each
generated sound in a specific visual object. Inspired by
how humans parse complex soundscapes (Gaver, 1993), our
model not only processes the overall scene context (e.g., a
city street) but also decouples separate events (e.g., honks,
footsteps). Drawing on object-centric learning (Greff et al.,
2019), we build our model upon a conditional audio generation framework (Liu et al., 2023) and introduce multi-modal
dot-product attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) to learn soundobject associations through self-supervision (Zhao et al.,
2018; Afouras et al., 2020), which fundamentally overcomes
the problem of forgetting or binding sound events.

1. Introduction
Humans naturally perceive the world as ensembles of distinct objects and their associated sounds (Bregman, 1994).
For example, in a busy city street (Figure 1), we can identify
sounds from multiple objects, such as honks, footsteps, and
chatters. However, replicating such object-level specificity
remains challenging for computational models. Despite
notable advances in audio generation (Van Den Doel et al.,
2001; Kong et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2023), existing methods
often generate holistic soundscapes that fail to accurately
reproduce the distinct sounds of specific objects (Pijanowski
et al., 2011). In complex scenes, models may either forget
subtle sounds (e.g., footsteps) or bind co-occurring events

To provide finer control and interactivity, we leverage segmentation masks (Kirillov et al., 2023) to convert user
queries into attention maps at test time, allowing users to
select specific objects in an image (e.g., car shapes) to generate the corresponding sounds (e.g., engine sounds) with
simple mouse clicks. Since these masks guide the model to
focus on objects of interest, even subtle sound events can
be captured more accurately than with scene-wide analysis
alone. Moreover, because the entire image still informs
the generation process, selecting multiple objects naturally
blends their sounds into a consistent environment, rather

1
University of California, Berkeley 2 ByteDance Inc. Correspondence to: Tingle Li <tingle@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

