Universal Length Generalization with Turing Programs

Kaiying Hou 1 2 David Brandfonbrener 3 Sham Kakade 3 Samy Jelassi * 4 Eran Malach * 3

Abstract
Length generalization refers to the ability to extrapolate from short training sequences to long
test sequences and is a challenge for current large
language models. While prior work has proposed some architecture or data format changes
to achieve length generalization, these proposals
typically apply to a limited set of tasks. Building
on prior scratchpad and Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
techniques, we propose Turing Programs, a novel
CoT strategy that decomposes an algorithmic task
into steps mimicking the computation of a Turing Machine. This framework is both universal,
as it can accommodate any algorithmic task, and
simple, requiring only copying text from the context with small modifications. We show that by
using Turing Programs, we obtain robust length
generalization on a range of algorithmic tasks:
addition, multiplication and in-context SGD. We
then demonstrate that transformers achieve length
generalization on random Turing Programs, suggesting that length generalization is possible for
any algorithmic task. Finally, we theoretically
prove that transformers can implement Turing
Programs, constructing a simple RASP (Weiss
et al. (Weiss et al., 2021)) program that simulates
an arbitrary Turing machine.

Figure 1. Turing Program example for simulating a Turing Machine with scratchpad.

et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Lewkowycz et al.,
2022; Gunasekar et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Despite these impressive abilities, transformers struggle with
length generalization, which refers to the ability to generalize to longer sequences than seen during training (Abbe
et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2022; Jelassi et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023). This limitation raises a central question about
transformers: are they capable of actually learning an algorithm or do they solve algorithmic tasks by resorting to
memorization or shortcuts (Liu et al., 2022)?
Recently, several works have reported poor length generalization of transformers on a wide range of algorithmic
tasks (Anil et al., 2022; Delétang et al., 2022; Dziri et al.,
2024; Zhang et al., 2022). In parallel, a myriad of papers
(Jelassi et al., 2023; Kazemnejad et al., 2024; Shen et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2023; 2024) have optimized the data
formats choice (see section 3 for details) to improve the
length generalization of transformers when trained to perform multi-digit addition of two numbers. While the recent
progress is impressive—(Zhou et al., 2024) achieve almost
perfect accuracy on addition with 100-digit operands while
trained on 40-digit, all these “tricks” are specific to the
case of addition and may not generalize to other tasks. In
contrast, our goal is to develop a technique that is general
enough to enable length generalization on any algorithmic
task.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based language models have shown impressive
abilities in natural language generation, reading comprehension, code-synthesis, instruction-following, commonsense
reasoning, and many other tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chen
∗

Equal senior contribution. 1 Department of Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States 2 Department of
Mathematics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States 3 Kempner
Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States
4
Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States. Correspondence to: Kaiying Hou <kaiying@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

