Determinant Estimation under Memory Constraints and Neural Scaling Laws

Siavash Ameli 1 2 Chris van der Heide 3 Liam Hodgkinson 4 Fred Roosta 5 Michael W. Mahoney 1 2 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Many quantities of interest in machine learning require accurate estimation of the log-(pseudo-)determinant of large
dense positive (semi-)definite matrices, often indexed by
some number of datapoints. These quantities arise in a number of tasks, including training Gaussian processes (GPs)
and other kernel-based methods (Wang et al., 2019), graphical models (Rue & Held, 2005), determinantal point processes (Kulesza et al., 2012), and model comparison and
selection techniques (Hodgkinson et al., 2023b). Problems
where the calculation cannot be avoided can often be reduced to computing a volume form, which is the case for
tasks in statistical mechanics (Mézard & Montanari, 2009)
or Bayesian computation (Gelman et al., 2013), or applications of the Karlin-McGregor theorem (Karlin & McGregor, 1959) including determinantal point processes. Similarly, when training GPs via empirical Bayes (Rasmussen
& Williams, 2006), the log-determinant term is the most
difficult to compute. In many applications, these matrices
are not only dense but highly ill-conditioned. This renders
methods that leverage sparsity inappropriate and makes accurate estimation of small eigenvalues essential, since errors
in these small values are magnified at log-scale. Much of
the research focus has concentrated on approximation techniques that ameliorate the cubic computational complexity of these log-determinant calculations. Methods leveraging stochastic expansions that rely upon matrix-vector
multiplications—such as Lanczos-based methods (Ubaru
et al., 2017)—have been particularly successful, yielding
approximate methods that scale linearly (Dong et al., 2017),
and methods leveraging Taylor’s expansions (Fitzsimons
et al., 2017) have also been proposed. However, accuracy
can suffer when they encounter common ill-conditioning
pathologies. Crucially, time complexity isn’t the only bottleneck at play: large-scale matrices found in modern applications often hit the memory wall before computational
cost becomes an issue (Gholami et al., 2024).

Calculating or accurately estimating logdeterminants of large positive definite matrices
is of fundamental importance in many machine
learning tasks. While its cubic computational
complexity can already be prohibitive, in modern
applications, even storing the matrices themselves can pose a memory bottleneck. To address
this, we derive a novel hierarchical algorithm
based on block-wise computation of the LDL
decomposition for large-scale log-determinant
calculation in memory-constrained settings. In
extreme cases where matrices are highly illconditioned, accurately computing the full matrix
itself may be infeasible. This is particularly
relevant when considering kernel matrices at
scale, including the empirical Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) of neural networks trained on large
datasets. Under the assumption of neural scaling
laws in the test error, we show that the ratio
of pseudo-determinants satisfies a power-law
relationship, allowing us to derive corresponding
scaling laws. This enables accurate estimation
of NTK log-determinants from a tiny fraction
of the full dataset; in our experiments, this
results in a ∼100,000× speedup with improved
accuracy over competing approximations. Using
these techniques, we successfully estimate
log-determinants for dense matrices of extreme
sizes, which were previously deemed intractable
and inaccessible due to their enormous scale and
computational demands.
1

Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
2
CA, USA International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley CA,
3
USA Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Univer4
sity of Melbourne, Australia School of Mathematics and Statis5
tics, University of Melbourne, Australia CIRES and School of
Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Australia
6
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Chris van der Heide <chris.vdh@gmail.com>.

Recently, the empirical Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) has
become a prominent theoretical and practical tool for studying the behavior of neural networks both during training
and at inference (Novak et al., 2022; Hodgkinson et al.,
2025). The Gram matrix associated with the NTK has
been used in lazy training (Chizat et al., 2019) and shows
promise as a tool to obtain uncertainty quantification esti-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

