Heterogeneous Sufficient Dimension Reduction and Subspace Clustering

Lei Yan 1 Xin Zhang 1 Qing Mai 1

Abstract

dimensionality. First, real-world data often lie in a union
of multiple subspaces with unknown membership, reflecting underlying latent sub-populations. Second, PCA, as
an unsupervised method, equates variation with information and thus disregards the specific relationship between
Y and X. Third, in the high-dimensional setting where p is
much larger than the sample size n, the subspace estimated
by PCA can be highly unreliable, or even orthogonal to the
true subspace (Baik & Silverstein, 2006; Paul, 2007).

Scientific and engineering applications are often heterogeneous, making it beneficial to account for latent clusters or sub-populations when
learning low-dimensional subspaces in supervised learning, and vice versa. In this paper,
we combine the concept of subspace clustering
with model-based sufficient dimension reduction
and thus generalize the sufficient dimension reduction framework from homogeneous regression setting to heterogeneous data applications.
In particular, we propose the mixture of principal fitted components (mixPFC) model, a novel
framework that simultaneously achieves clustering, subspace estimation, and variable selection,
providing a unified solution for high-dimensional
heterogeneous data analysis. We develop a group
Lasso penalized expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm and obtain its non-asymptotic convergence rate. Through extensive simulation studies, mixPFC demonstrates superior performance
compared to existing methods across various settings. Applications to real world datasets further highlight its effectiveness and practical advantages.

Addressing the challenges of heterogeneity and high dimensionality is crucial for statistical and machine learning methods. Subspace clustering is a family of powerful methods for clustering the data into multiple subspaces(Vidal, 2011; Soltanolkotabi & Candés, 2012). Most
subspace clustering methods generalize PCA and factor
analysis from a single subspace to a union of multiple subspaces (Agarwal & Mustafa, 2004; Vidal et al., 2005; Yan
& Pollefeys, 2006; Tron & Vidal, 2007; Favaro et al., 2011;
Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013). However, like PCA, these methods ignore the response, leading to inevitable loss of regression relevant information. Furthermore, subspace clustering methods often assume clean observations with small
random noise (Kanatani, 2001; Vidal et al., 2005), meaning data points are expected to lie nearly exactly within a
subspace. When the observations are subject to significant
random errors, these methods frequently fail to accurately
identify clusters.

1. Introduction

Conversely, sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) provides
a supervised framework by projecting X onto a lowdimensional subspace while preserving all relevant regression information. Formally, we have

Reducing high-dimensional data to a low-dimensional representation is one of the most important steps in multivariate statistics and various applied sciences. Typically, this is
achieved by projecting data onto a single low-dimensional
subspace. Among unsupervised dimension reduction methods, principal component analysis (PCA) is probably the
most popular one. However, when applied in the context of
regressing a univariate response Y on p-dimensional predictor X, PCA faces three critical limitations: data heterogeneity, loss of information on regression, and the curse of

Y ⊥
⊥ X | PS X,

(1)

Department of Statistics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, United States. Correspondence to: Xin Zhang
<henry@stat.fsu.edu>.

where PS is the projection matrix onto S. The intersection of all the subspaces satisfying (1) is called the central
subspace. Recent advances in deep learning-based SDR
methods (Banijamali et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2022; Kapla
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024) have
demonstrated the potential to capture complex nonlinear
structures in high-dimensional data.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

While SDR guarantees regression sufficiency (Li, 1991;
Cook & Forzani, 2008), it overlooks the heterogeneous
nature of scientific and engineering applications. Incor-

1

1

