C O SER: Coordinating LLM-Based Persona Simulation of Established Roles

Xintao Wang 1 Heng Wang 2 Yifei Zhang 1 Xinfeng Yuan 3 Rui Xu 1 Jen-tse Huang 4 Siyu Yuan 3
Haoran Guo 1 Jiangjie Chen 1 Shuchang Zhou 2 Wei Wang 1 Yanghua Xiao 1

Abstract

Conversa on

Se ng

Scenario: Harry, Ron, and Hermione decided to retrieve the
Philosopher's Stone on their own.
Characters' Mo va ons

Role-playing language agents (RPLAs) have
emerged as promising applications of large language models (LLMs). However, simulating established characters presents a challenging task
for RPLAs, due to the lack of authentic character datasets and nuanced evaluation methods
using such data. In this paper, we present
C O SER, a collection of a high-quality dataset,
open models, and an evaluation protocol towards
effective RPLAs of established characters. The
C O SER dataset covers 17,966 characters from
771 renowned books. It provides authentic dialogues with real-world intricacies, as well as diverse data types such as conversation setups, character experiences and internal thoughts. Drawing
from acting methodology, we introduce givencircumstance acting for training and evaluating
role-playing LLMs, where LLMs sequentially portray multiple characters in book scenes. Using
our dataset, we develop C O SER 8B and C O SER
70B, i.e., advanced open role-playing LLMs built
on LLaMA-3.1 models. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the value of the C O SER dataset for
RPLA training, evaluation and retrieval. Moreover, C O SER 70B exhibits state-of-the-art performance surpassing or matching GPT-4o on our
evaluation and three existing benchmarks, i.e.,
achieving 75.80% and 93.47% accuracy on the
InCharacter and LifeChoice benchmarks respectively. Our code, dataset and models are available
at: https://github.com/Neph0s/CoSER.

…

We have to stop Snape from
obtaining the Philosopher’s Stone ...

Dialogue
[I'm nervous, but we have to do this.] (Takes a deep
breath) Alright, this is it. Are you both sure you want to
come? It could be dangerous.

Harry
[I'm scared, but I can't let Harry face this alone.]
(Nods rmly) Of course we're coming, mate. You can't
do this by yourself ...

Ron

[We need a plan.] Wait! (Pulls out her wand) Harry ...

…

Hermione

The door opened. and the three-headed dog Flu y
was already asleep, with a harp self-playing beside.

Environment

Plot

Conversa ons

A list of structured conversa ons.

Summary
Harry, Ron, and Hermione go through the trapdoor to protect
the Sorcerer's Stone. They face a series of magical challenges,
including Devil's Snare, Giant Wizard's Chess ……

Characters' Experiences
Leads the mission to protect the
Stone, showing bravery throughout ...
Harry Po er and the
Philosopher's Stone
Book

...
...

Extract plot and
conversa on data
LLM-based Pipeline

Figure 1. An example from C O SER dataset, which provides comprehensive data types such as conversation dialogues and settings,
plot summaries, character motivations and inner thoughts, authentically sourced from renowned books.
tti

fi

tt
ti

ti
ti

ti

ti

ti

ff

1. Introduction
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, College of
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University 2 StepFun 3 School of Data Science, Fudan University 4 Johns Hopkins University.
Correspondence to:
Yanghua Xiao <shawyh@fudan.edu.cn>, First author’s email
<xtwang21@m.fudan.edu.cn>.

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have
facilitated the emergence of anthropomorphic cognition in
AI (Kosinski, 2023; Shanahan et al., 2023). Role-playing
language agents (RPLAs), i.e., LLMs that simulate specific
personas based on relevant data, have hence been popular (Park et al., 2023). RPLAs have been adopted to simulate
personas of various types, including demographics, characters, or daily individuals (Chen et al., 2024a). They have

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

