Minerva: A Programmable Memory Test Benchmark for Language Models

Menglin Xia * 1 Victor Rühle 1 Saravan Rajmohan 1 Reza Shokri * 2

Abstract

paper, we address a fundamental question that is critical to
improving AI assistants: What specific capabilities do large
language models demonstrate in utilizing their memory?

How effectively can LLM-based AI assistants utilize their memory (context) to perform various
tasks? Traditional data benchmarks, which are
often manually crafted, suffer from several limitations: they are static, susceptible to overfitting,
difficult to interpret, and lack actionable insights–
failing to pinpoint the specific capabilities a model
lacks when it does not pass a test. In this paper,
we present a framework for automatically generating a comprehensive set of tests to evaluate models’ abilities to use their memory effectively. Our
framework extends the range of capability tests
beyond the commonly explored (passkey, keyvalue, needle in the haystack) search, a dominant
focus in the literature. Specifically, we evaluate
models on atomic tasks such as searching, recalling, editing, matching, comparing information
in context memory, performing basic operations
when inputs are structured into distinct blocks,
and maintaining state while operating on memory, simulating real-world data. Additionally, we
design composite tests to investigate the models’
ability to perform more complex, integrated tasks.
Our benchmark enables an interpretable, detailed
assessment of memory capabilities of LLMs.

One common approach to testing models is through data
benchmarks. However, evaluating model capabilities using
static data benchmarks–based on some user queries, their
data, and expected outcomes–can be costly, imprecise, and
lacks scalability. Additionally, performing tasks in realistic
scenarios often requires multiple capabilities, making it
challenging to identify which specific capability a model
lacks when it fails a data benchmark. This limitation reduces
the effectiveness of these benchmarks in designing better
models. Moreover, blindly optimizing models to improve
on such benchmarks risks overfitting, often rendering the
data benchmarks obsolete over time.
To address some of these concerns, recently, there have been
many attempts to test models using automatically generated
benchmarks, but these efforts have primarily focused on
evaluating basic search capabilities (e.g., passkey or keyvalue search) in long-contexts (Kamradt, 2023; Liu et al.,
2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2024; Wu et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2024; Hsieh et al., 2024). In this paper, we go
beyond simple search tasks and introduce a framework to
test a comprehensive range of memory-related capabilities
in LLMs. Note that, we deliberately avoid conflating the
memory usage capabilities with the complex reasoning abilities (e.g., complex mathematical or logical reasoning) in
language models, as the latter is a separate skill that is currently the focus of extensive study (Clark et al., 2018; Cobbe
et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021b; Suzgun et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
What capabilities should we expect from AI assistants? The
AI assistants are provided with a (large) input context containing all the available information that is potentially relevant to the user’s request (e.g., all the prior emails, messages,
and confirmed calendar events). This input, commonly referred to as the context (for the LLM), encapsulates what
the AI assistant knows about the world in which it is tasked
to operate. This representation of the world, expressed in
natural language, functions as the model’s memory. In this

What are memory-usage capabilities? We define these as
the abilities to retrieve relevant information, compose it for
the instructed task, and recall key details when synthesizing
the output. This process also involves creating associations
between the instruction and the stored information, as well
as among different parts of the memory itself. Without extracting these relationships, the memory remains flat and
formless, rendering it less useful. Consequently, the model
must be able to recognize differences, identify similarities,
and take appropriate actions based on them. We design a
series of atomic tests aimed at evaluating each of these individual capabilities in isolation, to the extent that isolating
such capabilities is possible.

*

Equal contribution 1 M365 Research, Microsoft 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Menglin Xia <mollyxia@microsoft.com>, Reza Shokri <reza@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

