Automatically Identify and Rectify: Robust Deep Contrastive
Multi-view Clustering in Noisy Scenarios

Xihong Yang 1 2 Siwei Wang 3 Fangdi Wang 1 Jiaqi Jin 1
Suyuan Liu 1 Yue Liu 2 En Zhu 1 Xinwang Liu 1 Yueming Jin 2

Abstract

Leveraging the powerful representation learning
capabilities, deep multi-view clustering methods
have demonstrated reliable performance by effectively integrating multi-source information from
diverse views in recent years. Most existing
methods rely on the assumption of clean views.
However, noise is pervasive in real-world scenarios, leading to a significant degradation in performance. To tackle this problem, we propose
a novel multi-view clustering framework for the
automatic identification and rectification of noisy
data, termed AIRMVC. Specifically, we reformulate noisy identification as an anomaly identification problem using GMM. We then design a hybrid rectification strategy to mitigate the adverse
effects of noisy data based on the identification
results. Furthermore, we introduce a noise-robust
contrastive mechanism to generate reliable representations. Additionally, we provide a theoretical proof demonstrating that these representations
can discard noisy information, thereby improving
the performance of downstream tasks. Extensive
experiments on six benchmark datasets demonstrate that AIRMVC outperforms state-of-the-art
algorithms in terms of robustness in noisy scenarios. The code of AIRMVC are available at
https://github.com/xihongyang1999/AIRMVC on
Github.

Figure 1. An illustrative diagram of noise in a multi-view scenario.
In the diagram, the areas marked with red exclamation points
indicate instances where sensor failures or malfunctions at specific
moments lead to data corruption. Compared to other views, these
instances are considered noisy data.

1. Introduction
In real-world scenarios, multi-source information data is
prevalent. To effectively handle such data, Multi-View
Clustering (MVC) has emerged as a powerful unsupervised
method. In recent years, MVC has gained significant attention and has become a prominent focus of research. Existing
MVC methods can be broadly categorized into two main
groups. The first group comprises traditional approaches,
including Multiple Kernel Clustering (MKC) (Liu et al.,
2021), Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) (Wen
et al., 2018), subspace clustering(Zhou et al., 2019), and
graph-based clustering (Liu et al., 2022a). With the advancement of deep neural networks, deep multi-view clustering
algorithms (Yang et al., 2023b; Sun et al., 2024), representing the second category of MVC methods, have garnered
significant attention from researchers.

1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China 2 National University of Singapore,
Singapore. 3 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China,
xihong edu@163.com. Correspondence to: Xinwang Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>.

While existing MVC algorithms have demonstrated notable
clustering performance, they predominantly rely on the assumption that the features from all views are clean. These
approaches generally adopt a standard workflow: representations are first extracted via an encoder, followed by a

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

