How does Labeling Error Impact Contrastive Learning? A Perspective from
Data Dimensionality Reduction

Jun Chen 1 Hong Chen 1 2 Yonghua Yu 3 Yiming Ying 4

1. Introduction

Abstract
In recent years, contrastive learning has achieved
state-of-the-art performance in the territory of selfsupervised representation learning. Many previous works have attempted to provide the theoretical understanding underlying the success of
contrastive learning. Almost all of them rely on
a default assumption, i.e., the label consistency
assumption, which may not hold in practice (the
probability of failure is called labeling error) due
to the strength and randomness of common augmentation strategies, such as random resized crop
(RRC). This paper investigates the theoretical impact of labeling error on the downstream classification performance of contrastive learning. We
first reveal several significant negative impacts of
labeling error on downstream classification risk.
To mitigate these impacts, data dimensionality
reduction method (e.g., singular value decomposition, SVD) is applied on original data to reduce
false positive samples, and establish both theoretical and empirical evaluations. Moreover, it is also
found that SVD acts as a double-edged sword,
which may lead to the deterioration of downstream classification accuracy due to the reduced
connectivity of the augmentation graph. Based
on the above observations, we give the augmentation suggestion that we should use some moderate embedding dimension (such as 512, 1024 in
our experiments), data inflation, weak augmentation, and SVD to ensure large graph connectivity
and small labeling error to improve model performance.

Contrastive learning, as an emerging self-supervised learning paradigm, has achieved remarkable performance by
leveraging data without label information (He et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020c; Jang & Wang, 2023; Wang et al., 2023b;
Ji et al., 2023). Typically, this learning framework entails formulating an auxiliary contrastive task endowed with pseudolabels, which aims to maximize the similarity between two
samples augmented from the same original sample while
minimizing the similarity between samples augmented from
different original samples (Chen et al., 2020b).

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China 2 Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, China
3
College of Engineering, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, China 4 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. Correspondence to: Hong Chen
<chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn>.

Recently, some studies have delved into the theoretical
mechanism underlying the empirical success of contrastive
learning (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pagliardini et al., 2018; Jean
et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Jing et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Lei et al., 2023). Generally speaking, they acquiesce
that the labels of two augmented samples generated from the
same original sample remain consistent, which is referred
to as the label consistency assumption (Wang et al., 2022).
Particularly, Wang et al. (2022) stated that label consistency
is a natural and minimal assumption that is likely to hold
in practice, and established the upper and lower bounds
of downstream classification risk for contrastive learning
only requiring intra-class samples have similar augmented
views (called intra-class augmentation overlap, see Figure
1 (b)). Nevertheless, given that data augmentation process
is random, some strong augmentation strategies like RRC
may lead to the lose of semantic-related information (Zang
et al., 2024), which undermines label consistency and gives
rise to labeling error (Tamkin et al., 2023). For instance,
Figure 1 (a) shows that several images augmented from a
dog image using RRC possess different labels (dog, ship,
fog and blanket). In such a situation, it can be observed
that inter-class samples also exhibit the augmentation overlap phenomenon (see Figure 1 (c)). This inconsistent label
phenomenon (called labeling error) motivates us to develop
new theoretical analysis for contrastive learning to better
understand the interplay among data augmentation, labeling
error, and downstream classification performance.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Recently, the analysis framework of HaoChen et al. (2021)
pioneered the consideration of the labeling error caused by
data augmentation, which revealed the first dependencies

1

1

