Learning-Augmented Hierarchical Clustering

Vladimir Braverman 1 2 3 Jon C. Ergun 4 Chen Wang 2 5 Samson Zhou 5

Abstract

the “correct” number of clusters in flat clusterings is often
a difficult question that is the focus of a sequence of works
dating back to the 1950s (Thorndike, 1953). In hierarchical
clustering, there is no fixed number of clusters that needs
to be determined in advance. Another advantage of hierarchical clustering is that the dendrogram simultaneously
captures structure at all levels of granularity, whereas flat
clustering does not identify further structure inside each of
the clusters. Hence, hierarchical clustering arises in various
applications where data exhibits hierarchical structure, such
as biology and phylogenetics (Sneath et al., 1973; Sotiriou
et al., 2003), image and text analysis (Steinbach et al., 2000),
and community detection (Leskovec et al., 2020).

Hierarchical clustering (HC) is an important data
analysis technique in which the goal is to recursively partition a dataset into a tree-like structure while grouping together similar data points
at each level of granularity. Unfortunately, for
many of the proposed HC objectives, there exist
strong barriers to approximation algorithms with
the hardness of approximation. We consider the
problem of hierarchical clustering given auxiliary
information from natural oracles in the learningaugmented framework. Our main results are algorithms that given learning-augmented oracles,
compute efficient approximate HC trees for the
celebrated Dasgupta’s and Moseley-Wang objectives that overcome known hardness barriers.

Despite a wealth of heuristics for both agglomerative
bottom-up (Ward Jr, 1963) and divisive top-down approaches (Guénoche et al., 1991), formal mathematical understanding of hierarchical clustering often stagnated due to
the absence of well-posed objectives until a relatively recent
work by Dasgupta (Dasgupta, 2016). Subsequently, additional objectives (Moseley & Wang, 2017; Cohen-Addad
et al., 2019) were proposed to quantify the performance of
dendrograms with n leaves, so that high-revenue similarity
trees and low-cost dissimilarity trees correspond to desirable
hierarchical partitions of the dataset.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical clustering (HC) is a popular data analysis technique that recursively partitions a dataset throughout a treelike structure, so that similar data points are grouped together at different levels of granularity. Specifically, the
input is a set of n data points and a measure of similarity or
dissimilarity between the points, which induces a weighted
graph whose vertices represent the data points and whose
edge weights represent the pairwise measure between the
vertices. The output is a binary dendrogram, which is a
rooted tree whose leaves represent the individual data points
and whose internal nodes each represent a cluster of the data
points in its subtree, thus providing a hierarchical representation of relationships within the dataset.

For a number of these objectives, various algorithms have
been proven to achieve specific approximation guarantees.
For example, a divisive clustering algorithm based√on the
sparsest cut subroutine was shown to give an O( log n)
approximation (Charikar & Chatziafratis, 2017b; CohenAddad et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2025) for Dasgupta’s objective (Dasgupta, 2016), while the long-used agglomerative heuristic was shown to give a 2-approximation for
the dissimilarity objective proposed by (Cohen-Addad et al.,
2019) and a 13 -approximation for the similarity objective proposed by (Moseley & Wang, 2017), i.e., the Moseley-Wang
(MW) objective. These objectives were further explored in
the contexts of better approximation factors (Chatziafratis
et al., 2020b; Alon et al., 2020), sublinear computation models (Rajagopalan et al., 2021; Assadi et al., 2022; Agarwal
et al., 2022), and graphs with special properties (Charikar
et al., 2019b; Manghiuc & Sun, 2021).

Hierarchical clustering has several advantages over flat clusterings such as k-means or k-median, where the dataset is
partitioned into a fixed number of clusters. For example,
Alphabetical order of author names. 1 Johns Hopkins University
Rice University 3 Google Research 4 Carnegie Mellon University
5
Texas A&M University. Correspondence to: Vladimir Braverman
<vova@cs.jhu.edu>, Jon C. Ergun <ergunjon0@gmail.com>,
Chen Wang <chen.wang.research@gmail.com>, Samson Zhou
<samsonzhou@gmail.com>.
2

Unfortunately, (Charikar et al., 2019a) showed that averagelinkage cannot do better than 32 -approximation for the for-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

