MONA: Myopic Optimization with Non-myopic Approval Can Mitigate
Multi-step Reward Hacking

Sebastian Farquhar * 1 Vikrant Varma * 1 David Lindner * 1 David Elson * 1
Caleb Biddulph 1 Ian Goodfellow 1 Rohin Shah a 1

Abstract

centivizing it. This only works if the overseer—whatever
the source of the reward is—can detect the bad behavior.
But agents with superhuman capabilities in narrow domains,
like AlphaGo, already show that RL agents can learn strategies that are opaque to even the world’s top experts (Silver
et al., 2016). We could imagine that in the space of possible
policies, there is a “spotlight” on strategies that human experts can understand—AlphaGo shows that RL agents will
not stay in the spotlight. Scalable oversight (Amodei et al.,
2016) aims to expand the spotlight by improving the ability
to distinguish good from bad behavior, but it may not be
able to cover all strategies found by RL-trained agents.

Future advanced AI systems may learn sophisticated strategies through reinforcement learning
(RL) that humans cannot understand well enough
to safely evaluate. We propose a training method
which avoids agents learning undesired multi-step
plans that receive high reward (multi-step “reward
hacks”) even if humans are not able to detect that
the behaviour is undesired. The method, Myopic Optimization with Non-myopic Approval
(MONA), works by combining short-sighted optimization with far-sighted reward. We demonstrate that MONA can prevent multi-step reward
hacking that ordinary RL causes, even without
being able to detect the reward hacking and without any extra information that ordinary RL does
not get access to. We study MONA empirically
in three settings which model different misalignment failure modes including 2-step environments
with LLMs representing delegated oversight and
encoded reasoning and longer-horizon gridworld
environments representing sensor tampering.

We show how to address multi-step reward hacking by ensuring the agent only learns strategies that the overseer understands but without assuming the overseer can detect bad
behavior. Instead of expanding the spotlight to cover the
agent’s strategies, we instead restrict the agent to strategies
within the spotlight. The intention is to reduce the more
challenging problem of detecting and disincentivizing multistep reward hacking to the simpler problem of single-step
reward hacking. Myopic Optimization with Non-myopic
Approval (MONA) does this by combining:
Myopic optimization: Ordinary RL agents learn longhorizon strategies due to expectation of future rewards.
Since this can produce strategies outside the spotlight,
we optimize only based on near-term rewards.
Non-myopic approval: To guide the agent’s forward behavior, the overseer evaluates future usefulness of the
agent’s actions and provides it as a reward to the agent.

1. Introduction
When training an agent with reinforcement learning (RL)
and imperfectly-specified rewards, the agent may engage
in “reward hacking”, where its behaviour is undesired but
achieves a high reward (Clark & Amodei, 2016; Amodei
et al., 2016). For example, large language models (LLMs)
trained with RL from human feedback (Christiano et al.,
2017) can become sycophantic, where an agent says what
users likely want to hear (Sharma et al., 2023).

In this paper, we argue that this approach is a feasible strategy for building superhuman, safe agents. Concretely, we:
• Introduce MONA and argue conceptually that it can
remove the incentive for multi-step reward hacking
with reasonable performance cost (Section 3).
• Introduce three “model organisms of misalignment”
that let us study multi-step reward hacking (Table 1).
• Show empirically that MONA avoids multi-step reward hacking by LLM agents in these model organisms
whereas ordinary RL does not (Section 4).

Currently, most reward hacking is addressed via “patching”:
noticing bad behavior and changing the reward to stop inGoogle DeepMind ∗ Core contributor a Senior author.
Correspondence to: dlindner@google.com, sebfar@google.com.
See arxiv.org/abs/2501.13011 for an extended version.
1

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

