X-Hacking: The Threat of Misguided AutoML

Rahul Sharma 1 Sumantrak Mukherjee 1 Andrea Šipka 1 Eyke Hüllermeier 2 Sebastian Vollmer 1
Sergey Redyuk 1 David Antony Selby 1

Abstract

However, the growing demand for interpretable models
and ‘data-driven’ decisions creates an incentive for actors,
unscrupulously—or through lack of time or experience—to
seek out model explanations that support pre-specified conclusions, conceal hidden agendas or evade ethical scrutiny.

Explainable AI (XAI) and interpretable machine
learning methods help to build trust in model predictions and derived insights, yet also present a
perverse incentive for analysts to manipulate XAI
metrics to support pre-specified conclusions. This
paper introduces the concept of X-hacking, a form
of p-hacking applied to XAI metrics such as S HAP
values. We show how easily an automated machine learning pipeline can be adapted to exploit
model multiplicity at scale: searching a Rashomon
set of ‘defensible’ models with similar predictive
performance to find a desired explanation. We formulate the trade-off between explanation and accuracy as a multi-objective optimisation problem,
and illustrate empirically on familiar real-world
datasets that, on average, Bayesian optimisation
accelerates X-hacking 3-fold for features susceptible to it, versus random sampling. We show
the vulnerability of a dataset to X-hacking can
be determined by information redundancy among
features. Finally, we suggest possible methods
for detection and prevention, and discuss ethical
implications for the credibility and reproducibility
of XAI.

In this paper, we introduce the concept of explanation hacking, or X-hacking—a form of p-hacking (Head et al., 2015)
applied to XAI metrics. X-hacking refers to the practice of
deliberately searching for and selecting models that produce
a desired explanation while maintaining ‘acceptable’ accuracy. Unlike other adversarial XAI attacks, X-hacking explores plausible combinations of analysis decisions to build
a pipeline that might otherwise have been found innocuously. It is a strategy of lying through omission, exploiting
a phenomenon known as model multiplicity (Black et al.,
2022), where different models offer equivalent predictive
performance (Brunet et al., 2022).
We extend existing work on model multiplicity to incorporate the full analysis pipeline, including data preprocessing,
feature extraction, choice of model class and hyperparameter tuning, steps which are often poorly reported in scientific
publications.
Though the search for such decision sets by hand is long
and laborious, it can be accelerated through the exploitation of automated machine learning (AutoML) solutions,
or any automated model selection tools that facilitate discovery of a model that may also be found—or presented as
found—via human decision-making. Recently, a number of
AutoML solutions have been introduced that integrate data
preprocessing into the decision-making pipeline, opening
up additional avenues for explanation attacks (Salehin et al.,
2024).

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly integral to
decision-making in critical sectors such as healthcare, criminal justice and public policy. As these models grow more
complex, so does the challenge of interpreting the rationale
behind their predictions. This has given rise to explainable
AI (XAI) methods, which aim to make model reasoning
more transparent and globally maintain trust in ML systems.

We demonstrate empirically in a post-hoc manner how offthe-shelf AutoML pipelines can be used, even with a limited computational budget, to perform X-hacking on S HAP
values for familiar real-world datasets, by ‘cherry picking’
those models that support a desired narrative. Secondly,
we develop a custom AutoML solution to facilitate ad-hoc
X-hacking at scale, formulating the task as a multi-objective
optimisation (MOO) problem, selecting from the Pareto
frontier of predictive performance and model explanations
to find a ‘defensible’ model in the Rashomon set. We com-

*
Equal contribution 1 Deutsches Forschungszentrum für
Künstliche Intelligenz GmbH 2 Institute of Informatics, LudwigMaximilians-Universität München. Correspondence to: David
Antony Selby <david.antony selby@dfki.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

