Position: LLM Social Simulations Are a Promising Research Method

Jacy R. Anthis 1 2 3 Ryan Liu 4 Sean M. Richardson 1 Austin C. Kozlowski 1
Bernard Koch 1 Erik Brynjolfsson 2 James Evans 1 5 Michael S. Bernstein 2

Abstract

high-quality synthetic data for the development of humancentered AI at scale (Bai et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023).
Nonetheless, the limitations of LLMs and simulation results to date have cast doubt on whether accurate and verifiable simulation is possible (Agnew et al., 2024; Gao et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024a;b).

Accurate and verifiable large language model
(LLM) simulations of human research subjects
promise an accessible data source for understanding human behavior and training new AI
systems. However, results to date have been limited, and few social scientists have adopted this
method. In this position paper, we argue that
the promise of LLM social simulations can be
achieved by addressing five tractable challenges.
We ground our argument in a review of empirical
comparisons between LLMs and human research
subjects, commentaries on the topic, and related
work. We identify promising directions, including context-rich prompting and fine-tuning with
social science datasets. We believe that LLM
social simulations can already be used for pilot and exploratory studies, and more widespread
use may soon be possible with rapidly advancing
LLM capabilities. Researchers should prioritize
developing conceptual models and iterative evaluations to make the best use of new AI systems.

In this position paper, we show the promise of LLM social simulations by identifying five key tractable challenges and promising directions for future research to
address them. We summarize the challenges in Table 1:
diversity, bias, sycophancy, alienness, and generalization.
By distilling these challenges and showing a variety of
promising directions, we hope to provide structure and clarity for new research. Our argument is grounded in a literature review of empirical studies that have compared human
research subjects to LLMs, commentaries on the topic, and
related work in social science and other LLM applications.
Compelling simulation results so far include:
• Hewitt et al. (2024), the largest test of sims to date,
spanned 70 preregistered and U.S.-representative experiments alongside an archive of replication studies.
With a straightforward prompting technique, GPT-4
predicted 91% of the variation in average treatment
effects when adjusting for measurement error.

1. Introduction
With the quickly increasing humanlikeness of large language models (LLMs), many researchers are investigating their use for simulating human research subjects. This
could address many limitations of human data, including difficulties of representative sampling (Henrich et al.,
2010), financial costs that limit accessibility (Alemayehu
et al., 2018), and methodological biases such as nonresponse bias (Sedgwick, 2014). Complementing human data with humanlike simulations could accelerate social science, open up new research opportunities—such
as exploring historical or potential future counterfactuals and piloting large-scale policy changes—and provide

• Binz et al. (2024) fine-tuned Llama-3.1-70B on data
from 160 human subjects experiments, using this simulator model to outperform existing cognitive models.
• Park et al. (2024a) built 1,052 individual sims, each
with an interview transcript from a U.S.-representative
sample. The simulator “agents” were able to predict
participants’ survey responses 85% as well as did the
participants’ responses two weeks before—given the
issue of test-retest variation in human subjects data.
Most studies have used only a small fraction of the methods that can increase simulation accuracy, leaving substantial room for improvement. Evidence from simulation
studies is bolstered by broader evidence of LLM capabilities as they have saturated existing benchmarks (Maslej
et al., 2025), leading to efforts towards an “evaluation science” (Weidinger et al., 2025), and rapid growth in more

1

University of Chicago 2 Stanford University 3 Sentience Insti4
tute Princeton University 5 Santa Fe Institute. Correspondence to:
Jacy Reese Anthis <anthis@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

