Gradient Descent Converges Arbitrarily Fast
for Logistic Regression via Large and Adaptive Stepsizes

Ruiqi Zhang 1 Jingfeng Wu 1 Peter L. Bartlett 1 2

Abstract

Classical analyses of GD require the stepsizes to be sufficiently small so that the risk decreases monotonically (Nesterov, 2018). This is often referred to as the descent lemma.
Specifically, by the definition of GD and the midpoint theorem, there exists v in between wt and wt+1 such that

We analyze the convergence of gradient descent
(GD) with large, adaptive stepsizes for logistic
regression on linearly separable data. The stepsize adapts to the current risk, scaled by a fixed
base stepsize η. We prove that once the number
of iterates t surpasses a margin-dependent threshold, the averaged GD iterate achieves a risk upper
bound of exp(−Θ(ηt)), where η can be chosen
arbitrarily large. This implies that GD attains
arbitrarily fast convergence rates via large stepsizes, although the risk evolution might not be
monotonic. In contrast, prior adaptive stepsize
GD analyses require a monotonic risk decrease,
limiting their rates to exp(−Θ(t)). We further
establish a margin-dependent lower bound on the
iteration complexity for any first-order method to
attain a small risk, justifying the necessity of the
burn-in phase in our analysis. Our results generalize to a broad class of loss functions and two-layer
networks under additional assumptions.

L(wt+1 ) = L(wt ) − ηt ∥∇L(wt )∥2
+

Thus a small stepsize ηt < 2/∥∇2 L(v)∥ guarantees the
descent lemma. In this regime, a large volume of theory has
been developed to show the convergence of GD in a variety
of settings (see Lan, 2020, for example). We call this the
stable regime.
However, in practice, deep learning models trained by GD
often converge in the long run while suffering from a locally oscillatory risk (Wu et al., 2018; Xing et al., 2018;
Lewkowycz et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2021). This oscillation occurs when the stepsizes for GD are too large and
the descent lemma is violated. This unstable convergence
phenomenon is referred to by Cohen et al. (2021) as the
edge of stability (EoS). Moreover, to obtain a reasonable optimization and generalization performance in deep learning
practice, GD usually needs to operate in the EoS regime,
instead of remaining in the stable regime (Wu et al., 2018;
Cohen et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Gradient descent (GD) and its variants are a popular class
of optimization methods in modern machine learning and
deep learning. In this paper, we study the convergence of
GD with adaptive stepsizes given by
w0 = 0,

wt+1 := wt − ηt ∇L(wt ),

t ≥ 0,

ηt2
∇L(wt )⊤ ∇2 L(v)∇L(wt ).
2

(GD)

Recently, an interesting line of theoretical works showed the
benefits of EoS for accelerating the convergence of GD (see
for examples Altschuler & Parrilo, 2024a; Wu et al., 2024,
other related works will be discussed later in Section 6).
Specifically, Altschuler & Parrilo (2024a) proposed a stepsize scheduler for GD, in which GD occasionally violates
the descent lemma but achieves a faster convergence rate for
convex and smooth problems. The work by Wu et al. (2024)
focused on GD with a constant stepsize for logistic regression with linearly separable data. They showed that a large
constant stepsize leads to EoS but also a faster convergence.
Note that the stepsizes considered in (Altschuler & Parrilo,
2024a; Wu et al., 2024) are oblivious, which are determined
before the GD run and do not adapt to the evolving risk.

where L(·) is the loss objective to be minimized, wt ∈ Rd
is the trainable parameters, and ηt > 0 is the stepsize at the
t-th step. In particular, we allow ηt to be a function of the
current risk L(wt ). Setting the initialization to zero does
not cause the loss of generality.
1
University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Google DeepMind,
USA. Correspondence to: Ruiqi Zhang <rqzhang@berkeley.edu>.
This work is extended in https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
04105, and Licong Lin was included as a co-author.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

