In-Context Reinforcement Learning From Suboptimal Historical Data

Juncheng Dong 1 Moyang Guo 1 Ethan X. Fang 2 Zhuoran Yang 3 Vahid Tarokh 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transformer models (TMs) have achieved remarkable empirical successes (Radford et al., 2019; OpenAI, 2024). In
particular, TMs trained on vast amount of data have shown
remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capabilities, solving
new supervised learning tasks only with a few demonstrations and without requiring any parameter updates (Brown
et al., 2020a; Akyürek et al., 2022). Meanwhile, substantial evidence demonstrates that autoregressive TMs excel at
solving individual reinforcement learning (RL) tasks, where
a TM-based policy is trained and tested on the same RL
task (Li et al., 2023b). Inspired by these, recent research has
explored the use of TMs for in-context RL (ICRL). In this
setting, we pretrain TMs on an offline dataset consisting of
trajectories collected from a family of different RL tasks. After pretraining, we deploy the pretrained TMs to solve new
and unseen RL tasks (Laskin et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2024).
See Figure 1 (a) and (c) for comparisons between standard
offline RL and ICRL. When presented with a context dataset
containing environment interactions collected by unknown
and often suboptimal policies, pretrained TMs predict the
optimal actions for current states from the environmental
information within the context dataset. See Figure 1 for
a visual illustration. Two recent works, Algorithm Distillation (AD) (Laskin et al., 2022) and Decision Pretrained
Transformer (DPT) (Lee et al., 2024), have demonstrated
impressive ICRL abilities, inferring near-optimal policies
for new RL tasks.

Transformer models have achieved remarkable
empirical successes, largely due to their incontext learning capabilities. Inspired by this,
we explore training an autoregressive transformer
for in-context reinforcement learning (ICRL). In
this setting, we initially train a transformer on
an offline dataset consisting of trajectories collected from various RL tasks, and then fix and
use this transformer to create an action policy for
new RL tasks. Notably, we consider the setting
where the offline dataset contains trajectories sampled from suboptimal behavioral policies. In this
case, standard autoregressive training corresponds
to imitation learning and results in suboptimal
performance. To address this, we propose the
Decision Importance Transformer (DIT) framework, which emulates the actor-critic algorithm
in an in-context manner. In particular, we first
train a transformer-based value function that estimates the advantage functions of the behavior
policies that collected the suboptimal trajectories.
Then we train a transformer-based policy via a
weighted maximum likelihood estimation loss,
where the weights are constructed based on the
trained value function to steer the suboptimal policies to the optimal ones. We conduct extensive
experiments to test the performance of DIT on
both bandit and Markov Decision Process problems. Our results show that DIT achieves superior
performance, particularly when the offline dataset
contains suboptimal historical data.

Challenges. However, existing supervised pretraining approaches focus on training TMs to imitate the actions in
the pretraining datasets and thus have stringent requirements on the pretraining datasets. For example, AD requires
the pretraining dataset to capture the learning process of
RL algorithms—from episodes generated by randomly initialized policies to those collected by nearly optimal policies—across a wide range of RL tasks; DPT requires access
to optimal policies to generate a set of optimal action labels
for its supervised pretraining of TMs. To overcome these
limitations, this work considers pretraining TMs for ICRL
using only suboptimal historical data. While this presents
significant challenges, it also offers substantial potential
benefits by significantly improving the feasibility of ICRL,
as suboptimal trajectories are far easier to gather. For instance, large companies often maintain extensive databases

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, US 2 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, US 3 Department of Statistics
and Data Science, Yale University, New Haven, US. Correspondence to: Juncheng Dong <juncheng.dong@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

