SPD: Sync-Point Drop for Efficient Tensor Parallelism of Large Language
Models
Han-Byul Kim 1 Duc Hoang 1 Arnav Kundu 1 Mohammad Samragh 1 Minsik Cho 1

Abstract

comes a crucial challenge, particularly in terms of latency.

With the rapid expansion in the scale of large
language models (LLMs), enabling efficient distributed inference across multiple computing units
has become increasingly critical. However, communication overheads from popular distributed
inference techniques such as Tensor Parallelism
pose a significant challenge to achieve scalability
and low latency. Therefore, we introduce a novel
optimization technique, Sync-Point Drop (SPD),
to reduce communication overheads in tensor parallelism by selectively dropping synchronization
on attention outputs. In detail, we first propose
a block design that allows execution to proceed
without communication through SPD. Second, we
apply different SPD strategies to attention blocks
based on their sensitivity to the model accuracy.
The proposed methods effectively alleviate communication bottlenecks while minimizing accuracy degradation during LLM inference, offering
a scalable solution for diverse distributed environments: SPD offered about 20% overall inference
latency reduction with < 1% accuracy regression
for LLaMA2-70B inference over 8 GPUs.

A proven approach to achieving low latency is to run LLM
inference in distributed computing environments, notably
using Tensor Parallelism (TP) (Shoeybi et al., 2019). By
sharding tensor operations into separate tracks or blocks
and processing them simultaneously on parallel devices,
TP significantly reduces inference time while maintaining
accuracy.
However, to maintain mathematical parity with singledevice inference, TP requires collective communication—often referred to as sync-points—throughout the
model. These sync-points serve as communication barriers
across all parallel devices to synchronize hidden representation tensors, as shown in Figure 1a. Because of this communicative nature, the overhead of sync-points depends on
hardware constraints—such as the interconnects between devices and the network connections between nodes—which
can become a bottleneck during execution. As LLMs grow
in size, one must use more compute devices, which in turn
increases the number of sync-points and further worsens
inference latency. Therefore, in any distributed system, optimizing sync-points would greatly improve overall system
performance.
To tackle this important issue, we propose Sync-Point Drop
(SPD) a simple yet novel optimization technique with broad
applications for LLM systems. Unlike existing works which
tried to improve the communication process itself (NVIDIA,
2019; Jeaugey, 2019; Cheng et al., 2023) on system-level,
SPD directly removes sync-point in the self-attention output
(as in Figure 1b) within the target budget. To enable SPD
directly on decoder block, we first introduce a block design
for SPD that minimizes negative effects resulting from reduced communication (see Figure 3). Second, we apply
SPD strategies differently to each blocks based on communication sensitivity, which we defined as the relative impact
on downstream performance when all communications are
dropped up to that point (see Figure 4). Our experimental results show effective possibility of latency improvement with
minimizing the accuracy degradation throughout diverse
sizes of models. In summary, our contributions are:

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Gunter et al., 2024;
Brown et al., 2020; Bubeck et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023a;b; Zhang et al., 2022; Penedo et al., 2023; Jiang et al.,
2023) have revolutionized the field of natural language processing (NLP), driving significant advancements in a wide
range of applications. Their ability to understand and generate human-like text has opened new possibilities for both
research and practical uses. However, as these models grow
in size and complexity, optimizing their performance be1
Apple.
Correspondence to:
byul@apple.com>.

Han-Byul Kim <han-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We propose novel block designs for SPD that minimize
1

