A Causal World Model Underlying Next Token Prediction:
Exploring GPT in a Controlled Environment

Raanan Y. Rohekar * 1 Yaniv Gurwicz * 1 Sungduk Yu 1 Estelle Aflalo 1 Vasudev Lal 1

Abstract

In this paper, we suggest that there is no restriction in the
GPT architecture that prevents it from learning conditional
independence (CI) relations between tokens in a sequence.
Moreover, under certain assumptions, a causal structure
is directly entailed from these CI relations. One may ask
whether this lack of restriction results in implicitly learning a
causal model of the world during the pre-training procedure
of GPT. Assuming that both a causal world model and a
model based on surface statistics are sufficient solutions,
one possibility is that a causal world model is more compact
and more likely to be learned during pre-training, in line
with Occam’s razor. For example, if weights are distributed
from a uniform distribution in the surface statistics model,
then a causal structure limits the range of their distribution.
If so, what assumptions underlie this causal world model?

Are generative pre-trained transformer (GPT)
models, trained only to predict the next token,
implicitly learning a world model from which sequences are generated one token at a time? We
address this question by deriving a causal interpretation of the attention mechanism in GPT and presenting a causal world model that arises from this
interpretation. Furthermore, we propose that GPT
models, at inference time, can be utilized for zeroshot causal structure learning for input sequences,
and introduce a corresponding confidence score.
Empirical tests were conducted in controlled environments using the setups of the Othello and
Chess strategy games. A GPT, pre-trained on realworld games played with the intention of winning,
was tested on out-of-distribution synthetic data
consisting of sequences of random legal moves.
We find that the GPT model is likely to generate
legal next moves for out-of-distribution sequences
for which a causal structure is encoded in the attention mechanism with high confidence. In cases
where it generates illegal moves, it also fails to
capture a causal structure.

Rohekar et al. (2024) recently proposed ABCD, a method
for causal interpretation of unmasked self-attention in BERT
models (Devlin et al., 2019), demonstrating its use in explaining movie recommendations (Nisimov et al., 2022). We
take a similar approach, with key differences, and propose a
causal interpretation of GPT’s masked attention mechanism.
Furthermore, we define a corresponding causal world model.
ABCD is adapted to learn causal structures, where the induced dependency relations are encoded in GPT’s attention
matrices. We then ask whether errors generated by GPT are
correlated with the uncertainty in representing the causal
structure by the attention matrices. To this end, we define a
metric based on the entropy of p-values from CI tests used
for inferring the causal structures.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the generative pre-trained transformer (GPT)
model (Radford et al., 2018) has demonstrated high-quality
generative capabilities, as perceived by humans. Although
this model is trained to generate one token at a time, it has
been demonstrated to perform a range of tasks beyond nexttoken prediction, such as visual understanding and symbolic
reasoning (Liu et al., 2024; Team et al., 2023; Chowdhery
et al., 2023). Are these emergent abilities (Li et al., 2023)
or are they merely a ‘mirage’ resulting from the choice of
metric and task (Schaeffer et al., 2024)?

2. Related Work
Recent work has examined the internal process of large language models and investigated whether a world model is
implicitly learned using a well-defined and constrained setting, such as in Chess (Toshniwal et al., 2022) and Othello
(Li et al., 2023) games environments. For the Othello board
game setting, Li et al. (2023) demonstrated that the board
state can be inferred from attention matrices in GPT, and
Nanda et al. (2023) showed that a linear classifier suffices
to reconstruct the board state from these attention matrices. They claim the emergence of a world model in GPT.
Nevertheless, they do not explain how the board game is

*
Equal contribution 1 Intel Labs. Correspondence to: Raanan
Rohekar <raanan.yehezkel@intel.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

