Inductive Gradient Adjustment
for Spectral Bias in Implicit Neural Representations

Kexuan Shi 1 Hai Chen 2 3 Leheng Zhang 1 Shuhang Gu 1

Abstract

to parameterize discrete signals in an implicit and continuous manner. Benefiting from the continuity and implicit
nature, INRs have gained great attention as a versatile signal
representation paradigm (Luo et al., 2025) and achieved
state-of-the-art performance across various computer vision
tasks such as signal representation (Sitzmann et al., 2020;
Liang et al., 2022; Saragadam et al., 2023; Kazerouni et al.,
2024; Zhang et al., 2025), 3D shape reconstruction (Zhu
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), and novel view synthesis (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Müller et al., 2022).

Implicit Neural Representations (INRs), as a versatile representation paradigm, have achieved success in various computer vision tasks. Due to
the spectral bias of the vanilla multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), existing methods focus on designing MLPs with sophisticated architectures
or repurposing training techniques for highly accurate INRs. In this paper, we delve into the
linear dynamics model of MLPs and theoretically identify the empirical Neural Tangent Kernel
(eNTK) matrix as a reliable link between spectral
bias and training dynamics. Based on this insight, we propose a practical Inductive Gradient
Adjustment (IGA) method, which could purposefully improve the spectral bias via inductive generalization of eNTK-based gradient transformation matrix. Theoretical and empirical analyses
validate impacts of IGA on spectral bias. Further, we evaluate our method on different INRs
tasks with various INR architectures and compare to existing training techniques. The superior and consistent improvements clearly validate
the advantage of our IGA. Armed with our gradient adjustment method, better INRs with more
enhanced texture details and sharpened edges
can be learned from data by tailored impacts
on spectral bias. The codes are available at:
https://github.com/LabShuHangGU/IGA-INR.

However, obtaining high-precision INRs is non-trivial.
MLPs with ReLU activations often fail to represent highfrequency details. Such tendency of MLPs to represent
simple patterns of target function is referred to as spectral
bias (Xu, 2018; Rahaman et al., 2019). To improve the
performance of INRs, great efforts have been made to alleviate or overcome this bias of MLPs. These efforts have
primarily focused on how MLPs are constructed, such as
complex input embeddings (Tancik et al., 2020; Müller et al.,
2022; Xie et al., 2023) and sophisticated activation functions (Sitzmann et al., 2020; Ramasinghe & Lucey, 2022;
Saragadam et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024; Shenouda et al.,
2024). Recently, two studies find that training dynamics
adjustments based on traditional training techniques, i.e.,
Fourier reparameterized training (FR) (Shi et al., 2024a) and
batch normalization (BN) (Cai et al., 2024), can overcome
the spectral bias. Compared to the above approaches emphasizing architectural refinements, these methods could offer
considerable representation performance gains while barely
increasing the complexity of inference structures.
Despite these works serendipitously revealing the great potential of training dynamics in alleviating spectral bias for
better INRs, the underlying mechanism driving their improvements remains unclear. Moreover, there is no clear
guidance on the choice of Fourier bases matrix for reparameterization or batch normalization layer to confront spectral
bias with varying degrees in various INR tasks. Lack of reliable insight and guidance results in unstable and suboptimal
improvements across different scenarios and INR models
(Essakine et al., 2024), hindering their broader applications.

1. Introduction
The main idea of implicit neural representations (INRs) is using neural networks such as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs)
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 3 North China Institute
of Computer Systems Engineering. Correspondence to: Shuhang
Gu <shuhanggu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Notably, a stream of works (Ronen et al., 2019; Tancik et al.,
2020; Shi et al., 2024a; Cai et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024)
1

