SynEVO: A neuro-inspired spatiotemporal evolutional framework for
cross-domain adaptation

Jiayue Liu 1 Zhongchao Yi 1 Zhengyang Zhou 1 2 3 Qihe Huang 1 Kuo Yang 1 Xu Wang 1 2 Yang Wang 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Spatiotemporal learning aims to predict future urban evolution, which facilitates urban management and socioeconomic planning. Recently, diverse spatiotemporal forecasting solutions have well resolved data sparsity (Zhou et al.,
2020), temporal shifts (Zhou et al., 2023), as well as unseen
area inferences (Feng et al., 2024). As usual practices, almost all spatiotemporal learners train independent models
from specific sources where both models and data are isolated. With the growing of available urban sensors and the
diversity of data sources under the rapid urban expansion,
the task-specific data-driven learning is inevitably faced
with the increased costs of repetitive model designs and
computational resources. To this end, an evolvable dataadaptive learner that accommodates cross-domain transferability and adaptivity is highly required to facilitate sustainable urban computing. There have been a number of
efforts that try to improve generalization of spatiotemporal
learning, where it can be classified as two folds, i.e., countering shifts on the same source domain and across different
source domains. On the same source, the initial step is
the continuous spatiotemporal learning implemented with
experience reply (Chen et al., 2021), and spatiotemporal outof-distribution issue (OOD) is raised by capturing causal invariance for confronting temporal shifts (Zhou et al., 2023).
After that, a series of models take environments as indicators
to guide generalization (Xia et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a;
Yuan et al., 2023). However, even for different kinds of
sources in a same system, these independent models fail to
share common information for task transfer across domains.
For generalization across sources, a prompt-empowered
universal model for adapting various data sources (Yuan
et al., 2024), and a task-level continuous spatiotemporal
learner, which actively capture the stable commonality and
fine-tune with individual personality for new tasks (Yi et al.,
2024) are proposed. Even so, these models still suffer three
critical issues for cross-domain transfer and data adaptive
model evolution. 1) No theoretical guarantee for collective
intelligence facilitating cross-domain transfer. 2) Not all
tasks share common patterns, thus uniformly involving all
tasks inevitably introduces noise. 3) These models are not
elastic to actively evolve when data distribution changes.

Discovering regularities from spatiotemporal systems can benefit various scientific and social
planning. Current spatiotemporal learners usually train an independent model from a specific
source data that leads to limited transferability
among sources, where even correlated tasks requires new design and training. The key towards increasing cross-domain knowledge is to
enable collective intelligence and model evolution. In this paper, inspired by neuroscience theories, we theoretically derive the increased information boundary via learning cross-domain
collective intelligence and propose a Synaptic
EVOlutional spatiotemporal network, SynEVO,
where SynEVO breaks the model independence
and enables cross-domain knowledge to be shared
and aggregated. Specifically, we first re-order the
sample groups to imitate the human curriculum
learning, and devise two complementary learners,
elastic common container and task-independent
extractor to allow model growth and task-wise
commonality and personality disentanglement.
Then an adaptive dynamic coupler with a new
difference metric determines whether the new
sample group should be incorporated into common container to achieve model evolution under various domains. Experiments show that
SynEVO improves the generalization capacity by
at most 42% under cross-domain scenarios and
SynEVO provides a paradigm of NeuroAI for
knowledge transfer and adaptation. Code available at https://github.com/Rodger-Lau/SynEVO.
1
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC),
Hefei, China 2 Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC,
Suzhou, China 3 State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information System, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhengyang Zhou <zzy0929@ustc.edu.cn>, Yang Wang
<angyan@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

