A Trichotomy for List Transductive Online Learning

Steve Hanneke 1 Amirreza Shaeiri 1

Abstract

result by (Brukhim et al., 2022) on the combinatorial characterization of multiclass PAC learnability is the use of list
learners. Subsequent works, including (Charikar & Pabbaraju, 2023), (Moran et al., 2023), (Brukhim et al., 2024),
(Hanneke et al., 2024a), and (Pabbaraju & Sarmasarkar,
2024) have studied the notion of list learnability in various
contexts, such as PAC learning, online learning, boosting, as
well as sample compression and uniform convergence, and
real-valued regression, accordingly. Moreover, this topic
brings to mind the fundamental setting of list-decodable
learning in statistics. For a detailed discussion, for example,
refer to Chapter 5 of the recent textbook by (Diakonikolas
& Kane, 2023). From an empirical point of view, there are
many scenarios in which one may prefer the list learning
approach to the classical multiclass classification. For instance, in recommendation systems, the objective is often to
present a short list of items to users, trying to ensure that the
user will select one of the items from the list. As another
example, in computer vision classification tasks, predicting a list of labels can potentially prevent label ambiguity.
Furthermore, this subject may bring to mind the fundamental setting of conformal prediction in practical applications,
which can be viewed as a dual counterpart of the list setting.

List learning is an important topic in both theoretical and empirical machine learning research, playing a key role in the recent breakthrough result of
(Brukhim et al., 2022) on the characterization of
multiclass PAC learnability, as well as the ambiguity of labels in computer vision classification
tasks, among others. In this paper, we study the
problem of list transductive online learning. In
this framework, the learner outputs a list of multiple labels for each instance rather than just one,
as in traditional multiclass classification. In the
realizable setting, we demonstrate a trichotomy of
possible rates of the minimax number of mistakes.
In particular, if the learner plays for T ∈ N rounds,
its minimax number of mistakes can only be of the
orders Θ(T), Θ(log T), or Θ(1). This resolves an
open question raised by (Hanneke et al., 2024b).
On the other hand, in the agnostic setting, we characterize the√learnability by constructively prove T) upper bound on the minimax exing the O(
pected regret. Along this way, we also answer another open question asked by (Moran et al., 2023).
To establish these results, we introduce two new
combinatorial complexity dimensions, called the
Level-constrained (L + 1)-Littlestone dimension
and Level-constrained (L + 1)-Branching dimension, if the list size is L ∈ N. Eventually, we
conclude our work by raising an open question
regarding eliminating the factor of list size, which
seems to be a crucial step, as it has consistently
appeared in previous works on this subject.

Consider a round-robin tennis tournament consisting of T ∈
N matches, all scheduled in advance. In tennis, each set
continues until one player leads by at least two games, so
sets can, in theory, play on indefinitely; this means the space
of possible exact outcomes is countably infinite. A gambler,
aware of the players participating in each match based on
the schedule, aims to predict the exact outcomes. Since
predicting the precise results is challenging, the gambler is
allowed to submit a list of L ∈ N possible outcomes for
each match before it begins. After each match concludes,
the actual result is disclosed. The gambler earns a profit
if the actual outcome is among the predictions they have
submitted for that match. Given minimal assumptions about
the nature of the matches, how can the gambler effectively
select predictions to maximize the number of rounds that
yield a profit?

1. Introduction
List learning is a significant subject in both theoretical and
empirical machine learning research. From a theoretical
point of view, a key technique in the recent breakthrough
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Steve Hanneke
<steve.hanneke@gmail.com>.

The aforementioned example, along with many other realworld scenarios involving possibly adversarially chosen prespecified schedules, can be formulated within the framework
called List Transductive Online Learning. This framework
is informally defined as follows. Initially, an adversary

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

