Putnam-AXIOM: A Functional & Static Benchmark for
Measuring Higher Level Mathematical Reasoning in LLMs

Aryan Gulati * 1 Brando Miranda * 1 Eric Chen * 1 Emily Xia * 1 Kai Fronsdal * 1 Bruno Dumont 1
Sanmi Koyejo 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The ability for Large Language Models (LLMs) to reason
about complex problems has a plethora of applications in
fields such as economics (Zhang et al., 2024), drug discovery
(Bran et al., 2023), and even simulations of human behavior
and society (Park et al., 2023). Rapid adoption of LLMs
for reasoning has, in turn, spurred rapid gains on standard
reasoning benchmarks (OpenAI, 2023; Gemini, 2023; Yang
et al., 2024a).

Current mathematical reasoning benchmarks for
large language models (LLMs) are approaching
saturation, with some achieving > 90% accuracy,
and are increasingly compromised by training-set
contamination. We introduce Putnam-AXIOM, a
benchmark of 522 university-level competition
problems drawn from the prestigious William
Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition, and
Putnam-AXIOM Variation, an unseen companion set of 100 functional variants generated by
programmatically perturbing variables, and constants. The variation protocol produces an unlimited stream of equally difficult, unseen instances – yielding a contamination-resilient test
bed. On the Original set, OpenAI’s o1-preview
– the strongest evaluated model – scores 41.9%,
but its accuracy drops by 19.6 % (46.8% relative decrease) on the paired Variations. The remaining eighteen models show the same downward trend, ten of them with non-overlapping
95% confidence intervals. These gaps suggest
memorization and highlight the necessity of dynamic benchmarks. We complement (”boxed”)
accuracy with Teacher-Forced Accuracy (TFA), a
lightweight metric that directly scores reasoning
traces and automates natural language proof evaluations. Putnam-AXIOM therefore provides a rigorous, contamination-resilient evaluation framework for assessing advanced mathematical reasoning of LLMs. Data and evaluation code are
publicly available at https://github.com/
brando90/putnam-axiom.

Outpacing Current Evaluations. Indeed, advanced models like GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and Gemini Ultra (Gemini,
2023) have reported human-level performance on many
benchmarks like MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020) and
MMMU (Yue et al., 2023). Similarly, LLMs have seen
progress in other challenging benchmarks like GSM8K
(Chen et al., 2022) and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021), with
SOTA models attaining nearly 90% accuracy on MATH (Lei,
2024) and nearly perfect accuracy on GSM8K (Zhong et al.,
2024). Although this progress demonstrates rapidly evolving LLM capabilities, it creates an evaluation ceiling effect:
current benchmarks lack sufficient difficulty to discriminate
between state-of-the-art models’ reasoning abilities.
Data Contamination. The problem is further complicated
by data contamination, which remains a major concern for
current evaluation benchmarks. By training LLMs on larger
portions of the internet, researchers are incorporating an
increasing number of open-source benchmark data into the
models’ pretraining. Therefore, a model can display artificially high “reasoning ability” by simply memorizing
the answers it has seen, undermining the integrity of the
evaluation.
To address these limitations, we introduce the PutnamAXIOM (Advanced eXamination of Intelligence in
Operational Mathematics) dataset, a novel and challenging
compilation of high-level mathematics problems sourced
from the William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition, an annual mathematics competition for undergraduate college students in North America which requires advanced mathematical reasoning and covers a wide range
of university-level mathematical concepts. In addition, we

*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence
to:
Aryan Gulati <aryangul@cs.stanford.edu>, Brando
Miranda <brando9@cs.stanford.edu>,
Sanmi Koyejo
<sanmi@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

