E PIC: Efficient Position-Independent Caching for Serving Large Language
Models
Junhao Hu† 1 Wenrui Huang 2 Weidong Wang 2 Haoyi Wang 1 Tiancheng Hu 1 Qin Zhang 3 Hao Feng 3
Xusheng Chen 3 Yizhou Shan 3 Tao Xie 4

Abstract

Static Sparsity

Naive
No Recomputation

Ours

FR
Full Recomputation

Large Language Models (LLMs) show great capabilities in a wide range of applications, but serving them efficiently becomes increasingly challenging as requests (prompts) become more complex. Context caching improves serving performance by reusing Key-Value (KV) vectors, the
intermediate representations of tokens that are repeated across requests. However, existing context
caching requires exact prefix matches across requests, limiting reuse cases in settings such as
few-shot learning and retrieval-augmented generation, where immutable content (e.g., documents)
remains unchanged across requests but is preceded by varying prefixes. Position-Independent
Caching (PIC) addresses this issue by enabling
modular reuse of the KV vectors regardless of prefixes. We formalize PIC and advance prior work
by introducing E PIC, a serving system incorporating our new LegoLink algorithm, which mitigates
the inappropriate “attention sink” effect at every
document beginning, to maintain accuracy with
minimal computation. Experiments show that
E PIC achieves up to 8× improvements in TimeTo-First-Token (TTFT) and 7× throughput gains
over existing systems, with negligible or no accuracy loss.

CacheBlend
Dynamic Sparsity

Figure 1. Left: Design space of position-independent context
caching. Right: The x-axis shows the computation overhead or
TTFT, while the y-axis shows accuracy. Different shades of the
same color indicate variants of the same algorithm.

chatbots, education, and medicine (Zhou et al., 2024). Users
interact with LLMs by submitting requests, or prompts that
consist of text-like tokens. As LLMs’ capabilities continue
to grow, their usage has shifted from simple dialogues to
more complex tasks, such as multi-document question answering, few-shot learning, and tool use. These tasks typically involve long prompts comprising relatively immutable
token chunks (compared to mutable user instructions) such
as system messages, few-shot examples, and documents.
Notably, such immutable chunks are frequently repeated
across requests.
Context Caching1 (CC) is an emerging approach that reuses
Key-Value (KV) vectors, the intermediate representations of
repeated tokens in previous requests to reduce computation,
and is generally categorized into two types. First, prefixbased CC matches the current request against previous ones
to reuse the KV vectors of the longest common prefix. Although prefix-based CC remains the dominant approach in
existing systems (kim; gem, b; Zheng et al., 2024; Kwon
et al., 2023), it requires exact prefix matches across requests,
limiting reuse cases in settings such as few-shot learning and
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), where immutable
chunks (e.g., documents) remain unchanged across requests
but are preceded by varying prefixes. Second, PositionIndependent Caching (PIC) (Figure 2 (b)) extends prefix-

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are now fundamental to
various emerging applications such as question answering,
†

This work was completed during his internship at Huawei
Cloud. 1 SCS, Peking University; Key Lab of HCST (PKU),
MOE, China 2 School of Computer Science, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China 3 Huawei Cloud, Shanghai, China 4 Key Lab of
HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Tao Xie <taoxie@pku.edu.cn>, Yizhou Shan <shanyizhou@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Also referred to as prompt caching.

