EVOLvE: Evaluating and Optimizing LLMs For In-Context Exploration

Allen Nie * 1 Yi Su * 2 Bo Chang * 2 Jonathan N. Lee 2 Ed H. Chi 2 Quoc V. Le 2 Minmin Chen 2

Abstract

cluding but not limited to personal assistants (Liu et al.,
2024a), recommendation systems (Li et al., 2023a), gameplaying (Wang et al., 2023a;c), education (Nie et al., 2024;
He-Yueya et al., 2024), and healthcare (Singhal et al., 2023).
In these tasks, LLMs function as agents that engage with
users or the environment in a dynamic interaction process.
For example, at each time step, the LLM suggests a pedagogical strategy or make a recommendation to a specific
user, then receives feedback - either explicit or implicit in the form of rewards. Based on this feedback, the agent
updates its beliefs about the environment, e.g., underlying
reward distributions, and adapts its strategies to maximize
the cumulative reward. These tasks differ fundamentally
from classic prediction tasks where LLM is used to predict a target. A decision making LLM only receives partial
feedback, i.e., the reward for its own actions, but not for
others. Thus, it requires the LLM to effectively interact
with the environment and explore to discover the optimal
action. Meanwhile, exploring an unknown action that turns
out to have lower reward than the known ones incurs an
opportunity cost. The agent, therefore, needs to strike a
balance between exploration and exploitation. While the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff has been extensively studied in the pre-LLM era, particularly in the fields of bandits (Li et al., 2010; Slivkins et al., 2019) and reinforcement
learning (Mnih, 2013; Osband et al., 2013; Sutton, 2018),
it remains unclear how LLMs approach this tradeoff when
faced with uncertainty.

Despite their success in many domains, large language models (LLMs) remain under-studied in
scenarios requiring optimal decision-making under uncertainty. This is crucial as many real-world
applications, ranging from personalized recommendations to healthcare interventions, demand
that LLMs not only predict but also actively learn
to make optimal decisions through exploration.
In this work, we measure LLMs’ (in)ability to
make optimal decisions in bandits, a state-less
reinforcement learning setting relevant to many
applications. We develop a comprehensive suite
of environments, including both context-free and
contextual bandits with varying task difficulties,
to benchmark LLMs’ performance. Motivated by
the existence of optimal exploration algorithms,
we propose efficient ways to integrate this algorithmic knowledge into LLMs: by providing explicit algorithm-guided support during inference;
and through algorithm distillation via in-context
demonstrations and fine-tuning, using synthetic
data generated from these algorithms. Impressively, these techniques allow us to achieve superior exploration performance with smaller models, surpassing larger models on various tasks.
We conducted an extensive ablation study to shed
light on various factors, such as task difficulty and
data representation, that influence the efficiency
of LLM exploration. Additionally, we conduct
a rigorous analysis of the LLM’s exploration efficiency using the concept of regret, linking its
ability to explore to the model size and underlying algorithm.

We study LLMs’ in-context exploration capabilities under
the simplified framework of bandits — a stateless form of
reinforcement learning that is highly applicable to many domains. We set up the LLM to interact with the environment
over T rounds. In each round, it receives the full history
of its past interactions, the current state (if provided), and
a set of actions, and it is tasked with selecting an action to
maximize the cumulative reward. Ideally, the LLM should
adaptively choose an action in each round to learn the reward
distributions of different actions and eventually converge to
consistently selecting the optimal one. We study LLM’s ability to do so in-context, without the need to re-train, which
we dubbed as in-context exploration. Unlike using LLM
for reward-free or curiosity-driven exploration, in-context
exploration is in-context self-improvement, where the LLM
builds up context through interactions to solve a task.

1. Introduction
The rapid advance of LLMs has positioned them as valuable tools for a wide range of decision-making tasks, in*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Allen Nie <anie@cs.stanford.edu>, Yi Su
<yisumtv@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

