G-Adaptivity: optimised graph-based mesh relocation for finite element methods

James Rowbottom * 1 Georg Maierhofer * 1 Teo Deveney 2 3 Eike Mueller 3 Alberto Paganini 4
Katharina Schratz 5 Pietro Liò 6 Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb 1 Chris Budd 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Finite element methods (FEM) are currently the most
widely-used tool for the large scale solution of partial differential equations (PDEs) (Ainsworth & Oden, 1997; Cotter,
2023). Central advantages are robustness, reliable error
estimates, and thoroughly developed code bases (such as
deal.II (Africa et al., 2024), DUNE (Bastian et al., 2008),
Fenics (Logg et al., 2012), and Firedrake (Ham et al., 2023)),
which are highly parallelisable and efficient. However, even
with such optimised software the simulation of large scale
problems (e.g. weather forecasting, structural simulations
in engineering systems) is computationally costly. An important ingredient that determines the cost is the number of
degrees of freedom (DOFs) required by a FEM to satisfy
a chosen error tolerance. Since this cost depends on the
number Nz of mesh points z(i) of the underlying computational mesh, it is desirable to keep Nz moderate. Mesh
adaptivity based on mesh refinement and/or relocation to
capture important solution features at the right scale can balance computational cost and accuracy. However, classical
mesh-adaptive methods can be difficult to implement and
require significant computational resources. In contrast, in
the present work, we introduce a cheap, stable and highly
efficient graph neural network (GNN) architecture to implement learnable mesh relocation (r-adaptivity). Our method
keeps Nz fixed and adapts the mesh point locations to reduce
the overall FE error. Many classical mesh relocation methods have focused on finding and minimising mathematical
substitutes of the FE error (usually simplified upper bounds)
and solving additional (differential) equations to relocate
the mesh points. For example, one can solve the MongeAmpère (MA) equation (Budd et al., 2009) to find mesh
point locations that minimise the interpolation error, which
is an upper bound (up to some parameters and constants) of
the FEM error arising from Céa’s lemma (Huang & Russell,
2011). Recent Machine Learning (ML) approaches rely
on similar mathematical simplifications and learn a surrogate for the mesh equations (Song et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2024) leading to significant speed-up with comparable error
reduction. In the present work we take an entirely different
approach. We present G-adaptivity, an approach to mesh
adaptivity that trains a GNN to generate meshes that directly
minimise the error of the corresponding FEM solution. We

We present a novel, and effective, approach to
achieve optimal mesh relocation in finite element
methods (FEMs). The cost and accuracy of FEMs
is critically dependent on the choice of mesh
points. Mesh relocation (r-adaptivity) seeks to
optimise the mesh geometry to obtain the best
solution accuracy at given computational budget.
Classical r-adaptivity relies on the solution of a
separate nonlinear “meshing” PDE to determine
mesh point locations. This incurs significant cost
at remeshing, and relies on estimates that relate
interpolation- and FEM-error. Recent machine
learning approaches have focused on the construction of fast surrogates for such classical methods.
Instead, our new approach trains a graph neural
network (GNN) to determine mesh point locations
by directly minimising the FE solution error from
the PDE system Firedrake to achieve higher solution accuracy. Our GNN architecture closely
aligns the mesh solution space to that of classical
meshing methodologies, thus replacing classical
estimates for optimality with a learnable strategy.
This allows for rapid and robust training and results in an extremely efficient and effective GNN
approach to online r-adaptivity. Our method outperforms both classical, and prior ML, approaches
to r-adaptive meshing. In particular, it achieves
lower FE solution error, whilst retaining the significant speed-up over classical methods observed
in prior ML work.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics and
Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Bath, UK 3 Department
of Mathematical Sciences, University of Bath, UK 4 School of
Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Leicester, UK 5 Laboratoire Jacques-Louis Lions, Sorbonne Université,
France 6 Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: James Rowbottom
<jr908@cam.ac.uk>, Georg Maierhofer <gam37@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

