Off-Policy Evaluation Under Nonignorable Missing Data

Han Wang 1 Yang Xu 1 Wenbin Lu 1 Rui Song 1

Abstract

In recent years, there has been growing interest in highconfidence off-policy evaluation (HCOPE), which not only
estimates the policy’s value but also provides statistical inference to quantify the confidence in these estimates (Thomas
et al., 2015; Luckett et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2021b). However,
one overlooked aspect in this literature is that offline data is
often incomplete due to different types of missingness. For
example, the reward and next-state may be absent following
some actions, resulting in incomplete transition tuples.

Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE) aims to estimate the
value of a target policy using offline data collected
from potentially different policies. In real-world
applications, however, logged data often suffers
from missingness. While OPE has been extensively studied in the literature, a theoretical understanding of how missing data affects OPE results
remains unclear. In this paper, we investigate
OPE in the presence of monotone missingness
and theoretically demonstrate that the value estimates remain unbiased under ignorable missingness but can be biased under nonignorable (informative) missingness. To retain the consistency
of value estimation, we propose an inverse probability weighting value estimator and conduct statistical inference to quantify the uncertainty of
the estimates. Through a series of numerical experiments, we empirically demonstrate that our
proposed estimator yields a more reliable value
inference under missing data.

Missing data mechanisms are generally categorized as ignorable or nonignorable (informative) missingness. Ignorable
missingness assumes that the pattern of missing data can be
fully explained by observed variables. In contrast, nonignorable missingness occurs when the missing data depends on
the outcome or reward of interest, making it a more complex
and challenging issue to address. Both types of missingness
frequently arise in real-world RL applications, including
online advertising (Tewari & Murphy, 2017), healthcare
(Smith et al., 2023; Yu et al.), robotics (Wang et al., 2019),
and more. Failing to account for the underlying missingness
pattern, particularly nonignorable missingness (as discussed
in later sections), can lead to biased evaluations of policy
performance and, consequently, flawed decision-making.

1. Introduction

For example, in movie recommendation systems like Movielens (Harper & Konstan, 2015), platforms aim to determine
the best strategy for recommending personalized movie genres using historical user rating data. However, it is well
known that users are more likely to rate movies they prefer,
leading to nonignorable missingness. Imagine we want to
assess user preferences for two genres, comedy and horror.
If users only rate movies they enjoy and avoid providing ratings for those they dislike, the dataset might consist solely of
high ratings (e.g., 5-star ratings) while lower ratings remain
completely unobserved. Without accounting for this nonignorable missingness, the resulting recommendation strategy
might mistakenly treat comedy and horror as equally preferred genres and recommend them at random to all users,
which is totally ineffective in evaluating user preferences.

Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated many successes in various domains such as game playing (Mnih
et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016), robotic control (Kober
et al., 2013), bidding (Jin et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2023), and
ridesharing (Xu et al., 2018). These successes often rely on
simulators to generate large amounts of interaction data for
training. However, in real-world applications, direct access
to the environment is usually limited, making it difficult to
deploy and evaluate new policies in practice, especially in
safety-critical fields like healthcare and autonomous driving.
Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE) is a critical step in offline
RL to estimate the value of a target policy using offline
data that may have been collected under different policies
(Prasad et al., 2017; Raghu et al., 2017b; Wang et al., 2018).

A similar challenge arises in survival analysis. Healthcare
data often suffers from missingness caused by factors like
early discharge (nonignorable when health status is the outcome) or missed follow-ups (ignorable, as it occurs randomly and is unrelated to health status). For example, in

1

Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University,
USA. Correspondence to: Rui Song <songray@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

