SPINN Neural Networks
CoPINN: Cognitive Physics-Informed

Siyuan Duan * 1 Wenyuan Wu * 1 Peng Hu 1 Zhenwen Ren 2 Dezhong Peng 1 3 Yuan Sun 1 3
CoPINN (Ours)
y=-1

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINN) aim to
constrain the outputs and gradients of deep learning models to satisfy specified governing physics
equations, which have demonstrated significant
potential for solving partial differential equations
(PDEs). Although existing PINN methods have
achieved pleasing performance, they always treat
both easy and hard sample points indiscriminately,
especially ones in the physical boundaries. This
easily causes the PINN model to fall into undesirable local minima and unstable learning, thereby
resulting in an Unbalanced Prediction Problem
(UPP). To deal with this daunting problem, we
propose a novel framework named Cognitive
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (CoPINN)
that imitates the human cognitive learning manner from easy to hard. Specifically, we first employ separable subnetworks to encode independent one-dimensional coordinates and apply an aggregation scheme to generate multi-dimensional
predicted physical variables. Then, during the
training phase, we dynamically evaluate the difficulty of each sample according to the gradient of
the PDE residuals. Finally, we propose a cognitive training scheduler to progressively optimize
the entire sampling regions from easy to hard,
thereby embracing robustness and generalization
against predicting physical boundary regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our CoPINN
achieves state-of-the-art performance, particularly
significantly reducing prediction errors in stubborn regions. The code is available at this repository: https://github.com/siyuancncd/CoPINN.

y=0

(a)

SPINN
y=-1

CoPINN (Ours)

y=0

(b)

Figure 1. The 2D and 3D visualization of the absolute error between the predicted and exact values. The left graph illustrates
the absolute error of the entire three-dimensional space. The middle graph demonstrates the absolute error of the boundary when
y = −1, while the right graph displays the absolute error of
the cross-section when y = 0. (a) The absolute error of SPINN
(SOTA) (Cho et al., 2023) on the Helmholtz equation. These results
indicate that SPINN exhibits significantly larger errors near the
physical boundary region compared to the middle region, which
reveals the Unbalanced Prediction Problem (UPP). (b) The absolute error of our CoPINN on the Helmholtz equation, which shows
that CoPINN maintains consistent small absolute errors both near
the physical boundary and in the middle region.

1. Introduction
As a type of equation in mathematics that describes the relationship between functions of multiple variables (Evans,
2022), partial differential equations (PDEs) usually involve
partial derivatives of unknown functions and describe the
laws of change of natural phenomena in disciplines such as
physics, chemistry, and economics. In recent years, solving
PDEs has a wide range of applications in many fields of
science and engineering (Roubı́ček, 2013; Li et al., 2025),
which are crucial for understanding and uncovering the
underlying physical laws. Therefore, a large number of traditional numerical methods have been developed to solve
PDEs, such as finite element methods (Jagota et al., 2013),
finite difference methods (Thomas, 2013), and finite volume
methods (Barth et al., 2018). Unfortunately, these methods
are resource-intensive and mesh-dependent, thus often requiring a huge time cost to solve such complex systems, for
example, the Navier-Stokes equations (Zou et al., 2024a).
Thanks to the powerful nonlinear representation capabilities
of deep learning, they are also widely used to solve partial

*
Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China. 2 Southwest University of Science
and Technology, Mianyang, China. 3 National Key Laboratory of
Fundamental Algorithms and Models for Engineering Numerical
Simulation, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. Correspondence
to: Yuan Sun <sunyuan work@163.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

