Improved Discretization Complexity Analysis of Consistency Models:
Variance Exploding Forward Process and Decay Discretization Scheme

Ruofeng Yang 1 Bo Jiang 1 Cheng Chen 2 Shuai Li 1

Abstract

generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Esser et al., 2024; Ho
et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). The mathematical mechanism of diffusion models is made up of two
processes: the forward and reverse process. The forward
process gradually injects noise into data till the marginal
distribution is close to pure noise. The reverse process is
an iterative sampling process, which sequentially removes
noise from data to generate samples. At each denoised step,
diffusion models only need to predict and remove a small
noise, making the training process more stable than Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
However, the iterative sampling process requires diffusion
models to evaluate a large neural network to predict noise
at each step, leading to a higher computational cost than
other one-step algorithms such as GAN, Variational AutoEncoder (Kingma and Welling, 2013), and Normalizing
Flow (Papamakarios et al., 2021).

Consistency models, a new class of one-step generative models, have shown competitive performance with multi-step diffusion models. The
most challenging part of consistency models is
the training process, which discretizes the continuous diffusion process into K steps and trains a
one-step mapping function on these discretized
timepoints. Despite the empirical success, only
a few works focus on the discretization complexity K, and their setting is far from that of empirical works. More specifically, the current theoretical works analyze the variance preserving
(VP) diffusion process with a uniform stepsize,
while empirical works adopt a variance exploding (VE) process with a decay discretization stepsize. As a result, these works suffer from large
discretization complexity and fail to explain the
empirical success of consistency models. To close
the gap between theory and application, we analyze consistency models with (1) VE process and
(2) decay stepsize and prove the state-of-the-art
discretization complexity for consistency models. This result is competitive with the results
of diffusion models and shows the potential of
consistency models. To balance the computation
and performance, previous empirical work further proposes a 2-step consistency algorithm. In
this work, we also analyze the role of 2-step sampling and show that it improves the discretization
complexity compared with one-step generation.

To solve the computational issue, a series of works try to
accelerate the sampling process of diffusion models (Song
et al., 2020a; Zheng et al., 2023). One notable algorithm in
these works is Consistency Model (Song et al., 2023), which
tries to find a mapping function (a.k.a. consistency function)
to directly map any points at any time of the forward process
to the target data distribution. Consistency models have
shown state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance compared to
other one-step generative models in image generation (Song
et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024; Lu and Song, 2024), video
generation (Wang et al., 2023) and music generation (Fei
et al., 2024). Furthermore, it is also widely used in other
areas, such as reinforcement learning (Ding and Jin, 2024)
and medical image segmentation (Zhang et al., 2024).
To obtain the consistency function, consistency models discretize the timeline into K discretization points and hope
the consistency function outputs similar results at two adjacent points in the training phase. When the two adjacent
points are far away, the learned consistency function is far
away from the ground truth (Thm. 1, (Song et al., 2023)).
However, it is also necessary to avoid a large K since it
will make the training phase time-consuming. Hence, one
core of consistency models is the discretization number K
in the training phase, which is helpful in effectively training
a consistency function with great performance.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models have shown impressive performance in different areas such as image generation and video
1

John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 2 East China Normal University. Correspondence
to: Shuai Li <shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

