Beyond Low-rank Decomposition: A Shortcut Approach for Efficient On-Device
Learning

Le-Trung Nguyen 1 Aël Quélennec 1 Van-Tam Nguyen 1 Enzo Tartaglione 1

Abstract

Before training

On-device learning has emerged as a promising
direction for AI development, particularly because of its potential to reduce latency issues
and mitigate privacy risks associated with deviceserver communication, while improving energy
efficiency. Despite these advantages, significant
memory and computational constraints still represent major challenges for its deployment. Drawing on previous studies on low-rank decomposition methods that address activation memory
bottlenecks in backpropagation, we propose a
novel shortcut approach as an alternative. Our
analysis and experiments demonstrate that our
method can reduce activation memory usage,
even up to 120.09× compared to vanilla training,
while also reducing overall training FLOPs up to
1.86× when evaluated on traditional benchmarks.
The code is available at https://github.com/LeTrungNguyen/ICML2025-ASI.git.

Ranks Selection

Memory

Layer

Forward

Backward

Low-rank
component

ASI

Low-rank
calculation

Figure 1. Trajectory of activation maps during a single training
step of a deep learning model using ASI.

1. Introduction
nication between data and servers, and thereby enhancing
user data security. This method proves valuable in diverse
scenarios, particularly in environments without internet connectivity, such as autonomous vehicles (Dhar et al., 2021).
It can also enable smartphones to learn from local user data,
allowing personalized adaptation to individual usage patterns (Hard et al., 2018).

Recent significant advances in deep learning have allowed
artificial intelligence to penetrate deeply into human activities, enhancing the quality of life for users more than ever
before. Deep learning has found applications in a wide
variety of fields, such as healthcare through tumor image detection (Hu et al., 2018) or finance through quantitative trading (Ozbayoglu et al., 2020). Most notable are applications
of large language models (LLMs), such as GPT (Radford
et al., 2018) or Gemini (Gemini Team et al., 2023).

Along with the substantial increase in the number of parameters in deep learning models comes an exponential rise in
resource demand to train and exploit such models. During
training, the main algorithmic bottleneck with respect to
energy and memory is backpropagation. Although it has
demonstrated its effectiveness in terms of performance, surpassing many other methods such as Forward-Forward (Hinton, 2022) and PEPITA (Pau & Aymone, 2023), it is not yet a
“resource-friendly” algorithm. Specifically, for each trained
layer, backpropagation requires storing in memory the corresponding activation maps during the forward pass (Gomez
et al., 2017), which are then used to compute weight derivatives during the backward pass. As the number of model

In that regard, one of the current prominent research
branches is on-device learning, where models are fine-tuned
directly on edge devices, eliminating the need for commu1
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de
Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Le-Trung Nguyen
<le-trung.nguyen@telecom-paris.fr>,
Enzo
Tartaglione
<enzo.tartaglione@telecom-paris.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

