VideoJAM: Joint Appearance-Motion Representations for Enhanced Motion
Generation in Video Models
Hila Chefer * 1 2 Uriel Singer 1 Amit Zohar 1 Yuval Kirstain 1
Adam Polyak 1 Yaniv Taigman 1 Lior Wolf 2 Shelly Sheynin 1
https://hila-chefer.github.io/videojam-paper.github.io/

“A ballet dancer twirls on the surface of a still lake at sunset”

“A skateboarder performs jumps”

“An acrobat executing a handstand on a narrow beam above water”

“Fingers press into a shimmering slime ball”

Figure 1. Text-to-video samples generated by VideoJAM. We present VideoJAM, a framework that explicitly instills a strong motion
prior to any video generation model. Our framework significantly enhances motion coherence across a wide variety of motion types.

Abstract

aging the model’s own evolving motion prediction as a dynamic guidance signal. Notably, our
framework can be applied to any video model
with minimal adaptations, requiring no modifications to the training data or scaling of the model.
VideoJAM achieves state-of-the-art performance
in motion coherence, surpassing highly competitive proprietary models while also enhancing the
perceived visual quality of the generations. These
findings emphasize that appearance and motion
can be complementary and, when effectively integrated, enhance both the visual quality and the
coherence of video generation.

Despite tremendous recent progress, generative
video models still struggle to capture real-world
motion, dynamics, and physics. We show that
this limitation arises from the conventional pixel
reconstruction objective, which biases models toward appearance fidelity at the expense of motion
coherence. To address this, we introduce VideoJAM, a novel framework that instills an effective
motion prior to video generators, by encouraging the model to learn a joint appearance-motion
representation. VideoJAM is composed of two
complementary units. During training, we extend
the objective to predict both the generated pixels and their corresponding motion from a single
learned representation. During inference, we introduce Inner-Guidance, a mechanism that steers
the generation toward coherent motion by lever-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in video generation showcased remarkable progress in producing high-quality clips (Brooks et al.,
2024; KlingAI, 2024; Polyak et al., 2024). Yet, despite continuous improvements in the visual quality of the generated
videos, these models often fail to accurately portray motion, physics, and dynamic interactions (Kang et al., 2024;
Brooks et al., 2024) (Fig. 2). When tasked with generating challenging motions like gymnastic elements (e.g., a
cartwheel in Fig. 2(b)), the generations often display severe

*

Work done while the first author was an intern at GenAI, Meta.
GenAI, Meta 2 Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to: Hila
Chefer <hilach70@gmail.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

