EncryptedLLM: Privacy-Preserving Large Language Model Inference via
GPU-Accelerated Fully Homomorphic Encryption

Leo de Castro 1 Daniel Escudero 2 Adya Agrawal 2 Antigoni Polychroniadou 2 Manuela Veloso 2

Abstract

resources to be trained, and are often not publicly available
as this constitutes the provider’s intellectual property. This
leads to a “inference-as-a-service” scenario, where clients
send their queries to external providers who locally run an
LLM to return a result to the client. Furthermore, even
open source LLMs such as Llama 22 are very expensive to
run in commodity hardware and still require in most cases
delegating inference to a third party provider.

As large language models (LLMs) become more
powerful, the computation required to run these
models is increasingly outsourced to a thirdparty cloud. While this saves clients’ computation, it risks leaking the clients’ LLM queries
to the cloud provider. Fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) presents a natural solution to this
problem: simply encrypt the query and evaluate the LLM homomorphically on the cloud machine. The result remains encrypted and can only
be learned by the client who holds the secret
key. In this work, we propose a GPU-accelerated
FHE scheme and leverage it to benchmark an
encrypted GPT-2 forward pass. Our approach
achieves runtimes that are over 200× faster than
the CPU baseline. We also present novel and extensive experimental analysis of approximations
of LLM activation functions to maintain accuracy while achieving this performance.

Unfortunately, delegating inference is undesirable in many
settings where the client wants to preserve the privacy of
their input. Furthermore, as mentioned above, there are
multiple contexts in which the model owner also wants to
retain privacy of the model itself, for example when the
model involves massive monetary resources to be trained,
or when it incorporates sensitive data (e.g. a bank servicing a credit score model trained on internal data). This is
particularly relevant as LLMs become more pervasive and
find more use-cases that permeate all areas of society. This
tension between privacy and utility heavily limits the applicability of LLMs, rendering them useless in contexts where
data cannot be outsourced due to privacy constraints.
Towards resolving this tension, fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) is a promising tool that enables computing on
data without revealing it, only outputting the final result (cf
(Marcolla et al., 2022) for a survey). Using FHE, a client
can encrypt their query to the server, who can locally apply
their model to this encrypted data, making use of the homomorphic properties of the scheme to obtain an encrypted
result, which is sent back to the client for decryption. See
Fig. 1a for a pictorial representation of this interaction pattern. Advances in the last decade on all fronts including
algorithms, software, and hardware, have made FHE practical for several tasks that were not within reach before.
However, LLMs are in an entirely different regime: their
computation is already very expensive in the clear, up to
the point in which specialized software such as high-end
GPUs, coupled with several architectural optimizations, are
needed in order to provide a reasonable inference latency.
Any computation that is ran under FHE becomes much
slower, which is going to be a major blocker when porting
LLMs to FHE. However, the question remains:

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have proven to be groundbreaking artificial intelligence tools that are set to change
the way humans interact with software. By training on massive amounts of data and using an incredibly large amount
of trainable parameters, LLMs are able to provide unprecedented inference results. The tasks that LLMs excel at
include natural language generation, question-answering,
summarization, translation, code generation, among several others. Models like GPT-31 can produce coherent
and contextually appropriate text on a wide range of topics. However, these models require massive amounts of
1

J.P. Morgan Chase Cybersecurity & Technology Controls,
New York, New York, USA 2 J.P. Morgan AI Research & AlgoCRYPT CoE, New York, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Leo de Castro <leo.decastro@jpmchase.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://openai.com/index/gpt-3-apps/

2

1

https://llama.meta.com/llama2/

