Towards Escaping from Class Dependency Modeling for
Multi-Dimensional Classification
Teng Huang 1 2 Bin-Bin Jia 3 Min-Ling Zhang 1 2

Abstract

the analysis of multiple class spaces carrying distinct semantics aspects. For example, Figure 1 (Liu et al., 2016) illustrates a cloth image characterized by three dimensions including Texture, style and Elasticity, each with
corresponding possible labels. In reality, the necessity for
learning from MDC objects is prevalent across a variety of
real-world applications, including computer vision (Lian
et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2025), text mining (Lertnattee &
Theeramunkong, 2004; Serafino et al., 2015), ecological
informatics (Dzeroski et al., 2000; Verma et al., 2021), etc.

In multi-dimensional classification (MDC), the
semantics of objects are characterized by multiple
class variables from different dimensions. Existing MDC approaches focus on designing effective
class dependency modeling strategies to enhance
classification performance. However, the intercoupling of multiple class variables poses a significant challenge to the precise modeling of class
dependencies. In this paper, we make the first
attempt towards escaping from class dependency
modeling for addressing MDC problems. Accordingly, a novel MDC approach named D COM is
proposed by decoupling the interactions of different dimensions in MDC. Specifically, D COM
endeavors to identify a latent factor that encapsulates the most salient and critical feature information. This factor will facilitate partial conditional independence among class variables conditioned on both the original feature vector and the
learned latent embedding. Once the conditional
independence is established, classification models can be readily induced by employing simple
neural networks on each dimension. Extensive
experiments conducted on benchmark data sets
demonstrate that D COM outperforms other stateof-the-art MDC approaches.

Formally speaking, let X = Rd be the input (feature) space
and Y = C1 ×C2 ×· · ·×Cq be the output space which corresponds to the Cartesian product of q class spaces. Each class
space Cj = {cj1 , cj2 , . . . , cjKj } consists of Kj possible class
labels (1 ≤ j ≤ q). In addition, denote the d-dimensional
feature variable by X defined on X and the associated qdimensional class variable by Y = (Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Yq ) defined
on Y, where each component Yj is a scalar class variable
defined on class space Cj (1 ≤ j ≤ q). Given an MDC data
set D = {(xi , yi )|1 ≤ i ≤ m} consisting of m i.i.d. training examples sampled from the Cartesian product of input
space and output space X × Y, the aim of discriminative
MDC approaches is to estimate the conditional joint probability pY |X (y⋄ |x⋄ ) = pY1 ,Y2 ...,Yq |X (y⋄1 , y⋄2 . . . , y⋄q |x⋄ )1
by training on the data set D.
Specifically, for an unseen sample x∗ , the predicted class
vector ŷ∗ is exactly arg maxy⋄ ∈Y pY |X (y⋄ |x⋄ = x∗ ). One
straightforward strategy is to transform the multi-variant
class vector y⋄ into a scalar variable y (cp) with a predefined
bijective mapping function ϕ : Y → {1, 2, . . . , K1 · K2 ·
. . . · Kj }. In other words, each distinct class combination is
regarded as a new class and multi-class classification algorithms can be utilized subsequently, which is known as class
powerset (C P) (Read et al., 2014b). Then the targeted probability is transformed into pY |X (ϕ(y⋄1 , . . . , y⋄q )|x⋄ ). However, the considered sample space is still the whole output
space Y, which contains a tremendous number
Qqof elements
(i.e., the cardinality of Y, denoted by |Y| = j=1 Kj ) and

1. Introduction
In practical applications, objects are always characterized by
diverse semantics across multiple dimensions. To achieve
a more nuanced and comprehensive depiction of these objects, multi-dimensional classification (MDC) focuses on
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Lab. of Computer Network
and Information Integration (Southeast University), MOE, China
3
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou 730050, China. Correspondence
to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.

1
Note that x⋄ is a randomly sampled value of the feature variable X and xi represents the i-th feature vector in the data set D.
Similarly, y⋄ , y⋄1 , . . . , y⋄q are randomly sampled values of class
variables Y, Y1 , . . . , Yq and yi represents the i-th class vector in
the data set D. Additionally, yij denotes the j-th elements of yi .

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

