FlexTok: Resampling Images into 1D Token Sequences of Flexible Length

Roman Bachmann * 1 2 Jesse Allardice * 1 David Mizrahi * 1 Enrico Fini 1 Oğuzhan Fatih Kar 2
Elmira Amirloo 1 Alaaeldin El-Nouby 1 Amir Zamir 2 Afshin Dehghan 1
https://flextok.epfl.ch
1 token

2 tokens

4 tokens

8 tokens

...

...

...

...

16 tokens

32 tokens

64 tokens

128 tokens

256 tokens

golden retriever

Raster 2D-grid
tokens with
autoregressive
decoding

golden retriever

...

...

...

...

...

FlexTok
Flexible-length
1D token
sequences with
autoregressive
decoding

Figure 1. Comparison of partial sequence generation: Raster-scan 2D-grid tokenizer vs. FlexTok. FlexTok resamples images
into a 1D sequence of discrete tokens of flexible length, describing images in a coarse-to-fine manner. When training autoregressive (AR)
models on FlexTok token sequences, the class conditioning (here “golden retriever”) can be satisfied by generating as few as 8 tokens,
whereas AR models trained on 2D tokenizer grids (here, LlamaGen (Sun et al., 2024)) need to always generate all tokens, no matter the
complexity of the condition or image.

Abstract

TiTok and matching state-of-the-art methods with
far fewer tokens. We further extend the model
to support to text-conditioned image generation
and examine how FlexTok relates to traditional
2D tokenization. A key finding is that FlexTok
enables next-token prediction to describe images
in a coarse-to-fine “visual vocabulary”, and that
the number of tokens to generate depends on the
complexity of the generation task.

We introduce FlexTok, a tokenizer that projects
2D images into variable-length, ordered 1D token
sequences. For example, a 256×256 image can be
resampled into anywhere from 1 to 256 discrete
tokens, hierarchically and semantically compressing its information. By training a rectified flow
model as the decoder and using nested dropout,
FlexTok produces plausible reconstructions regardless of the chosen token sequence length. We
evaluate our approach in an autoregressive generation setting using a simple GPT-style Transformer. On ImageNet, this approach achieves an
FID < 2 across 8 to 128 tokens, outperforming

1. Introduction
Image generation has advanced significantly in both quality
and inference speed. Tokenization plays a crucial role in
reducing the computational cost of training generative models (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Esser et al., 2021). Recently,
autoregressive (AR) image generation has shown competitive performance when scaled to billions of parameters (Sun
et al., 2024).

*
Equal contribution 1 Apple 2 Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology Lausanne (EPFL). Correspondence to: Roman
Bachmann <roman.bachmann@epfl.ch>, Jesse Allardice <jallardice@apple.com>, David Mizrahi <d mizrahi@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Generative models such as diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022;
Peebles & Xie, 2023), masked (Chang et al., 2022; 2023),
1

