Prediction-Powered Adaptive Shrinkage Estimation

Sida Li 1 Nikolaos Ignatiadis 1 2

Abstract

Prediction-Powered Inference (PPI) (Angelopoulos et al.,
2023) addresses the scarcity issue by providing a framework for valid statistical analysis using predictions from
black-box ML models. By combining ML-predicted and
gold-standard outcomes, PPI and its variants (Angelopoulos
et al., 2024; Zrnic & Candès, 2024; Zrnic, 2025) use the
abundance of predictions to reduce variance while relying
on the accuracy of labeled1 data to control bias.

Prediction-Powered Inference (PPI) is a powerful
framework for enhancing statistical estimates by
combining limited gold-standard data with machine learning (ML) predictions. While prior
work has demonstrated PPI’s benefits for individual statistical problems, modern applications require answering numerous parallel statistical questions. We introduce Prediction-Powered Adaptive
Shrinkage (PAS), a method that bridges PPI with
empirical Bayes shrinkage to improve estimation
of multiple means. PAS debiases noisy ML predictions within each problem and then borrows
strength across problems by using those same predictions as a reference point for shrinkage. The
amount of shrinkage is determined by minimizing an unbiased estimate of risk, and we prove
that this tuning strategy is asymptotically optimal.
Experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets show that PAS adapts to the reliability of
the ML predictions and outperforms traditional
and modern baselines in large-scale applications.

In this work, we adapt PPI to the estimation of multiple
outcome means in compound estimation settings. Many
applications of PPI naturally involve parallel statistical problems that can be solved simultaneously. For instance, several
PPI methods (Angelopoulos et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024)
have shown improvements in estimating the fraction of spiral galaxies using predictions on images from the Galaxy
Zoo 2 dataset (Willett et al., 2013). While these methods
focus on estimating a single overall fraction, a richer analysis emerges from partitioning galaxies based on metadata
(such as celestial coordinates or pre-defined bins) and estimating the fraction of galaxies within each partition. This
compound estimation approach enables more granular scientific inquiries that account for heterogeneity across galaxy
clusters and spatial locations (Nair & Abraham, 2010).
We demonstrate, both theoretically and empirically, the benefits of solving multiple mean estimation problems simultaneously. Our approach builds on the empirical Bayes (EB)
principle of sharing information across problems (Robbins,
1956; Efron, 2010) as exemplified by James-Stein shrinkage (James & Stein, 1961; Xie et al., 2012). The connection
between modern and classical statistical ideas allows us to
perform within problem PPI estimation in the first place, followed by a shrinkage step reusing the ML predictions in an
adaptive way, which becomes possible through borrowing
information across problems. Our contributions are:

1. Introduction
A major obstacle in answering modern scientific questions
is the scarcity of gold-standard data (Miao et al., 2024b).
While advancements in data collection, such as large-scale
astronomical surveys (York et al., 2000) and web crawling (Penedo et al., 2024), have led to an abundance of
covariates (or features), scientific conclusions often rely
on outcomes (or labels), which are often expensive and
labor-intensive to obtain. The rapid development of machine learning (ML) algorithms has offered a path forward,
with ML predictions increasingly used to supplement goldstandard outcomes and increase the statistical efficiency of
subsequent analyses (Liang et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2020).

1. We propose Prediction-Powered Adaptive Shrinkage
(PAS) for compound mean estimation. PAS inherits the
flexibility of PPI in working with any black-box predictive model and makes minimal distributional assumptions
about the data. Its two-stage estimation process makes
efficient use of the ML predictions as both a variancereduction device and a shrinkage target.

1

Data Science Institute, The University of Chicago 2 Department
of Statistics, The University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Sida
Li <listar2000@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Throughout the paper, we use the terms “labeled” and “goldstandard” interchangeably.

1

