An Asymptotically Optimal Approximation Algorithm for Multiobjective
Submodular Maximization at Scale
Fabian Spaeh 1 Atsushi Miyauchi 2

Abstract

modular objective f (S) is maximized. Applications range
from welfare maximization to experimental design and viral marketing via influence maximization (Bilmes, 2022;
Kempe et al., 2003; Krause & Guestrin, 2007). Maximizing
a single monotone submodular function is well understood,
and the greedy algorithm is practically efficient and obtains
the best possible polynomial-time approximation guarantee
of 1 − 1e ≈ 0.63 (Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978). Moreover,
so-called lazy evaluations make the greedy algorithm highly
scalable (Minoux, 2005).

Maximizing a single submodular set function subject to a cardinality constraint is a well-studied
and central topic in combinatorial optimization.
However, finding a set that maximizes multiple
functions at the same time is much less understood, even though it is a formulation which naturally occurs in robust maximization or problems
with fairness considerations such as fair influence
maximization or fair allocation. In this work, we
consider the problem of maximizing the minimum over many submodular functions, which is
known as multiobjective submodular maximization. All known polynomial-time approximation
algorithms either obtain a weak approximation
guarantee or rely on the evaluation of the multilinear extension. The latter is expensive to evaluate and renders such algorithms impractical. We
bridge this gap and introduce the first scalable and
practical algorithm that obtains the best-known approximation guarantee. We furthermore introduce
a novel application fair centrality maximization
and show how it can be addressed via multiobjective submodular maximization. In our experimental evaluation, we show that our algorithm
outperforms known algorithms in terms of objective value and running time.

Another line of work studies the task where k different submodular objectives have to be simultaneously maximized,
which is called multiobjective submodular maximization.
This is also important for many applications. For instance,
in robust experimental design, the goal is to maximize a submodular function fθ , which depends on an a-priori unknown
parameter θ (Krause et al., 2008). One seeks to find a set
that maximizes fθ simultaneously for all valid parameters θ.
Recently, many applications in artificial intelligence consider the max-min fairness objective, which often naturally
falls into the multiobjective scenario. One such example is
fair influence maximization, where the goal is to maximize
the influence among all groups (Tsang et al., 2019).
Even though applications for the multiobjective setting are
numerous and relevant, solving the problem with theoretical
guarantees still presents challenges for current algorithms.
Indeed, the prior work can be split into two categories of
approximation algorithms: First, there are algorithms that
cannot recover the (1 − 1e )-approximation, but are discrete
and efficient in practice. The best approximation ratio for
such an algorithm is (1 − 1e )2 ≈ 0.40 (Udwani, 2018). Second, there are algorithms that (almost) recover the (1 − 1e )approximation guarantee (Chekuri et al., 2010; Udwani,
2018), but solve a continuous relaxation of the problem
based on the multilinear extension, which is known to be
impractical (Bai et al., 2018; Chen & Kuhnle, 2024; Buchbinder & Feldman, 2024). These algorithms do not scale
to larger problem instances, as the ones necessitated by the
mentioned applications.

1. Introduction
Due to the natural diminishing returns property, maximizing submodular functions is a central task in various fields
such as optimization, machine learning, and economics (Fujishige, 2005; Nemhauser et al., 1978). In submodular maximization subject to a cardinality constraint the task is to find
a set S of size |S| ≤ B for some budget B such that a sub1

Boston University, Boston, USA 2 CENTAI Institute, Turin,
Italy. Correspondence to: Fabian Spaeh <fspaeh@bu.edu>, Atsushi Miyauchi <atsushi.miyauchi@centai.eu>.

This is where our work comes in: We introduce an algorithm that (almost) achieves the (1 − 1e )-approximation, but
does not relax the problem to the continuous setting and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

