Offline Opponent Modeling with Truncated Q-driven Instant Policy Refinement

Yuheng Jing 1 2 Kai Li † 1 2 Bingyun Liu 1 2 Ziwen Zhang 1 2 Haobo Fu 3 Qiang Fu 3 Junliang Xing 4
Jian Cheng † 1 5 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
A fundamental task towards Artificial General Intelligence
is the development of autonomous agents capable of modeling others. The line of work that focuses on adversarial
domains is commonly referred to as Opponent Modeling
(OM), where we build a self-agent (i.e., autonomous agent)
that models the behaviors, goals, or other properties of opponents to reduce its uncertainty about the environment and
enhance its decision-making (He et al., 2016a; Albrecht
& Stone, 2018; Papoudakis et al., 2021a; Nashed & Zilberstein, 2022; Fu et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Ma et al.,
2024; Jing et al., 2024b; 2025). Among the research, Offline
OM (OOM) is a recently proposed learning paradigm (Jing
et al., 2024a). OOM aims to learn an adaptive self-agent
policy that can dynamically adapt to opponents based on the
available opponent information using offline datasets. This
new paradigm makes OM more practical and efficient, as
it relaxes the reliance on interactions with the environment
and opponent policies in the learning process.

Offline Opponent Modeling (OOM) aims to learn
an adaptive autonomous agent policy that dynamically adapts to opponents using an offline dataset
from multi-agent games. Previous work assumes
that the dataset is optimal. However, this assumption is difficult to satisfy in the real world. When
the dataset is suboptimal, existing approaches
struggle to work. To tackle this issue, we propose
a simple and general algorithmic improvement
framework, Truncated Q-driven Instant Policy
Refinement (TIPR), to handle the suboptimality of OOM algorithms induced by datasets. The
TIPR framework is plug-and-play in nature. Compared to original OOM algorithms, it requires only
two extra steps: (1) Learn a horizon-truncated incontext action-value function, namely Truncated
Q, using the offline dataset. The Truncated Q estimates the expected return within a fixed, truncated
horizon and is conditioned on opponent information. (2) Use the learned Truncated Q to instantly
decide whether to perform policy refinement and
to generate policy after refinement during testing.
Theoretically, we analyze the rationale of Truncated Q from the perspective of No Maximization
Bias probability. Empirically, we conduct extensive comparison and ablation experiments in four
representative competitive environments. TIPR effectively improves various OOM algorithms pretrained with suboptimal datasets.

Existing work on OOM assumes that the pre-collected multiagent game dataset is optimal (Jing et al., 2024a). Here,
‘optimal’ means that for each opponent policy in the offline
dataset, all trajectories are generated by the opponent policy
and its Best Response (BR) self-agent policy. However, the
experiences we can collect are often suboptimal, making
it difficult to meet the above optimality requirement. By
‘suboptimal’, we mean that within the dataset, the self-agent
policy can be arbitrarily bad rather than being the BR to the
opponent policy. As expected, we observe that when pretrained on suboptimal datasets, existing OOM algorithms
deteriorate dramatically. This contradicts the original intention of OOM, which is to improve learning efficiency
through offline learning. Regarding this, we aim to explore
how to make OOM effective using suboptimal datasets in
this work. The concept of OOM with suboptimal data is reflected in many real-world applications. E.g., NBA players
study opponents’ styles and strategies by analyzing game
replays to identify their weaknesses, even though many replays include videos of losses against those opponents.

†
Corresponding authors 1 C2 DL, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Tencent AI Lab
4
Tsinghua University 5 School of Future Technology, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences 6 AiRiA. Correspondence to: Kai Li
<kai.li@ia.ac.cn>, Jian Cheng <jian.cheng@ia.ac.cn>.

In Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL), a mainstream
methodoloy to acquire a policy potentially better than
the one embedded in the dataset is to learn an additional

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

