Self-Consistency Preference Optimization

Archiki Prasad 1 2 Weizhe Yuan 1 3 Richard Yuanzhe Pang 1 Jing Xu 1 Maryam Fazel-Zarandi 1 Mohit Bansal 2
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar 1 Jason Weston 1 3 Jane Yu 1

Abstract

propose a “self-rewarding” training pipeline for instructionfollowing, comprising two steps: (i) using the LLM to generate new queries and self-evaluating the generated responses
for each query; and (ii) building preference pairs and training the LLM using iterative direct preference optimization
loss (DPO; Rafailov et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023). However,
Huang et al. (2024) demonstrate that LLMs struggle at evaluating the correctness of their own responses on complex
problem-solving tasks which have an unambiguous correct
answer, thereby rendering Yuan et al.’s self-evaluation approach ineffective. Using an external reward model (RM)
to rank responses can have similar problems; even if such
models are trained on reasoning tasks they may still suffer
on out-of-distribution problems (Casper et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024; Mahan et al., 2024).

Self-alignment, whereby models learn to improve
themselves without human annotation, is a rapidly
growing research area. However, existing techniques often fail to improve complex reasoning tasks due to the difficulty of assigning correct rewards. An orthogonal approach that is
known to improve correctness is self-consistency,
a method applied at inference time based on multiple sampling in order to find the most consistent answer. In this work, we extend the selfconsistency concept to help train models. We
thus introduce self-consistency preference optimization (S C PO), which iteratively trains consistent answers to be preferred over inconsistent
ones on unsupervised new problems. We show
S C PO leads to large improvements over conventional reward model training on reasoning tasks
such as GSM8K and MATH, closing the gap with
supervised training with gold answers or preferences, and that combining S C PO with standard
supervised learning improves results even further.
On ZebraLogic, S C PO finetunes Llama-3 8B to
be superior to Llama-3 70B, Gemma-2 27B, and
Claude-3 Haiku.

To address this, we introduce Self-consistency Preference
Optimization (S C PO). S C PO is an approach to self-train
LLMs for complex problem-solving tasks without access
to gold solutions or final answers in the training data. Our
approach leverages the concept of self-consistency (Wang
et al., 2023), an inference-time only approach that improves
performance on reasoning tasks by generating multiple solutions using the LLM and choosing the most frequent final
answer. More consistent answers are more likely to be correct because mistakes made by the model are often random,
so incorrect solutions are unlikely to lead to the same answer
multiple times (Fischler & Bolles, 1981; Chen et al., 2023).
In S C PO, the self-consistency concept is instead applied
during unsupervised self-training. The method consists of
(i) selecting model-generated queries, (ii) annotating preference pairs using the most self-consistent response (winner)
and least self-consistent response (loser), and (iii) optimizing
a loss function that is weighted for each instance depending
on the model’s confidence in the preference pair. Additionally, we propose a semi-supervised variant of S C PO that
jointly trains LLMs on labeled and unlabeled instances, taking advantage of human annotations whenever available.
Unlike self-consistency applied during inference, S C PO
does not increase inference-time compute, but they can also
be combined together for better performance.

1. Introduction
Training large language models (LLMs) on humanannotated data has improved their performance on a wide
array of tasks (Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023). However, the size and quality of human data remains a major
bottleneck as the data collection process is often resourceintensive in terms of cost, time, and expertise. To address
this challenge, recent works focus on iteratively training
from model-generated data via self-training (Yuan et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2024b). Notably, Yuan et al. (2024)
1
Meta FAIR 2 UNC Chapel Hill 3 New York University. Correspondence to: Archiki Prasad <archiki@cs.unc.edu>.

In our experiments using Llama-3 8B models (Dubey et al.,
2024), we show that even without access to any gold answers during training, two iterations of unsupervised S C PO

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

