Solving Probabilistic Verification Problems of Neural Networks
using Branch and Bound

David Boetius 1 Stefan Leue 1 Tobias Sutter 1

Abstract

neural networks being fragile with respect to various types
of input perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2014; Hosseini et al.,
2017; Bibi et al., 2018; Ebrahimi et al., 2018; Hendrycks
et al., 2021). In contrast, neural network verification analyses neural networks with mathematical rigour, facilitating
the faithful auditing of neural networks.

Probabilistic verification problems of neural networks are concerned with formally analysing
the output distribution of a neural network under a probability distribution of the inputs. Examples of probabilistic verification problems include verifying the demographic parity fairness
notion or quantifying the safety of a neural network. We present a new algorithm for solving
probabilistic verification problems of neural networks based on an algorithm for computing and
iteratively refining lower and upper bounds on
probabilities over the outputs of a neural network. By applying state-of-the-art bound propagation and branch and bound techniques from nonprobabilistic neural network verification, our algorithm significantly outpaces existing probabilistic verification algorithms, reducing solving
times for various benchmarks from the literature
from tens of minutes to tens of seconds. Furthermore, our algorithm compares favourably even to
dedicated algorithms for restricted probabilistic
verification problems. We complement our empirical evaluation with a theoretical analysis, proving
that our algorithm is sound and, under mildly restrictive conditions, also complete when using a
suitable set of heuristics.

In this paper, we consider probabilistic verification problems of neural networks, which are concerned with proving
statements about the output distribution of a neural network
given a distribution of the inputs. We refer to solving probabilistic verification problems as probabilistic verification. An
example of probabilistic verification is proving that a neural
network net making a binary decision affecting a person
(for example, hire/do not hire, credit approved/denied) satisfies the demographic parity fairness notion (Barocas et al.,
2023) under a probability distribution Px of the network
inputs x representing the person
Px [net(x) = yes | x is disadvantaged]
≥ γ,
Px [net(x) = yes | x is advantaged]

(1)

where ‘x is disadvantaged’ could, for example, refer to a
person not being male and γ ∈ [0, 1] with γ = 0.8 being a
common choice (Feldman et al., 2015). A closely related
problem to probabilistic verification is computing bounds
on probabilities over a neural network. An example of this
is quantifying the safety of a neural network by bounding
Px [net(x) is unsafe].

(2)

In this paper, we introduce a novel algorithm for computing bounds on probabilities such as Equation (2) using a
branch and bound framework (Land & Doig, 2010; Morrison et al., 2016; Bunel et al., 2020). These bounds allow
us to verify probabilistic statements like Equation (1) using
bound propagation (Moore et al., 2009; Albarghouthi et al.,
2017). Our algorithm P ROBABILISTIC V ERIFICATION (PV)
is a fast and generally applicable probabilistic verification
algorithm for neural networks based on massively parallel
branch and bound neural network verification (Xu et al.,
2021) using linear relaxations of neural networks (Weng
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019). Our theoretical analysis shows that PV is sound and, under mildly
restrictive conditions, complete when using suitable branching and splitting heuristics.

1. Introduction
As deep learning spreads through society, it becomes increasingly important to ensure the reliability of artificial
neural networks, including aspects of fairness and safety.
However, manually introspecting neural networks is infeasible due to their non-transparent nature. Furthermore, empirical assessments of neural networks are challenged by
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Konstanz, Konstanz, Baden-Würtemberg, Germany. Correspondence to: David Boetius <david.boetius@uni-konstanz.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

