On the Benefits of Active Data Collection in Operator Learning

Unique Subedi 1 Ambuj Tewari 1

Abstract

F under a suitable metric. The hope is that for a new input function f , evaluating u
b = Fbn (f ) will be considerably
faster than solving for u through traditional methods, with
minimal loss in accuracy.

We study active data collection strategies for operator learning when the target operator is linear and
the input functions are drawn from a mean-zero
stochastic process with continuous covariance kernels. With an active data collection strategy, we
establish an error convergence rate in terms of the
decay rate of the eigenvalues of the covariance
kernel. We can achieve arbitrarily fast error convergence rates with sufficiently rapid eigenvalue
decay of the covariance kernels. This contrasts
with the passive (i.i.d.) data collection strategies,
where the convergence rate is never faster than
linear decay (∼ n−1 ). In fact, for our setting,
we show a non-vanishing lower bound for any
passive data collection strategy, regardless of the
eigenvalues decay rate of the covariance kernel.
Overall, our results show the benefit of active data
collection strategies in operator learning over their
passive counterparts.

In this work, we study the sample complexity of operator
learning. Specifically, given an operator F, how many inputoutput pairs {(fj , F(fj ))}nj=1 are necessary to estimate an
operator Fbn such that Fbn (f ) ≈ F(f ) for all relevant f ?
This question has been studied in several specific contexts,
such as for linear operators with fixed singular value decomposition by de Hoop et al. (2023) and Subedi & Tewari
(2024), for Lipschitz operators by Liu et al. (2024), and
for the random feature model by Nelsen & Stuart (2021).
These are just a few representative works, and we refer the
reader to (Kovachki et al., 2024b, Section 5) for a more
comprehensive review of such sample complexity results.
A common theme of these sample complexity analyses is
that they are conducted within the framework of traditional
statistical learning (Kovachki et al., 2023, Section 2.2). In
the statistical setting, the learner has access to training samples {(fj , F(fj ))}nj=1 , where fj ∼iid µ from some probability measure µ, and the objective is to produce an estimator
Fbn such that Fbn (f ) ≈ F(f ) on average over test samples
f ∼ µ. This scenario is also referred to as the passive learning setting. Under reasonable non-trivial assumptions, the
best achievable rate of error convergence in this setting is
∼ 1/n, when Fbn is evaluated under an appropriate metric,
say the p-th power of the Lpµ -Bochner norm.

1. Introduction
There is an increasing interest in using data-driven methods
to estimate solution operators of partial differential equations (PDEs) encountered in scientific applications. To set
up the problem, consider X ⊆ Rd and a linear PDE of the
form Lu = f , subject to the boundary condition u(x) = 0
for all x ∈ boundary(X ). The goal, given a function f , is
to find the corresponding solution u that satisfies the PDE.

1.1. Our Contribution

Traditionally, numerical PDE solvers are used to compute
u from f . In contrast, operator learning focuses on approximating the solution operator of the PDE (Lu et al., 2021;
Kovachki et al., 2023). Under typical conditions, this PDE
has a linear solution operator F such that u = F(f ) for all
f in an appropriate function space. Given a set of training
samples (f1 , u1 ), . . . , (fn , un ), the aim is to learn an operator Fbn that closely approximates the true solution operator

In this work, we go beyond the passive statistical setting and
study operator learning where the learner is not restricted
to iid samples from a source distribution and can use active
data collection strategies. We focus on the case where the
operator of interest F is a bounded linear operator and µ is
a distribution with zero mean and the covariance structure
defined by a continuous kernel K. Such distributions include Gaussian processes with common covariance kernels.
For a given covariance kernel K, our main result provides
an active data collection strategy, an estimation rule, and
establishes an error bound for the proposed estimator in
terms of the eigenvalue decay of the integral operator of
K. Formally, if λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ . . . are the eigenvalues of the

1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
USA. Correspondence to: Unique Subedi <subedi@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

