You Always Recognize Me (YARM): Robust Texture Synthesis
Against Multi-View Corruption

Weihang Ran 1 Wei Yuan 2 Yinqiang Zheng 1

Abstract
Damage to imaging systems and complex external
environments often introduce corruptions, which
can impair the performance of deep learning models pretrained on high-quality image data. Previous methods have focused on restoring degraded
images or fine-tuning models to adapt to outof-distribution data. However, these approaches
struggle with complex, unknown corruptions and
often reduce model accuracy on high-quality data.
Inspired by the use of warning colors and camouflage in the real world, we propose designing a
robust appearance that can enhance model recognition of low-quality image data. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that certain universal features in
radiance fields can be applied across objects of the
same class with different geometries. We also examine the impact of different proxy models on the
transferability of robust appearances. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method, which outperforms existing image restoration and model fine-tuning approaches
across different experimental settings, and retains
effectiveness when transferred to models with different architectures. Code will be available at
https://github.com/SilverRAN/YARM.

Figure 1. The proposed method is illustrated in this diagram. During imaging of a real-world object, various types of degradation
(e.g., noise from damaged camera components, blur from object
motion, or adverse weather conditions like snowfall) can be introduced, resulting in low-quality images that degrade performance in
downstream tasks (e.g., image classification). Previous approaches
have primarily focused on data preprocessing (image restoration)
or model fine-tuning. In contrast, we propose addressing this issue
from a data perspective, enhancing robustness to low-quality imaging by altering the appearance of natural objects.

& Karam, 2017; Geirhos et al., 2017). For instance, commonly encountered conditions like rain or snow can reduce
the accuracy of target detection models in recognizing traffic
signs (Wang et al., 2022). This lack of robustness hinders
the advancement of neural network technologies in industrial applications where high accuracy and reliability are
essential. Addressing these issues is also critical for the transition from Artificial Narrow Intelligence (ANI) to Artificial
General Intelligence (AGI).

1. Introduction
Neural network-based deep learning technologies have
made significant impacts across various domains in modern society, including facial recognition, autonomous driving, and 3D reconstruction. However, previous research
has shown that neural network models can yield erroneous
predictions in certain scenarios, such as under adversarial
attacks or image degradation (Hosseini et al., 2017; Dodge

Previous studies have proposed two primary approaches
to address this issue (see Fig.1): input preprocessing (Pei
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018; Son et al., 2020), and model
fine-tuning (Wang et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2023). Since model accuracy often degrades due to input
data being attacked or corrupted, restoring low-quality data
to its original state could theoretically prevent prediction
errors. This approach typically employs image restoration
techniques to remove corruptions in the input image, aiming to recover its original content as closely as possible.
Methods include image denoising, deblurring, rain and fog
removal, and super-resolution. However, these techniques

1

The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 Tohoku University,
Japan. Correspondence to: Yinqiang Zheng <yqzheng@ai.utokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

