Symmetry-Robust 3D Orientation Estimation

Christopher Scarvelis 1 David Benhaim 2 Paul Zhang 2

Abstract

A shape’s orientation axes are not intrinsic geometric quantities: They are determined by humans based on physical
and functional considerations. It is therefore difficult to
construct simple geometric algorithms for orientation estimation. However, given a large dataset of canonically
oriented shapes, one may pose orientation estimation as a
supervised learning problem. This task is challenging, and
developing an orientation pipeline that reliably estimates
complete orientations of general shapes remains an open
problem.

Orientation estimation is a fundamental task in
3D shape analysis which consists of estimating a
shape’s orientation axes: its side-, up-, and frontaxes. Using this data, one can rotate a shape into
canonical orientation, where its orientation axes
are aligned with the coordinate axes. Developing
an orientation algorithm that reliably estimates
complete orientations of general shapes remains
an open problem. We introduce a two-stage orientation pipeline that achieves state of the art performance on up-axis estimation and further demonstrate its efficacy on full-orientation estimation,
where one seeks all three orientation axes. Unlike
previous work, we train and evaluate our method
on all of Shapenet rather than a subset of classes.
We motivate our engineering contributions by theory describing fundamental obstacles to orientation estimation for rotationally-symmetric shapes,
and show how our method avoids these obstacles.

The naı̈ve deep learning approach is to train a model with
an L2 loss to directly predict a shape’s orientation from a
point cloud of surface samples. However, this strategy fails
for shapes with rotational symmetries, where the optimal
solution to the L2 regression problem is the Euclidean mean
(Moakher, 2002) of a shape’s orientations over all of its
symmetries. In contrast, works such as Poursaeed et al.
(2020) discretize the unit sphere into a set of fixed rotations
and train a classifier to predict a probability distribution
over these rotations, but find that this approach fails for any
sufficiently dense discretization of the unit sphere.

1. Introduction

Our key insight is to divide orientation estimation into two
tractable sub-problems. In the first stage (the quotient orienter), we solve a continuous regression problem to recover
a shape’s orientation up to octahedral symmetries. In the
second stage (the flipper), we solve a discrete classification
problem to predict one of 24 octahedral flips that returns
the first-stage output to canonical orientation. Octahedral
symmetries form a small set covering a substantial proportion of the symmetries occurring in real-world shapes.
Consequently, quotienting our first-stage regression problem by octahedral symmetries prevents its predictions from
collapsing to averages, while also keeping the subsequent
classification problem tractable.

Orientation estimation is a fundamental task in 3D shape
analysis which consists of estimating a shape’s orientation
axes: its side-, up-, and front-axes. Using this data, one
can rotate a shape into canonical orientation, in which the
shape’s orientation axes are aligned with the coordinate
axes. This task is especially important as a pre-processing
step in 3D deep learning, where deep networks are typically
trained on datasets of canonically oriented shapes but applied to arbitrarily-oriented shapes at inference time. While
data augmentation or equivariant and invariant architectures
may improve a model’s robustness to input rotations, these
techniques come at the cost of data efficiency and model
expressivity (Kuchnik & Smith, 2019; Kim et al., 2023). In
contrast, orientation estimation allows one to pre-process
shapes at inference time so that their orientation matches a
model’s training data.

Using this strategy, our method accurately estimates a
shape’s orientation up to one of its symmetries, which suffices for returning the shape to an upright and front-facing
pose. As we are unaware of prior work on this problem,
we also benchmark our pipeline’s performance on the wellstudied task of up-axis prediction, in which one seeks to
return a shape to an upright (but not necessarily front-facing)
pose, and find that our work achieves state-of-the-art performance on this task. Unlike previous work, we train and

1
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA 2 Backflip AI, San Francisco,
CA. Correspondence to: Christopher Scarvelis <scarv@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

