Internal Causal Mechanisms Robustly Predict
Language Model Out-of-Distribution Behaviors

Jing Huang * 1 Junyi Tao * 1 Thomas Icard 1 Diyi Yang 1 Christopher Potts 1
1. Abstract the causal mechanism for correct ID samples

Abstract

output

Interpretability research now offers a variety of
techniques for identifying abstract internal mechanisms in neural networks. Can such techniques be
used to predict how models will behave on out-ofdistribution examples? In this work, we provide
a positive answer to this question. Through a diverse set of language modeling tasks—including
symbol manipulation, knowledge retrieval, and
instruction following—we show that the most robust features for correctness prediction are those
that play a distinctive causal role in the model’s
behavior. Specifically, we propose two methods
that leverage causal mechanisms to predict the
correctness of model outputs: counterfactual simulation (checking whether key causal variables
are realized) and value probing (using the values of those variables to make predictions). Both
achieve high AUC-ROC in distribution and outperform methods that rely on causal-agnostic features
in out-of-distribution settings, where predicting
model behaviors is more crucial. Our work thus
highlights a novel and significant application for
internal causal analysis of language models.

1

localize

position

name a

name b

name c

2. Predict the correctness of the model’s OOD outputs
Wrong

output

IIA = 0.1

e
rven
inte

output

name a name b name c
position

Correct

output

name a name b name c

inte
rve
ne

Abstracted High-level
model for ID samples

name a name b name c

position

IIA = 0.9

Figure 1. We propose a two-stage framework to predict correctness of model outputs under distribution shifts, illustrated using
the counterfactual simulation method on the Indirect Object Identification task (Wang et al., 2023). Stage 1 (Abstract): Identify
the abstract causal mechanisms the model uses to solve the task
correctly on in-distribution data. Stage 2 (Predict): Predict the
model’s output correctness on out-of-distribution inputs by checking whether it implements the same mechanisms. Dark blue
indicates the key causal variables used for correctness prediction.

assumed that a model will succeed at a generalization task
if and only if it has induced a mechanism that implements a
“correct” algorithm for that task (provided one exists).

Introduction

A core task in interpretability research is to identify internal
mechanisms that mediate a model’s input–output behavior.
The motivations for this focus are several. One is simply that
compressed, algorithmic descriptions of complex models
can help confer a sense of understanding insofar as the
algorithms themselves are relatively simple and intuitive.
Another, related motivation stems from an intuition that the
very presence of abstract algorithmic mechanisms is deeply
related to a model’s ability to generalize beyond the specific
domains in which it has been trained. Indeed, it is commonly

IIA = 0.1 → pr

IIA = 1.0 → pre

There are two directions to this hypothesized correspondence. In one direction, when a model is successful, this
warrants a search for the internal mechanisms that explain
success. That is, we search for an appropriate abstraction of
the model to elucidate how the model was able to generalPredict
output
correctness
on OOD data
ize (Geiger et al., 2024a). This
is the
focus of
interpretability
using
identified
causal
mechanism
work that aims to understand
thethe
internal
causal
mechanisms
that mediate LLM behaviors (Vig et al., 2020; Geiger et al.,
2021; Finlayson et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023; Meng et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023).

*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University. Correspondence to:
Jing Huang <hij@stanford.edu>.

It would be desirable if we were able to move in the other
direction as well, from identifying an abstract mechanism to
better predicting model generalization behaviors. We refer
to this direction as prediction. In this work, we explore a

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

