Label Distribution Propagation-based Label Completion for Crowdsourcing

Tong Wu 1 Liangxiao Jiang 1 Wenjun Zhang 1 Chaoqun Li 2

Abstract

sition often presents significant challenges (Tu et al., 2019;
Wu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Traditionally, highquality annotated data is generated through manual annotation by domain experts, but which is both time-consuming
and expensive. As a result, efficiently obtaining large-scale
and high-quality annotated data has become a major bottleneck in the practical application of supervised learning.

In real-world crowdsourcing scenarios, most
workers often annotate a few instances only,
which results in a significantly sparse crowdsourced label matrix and subsequently harms the
performance of label integration algorithms. Recent work called worker similarity-based label
completion (WSLC) has been proven to be an
effective algorithm to addressing this issue. However, WSLC considers solely the correlation of the
labels annotated by different workers on per individual instance while totally ignoring the correlation of the labels annotated by different workers
among similar instances. To fill this gap, we propose a novel label distribution propagation-based
label completion (LDPLC) algorithm. At first, we
use worker similarity weighted majority voting
to initialize a label distribution for each missing
label. Then, we design a label distribution propagation algorithm to enable each missing label
of each instance to iteratively absorb its neighbors’ label distributions. Finally, we complete
each missing label based on its converged label
distribution. Experimental results on both realworld and simulated crowdsourced datasets show
that LDPLC significantly outperforms WSLC in
enhancing the performance of label integration
algorithms. Our codes and datasets are available
at https://github.com/jiangliangxiao/LDPLC.

To break through this bottleneck, crowdsourcing is introduced as an efficient and cost-effective method to rapidly obtain large volumes of annotated data (Xu et al., 2022; Ji et al.,
2023) . Currently, mainstream crowdsourcing platforms include Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), CloudCrowd and
CrowdFlower. These platforms utilize the internet to outsource tasks traditionally performed by domain experts to a
distributed group of non-professional crowd workers (Liang
et al., 2023; Mak & Lam, 2023). However, due to variations
in the knowledge and abilities of crowd workers, the annotated labels are often accompanied by noise and inconsistent
quality. To address this issue, each instance is typically
assigned to multiple crowd workers and thus obtains its multiple noisy label set. Then, label integration is used to infer
the integrated label of each instance from its multiple noisy
label set (Sheng et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2024a). In recent
years, label integration has attracted widespread attention
from researchers, and a large number of algorithms have
been proposed from different perspectives (Zheng et al.,
2017; Zhang, 2022; Zhang et al., 2024c).
However, in real-world crowdsourcing scenarios, most
workers often annotate a few instances only, thus most instances do not receive sufficient labels, leading to a large
number of missing labels in the crowdsourced label matrix.
The sparse label matrix significantly harms the performance
of label integration algorithms. To mitigate the problem of
sparsity, a small number of researchers have paid attention
to the importance of the preprocessing of crowdsourced label matrix and proposed a few label completion algorithms.
For example, to address binary-class crowdsourcing tasks,
Jung & Lease (2012) propose a probabilistic matrix factorization (PMF)-based label completion algorithm. To further
improve its performance, Yang et al. (2024) propose a PMFbased three-stage label completion (PMF-TLC) algorithm.
Recently, to address multi-class crowdsourcing tasks, Wu
et al. (2024) propose worker similarity-based label completion (WSLC), which significantly improves the performance

1. Introduction
Supervised learning is a critical branch of machine learning, with the primary goal of learning the mapping between
inputs and outputs from annotated data (Li & Tang, 2017;
Jiang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021). High-quality annotated
data is crucial for the success of model training, but its acqui1
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan 430074, China 2 School of Mathematics and Physics, China
University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China. Correspondence to: Liangxiao Jiang <ljiang@cug.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

