Two Tickets are Better than One:
Fair and Accurate Hiring Under Strategic LLM Manipulations

Lee Cohen * 1 Connie Hong * 1 Jack Hsieh * 1 Judy Hanwen Shen * 1

Abstract

journalists (Lytton, 2024), and policy makers (City of New
York, 2021). AI tools that exhibit undue biases and unexplainable behavior present a major barrier to achieving
accountability in these algorithmic hiring schemes (Dastin,
2018). Although algorithmic hiring tools are designed with
the goal of hiring the best candidates, these tools may not
be robust to candidates manipulating their application materials. For example, Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS)
are widely used to screen qualified candidates in the first
stage of the hiring process: however, there exist many tutorials for manipulating resumes for this system (Stahl, 2022).
This problem has been studied through the lens of strategic
classification where individuals can manipulate their inputs
(e.g., a job application) to influence the decision made by
a classifier (e.g., a hiring algorithm) (Hardt et al., 2016a;
Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2020; Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021).
The goal of the hiring side is to design a strategy-proof selection algorithm, whereas the goal of the applicants is to
maximize their utility: the difference between the benefit of
receiving a positive prediction and the cost of manipulation.
The applicant’s “best response” is then the optimal way an
individual should manipulate their input — given knowledge of the classifier’s behavior — in order to maximize
their utility. The challenge lies in designing classifiers that
are robust to such manipulations while maintaining fairness
and accuracy.

In an era of increasingly capable foundation models, job seekers are turning to generative AI tools
to enhance their application materials. However,
unequal access to and knowledge about generative AI tools can harm both employers and candidates by reducing the accuracy of hiring decisions
and giving some candidates an unfair advantage.
To address these challenges, we introduce a new
variant of the strategic classification framework
tailored to manipulations performed using large
language models, accommodating varying levels
of manipulations and stochastic outcomes. We
propose a “two-ticket” scheme, where the hiring
algorithm applies an additional manipulation to
each submitted resume and considers this manipulated version together with the original submitted
resume. We establish theoretical guarantees for
this scheme, showing improvements for both the
fairness and accuracy of hiring decisions when
the true positive rate is maximized subject to a no
false positives constraint. We further generalize
this approach to an n-ticket scheme and prove
that hiring outcomes converge to a fixed, groupindependent decision, eliminating disparities arising from differential LLM access. Finally, we
empirically validate our framework and the performance of our two-ticket scheme on real resumes
using an open-source resume screening tool.

With the recent proliferation of generative AI services that
are now widely used by job seekers (Chamorro-Premuzic,
2024), a new variable has been introduced to the algorithm
hiring cycle and strategic classification. Writing or editing
a resume using generative AI has become accessible and
widespread. In a recent survey, 57% of respondents admitted
to using AI to create their resume (Business Wire, 2025).
Since candidates have no knowledge of how employers
make hiring decisions, the optimal strategic classification
response becomes straightforward: candidates edit their
resumes using their preferred AI tool, opting for a premium
version if they recognize its advantages and can afford it.
As a result, those accessing better models may gain an
unfair advantage in the selection stage of automatic hiring
algorithms. Thus, companies may be filtering for candidates
who used the best LLMs rather than candidates who are the
most qualified.

1. Introduction
Hiring decisions can profoundly impact an individual’s professional path and long-term success. As algorithmic tools
are increasingly deployed to recommend or make these
decisions, they have rightfully come under scrutiny from
economists (Hu & Chen, 2018; van den Broek et al., 2020),
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Judy Hanwen Shen <jhshen@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

