Position: Deep Learning is Not So Mysterious or Different

Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

tinct to neural networks, or particularly mysterious.
Moreover, while some generalization frameworks such as
VC dimension (Vapnik, 1998) and Rademacher complexity
(Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002) do not explain these phenomena, they are formally described by other long-standing
frameworks such as PAC-Bayes (McAllester, 1999; Catoni,
2007; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017), and even simple countable
hypothesis generalization bounds (Valiant, 1984; ShalevShwartz & Ben-David, 2014; Lotfi et al., 2024a). In other
words, understanding deep learning does not require rethinking generalization, and it never did.

Deep neural networks are often seen as different from other model classes by defying conventional notions of generalization. Popular examples of anomalous generalization behaviour include benign overfitting, double descent, and the
success of overparametrization. This position paper argues that these phenomena are not distinct
to neural networks, or particularly mysterious.
Moreover, this generalization behaviour can be
intuitively understood, and rigorously characterized, using long-standing generalization frameworks such as PAC-Bayes and countable hypothesis bounds. We present soft inductive biases as
a key unifying principle in explaining these phenomena: rather than restricting the hypothesis
space to avoid overfitting, embrace a flexible hypothesis space, with a soft preference for simpler
solutions that are consistent with the data. This
principle can be encoded in many model classes,
and thus deep learning is not as mysterious or different from other model classes as it might seem.
However, we also highlight how deep learning is
relatively distinct in other ways, such as its ability
for representation learning, phenomena such as
mode connectivity, and its relative universality.

We are not aiming to argue that deep learning is fully understood, to comprehensively survey works on understanding
deep learning phenomena, or to assign historical priority to
any work for explaining some phenomenon. We are also not
claiming to be the first to note that any of these phenomena
can be reproduced using other model classes. In fact, we
want to make clear that there has been significant progress in
understanding what is often perceived as mysterious generalization behaviour in deep learning, and contrary to common
belief, much of this behaviour applies outside of deep learning and can be formally explained using frameworks that
have existed for decades. The textbooks wouldn’t need to
be re-written had they paid attention to what was already
known about generalization, decades ago! Instead, we need
to bridge communities, and acknowledge progress.
Indeed, we will aim to introduce the simplest examples
possible, often basic linear models, to replicate these phenomena and explain the intuition behind them. The hope
is that by relying on particularly simple examples, we can
drive home the point that these generalization behaviours
are hardly distinct to neural networks and can in fact be
understood with basic principles. For example, in Figure 1,
we show that benign overfitting and double descent can be
reproduced and explained with simple linear models.

1. Introduction
“The textbooks must be re-written!”
Deep neural networks are often considered mysterious and
different from other model classes, with behaviour that can
defy the conventional wisdom about generalization. When
asked what makes deep learning different, it is common to
point to phenomena such as overparametrization, double
descent, and benign overfitting (Zhang et al., 2021; Nakkiran
et al., 2020; Belkin et al., 2019; Shazeer et al., 2017).

We will also treat all of these phenomena collectively,
through a unifying notion of soft inductive biases. While
inductive biases are often thought of as restriction biases —
constraining the size of a hypothesis space for improved data
efficiency and generalization — there is no need for restriction biases. Instead, we can embrace an arbitrarily flexible
hypothesis space, combined with soft biases that express a
preference for certain solutions over others, without entirely

Our position is that none of these phenomena are dis1
New York University. Correspondence to:
Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

