Semi-Supervised Blind Quality Assessment with Confidence-quantifiable
Pseudo-label Learning for Authentic Images

Yan Zhong 1 2 Chenxi Yang 1 2 Suyuan Zhao 3 Tingting Jiang 2 4 B

Abstract
This paper presents CPL-IQA, a novel semisupervised blind image quality assessment
(BIQA) framework for authentic distortion scenarios. To address the challenge of limited labeled data in IQA area, our approach leverages
confidence-quantifiable pseudo-label learning to
effectively utilize unlabeled authentically distorted images. The framework operates through a
preprocessing stage and two training phases: first
converting MOS labels to vector labels via entropy minimization, followed by an iterative process that alternates between model training and
label optimization. The key innovations of CPLIQA include a manifold assumption-based label
optimization strategy and a confidence learning
method for pseudo-labels, which enhance reliability and mitigate outlier effects. Experimental results demonstrate the framework’s superior performance on real-world distorted image datasets, offering a more standardized semi-supervised learning paradigm without requiring additional supervision or network complexity.

Figure 1. Real-world images with similar MOS values may differ
greatly in score distribution and standard deviation (std), such
as images (A) and (C), as well as images (B) and (D). These
four images are all taken from the authentically distorted image
database KonIQ-10k (Hosu et al., 2020).

of the processed image. Therefore, plentiful image quality assessment (IQA) methods have emerged. According
to the amount of available reference images, existing objective IQA methods can be categorized as Full-Reference
approaches(FR-IQA), Reduced-Reference approaches(RRIQA) and No-Reference approaches (NR-IQA) (Zhai & Min,
2020). Since it is difficult to obtain the undistorted version
of authentically distorted images in practical applications,
growing attention has been given to NR-IQA (also termed as
Blind IQA, i.e.BIQA) (Su et al., 2020), which can be applied
in various domains, such as image denoising (Tian et al.,
2020), restoration (Li et al., 2023) and generation (Elasri
et al., 2022). In this work, we focus on BIQA methods for
authentically distorted images. Traditional BIQA methods
aim to predict the image quality scores (i.e. Mean Opinion Scores, MOS) by manually extracting features from
distorted images (Liu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2017; Jiang
et al., 2017). While effective for synthesized distortions,
they struggle with authentic distortions. Therefore, there
have sprung up numerous studies about Deep Learning (DL)
-based BIQA methods for authentically distorted images,
due to its strong ability in learning and the success of fusing
discriminative features in visual domains (Fang et al., 2020;
Su et al., 2020; Talebi & Milanfar, 2018; Ying et al., 2020).
However, the training process of these methods requires
a large amount of data to prevent overfitting, while there
exists no large database of authentically distorted images
nowadays since the annotation process is expensive and

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the proliferation of real-world
image datasets, which is the cornerstone of computer vision research and application (Yue et al., 2022). However,
there may occur distortions during the process of image
acquisition, transmission, and processing (Prabhakaran &
Swamy, 2023), leading to degradation in the visual quality
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information
Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Yan Zhong <zhongyan@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Tingting Jiang
<ttjiang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

