Efficient Length-Generalizable Attention via Causal Retrieval
for Long-Context Language Modeling

Xiang Hu 1 Zhihao Teng 2 Jun Zhao 3 Wei Wu 1 Kewei Tu 2

Abstract

Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024). While Transformers excel in representational power, they still struggle to
process longer contexts as expanding the attention window
beyond the pre-trained size may disrupt attention distribution (Wang et al., 2024). Some methods use a sliding window mechanism (Xiao et al., 2024) with a fixed attention
field to achieve extrapolation, but they fail to capture longdistance context dependencies outside the attention window.
Thus, a main challenge for the attention mechanism lies
in how to achieve length generalization but still maintain
random access to long-range information. To mitigate the
issue, most long-range LMs (Reid et al., 2024) resort to
expanding the attention window (Liu et al., 2023) during
post-training, significantly increasing training and inference
costs due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention.

Despite the success of Transformers, handling
longer contexts remains challenging due to the
limited length generalization and quadratic complexity of self-attention. Transformers often require post-training with a larger attention window, significantly increasing computational and
memory costs. In this paper, we propose a novel
attention mechanism based on dynamic context,
Grouped Cross Attention (GCA), which can generalize to 1000 × the pre-training context length
while maintaining the ability to access distant information with a constant attention window size.
For a given input sequence, we split it into chunks
and use each chunk to retrieve top-k relevant past
chunks for subsequent text generation. Specifically, unlike most previous works that use an offthe-shelf retriever, our key innovation allows the
retriever to learn how to retrieve past chunks that
better minimize the auto-regressive loss of subsequent tokens in an end-to-end manner. Such a
mechanism accommodates retrieved chunks with
a fixed-size attention window to achieve longrange information access, significantly reducing
computational and memory costs during training
and inference. Experiments show that GCA-based
models achieve near-perfect accuracy in passkey
retrieval for 16M context lengths, which is 1000×
the training length.

In this work, inspired by retrieval-based language models
(RLM) (Asai et al., 2023), we introduce an efficient attention mechanism that achieves both length generalization and
long-range information accessibility. Typically, RLMs (Rubin & Berant, 2024) divide an input sequence into chunks,
retrieve relevant ones from the history for the current input,
and then integrate the retrieved chunks into the decoder to
predict subsequent tokens. By choosing top-k chunks as a
“dynamic context”, RLMs can maintain the ability to access
distant information without expanding the attention window. However, most RLMs (Lewis et al., 2020; Borgeaud
et al., 2022) rely on separately pre-trained retrievers, whose
retrieved chunks are not necessarily helpful to the causal
LMs. Although a straightforward approach is training the
retriever end-to-end with the auto-regressive loss, it is rarely
explored. The main difficulty is that the relevance scores
computed by the retriever do not participate in the next token
prediction, thus cannot receive gradient backpropagation
from the auto-regressive loss. To overcome the difficulty, we
propose Grouped Cross-Attention (GCA), a novel attention
mechanism which integrates chunk-to-chunk retrieval as an
inherent ability, thus the retriever can learn to retrieve past
chunks that most effectively reduce the auto-regressive loss
of subsequent tokens, which we refer to as causal retrieval.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), serving as the backbone
of large language models (LLM), have demonstrated exceptional performance across a wide range of natural language
processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023;
1

Ant Group 2 ShanghaiTech University 3 Fudan University. Correspondence to: Wei Wu <congyue.ww@antgroup.com>, Kewei
Tu <tukw@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.

Specifically, GCA enables the relevance scores to participate
in the next token prediction in a differentiable way and can
be understood as a chunk-wise analogy of token-wise self-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

