StealthInk: A Multi-bit and Stealthy Watermark for Large Language Models

Ya Jiang 1 2 Chuxiong Wu 1 Massieh Kordi Boroujeny 2 Brian Mark 2 Kai Zeng 2

Abstract

democratic processes more easily. Moreover, there is a risk
of misuse of LLMs for scams or academic plagiarism. To
tackle these issues, it is crucial to implement regulations and
technical protections to encourage fair and responsible usage. Major providers of LLMs, including OpenAI, Google,
and Meta, have committed to watermarking text generated
by their models as part of this effort (Bartz & Hu., 2023).

Watermarking for large language models (LLMs)
offers a promising approach to identifying AIgenerated text. Existing approaches, however,
either compromise the distribution of original generated text by LLMs or are limited to embedding
zero-bit information that only allows for watermark detection but ignores identification. We propose StealthInk, a stealthy multi-bit watermarking
scheme that preserves the original text distribution while enabling the embedding of provenance
information, such as userID, TimeStamp, and
modelID, within LLM-generated text. This enhances fast traceability without requiring access
to the language model’s API or prompts. We derive a lower bound on the number of tokens necessary for watermark detection at a fixed equal error
rate, which provides insights on how to enhance
the capacity. Comprehensive empirical evaluations across diverse tasks highlight the stealthiness, detectability, and resilience of StealthInk,
establishing it as an effective solution for LLM
watermarking applications.

Several papers suggest incorporating invisible watermarks
into text to detect AI-generated content (Kirchenbauer et al.,
2023; 2024; Christ et al., 2024; Kuditipudi et al., 2024; Hu
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Aaronson,
2023; Wu et al., 2024). However, detecting whether text is
watermarked is insufficient to prevent misuse by malicious
users.
Rather than solely embedding a zero-bit watermark to identify AI-generated content, it is crucial to employ a multi-bit
watermark to track text provenance. Previous multi-bit watermarking schemes can be categorized into two groups: 1)
undetectable or distortion-free watermarking, in which the
watermarked text has exactly the same distribution as the
non-watermarked text, e.g., (Kordi Boroujeny et al., 2024)
and (Zamir, 2024), and 2) watermarking that allows some
distortion of the output distribution (Wang et al., 2024; Fernandez et al., 2023; Yoo et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2024). A
notable issue not tackled by the schemes in the first group is
robustness against modifications made to the text generated
by these methods.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2022) or the open-sourced LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023)
and Gemini (Team et al., 2023), which have the remarkable
ability to generate high-quality text, have become a crucial
part of various text generation APIs, such as question answering, blog creation, and programming assistance (Austin
et al., 2021; Perkins, 2023). However, these sophisticated
language models’ increased availability and capabilities
present a significant concern. A key concern is their potential for facilitating the creation of fake news, which could
be disseminated at scale, influencing public opinion and

In the second group, (Wang et al., 2024) use a proxy language model to guide LLM text generation according to the
message, requiring extra resources and distorting the LLM’s
distribution. Other works (Fernandez et al., 2023; Qu et al.,
2024) cyclically shift vocabulary permutations according
to the message and bias tokens in a green list to enable
efficient multi-bit decoding. However, overlapping shifts
introduce interference, weakening message distinctiveness
and statistical separation. To counteract this, a stronger bias
is needed for reliable extraction, but this increases text distortion and reduces stealthiness. The multi-bit watermarking
schemes proposed by (Yoo et al., 2024) essentially extend
the reweighting approach outlined in (Kirchenbauer et al.,
2023). This approach biases the frequency of certain words
or phrases to embed the watermark during the generation
process, such that the output distribution deviates from the

1
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA, USA 2 Wireless Cyber Center, College of Engineering
and Computing, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA.
Correspondence to: Ya Jiang <yjiang25@gmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

