An Online Statistical Framework for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Xinsong Ma 1 Xin Zou 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

OOD detection has garnered considerable attention recently
and an extensive collection of literature has been developed
to tackle this issue (Liu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), which mainly devote to obtaining a powerful score function. However, these methods
neglect to design a decision rule based on their score function, and directly use traditional threshold-based decision
rule, where the threshold is determined such that the true
positive rate (TPR) on ID validation set is 95% before testing (Sun et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022). But the traditional
decision rule is empirical and thus its outputs lack rigorous
statistical guarantee. Consequently, a natural question arise:
How to design an OOD detection method with rigorous theoretical guarantee and well empirical performance? This
paper aims to systematically study this question.

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection task is significant in reliable and safety-critical applications.
Existing approaches primarily focus on developing the powerful score function, but overlook the
design of decision-making rules based on these
score function. In contrast to prior studies, we rethink the OOD detection task from an perspective
of online multiple hypothesis testing. We then
propose a novel generalized LOND (g-LOND)
algorithm to solve the above problem. Theoretically, the g-LOND algorithm controls false discovery rate (FDR) at pre-specified level without
the consideration for the dependence between the
p-values. Furthermore, we prove that the false
positive rate (FPR) of the g-LOND algorithm converges to zero in probability based on the generalized Gaussian-like distribution family. Finally, the
extensive experimental results verify the effectiveness of g-LOND algorithm for OOD detection.

Different from previous OOD detection literature, we investigate the OOD detection problem from statistical perspective. Note that in some sensitive applications such
as financial transactions (Özbayoglu et al., 2020) and selfdriving (Huang et al., 2020), the testing examples arrive
sequentially in a stream, and the machine learning model
must make decisions in time. Hence, we frame the OOD
detection task as an online multiple hypothesis testing problem. (Javanmard & Montanari, 2015) proposes the LOND
algorithm to address this testing problem, which has been
heavily studied in various applications (Javanmard & Montanari, 2015; Robertson & Wason, 2018; Robertson et al.,
2022; Liou et al., 2023). Theoretically, to control the false
discovery rate (FDR) 2 , the LOND algorithm demands that
the p-values corresponding to different null hypotheses are
mutually independent, which easily leads to a contradiction to real-world applications. We then propose a novel
generalized LOND (g-LOND) algorithm to eliminate these
restrictions on p-values for FDR control. Moreover, we derive the asymptotic false positive rate (FPR) of the g-LOND
algorithm based on the generalized Gaussian-like distribution family. Finally, extensive experiments demonstrate the
promising performance of the g-LOND algorithm on OOD
detection. We summarize our contributions below:

1. Introduction
The ability to detect Out-of-Distribution (OOD) inputs is
a fundamental requirement for deploying deep learning
models in safety-critical applications (Liang et al., 2018;
Sastry & Oore, 2020; Ma et al., 2022). Although DNNs
have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a range
of complex tasks, such as speech recognition and machine
translation (He et al., 2016; Amodei et al., 2016; Dankers
et al., 2022), they are inherently vulnerable to OOD examples that deviate from the distribution of training data ( i.e.,
in-distribution (ID) data ). This vulnerability can lead to
overconfident yet incorrect predictions, which is particularly
problematic in domains such as computer vision (Sun et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2022).
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

(1) We frame the OOD detection task as an online multi-

nd

2

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

FDR is related to the concept of Precision, and can be considered as the generalization of type-I error for single hypothesis
testing. See the motivation of controlling FDR in Section 3.2.

1

