The Missing Alignment Link of In-context Learning on Sequences

Harshvardhan Agarwal 1 Sunita Sarawagi 1
as a prompt x1 , y1 , . . . , xk , yk , x∗ , they predict a ŷ indicative of having learned the task. The success of ICL has been
demonstrated on several tasks (Bertsch et al., 2024; Agarwal
et al., 2024), including novel key-value mappings (Kossen
et al., 2024), and new synthetic language learning tasks (Rajaraman et al., 2024; Bietti et al., 2023; Edelman et al., 2024;
Akyürek et al., 2024). For such unseen tasks, a widely accepted explanation is that ICL arises by the formation of
induction circuits (Olsson et al., 2022; Reddy, 2024; Singh
et al., 2024). An induction circuit requires at least two layers
for formation as illustrated in Figure 1. In the first stage,
each label position i copies over its previous xi as a key. In
the second stage, the test input x∗ is used as a query to copy
over the label yi (i ≤ k) with the matching key xi . This explanation also works for learning new languages where the
key corresponds to n-grams (Rajaraman et al., 2024; Bietti
et al., 2023; Edelman et al., 2024; Akyürek et al., 2024).

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated the capability to perform in-context learning (ICL) for completely unseen tasks in classification or language completion. Sequence to
sequence (Seq2Seq) is another popular task category with several applications seeking quick adaptation with ICL. We present a systematic analysis of the ICL capability of LLMs on Seq2Seq
tasks using a formal structured language-pair. Our
study reveals a critical limitation: except for very
short input sequences, ICL fails to achieve consistent learning across all output positions. This exposes a fundamental weakness of modern LLMs
— their inability to effectively uncover the alignment between input and output sequences. Consequently, this limitation results in incomplete induction heads, which form the basis for in-context
learning of new discrete mappings.

In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of in-context
learning (ICL) on unseen sequence to sequence tasks. In
this case each input x is a sequence x1 , . . . , xm of tokens,
likewise each output y is a sequence y1 , . . . , yn . ICL for
Seq2Seq is useful in several tasks such as semantic parsing for custom APIs (Roy et al., 2023), translation from
or to rare languages (Garcia et al., 2023), and Text2SQL
generation for new private enterprise schema. To study
the mechanism of ICL without fear of data contamination,
we follow the practice in prior work of evaluating on new
synthetic tasks. Our synthetic generator is inspired by real
languages. For each task, we sample a probabilistic context
free grammar generating x, and sample P (y|x) using an
alignment function inspired from classical models used in
lexical translation (Brown et al., 1993), and a probabilistic
finite state automata. An example of such a setup is shown
as the first row of Table 1. Over various characteristics
of these structured Seq2Seq tasks, we evaluate pre-trained
open-source LLMs for their ICL capabilities.

To address these limitations, we propose ICATune, a method for focused fine-tuning of an LLM
using in-context examples. We present a mechanistic evaluation with two accuracy probes to
show how alignment emerges in middle layers
of an LLM without any direct supervision. This
alignment leads to an abrupt jump in the completeness of the induction heads in higher layers.
We show that compared to standard fine-tuning,
ICA-Tune enables more sample efficient learning
and generalizes better to OOD instances.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated the capability of In Context Learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020) a
new task, where given k input-output pairs and a test input

We observe that except for very short x sequences, LLMs
fail to in-context learn Seq2Seq tasks even when they succeed in previously studied classification and language learning tasks. We attribute the failure to the inability of the LLM
to learn new x-y alignments. ICL for Seq2Seq tasks entails
two steps: (1) learning input-output alignments, and (2)
learning the next y token given previous y-s and the aligned
x. The second step can be learned by induction heads, but

1
Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India. Correspondence to: Harshvardhan Agarwal <hvag976@stanford.edu>, Sunita Sarawagi
<sunita@iitb.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

