Distinguishing Cause from Effect with Causal Velocity Models

Johnny Xi 1 Hugh Dance 2 Peter Orbanz 2 Benjamin Bloem-Reddy 1

Abstract

discovery possible, one common approach is to make functional assumptions, for example, non-linear additive noise
(Hoyer et al., 2008) or location-scale noise (Xu et al., 2022;
Strobl & Lasko, 2023; Immer et al., 2023) on the underlying
causal process, and decide on the causal direction based on
model fit and/or complexity in both candidate directions.

Bivariate structural causal models (SCM) are
often used to infer causal direction by examining their goodness-of-fit under restricted model
classes. In this paper, we describe a parametrization of bivariate SCMs in terms of a causal velocity by viewing the cause variable as time in a
dynamical system. The velocity implicitly defines
counterfactual curves via the solution of initial
value problems where the observation specifies
the initial condition. Using tools from measure
transport, we obtain a unique correspondence between SCMs and the score function of the generated distribution via its causal velocity. Based on
this, we derive an objective function that directly
regresses the velocity against the score function,
the latter of which can be estimated nonparametrically from observational data. We use this to
develop a method for bivariate causal discovery
that extends beyond known model classes such
as additive or location-scale noise, and that requires no assumptions on the noise distributions.
When the score is estimated well, the objective is
also useful for detecting model non–identifiability
and misspecification. We present positive results
in simulation and benchmark experiments where
many existing methods fail, and perform ablation
studies to examine the method’s sensitivity to accurate score estimation.

Likelihood-based approaches seem natural here, as they can
be used both for model estimation and evaluation. However,
they require the full specification of both the mechanism and
the noise distribution. This is undesirable due to the risks
of model misspecification, particularly with respect to the
noise distribution, which is not directly involved in causality,
but can still lead to incorrect causal inference (Schultheiss
& Bühlmann, 2023). To avoid that risk, the most prominent example of a functional method is to fit an additive
noise model (ANM) using nonparametric regression, which
avoids needing to model the noise distribution. Instead of
a likelihood-based measure, an independence score (e.g.,
HSIC, Gretton et al., 2005) between the estimated residuals
and cause variable can be used to determine goodness-of-fit
(Mooij et al., 2009; Peters et al., 2014). This approach has
been extended to location-scale models (LSNM) by Strobl &
Lasko (2023); Immer et al. (2023). Separately, Rolland et al.
(2022); Montagna et al. (2023b) derived other goodness-offit criteria for ANMs that avoid structural model estimation
altogether. Instead, those methods extract the signal directly
from estimates of the score function ∇ log p(x, y) under the
assumption of Gaussian noise. Subsequent work used score
estimation in conjunction with explicit model estimation in
the case of non-Gaussian noise (Montagna et al., 2023a).
However, we are unaware of any work on functional causal
discovery methods beyond the ANM and LSNM classes,
which may still be misspecified in many settings.

1. Introduction
Distinguishing cause from effect from purely observational
data is a challenging task. It is generally impossible to
distinguish a causal direction X → Y from an anti-causal
direction Y → X without intervention, as the corresponding causal graphs are Markov equivalent. To make causal

In this work, we develop a new framework that treats bivariate causal models as dynamical systems, and we use it
to devise a new estimation procedure based on the score
function of the data, applying it to causal discovery. Specifically, we parametrize a causal model via its causal velocity,
which describes infinitesimal counterfactuals and can be
directly recovered from the score in a simulation-free way
analogous to the recent literature on flow-based generative
modeling (Lipman et al., 2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden,
2023). Assuming that the marginal and joint score functions
can be estimated accurately, our proposed method combines

1

Department of Statistics, University of British Columbia
Gatsby Unit, University College London. Correspondence to:
Johnny Xi <johnny.xi@stat.ubc.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

