How Far is Video Generation from World Model:
A Physical Law Perspective

Rui Lu

2

Zhijie Lin
∗

1

Bingyi Kang∗ 1 Yang Yue∗ 1 2
Yang Zhao 1 Kaixin Wang 3 Gao Huang 2 Jiashi Feng 1

Equal Contribution (in alphabetical order)
https://phyworld.github.io

1. Introduction

Abstract

Foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) have emerged
remarkable capabilities by scaling the model and data to an
unprecedented scale (Brown, 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020). As
an example, video generation (Brooks et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2024) not only generates high-fidelity and surreal
videos, but has also sparked a new surge of interest in the
construction of world models (Yang et al., 2023). This
topic is receiving great attention from robotics (Yang et al.,
2023; Yue et al., 2024) and autonomous driving (Hu et al.,
2023) due to the ability to generate realistic data and accurate simulations. These models are required to comprehend
fundamental physical laws to produce data that extend beyond the training corpus and to guarantee precise simulation.
However, it remains an open question whether video generation can discover such rules merely by observing videos. We
aim to provide a systematic study to answer this question
by specifically focusing on scaling up the data and models.

Scaling video generation models is believed to
be promising in building world models that adhere to fundamental physical laws. However,
whether these models can discover physical laws
purely from vision can be questioned. A world
model learning the true law should give predictions robust to nuances and correctly extrapolate
on unseen scenarios. In this work, we evaluate
across three key scenarios: in-distribution, outof-distribution, and combinatorial generalization.
We developed a 2D simulation testbed for object
movement and collisions to generate videos deterministically governed by one or more classical
mechanics laws. We focus on the scaling behavior of training diffusion-based video generation
models to predict object movements based on initial frames. Our scaling experiments show perfect
generalization within the distribution, measurable
scaling behavior for combinatorial generalization,
but failure in out-of-distribution scenarios. Further experiments reveal two key insights about
the generalization mechanisms of these models:
(1) the models fail to abstract general physical
rules and instead exhibit “case-based” generalization behavior, i.e., mimicking the closest training example; (2) when generalizing to new cases,
models are observed to prioritize different factors
when referencing training data: color > size >
velocity > shape. Our study suggests that scaling
alone is insufficient for video generation models
to uncover fundamental physical laws.

It is challenging to determine whether a video model has
learned a law instead of simply memorizing the data. Since
the internal knowledge of the model is inaccessible, we
can only infer the understanding of the model by examining its predictions on unseen scenarios, i.e., its generalization ability. In this paper, we propose a categorization
(Figure 1) for a comprehensive evaluation based on the relationship between training and test data. In-distribution
(ID) generalization assumes that training and testing data
are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). Out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization, on the other hand, refers
to the model’s performance on testing data that come from
a different distribution than the training data, particularly
when latent parameters fall outside the range seen during
training. Human-level physical reasoning can easily extrapolate OOD and predict physical processes without having
encountered the exact same scenario before. Additionally,
we also examine a special OOD capacity called combinatorial generalization, which assesses whether a model can
combine two distinct concepts in a novel way, a trait often

1

ByteDance Research 2 Tsinghua University 3 Technion. Correspondence to: Bingyi Kang <bingykang@gmail.com>, Yang Yue
<le-y22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

