Learning to Keep a Promise: Scaling Language Model Decoding Parallelism with
Learned Asynchronous Decoding

Tian Jin * 1 † Ellie Y. Cheng * 1 Zachary Ankner 1 Nikunj Saunshi 2 Blake M. Elias 3 Amir Yazdanbakhsh 4
Jonathan Ragan-Kelley 1 Suvinay Subramanian 3 Michael Carbin 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Autoregressive decoding is a fundamental efficiency bottleneck in large language model (LLM) inference. Contemporary LLMs routinely require multiple seconds or even
minutes of decoding time to complete user requests (Jiang
et al., 2024; Touvron et al., 2023; Jaech et al., 2024; Guo
et al., 2025). This latency stems from the sequential nature
of autoregressive decoding, which leads to inefficient hardware utilization during inference. While training achieves
40-60% Model Flops Utilization (MFU) (Korthikanti et al.,
2022), inference typically achieves less than 20% MFU
(Pope et al., 2022).

Decoding with autoregressive large language
models (LLMs) traditionally occurs sequentially,
generating one token after another. An emerging
line of work explored parallel decoding by identifying and simultaneously generating semantically
independent chunks of LLM responses. However,
they rely on hand-crafted heuristics tied to syntactic structures like lists and paragraphs, making
them rigid and imprecise. We present PASTA, a
learning-based system that teaches LLMs to identify semantic independence and express parallel
decoding opportunities in their own responses.
At its core are PASTA -L ANG and its interpreter:
PASTA -L ANG is an annotation language that enables LLMs to express semantic independence in
their own responses; the language interpreter acts
on these annotations to orchestrate parallel decoding on-the-fly at inference time. Through a twostage finetuning process, we train LLMs to generate PASTA -L ANG annotations that optimize both
response quality and decoding speed. Evaluation
on AlpacaEval, an instruction following benchmark, shows that our approach Pareto-dominates
existing methods in terms of decoding speed and
response quality; our results demonstrate geometric mean speedups ranging from 1.21× to 1.93×
with corresponding quality changes of +2.2% to
-7.1%, measured by length-controlled win rates
against sequential decoding baseline.

Semantic Independence. Recent works like Skeleton-ofThought (SoT) and APAR leverage semantic independence
in LLM responses as a source of parallelism, decoding independent chunks of tokens in parallel. Namely, these methods decode semantically independent chunks (contiguous
sequences of tokens) of tokens in the response in parallel. Given a request, SoT first produces a bullet-point outline, then applies regular-expression-based syntactic pattern
matching to extract points that are then expanded in parallel.
APAR, in contrast, applies regular-expression-based syntactic pattern matching on training data to identify structures
like lists and paragraphs, and finetunes an LLM to decode
in parallel the item descriptions given list items and the
paragraph bodies given the first sentences.
While semantic independence broadly exists in LLM responses, relying purely on syntactic heuristics – manifested
as hand-crafted regular expressions – to identify them has
limitations. First, these heuristics lack scalability, requiring
manual engineering to capture more semantic independence,
even as more training compute becomes available. Second,
they lack robustness, failing to detect semantic independence when responses deviate from expected patterns, even
by a missing punctuation mark. These limitations motivate a learning-based approach to optimize LLMs’ ability
to identify semantic independence, enabling LLMs to find
parallelization opportunities beyond fixed patterns.

*
Equal contribution ,† Part of this work was completed during an internship at Google. 1 MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, USA
2
Google Research, New York, USA 3 Google, Mountain View,
USA 4 Google DeepMind, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to: Tian Jin <tianjin@csail.mit.edu>, Michael Carbin
<mcarbin@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Learned Parallel Decoding. We present PASTA, a system
that teaches LLMs to identify and annotate parallelization
1

