Aggregation Buffer: Revisiting DropEdge with a New Parameter Block

Dooho Lee 1 Myeong Kong 1 Sagad Hamid 1 2 Cheonwoo Lee 1 Jaemin Yoo 1

Abstract

GNNs are able to account for interaction patterns and structural dependencies, a source of knowledge that enables improving the performance in semi-supervised learning tasks,
even with limited observations (Ying et al., 2018; Brody
et al., 2022; Song et al., 2022).

We revisit DropEdge, a data augmentation technique for GNNs which randomly removes edges
to expose diverse graph structures during training. While being a promising approach to effectively reduce overfitting on specific connections in the graph, we observe that its potential
performance gain in supervised learning tasks
is significantly limited. To understand why, we
provide a theoretical analysis showing that the
limited performance of DropEdge comes from
the fundamental limitation that exists in many
GNN architectures. Based on this analysis, we
propose Aggregation Buffer, a parameter block
specifically designed to improve the robustness of
GNNs by addressing the limitation of DropEdge.
Our method is compatible with any GNN model,
and shows consistent performance improvements
on multiple datasets. Moreover, our method effectively addresses well-known problems such as
degree bias or structural disparity as a unifying solution. Code and datasets are available at https:
//github.com/dooho00/agg-buffer.

While leveraging edge structure has proven highly effective,
it often makes a GNN overfit to certain structural properties
of nodes mainly observed in the training data. As a result,
the model’s performance suffers considerably in the presence of structural inconsistencies. For example, it is widely
known that GNNs perform worse on low-degree nodes than
on high-degree nodes even when their features are highly
informative, since high-degree nodes are the main source of
information for their training (Tang et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2023; Subramonian et al., 2024). Moreover, GNNs exhibit
poor accuracy on nodes whose neighbors have conflicting
structural properties, such as heterophilous neighbors in homophilous graphs, or vice versa (Wang et al., 2024; Mao
et al., 2024). These problems clearly highlight the two faces
of GNNs–their reliance on edge structure is the key to their
success, while also making them more vulnerable.
Common approaches to enhance robustness against input
data variations in supervised learning are random dropping
techniques such as DropOut (Srivastava et al., 2014). For
GNNs, DropEdge (Rong et al., 2020) has been introduced
as a means to increase the robustness against edge perturbations. DropEdge removes a random subset of edges at each
iteration, exposing a GNN to diverse structural information.
However, the performance gain by DropEdge is limited in
practice, and DropEdge is typically excluded from the standard hyperparameter search space of GNNs in benchmark
studies (Dwivedi et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data are pervasive across various research
fields and real-world applications, as graphs naturally capture essential relationships among entities in complex systems. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a
powerful framework to effectively incorporate these relationships for graph-related tasks. In contrast to traditional
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), which solely consider node
features, GNNs additionally take advantage of edge information to incorporate crucial interrelations between node features (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Gasteiger et al., 2019; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018). As a consequence,

In this work, we provide a theoretical analysis on the reason
why DropEdge fails. We study the objective shift caused by
DropEdge and highlight the implicit bias-robustness tradeoff in its objective function. Then, we prove that the failure
of DropEdge is not because of its algorithm, but the inductive bias existing in most GNN architectures, based on the
concept of discrepancy bound in comparison to MLPs.

1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 Computer Science Department, University of
Münster, Münster, Germany. Correspondence to: Jaemin Yoo
<jaemin@kaist.ac.kr>.

Building on these insights, we propose Aggregation Buffer
(AGGB ), a new parameter block which can be integrated to
to any trained GNN as a post-processing procedure. AGGB
effectively addresses the architectural limitation of GNNs,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

