The Elicitation Game: Evaluating Capability Elicitation Techniques

Felix Hofstätter * 1 Teun van der Weij * 1 Jayden Teoh * 1 Rada Djoneva 1 Henning Bartsch 1
Francis Rhys Ward 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Trustworthy capability evaluations are required to understand and regulate AI systems (Shevlane et al., 2023). Leading AI companies depend on such evaluations to mitigate
risks, as outlined in OpenAI’s Preparedness Framework
(OpenAI, 2023), Google DeepMind’s Frontier Safety Framework (Google DeepMind, 2024), and Anthropic’s Responsible Scaling Policy (Anthropic, 2023). Government entities,
including the US and UK AI Safety Institutes (NIST, 2024;
UK AISI, 2024) and the EU AI Office (European Parliament, 2024), are also incorporating capability evaluations
into their AI risk management strategies.

Capability evaluations are required to understand
and regulate AI systems that may be deployed
or further developed. Therefore, it is important
that evaluations provide an accurate estimation
of an AI system’s capabilities. However, in numerous cases, previously latent capabilities have
been elicited from models, sometimes long after
initial release. Accordingly, substantial efforts
have been made to develop methods for eliciting
latent capabilities from models. In this paper, we
evaluate the effectiveness of capability elicitation
techniques by intentionally training model organisms – language models with hidden capabilities
that are revealed by a password. We introduce a
novel method for training model organisms, based
on circuit-breaking, which is more robust to elicitation techniques than standard password-locked
models. We focus on elicitation techniques based
on prompting and activation steering, and compare these to fine-tuning methods. Prompting
techniques can elicit the actual capability of both
password-locked and circuit-broken model organisms in the MCQA setting, while steering fails
to do so. For a code-generation task, only finetuning can elicit the hidden capabilities of our
novel model organism. Additionally, our results
suggest that combining techniques improves elicitation. Still, if possible, fine-tuning should be
the method of choice to improve the trustworthiness of capability evaluations. We publish our
code and results at https://github.com/
Felhof/sandbagging-elicitation

Accurate capability evaluations are crucial for AI development and deployment decisions, yet in numerous cases (Wei
et al., 2022a; Nori et al., 2023; Carlini, 2023), previously latent capabilities have been elicited from models, sometimes
long after initial release. For example, chain-of-thought
prompting revealed improved arithmetic, common-sense,
and reasoning capabilities (Wei et al., 2022b). Beyond unintentional latent capabilities, developers, or AI systems themselves, may have incentives to strategically underperform by
hiding capabilities to influence regulatory decisions. This
is called sandbagging by van der Weij et al. (2024), who
show that contemporary language models (LMs) possess
relevant capabilities, such as calibrating their performance
to specific thresholds.
Therefore, it is important to develop effective methods for
eliciting latent capabilities from LMs. Previous work by
(Greenblatt et al., 2024) has found that supervised finetuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning (RL) are effective
at eliciting hidden capabilities. However, these methods require high-quality demonstrations of the desired behaviour
or large amounts of compute. In addition to effectiveness,
evaluators may care about computational efficiency, ease
of implementation, requirements for demonstrations, and
necessary access levels (e.g., to model weights) when considering elicitation methods.

*

Equal contribution 1 Independent 2 Imperial College London. Correspondence to: Felix Hofstätter <felixahofstaetter@gmail.com>.

This motivates our work, in which we evaluate elicitation
methods selected based on the aspects described above.
To evaluate elicitation methods, we create model organisms which are intentionally trained to imitate AI systems with hidden capabilities (Hubinger et al., 2023). We

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

