Continuous-Time Analysis of Heavy Ball Momentum in Min-Max Games

Yi Feng 1 Kaito Fujii 2 Stratis Skoulakis 3 Xiao Wang 1 4 Volkan Cevher 5

Abstract

valuable insights it provides into the behavior of discretetime algorithms, the approach of using continuous-time
equations to analyze momentum-based methods in minimization has seen significant advancements in recent years
(Su et al., 2016; Kovachki & Stuart, 2021; Shi et al., 2022).

Since Polyak’s pioneering work, heavy ball (HB)
momentum has been widely studied in minimization. However, its role in min-max games remains
largely unexplored. As a key component of practical min-max algorithms like Adam, this gap limits their effectiveness. In this paper, we present
a continuous-time analysis for HB with simultaneous and alternating update schemes in minmax games. Locally, we prove smaller momentum enhances algorithmic stability by enabling
local convergence across a wider range of step
sizes, with alternating updates generally converging faster. Globally, we study the implicit regularization of HB, and find smaller momentum
guides algorithms trajectories towards shallower
slope regions of the loss landscapes, with alternating updates amplifying this effect. Surprisingly,
all these phenomena differ from those observed
in minimization, where larger momentum yields
similar effects. Our results reveal fundamental
differences between HB in min-max games and
minimization, and numerical experiments further
validate our theoretical results.

Min-max games model optimization scenarios where two
players interact such that one’s gain is the other’s loss, with
the objective of finding a local Nash equilibrium. They are
widely applied in tasks like GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
and adversarial training (Madry, 2017). Due to their extreme
importance, many specialized algorithms like Extra-gradient
(Korpelevich, 1976) and optimistic methods (Daskalakis
et al., 2017) have been proposed to solve this type of problems. However, heavy ball momentum, as a crucial component of practical min-max algorithms such as Adam, is
extensively employed in solving min-max games (Wang
et al., 2019; Do et al., 2022). Our understanding of heavy
ball momentum in min-max games remains relatively limited compared to minimization.
For example, Gidel et al. (2019) observed that in min-max
games, negative momentum can enhance training outcomes,
which is surprising given that positive momentum is typically employed in minimization. Moreover, in min-max
games, players can update their strategies simultaneously, as
in repeated Rock-Paper-Scissors, or alternately, as in GANs
training, where the discriminator is updated firstly, and then
the generator updates based on the feedback it received from
the discriminator. It turns out that this subtle difference on
the update rules can greatly affect the results of learning
process, and Gidel et al. (2019) proved in the special cases
of bilinear games, only combining negative momentum with
the alternating updates can lead to convergence. These discoveries motivate the following questions:

1. Introduction
The Heavy Ball momentum (a.k.a. Polyak’s momentum)
(Polyak, 1964) has played an important role in modern optimization for machine learning (Sutskever et al., 2013).
In the context of minimization, the mechanism of heavy
ball momentum is typically explained by modeling it as
a continuous-time differential equation that describes the
physical process of a mass moving through a frictional
medium (Qian, 1999). Due to its intuitive appeal and the

What is the impact of momentum and update rules on the
learning dynamics in min-max games?

The first four authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China 2 National
Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan 3 Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark 4 Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics, China 5 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Xiao Wang <wangxiao@sufe.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we investigate min-max learning dynamics
through the lens of continuous-time analysis, focusing on
both local and global aspects. Locally, we quantitatively
analyze how momentum and update rules influence the convergence rates of continuous-time models near a local Nash
equilibrium—a crucial first step in understanding algorithmic behavior (Ochs, 2018). Globally, given the limited
understanding of heavy ball momentum’s properties even

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

