Hidden No More: Attacking and Defending Private Third-Party LLM Inference

Rahul Thomas 1 2 Louai Zahran 1 Erica Choi 1 3 Akilesh Potti 1 Micah Goldblum 1 3 Arka Pal 1

Abstract

third-party LLM inference services that host these models.
This raises significant privacy implications, particularly in
domains where confidentiality of data is paramount, such
as healthcare, finance and legal applications, and in jurisdictions where data privacy is subject to regulations (e.g.
GDPR in Europe). As such, a growing area of research interest is the creation of inference methodologies and schemes
that protect the privacy of user prompts.

Recent advances in Large Language Models
(LLMs) have led to widespread adoption of thirdparty inference services, raising critical privacy
concerns. In this work, we introduce a novel reconstruction technique that can recover original
prompts from hidden states with nearly perfect
accuracy across multiple state-of-the-art LLMs
in the increasingly important open-weights setting. Although the attack is conceptually simple,
it has not – to the best of our knowledge – previously been described nor shown to work practically. Furthermore, our attack remains effective
against various permutation and noise-based defenses, challenging assumptions about the security of previously proposed schemes. To address
these vulnerabilities, we propose Cascade, a multiparty inference scheme that leverages sharding in
the sequence dimension to retain privacy of the
user input. Through theoretical analysis and empirical evaluation, we demonstrate that Cascade
is secure against both our attack as well as previous methods, while maintaining computational
and communication efficiency. Our findings highlight the importance of rigorous security analysis
in privacy-preserving LLM inference and offer
practical solutions for secure deployment.

One approach to privacy-preserving-inference is to have
multiple parties jointly perform the inference, with the idea
that each party cannot reconstruct the input with the information that it is given in the protocol. This approach is
known as Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMPC) and
has a long history of application to general functions (Yao,
1982; Goldreich et al., 1987). Recently, the methodologies
of SMPC have been applied to LLMs (Huang et al., 2022;
Hao et al., 2022; Pang et al., 2023; Akimoto et al., 2023;
Dong et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2024). However, SMPC methods introduce significant computational and communication
overhead, particularly so at non-linearities in the model.
Thus, other works aim to mitigate the punitive costs of
SMPC through statistical obfuscation. Recent work (Zheng
et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024) has used the
permutation-equivariance of transformers (Xu et al., 2024)
to propose permutation-based schemes for private inference.
In these schemes, hidden states are revealed as permuted
plaintext to the party performing inference. To justify security, these works refer to the extremely large permutation
space and conclude that input reversal is infeasible.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we show that such permutation-based schemes
are in general not secure in the open-weights setting. We
devise a novel vocab-matching attack1 (see Figure 1) that
can nearly perfectly decode the user input in this setting,
improving on existing work (Wan et al., 2024). We show
that this attack maintains near-perfect decoding performance
across various permutation types, including those used by
the schemes above. Furthermore, the attack is capable of
decoding against common noising methods proposed in the
literature for private inference (Morris et al., 2023a).

Modern large language models (LLMs) now often comprise
hundreds of billions of parameters, necessitating significant
hardware resources for deploying them for inference. In
particular, recent open-weights models demonstrate cuttingedge performance (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Qwen et al.,
2025), but remain difficult for many to run. Individuals and
organizations have therefore begun to increasingly rely on
*

Equal contribution 1 Ritual AI 2 Stanford University 3 Columbia
University. Correspondence to: Arka Pal (Project Lead)
<arka@ritual.net>.

We then introduce a new multi-party scheme, Cascade (see
1
Our implementation is available at https://github.
com/ritual-net/vma-external.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

