Sparse VideoGen: Accelerating Video Diffusion Transformers with
Spatial-Temporal Sparsity

Haocheng Xi * Shuo Yang * Yilong Zhao Chenfeng Xu Muyang Li Xiuyu Li Yujun Lin Han Cai
Jintao Zhang Dacheng Li Jianfei Chen Ion Stoica Kurt Keutzer Song Han
https://github.com/svg-project/Sparse-VideoGen

Abstract

CogVideoX-v1.5, 720p, 80 frames, Image-to-Video
) VS Ours (4 mins

)

Dense

Dense Attention (9 mins

MInference
PSNR=22.5

Ours
PSNR=28.2

Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) dominate video
generation but their high computational cost
severely limits real-world applicability, usually requiring tens of minutes to generate a few seconds
of video even on high-performance GPUs. This
inefficiency primarily arises from the quadratic
computational complexity of 3D full attention
with respect to the context length. In this paper, we propose a training-free framework termed
Sparse VideoGen (SVG) that leverages the inherent sparsity in 3D full attention to boost inference
efficiency. We reveal that the attention heads can
be dynamically classified into two groups depending on distinct sparse patterns: (1) Spatial Head,
where only spatially-related tokens within each
frame dominate the attention output, and (2) Temporal Head, where only temporally-related tokens
across different frames dominate. Based on this
insight, SVG proposes an online profiling strategy to capture the dynamic sparse patterns and
predicts the type of attention head. Combined
with a novel hardware-efficient tensor layout
transformation and customized kernel implementations, SVG achieves up to 2.28× end-to-end
speedup on CogVideoX-v1.5, 2.33× on HunyuanVideo, while preserving generation quality. Our
code is open-sourced at https://github.com/svgproject/Sparse-VideoGen.

Prompt: "A beautiful woman in a blue sari posing in front of a wall"

HunyuanVideo, 720p, 128 frames, Text-to-Video
) VS Ours (16 mins

)

MInference
PSNR=23.2

Ours
PSNR=29.5

Dense

Dense Attention (38 mins

Prompt: "A woodpecker is pecking holes in the tree."

Figure 1. SVG accelerates video generation while maintaining
high quality. On CogVideoX-v1.5-I2V and Hunyuan-T2V, our
method achieves a 2.28× and 2.33× speedup with high PSNR.
In contrast, MInference (Jiang et al., 2024) fails to maintain pixel
fidelity (significant blurring in the first example) and temporal
coherence (inconsistencies in the tree trunk in the second example).

1. Introduction
*

Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) (Peebles & Xie, 2023) have
recently emerged as a transformative paradigm for generative tasks, achieving state-of-the-art results in image generation. This success has been naturally carried over to video
generation, with models adapting from a spatial 2D attention
to a spatiotemporal 3D full attention (Arnab et al., 2021;

Equal contribution. University of California, Berkeley.
NVIDIA. MIT. Correspondence to: Chenfeng Xu <xuchenfeng@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

