Preference Controllable Reinforcement Learning
with Advanced Multi-Objective Optimization

Yucheng Yang 1 Tianyi Zhou 2 Mykola Pechenizkiy 1 Meng Fang 3 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning (MORL) has
attracted growing interests in applications of training
sequential decision-making agents that satisfy multiple
objectives. In practice, optimizing for potentially multiple
criteria often involves managing trade-offs between them.
For example, speed vs. safety or distance vs. energy for
robotic control tasks. Many previous MORL methods (Yang
et al., 2019; Abels et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Lu et al.,
2023; Alegre et al., 2023) tried to address the trade-off issue
by optimizing a linearly scalarized objective, which sums
up multiple objectives with preference weights. However,
the Linear Scalarization (LS) approach’s solutions are
limited to a subset of the Pareto optimal solutions, as shown
in Fig. 1. As a result, LS solutions have limited optimality
and are often not well aligned with the trade-off preferences.
However, the Linear Scalarization (LS) approach restricts
solutions to a subset of the Pareto-optimal solutions, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. Consequently, LS solutions often
exhibit limited optimality and may not align well with
trade-off preferences. More recently, Lu et al. (2023)
sought to enhance LS through reward augmentation, but
this can lead to information loss from the original problem.
Additionally, Basaklar et al. (2023) proposed optimizing
cosine similarity for better preference alignment; however,
their approach lacks a mechanism to resolve conflicts
between similarity gradients and objective gradients.

Practical reinforcement learning (RL) usually
requires agents to be optimized for multiple
potentially conflicting criteria, e.g. speed vs.
safety. Although Multi-Objective RL (MORL)
algorithms have been studied in previous works,
their trained agents often cover limited Pareto
optimal solutions and they lack precise controllability of the delicate trade-off among multiple
objectives. Hence, the resulting agent is not
versatile in aligning with customized requests
from different users. To bridge the gap, we
develop the “Preference controllable (PC) RL”
framework, which trains a preference-conditioned
meta-policy that takes user preference as input
controlling the generated trajectories within the
preference region on the Pareto frontier. PCRL
is compatible with advanced Multi-Objective
Optimization (MOO) algorithms that are rarely
seen in previous MORL approaches. We also
proposed a novel preference-regularized MOO
algorithm specifically for PCRL. We provide a
comprehensive theoretical analysis to justify its
convergence and preference controllability. We
evaluate PCRL with different MOO algorithms
against state-of-the-art MORL baselines in
various challenging environments with up to six
objectives. In these experiments, our proposed
method exhibits significantly better controllability
than existing approaches and can generate Pareto
solutions with better diversity and utilities.

This motivates us to develop a novel MORL framework,
Preference Control (PC) RL, to train a preference controllable agent for user’s preference trade-offs with advanced
Multi-Objective Optimization (MOO) algorithms. By leveraging well-established MOO methods (Lin et al., 2019;
Mahapatra & Rajan, 2020), our approach overcomes the
limitations of LS and enables the discovery of preferencespecific solutions along the Pareto front. Moreover, inspired
by how certain MOO methods (Désidéri, 2009; Liu et al.,
2021; Xiao et al., 2023) deal with conflicting gradients and
stochastic gradients, we propose a novel MORL-specific
algorithm PreCo. We also conduct a comprehensive theoretical analysis, demonstrating that in MORL’s noisy gradient
setting, PCRL with PreCo can achieve preference-controlled
Pareto-stationary solutions.

1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, The United States 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, The United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Yucheng Yang <y.yang@tue.nl>, Meng Fang
<Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

