Telling Peer Direct Effects from Indirect Effects in Observational Network Data

Xiaojing Du 1 Jiuyong Li 1 Debo Cheng 1 Lin Liu 1 Wentao Gao 1 Xiongren Chen 1 Ziqi Xu 2

Abstract
Estimating causal effects is crucial for decisionmakers in many applications, but it is particularly
challenging with observational network data due
to peer interactions. Some algorithms have been
proposed to estimate causal effects involving network data, particularly peer effects, but they often
fail to tell apart diverse peer effects. To address
this issue, we propose a general setting which considers both peer direct effects and peer indirect
effects, and the effect of an individual’s own treatment, and provide the identification conditions
of these causal effects. To differentiate these effects, we leverage causal mediation analysis and
tailor it specifically for network data. Furthermore, given the inherent challenges of accurately
estimating effects in networked environments, we
propose to incorporate attention mechanisms to
capture the varying influences of different neighbors and to explore high-order neighbor effects
using multi-layer graph neural networks (GNNs).
Additionally, we employ the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) to further enhance
the model’s robustness and accuracy. Extensive
experiments on two semi-synthetic datasets derived from real-world networks and on a dataset
from a recommendation system confirm the effectiveness of our approach. Our findings have the
potential to improve intervention strategies in networked systems, particularly in social networks
and public health.

Outcome (Infection)
Social ties

PDE

Tj≠i

Ti

STE

Neighbor j
2

1

Yj≠i

2

Individual i

(a)

Neighbor j

PIE

Yi

(b)

Figure 1. (a) An example showing the relationship between an individual i and their neighbors in a network setting about vaccination.
(b) A causal graph representing PDE, PIE, and STE. In the diagram, Ti and Yi indicate the treatment (e.g., vaccination status)
and outcome (e.g., infection condition), respectively. The subscript
i denotes an individual and j ̸= i denotes i’s neighbors.

data is collected from sources such as social networks, communication networks, or biological networks, accurately
estimating causal effects becomes challenging due to the
interconnected nature of individuals (e.g., units, nodes). In
a network setting, an individual’s outcomes are influenced
not only by their own treatment but also by the treatments
and outcomes of their neighbors (Sinclair et al., 2012). In
network data, as shown in Fig.1, there are different types
of causal effects involved with respect to an outcome of
interest, including individual outcomes influenced by their
own treatment (self-treatment effects, STE), and peer effects
(arising from the treatments and outcomes of their neighbors), which consist of peer direct effects (PDE) and peer
indirect effects (PIE). It is important to distinguish and estimate these different types of causal effects in network data,
particularly the PDE and PIE.

1. Introduction
Causal effect estimation is an important area of study, with
the focus on determining cause-and-effect relationships between variables (Imbens & Rubin, 2010; Pearl, 2009). When
1

One interesting question is how
these treatments directly (PDE)
and indirectly (PIE) impact an
individual i′s outcome?

Treatment (Vaccination)

We use an example from epidemiology (VanderWeele et al.,
2012) to show the importance of differentiating between
PDE and PIE. Suppose that an individual i is unvaccinated
against a disease but can benefit from their peers’ vaccination in two ways. First, vaccination of i’s peers reduces
the likelihood of them transmitting the disease to others
(PDE), thereby lowering i’s risk of contracting the disease.
Second, vaccinated peers are less likely to become infected,

2

University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia School of
Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.
Correspondence to: Jiuyong Li <jiuyong.li@unisa.edu.au>, Debo
Cheng <debo.cheng@unisa.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

