LineFlow: A Framework to Learn Active Control of Production Lines
Kai Müller 1 Martin Wenzel 1 Tobias Windisch 1

Abstract

take the interdependence of the individual work steps into
account is a computationally hard but well understood problem called assembly line balancing problem (Padrón et al.,
2009; Scholl & Becker, 2006). Solution strategies are powered by good stochastic models for interlinked production
lines, like in (Bierbooms, 2012; Liberopoulos et al., 2006),
that help computing the equilibrium state of the throughput
for a given layout. However, in practice, optimal layouts
and theoretic knowledge on the equilibrium of the throughput does not guarantee that the production line unfold its
full theoretical potential. This may be due to situations like
changing processing conditions, adverse coincidences in the
stochasticity of the processes, or machine failures. These
circumstances can suddenly lead to full buffers, jams, and
shifting bottlenecks (Roser et al., 2003; Mahmoodi et al.,
2022). Thus, reacting in a dynamic and optimal way at
runtime is key to keep the performance of the production
line at its best. At present, this is either a completely manual
task accomplished by line workers on-site or by line control
systems, that actively adjust line parameters in real-time
(see Figure 1). Possible interventions are rerouting tasks to
alternative stations (Huang et al., 2019), reallocating workers (Pérez-Wheelock et al., 2022; Dolgui et al., 2018), or
scheduling maintenance (Geurtsen et al., 2023). Classical

Many production lines require active control
mechanisms, such as adaptive routing, worker
reallocation, and rescheduling, to maintain optimal performance. However, designing these control systems is challenging for various reasons,
and while reinforcement learning (RL) has shown
promise in addressing these challenges, a standardized and general framework is still lacking.
In this work, we introduce LineFlow, an extensible, open-source Python framework for simulating production lines of arbitrary complexity and
training RL agents to control them. To demonstrate the capabilities and to validate the underlying theoretical assumptions of LineFlow, we
formulate core subproblems of active line control
in ways that facilitate mathematical analysis. For
each problem, we provide optimal solutions for
comparison. We benchmark state-of-the-art RL
algorithms and show that the learned policies approach optimal performance in well-understood
scenarios. However, for more complex, industrialscale production lines, RL still faces significant
challenges, highlighting the need for further research in areas such as reward shaping, curriculum learning, and hierarchical control.

1. Introduction
At its core, manufacturing is about transforming raw materials into finished goods, often on a large scale. In most
production systems, the necessary process steps are carried
out by work stations which each component has to traverse
sequentially. Typically, the work steps necessary have to
be applied in a fixed order, creating an interdependence between stations in the sense that performance issues of one
station directly affect stations down- and upstream.

Send parts
to Sink2

Buffer fills Processing times

π
Figure 1. Active line control based on real-time data.

active line control systems typically combine rule-based
strategies and mathematical models to optimize scheduling and resource allocation, focusing mostly on bottleneck
identification, see for instance (Roser et al., 2014; 2017; Li
et al., 2009; Lai et al., 2021) and references therein. Finding optimal control strategies is a complex task that not
only requires a detailed understanding of the production line
dynamics but also involves time-intensive trial-and-error
session on the real system and simulations. While effective

In theory, finding optimal layouts for production lines that
1

University of Applied Sciences Kempten, Kempten, Germany. Correspondence to: Tobias Windisch <tobias.windisch@hskempten.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

