Soup-of-Experts: Pretraining Specialist Models via Parameters Averaging

Pierre Ablin 1 Angelos Katharopoulos 1 Skyler Seto 1 David Grangier 1

Abstract

or be a small company’s internal document database. It
is, therefore, impossible to train a good-quality specialist
model on such data alone.

Machine learning models are routinely trained on
a mixture of different data domains. Different
domain weights yield very different downstream
performances. We propose the Soup-of-Experts,
a novel architecture that can instantiate a model
at test time for any domain weights with minimal computational cost and without re-training
the model. Our architecture consists of a bank of
expert parameters, which are linearly combined
to instantiate one model. We learn the linear combination coefficients as a function of the input
domain weights. To train this architecture, we
sample random domain weights, instantiate the
corresponding model, and backprop through one
batch of data sampled with these domain weights.
We demonstrate how our approach obtains small
specialized models on several language modeling
tasks quickly. Soup-of-Experts are particularly
appealing when one needs to ship many different
specialist models quickly under a size constraint.

To obtain a small model that performs well on the specialization data, we leverage a large, generic pretraining dataset.
That pre-training set contains data from several domains.
A powerful method to obtain a good specialist model is
importance sampling: it adjusts the mixture weights of the
pretraining distribution to resemble the scarce specialist
dataset. This method has been shown to outperform generic
pre-training (Grangier et al., 2024b), but it has a major
drawback: it requires pre-training a full model for each specialization dataset available. This makes training cost scale
linearly with the number of specialized downstream tasks,
which can be intractable as model size and data scales.
The goal of this paper is to answer the following question:
How can we leverage a large pre-training set to obtain
specialized models that can be instantiated quickly when
the specialization data is revealed?
We formalize this question by considering the two phases
of serving specialist models.
Pretraining We have multiple pre-training domains and use
them to train a model. At this point, we do not know the
specific data and are unaware of what specific tasks we will
need to address later on.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) work well on diverse tasks
because they have many parameters and are trained on generalist datasets (Brown et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021).
However, they are costly to train and to serve, both in terms
of memory and inference cost.

Specialization phase We receive a specific dataset, and
using the pre-trained model, we need to quickly instantiate
a small model that works well on this specific dataset.
In Table 1, we summarize the different costs and constraints
associated with these two phases and provide a qualitative
review of the strengths and weaknesses of several strategies.

Specialist language models hold fewer parameters; they
are, therefore, cheaper to store, send, and use at inference.
However, they must give up the generality of LLMs and
specialize in a few specific topics.

In this landscape of different models, we introduce the Soupof-Experts, which is designed to be able to instantiate a
small specialist model in a flash.

In cases where there is an abundance of specialization data,
training a small model on those data yields a good specialist.
However, in many settings, the specialization data is scarce:
for instance, it may come from a narrow topic of interest
1
Apple.
Correspondence
<p ablin@apple.com>.

to:

Pierre

Our main idea is to learn to instantiate models with any
mixture of domain weights by taking a linear combination
of jointly optimized base models, called experts. We are
inspired by the works of model merging (Wortsman et al.,
2022; Arpit et al., 2022; Rame et al., 2022; 2023; 2024).
The gist of model merging is that two model parameters ΘA
and ΘB that are obtained by fine-tuning the same model

Ablin

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

