A Unified Framework for Generalization Error Analysis of
Learning with Arbitrary Discrete Weak Features

Kosuke Sugiyama 1 Masato Uchida 1

Abstract

privacy concerns, high observation costs, and uncertainties
in sensor measurements. Consequently, challenges often
stem from low-quality labels (referred to as Weak Labels;
WLs) that contain incorrect, incomplete, or ambiguous supervisory information, and low-quality features (referred to
as Weak Features; WFs), which manifest as misobservations,
missing values, or ambiguous observations. Extensive research has focused on WLs within the framework of weakly
supervised learning (WSL), covering methods such as semisupervised learning and learning with label noise, which
have provided substantial theoretical guarantees (Chapelle
et al., 2006; Elkan & Noto, 2008; Cour et al., 2011; Natarajan et al., 2013; Ishida et al., 2017). In contrast, research
on WFs has proposed methods such as impute-then-regress
(ItR), which imputes missing before regression (Josse et al.,
2024; Bertsimas et al., 2021; Le Morvan et al., 2020b; 2021),
and complementary features learning (CFL), which leverages complementary features (CFs) that differ from the true
values (Sugiyama & Uchida, 2024). However, a unified
framework that provides consistent theoretical guarantees
across the various forms of WFs remains underexplored.

In many real-world applications, predictive tasks
inevitably involve low-quality input features
(Weak Features; WFs) which arise due to factors such as misobservations, missingness, or partial observations. While several methods have
been proposed to estimate the true values of specific types of WFs and to solve a downstream
task, a unified theoretical framework that comprehensively addresses these methods remains underdeveloped. In this paper, we propose a unified framework called Weak Features Learning
(WFL), which accommodates arbitrary discrete
WFs and a broad range of learning algorithms,
and we demonstrate its validity. Furthermore, we
introduce a class of algorithms that learn both
the estimation model for WFs and the predictive
model for a downstream task and perform a generalization error analysis under finite-sample conditions. Our results elucidate the interdependencies
between the estimation errors of WFs and the prediction error of a downstream task, as well as the
theoretical conditions necessary for the learning
approach to achieve consistency. This work establishes a unified theoretical foundation, providing generalization error analysis and performance
guarantees, even in scenarios where WFs manifest
in diverse forms.

Motivated by these challenges, this study focuses on weak
features learning (WFL), a generalized learning problem
involving arbitrary WFs. A common approach involves sequentially or iteratively learning feature estimation models
g to estimate the true values of WFs (referred to as exact values) and a label prediction model f to predict downstream
task labels using the outputs of g. This strategy is considered rational for improving both the quality of WFs and the
predictive performance of a downstream task (Yoon et al.,
2018; Mattei & Frellsen, 2019; Le Morvan et al., 2020a;
Ipsen et al., 2021; Zaffran et al., 2023; Ipsen et al., 2022;
Sugiyama & Uchida, 2024). Indeed, prior approaches such
as ItR and CFL are grounded in this learning strategy, utilizing various machine learning methods to construct g. These
methods aim to improve the quality of WFs, thereby enhancing the generalization performance and explainability of f
in a downstream task.

1. Introduction
The performance and explainability of machine learning
models are highly dependent on the quality of the training
data. However, in practical applications, obtaining highquality data is often infeasible due to constraints such as
1
Major in Computer Science and Communications Engineering,
Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kosuke
Sugiyama <kohsuke0322@asagi.waseda.jp>, Masato Uchida
<m.uchida@waseda.jp>.

However, in the context of WFL, where various methods
have been proposed, significant gaps remain in understanding how the learning of g and f impacts each other’s learning efficiency and under what conditions WFL can achieve

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

