Clustering Properties of Self-Supervised Learning

Xi Weng 1 2
Jie Luo 1

Jianing An 1
Xi Yang 3

Xudong Ma 1
Jin Song Dong 2

Binhang Qi 2
Lei Huang B 1 4
model

Abstract

te

gu

ra

id

ne

e

ge

Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods via joint
embedding architectures have proven remarkably
effective at capturing semantically rich representations with strong clustering properties, magically in the absence of label supervision. Despite this, few of them have explored leveraging
these untapped properties to improve themselves.
In this paper, we provide an evidence through
various metrics that the encoder’s output encoding exhibits superior and more stable clustering
properties compared to other components. Building on this insight, we propose a novel positivefeedback SSL method, termed Representation
Self-Assignment (ReSA), which leverages the
model’s clustering properties to promote learning in a self-guided manner. Extensive experiments on standard SSL benchmarks reveal that
models pretrained with ReSA outperform other
state-of-the-art SSL methods by a significant margin. Finally, we analyze how ReSA facilitates
better clustering properties, demonstrating that
it effectively enhances clustering performance at
both fine-grained and coarse-grained levels, shaping representations that are inherently more structured and semantically meaningful.

Positive
feedback

design

loss function

Representations

Figure 1. The positive-feedback SSL framework. It involves the
model generating representations that possess semantically clustering information. This clustering information is leveraged to
design self-supervised loss function, which is then employed to
more effectively guide the model’s learning process.

under different transformations and noise (Bachman et al.,
2019; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a), with demonstrated
exceptional effectiveness in visual representation learning.
Although such a pretext task may intuitively seem unrelated
to capturing semantic relationships, extensive studies (Caron
et al., 2018; 2021; Assran et al., 2022b) have demonstrated
the strong correlation between its learned representations
and semantic information.
Ben-Shaul et al. (2023) take a further step to characterize
the semantic structures learned by JEA into hierarchic clustering properties, indicating SSL-trained representations
exhibit a centroid-like geometric structure and induce three
levels of semantic clustering: augmentation sample level,
semantic classes, and superclass level. This intriguing finding reveals that SSL methods based on JEA can facilitate
strong clustering capabilities during training, but also raises
the question of whether these properties hold untapped potential that can be further leveraged to improve SSL itself.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a transformative paradigm in universal representation learning (Oord
et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019; He et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020a; Bao et al., 2021; Oquab et al., 2023; Assran
et al., 2023), consistently surpassing supervised learning in
downstream performance. Joint embedding architectures
(JEA), in particular, aim to learn invariance of the same data

Contributions. In this paper, we aim to investigate the
design of SSL methods by leveraging the inherent clustering properties of representations, enabling a closed-loop
positive-feedback SSL framework, as illustrated in Figure 1.
To achieve this goal, we propose three key questions and
our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• Where to extract clustering properties from? We
demonstrate through various metrics that the encoder’s
output, referred to as encoding, exhibits superior and
more stable clustering properties compared to other

1
SKLCCSE, School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 School of Computing, National University of Singapore
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 4 Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University. Correspondence
to: Lei Huang <huangleiAI@buaa.edu.cn>. Our code is available
at https://github.com/winci-ai/resa

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

