Complete-Tree Space Favors Data-Efficient Link Prediction

Chi Gao 1 Lukai Li 1 Yancheng Zhou 2 Shangqi Guo 1

Abstract

Its goal is to infer missing links in a network based on the
observed ones, as real-world networks are often incomplete.
Despite its significance, there exists a substantial gap between prevalent research settings and real-world demands:
most models operate under the assumption that less than
15% of existing links are unobserved (Cen et al., 2023;
Xiong et al., 2024), yet in numerous real-world networks,
such as biological, informational, and social networks, the
proportion of unobserved links can exceed by far that of
observed links (Amaral, 2008; Olesen et al., 2011; Wei et al.,
2016; Hohwald et al., 2009; Adafre & de Rijke, 2005). For
instance, it is estimated that around 89% − 98% human
binary protein interactomes are still not verified (Dunham
& Ganapathiraju, 2021). Our work aims to fill this gap by
investigating data-scarce regimes and tackling the challenge
of insufficient sample sizes.

Link prediction is a fundamental problem for
network-structured data. However, the prevalent
research paradigm tends to assume abundant observed links, overlooking more challenging scenarios with a scarcity of observed links, which
results in insufficient sample sizes. In real-world
networks, hierarchical modularity, characterized
by structured and nested connections, remains
robust even with sparsely observed links. To
address the challenge of limited link samples,
we propose leveraging hierarchical modularity
as a prior structure. We introduce complete-tree
(CT) space, a discrete metric space with latent
complete-tree structures, to formalize hierarchical
modularity with an emphasis on its hierarchical
permutation symmetry. Utilizing the group theory to quantize and compare permutation symmetries of different spaces, we prove that the
CT space provides a significantly lower bound
on sample complexity than the commonly used
Euclidean space. We develop leaf matching, a
data-efficient network embedding that maps nodes
onto the CT space and conducts discrete optimization by reducing it to decentralized search.
Experiments verify the data efficiency of CT
space over other spaces. Moreover, leaf matching outperforms the state-of-the-art graph transformer in data-scarce scenarios while exhibiting
excellent scalability. The code is available at:
https://github.com/KevinGao7/LeafMatching.

1. Introduction
Link prediction is a long-standing and crucial problem in
both graph representation learning and network science
(Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg, 2003; Kumar et al., 2020).
Figure 1. Hierarchical modularity exists regardless of link observability: the two distance matrices with different link observability
both indicate that a and b, as well as c and d, each form a module,
while the two formed modules together constitute a larger module.

1

Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research, Department
of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Weixian College, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Shangqi Guo <shangqi guo@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Insufficient sample sizes call for strong priors, leading us
to focus on hierarchical modularity, a general property in
many important real-world networks, including but not lim-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

