Representative Language Generation

Charlotte Peale * 1 Vinod Raman * 2 Omer Reingold * 1

Abstract

opment of new theoretical frameworks to rigorously analyze
their performance, capabilities, and limitations. Recently,
Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024) proposed a theoretical
framework that encapsulates the fundamental objective of
generative models: after being shown a sequence of strings
from an unknown target language (such as all valid code
snippets in java), generate new, unseen strings from the
target language. Informally, we say that a model satisfies
generation in the limit if it achieves this goal after seeing a
finite number of strings from the target language. Kleinberg
& Mullainathan (2024) showed that generation in the limit
is indeed possible in many scenarios, such as whenever the
class of potential target languages is countable, contrasting
to classic negative results by Gold and Angluin on identification, which tell us that no model can identify the target
language from a sequence of strings for most natural classes
of languages (1967; 1979; 1980). This positive result for the
task of language generation has spurred a flurry of followup works further formalizing the landscape of generation
tasks and understanding the limits of when generation is
possible (Li et al., 2024; Kalavasis et al., 2024b; Charikar &
Pabbaraju, 2024; Kalavasis et al., 2024a).

We introduce “representative generation,” extending the theoretical framework for generation proposed by Kleinberg et al. (2024) and formalized
by Li et al. (2024), to additionally address diversity and bias concerns in generative models. Our
notion requires outputs of a generative model to
proportionally represent groups of interest from
the training data. We characterize representative
uniform and non-uniform generation, introducing
the “group closure dimension” as a key combinatorial quantity. For representative generation in
the limit, we analyze both information-theoretic
and computational aspects, demonstrating feasibility for countably infinite hypothesis classes and
collections of groups under certain conditions, but
proving a negative result for computability using
only membership queries. This contrasts with
Kleinberg et al.’s (2024) positive results for standard generation in the limit. Our findings provide
a rigorous foundation for developing more diverse
and representative generative models.

While these recent results have demonstrated the possibility
of successful generation, a concern remains that models that
successfully generate in the limit may do so by generating
from a restricted subset of the true language. For instance,
consider an image generator trained on a diverse set of animal pictures. If this model were to produce only new images
of cats, it would technically satisfy the criteria for generation
in the limit, yet fail to capture the full diversity of the true
target set of animal pictures. In the spirit of this example,
it is not hard to imagine real-life concerns about the usage
of LLMs and other generative models. Training data often
includes text or images representing diverse groups, characterized by ethnicity, race, gender, and other protected attributes. However, the mere presence of diverse data doesn’t
guarantee diverse outputs. Beyond demographics, it’s essential to ensure that generators intended for widespread
use accurately reflect the diverse perspectives found across
various communities. Ensuring proportional representation
in a generator’s outputs can significantly enhance its utility,
enabling it to accurately reflect the diverse trends, themes,
and ideological perspectives present in human discourse,
rather than producing homogeneous responses.

1. Introduction
For decades, a central paradigm in machine learning has
been prediction, where models are trained to map input data
to specific output variables or categories. This approach encompasses tasks such as classification and regression, where
the goal is to accurately estimate outcomes based on given
inputs. However, recent years have seen a significant shift
toward generative models, such as Large Language Models (LLMs) and diffusion-based image generators. These
models are designed not to predict specific outcomes, but to
create new data that resembles their training sets, offering a
different approach to machine learning tasks.
This shift towards generative models necessitates the devel*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Charlotte Peale <cpeale@stanford.edu>,
Vinod Raman <vkraman@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

