MP-Nav: Enhancing Data Poisoning Attacks against Multimodal Learning

Jingfeng Zhang 1 Prashanth Krishnamurthy 1 Naman Patel 1 Anthony Tzes 1 Farshad Khorrami 1

Abstract

timodal models that have recently achieved excellent performance in many tasks (Radford et al., 2021). Specifically,
current multimodal models have greatly advanced many
tasks including image captaining, visual question answering, text-image retrieval with some salient examples such
as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALBEF (Li et al., 2021),
LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023), and commercialized models (OpenAI, 2024; Gemini Team, 2024).

Despite the success of current multimodal learning at scale, its susceptibility to data poisoning
attacks poses security concerns in critical applications. Attacker can manipulate model behavior
by injecting maliciously crafted yet minute instances into the training set, stealthily mismatching distinct concepts. Recent studies have manifested the vulnerability by poisoning multimodal
tasks such as Text-Image Retrieval (TIR) and Visual Question Answering (VQA). However, the
current attacking method only rely on random
choice of concepts for misassociation and random instance selections for injecting the poisoning noise, which often achieves the suboptimal
effect and even risks failure due to the dilution of
poisons by the large number of benign instances.
This study introduces Multimodal Poison Navigator (MP-Nav), a plug-and-play module designed
to evaluate and enhance data poisoning attacks
against multimodal models. MP-Nav operates at
both the concept and instance levels, identifying
semantically similar concept pairs and selecting
robust instances to maximize the attack efficacy.
The experiments corroborate MP-Nav can significantly improve the efficacy of state-of-the-art data
poisoning attacks such as AtoB and ShadowCast
in multimodal tasks, and maintain model utility
across diverse datasets. Notably, this study underscores the vulnerabilities of multimodal models
and calls for the counterpart defenses.

Despite the extraordinary performance, recent studies (Carlini & Terzis, 2022) have exposed security vulnerabilities in
current multimodal learning, urging the need for meticulous
caution in its critical applications to robotics (Bhat et al.,
2024a;b; Wu et al., 2024), medicine (Jin et al., 2024), etc. To
comprehensively uncover the risks, researchers have holistically evaluated vision-language multimodal models (Lee
et al., 2023; 2024), and developed attacks against the multimodal models, such as evasion adversarial attacks (Lu et al.,
2023; He et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2024;
Gao et al., 2025) and jailbreaking attacks (Qi et al., 2024;
Shayegani et al., 2024; Tao et al., 2024). In evasion attacks,
the adversarial users can maliciously manipulate the inputs
(but without affecting model parameters), and cause multimodal models to produce incorrect predictions. In contrast,
another less studied direction is data poisoning attack (Biggio et al., 2012), where model parameters can be tempered
by the injection of a small amount of poisoned data into the
training set, and the manipulated models affect the vast majority of benign users who query the model normally. Even
worse, modern multimodal learning often relies on a large
amount of noisy and uncrated data from external sources,
which exacerbates the threat of data poisoning attack.
There are three pioneering studies on data poison attacks
against multimodal learning (Carlini & Terzis, 2022; Yang
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). Carlini & Terzis (2022) has
shown that multimodal models are more vulnerable to data
poisoning attacks than unimodal models, and even worse,
the vulnerability increases with model capacity because
larger multimodal models can memorize more incorrect associations between different concepts. Furthermore, Yang
et al. (2023) extended the data poisoning attacks to the
CLIP-powered test-image retrieval (TIR) tasks (Radford
et al., 2021), where given texts from original concept O,
the poisoned CLIP will mistakenly and consistently retrieve the images from targeted concept T . Besides, Xu

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning (Yuhas et al., 1989; Hall & Llinas,
1997; Ngiam et al., 2011; Andrew et al., 2013; Baltrusaitis
et al., 2019) integrates data from multiple modalities (such
as vision, text, audio, and sensory signals) and outputs mul1
New York University. Correspondence to: Farshad Khorrami
<khorrami@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

