Mind the Gap: A Practical Attack on GGUF Quantization

Kazuki Egashira 1 2 Robin Staab 1 Mark Vero 1 Jingxuan He 3 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

LLM popularity, including their widespread sharing on community platforms such as Hugging Face (Hugging Face,
2024), quantization methods have become the primary enabler method of large-scale model sharing and deployment.

With the increasing size of frontier LLMs, posttraining quantization has become the standard
for memory-efficient deployment. Recent work
has shown that basic rounding-based quantization schemes pose security risks, as they can
be exploited to inject malicious behaviors into
quantized models that remain hidden in full precision. However, existing attacks cannot be applied to more complex quantization methods, such
as the GGUF family used in the popular ollama
and llama.cpp frameworks. In this work, we address this gap by introducing the first attack on
GGUF. Our key insight is that the quantization
error – the difference between the full-precision
weights and their (de-)quantized version – provides sufficient flexibility to construct malicious
quantized models that appear benign in full precision. Leveraging this, we develop an attack that
trains the target malicious LLM while constraining its weights based on quantization errors. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our attack on
three popular LLMs across nine GGUF quantization data types on three diverse attack scenarios:
insecure code generation (∆=88.7%), targeted
content injection (∆=85.0%), and benign instruction refusal (∆=30.1%). Our attack highlights
that (1) the most widely used post-training quantization method is susceptible to adversarial interferences, and (2) the complexity of quantization
schemes alone is insufficient as a defense.

Exploitation of LLM Quantization At the same time,
recent work (Egashira et al., 2024) has shown that quantization methods on LLMs can be exploited by malicious actors,
resulting in models that behave benignly in full precision
but exhibit adverse behavior when deployed under quantization. However, as in prior work on image classifiers (Ma
et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2021), existing attacks are only applicable to "zero-shot" quantization (e.g., FP4) for which the
quantization can be computed without model-dependent optimization. While such methods are well known due to their
simplicity, they are less popular in practical deployments as
they incur larger performance drops than optimization-based
approaches (Frantar et al., 2022). Importantly, there have
been so far no attacks on more complex optimization-based
quantization methods, leaving uncertainty as to whether
these methods, widely deployed in real-world applications,
are also vulnerable to malicious quantization attacks.
This Work: Exploiting Real World Schemes We demonstrate for the first time that a widely used optimization-based
quantization method is, in fact, vulnerable to such quantization attacks. In particular, we show that an adversary can
exploit many popular GGUF (Gerganov, 2023) k-quant data
types (bundled with the llama.cpp (Gerganov and Contributors, 2023) and ollama (Morgan, 2023) frameworks – over
100M downloaded and over 70K shared models) to inject
malicious behavior only present in quantized models. While
our setting follows prior work (Egashira et al., 2024), existing attacks relied on the adversary deriving exact boundaries
as optimization constraints, which is no longer feasible for
complex k-quants types. Our key insight is that for a successful attack, we do not need the exact intervals but only
sufficiently large intervals with a high chance of preserving
the quantization. Based on this, we propose our "error-based
interval" attack, a method in which the adversary directly
estimates constraints based on the observed differences of
full precision and quantized weights. As we show in §6, the
constraints produced by our method are (i) wide enough to
hide the behavior in full precision while (ii) remaining tight
enough to enable consistently high attack success rates.

1. Introduction
By reducing memory requirements, model quantization
emerged as a key method for enabling the lightweight deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs) on a wide
range of commodity hardware. Notably, with increasing
1

ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 The University of Tokyo, Japan
University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Kazuki Egashira <kazuki.egashira@inf.ethz.ch>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

