A Computationally Efficient Algorithm for
Infinite-Horizon Average-Reward Linear MDPs

Kihyuk Hong 1 Ambuj Tewari 1

Abstract

definitions of long-term rewards. The first is the infinitehorizon discounted setting, where the objective is to maximize the discounted cumulative sum of rewards, with exponentially decaying weight assigned to future rewards. The
second is the infinite-horizon average-reward setting, where
the objective is to maximize the undiscounted long-term
average of rewards, assigning uniform weight to future and
present rewards. Learning in the average-reward setting is
more challenging because its Bellman operator is not a contraction, and the widely used value iteration algorithm may
fail when the transition probability model used for value
iteration is not well-behaved. This complicates algorithm
design, especially when the underlying transition probability
model is unknown and must be estimated.

We study reinforcement learning in infinitehorizon average-reward settings with linear
MDPs. Previous work addresses this problem by
approximating the average-reward setting by discounted setting and employing a value iterationbased algorithm that uses clipping to constrain the
span of the value function for improved statistical efficiency. However, the clipping procedure
requires computing the minimum of the value
function over the entire state space, which is prohibitive since the state space in linear MDP setting
can be large or even infinite. In this paper, we introduce a value iteration method with efficient
clipping operation that only requires computing
the minimum of value functions over the set of
states visited by the algorithm. Our algorithm enjoys the same regret bound as the previous work
while being computationally efficient, with computational complexity that is independent of the
size of the state space.

Seminal work by Auer et al. (2008) introduces a value iteration based algorithm for the infinite-horizon averagereward setting in the tabular case, where the state space
and the action space are finite. To address sensitivity of
the value iteration algorithm to the transition probability
model, they maintain a confidence set that captures the true,
well-behaved transition probability model. Their algorithm
employs an extended value iteration approach, which optimally selects the transition probability model from the
confidence set at each iteration. This extended value iteration method has since been extensively used in the tabular
setting (Bartlett & Tewari, 2009; Fruit et al., 2018; Zhang
& Ji, 2019). Beyond the tabular case, the method has also
been adapted to the linear mixture MDP setting (Modi et al.,
2020; Ayoub et al., 2020), where the transition probability
model has a low-dimensional structure (Ayoub et al., 2020;
Wu et al., 2022; Chae et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn optimal actions
for an agent by interacting with the environment. Among
the various RL settings, the infinite-horizon setting is particularly well-suited for applications where optimizing longterm performance is the primary objective. Examples include production system management (Yang et al., 2021;
Gosavi, 2004), inventory management (Gijsbrechts et al.,
2022; Giannoccaro & Pontrandolfo, 2002) and network routing (Mammeri, 2019), where interactions between the agent
and the environment continue indefinitely, and the natural
goal is to optimize long-term rewards.

To our knowledge, the extended value iteration method is
limited to tabular and linear mixture MDPs, as it relies on
sample-efficient transition probability estimation, which is
infeasible for settings like linear MDPs with large state
spaces (Jin et al., 2020). In response to these limitations,
researchers have explored alternative approaches for such
settings. For example, Wei et al. (2021) propose a reduction
to the finite-horizon episodic setting by dividing the time
steps into episodes of a fixed length. This approach achieves
e 3/4 ), which is suboptimal, where T
a regret bound of O(T
denotes the number of time steps. They also introduce a

In the infinite-horizon framework, there are two widely-used
1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
US. Correspondence to: Ambuj Tewari <tewaria@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

