Scalable Meta-Learning via Mixed-Mode Differentiation

Iurii Kemaev 1 Dan A. Calian 1 Luisa M. Zintgraf 1 Gregory Farquhar 1 Hado van Hasselt 1

Abstract

optimisation (Bengio, 2000; Franceschi et al., 2018), data
weighting (Hu et al., 2023b; Calian et al., 2025), and fast
task adaptation (Finn et al., 2017), to neural architecture
search (Liu et al., 2018), adaptive reinforcement learning
(Xu et al., 2018; Zahavy et al., 2020), algorithm discovery
(Oh et al., 2020), and more.

Gradient-based bilevel optimisation is a powerful technique with applications in hyperparameter optimisation, task adaptation, algorithm
discovery, meta-learning more broadly, and beyond. It often requires differentiating through the
gradient-based optimisation process itself, leading
to ”gradient-of-a-gradient” calculations with computationally expensive second-order and mixed
derivatives. While modern automatic differentiation libraries provide a convenient way to write
programs for calculating these derivatives, they
oftentimes cannot fully exploit the specific structure of these problems out-of-the-box, leading to
suboptimal performance. In this paper, we analyse such cases and propose Mixed-Flow MetaGradients, or MixFlow-MG – a practical algorithm that uses mixed-mode differentiation to construct more efficient and scalable computational
graphs yielding over 10x memory and up to 25%
wall-clock time improvements over standard implementations in modern meta-learning setups.

In gradient-based bilevel optimization, the meta-parameter
update requires backpropagating through the inner loop,
leading to second-order derivatives (gradients of gradients)
– a notoriously computationally expensive process both in
terms of memory and FLOPs. Updating outer parameters every T inner steps (truncated backpropagation through time,
Truncated-BPTT; Werbos, 1990) still results in computational cost scaling linearly with T . Consequently, we are
often restricted to small inner and outer models θ and η
and short horizons T , limiting the exploration of the full
potential of BLO. While Truncated-BPTT can be effective
for smaller meta-models η (Xu et al., 2018; Shaban et al.,
2019), its applicability to large neural networks with billions
of parameters (Gemini et al., 2023; OpenAI et al., 2023) remains an open question. Moreover, given the demonstrated
impact of scale on model performance (Kaplan et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022b), the trend of scaling inner models θ is likely to continue. This necessitates more efficient
BLO algorithms to support modern and future generations
of models and to explore larger backpropagation horizons
T whilst keeping the cost of experiments affordable.

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimisation (BLO) is a commonly used tool to solve
problems in meta-learning and deep learning (Liu et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2024). In this problem setting, an innerloop optimisation of parameters θ incrementally searches
for optimal values θ∗ , in a process that depends on (fixed)
meta-parameters η. In an outer-loop meta-optimisation, we
search for optimal meta-parameters η ∗ . For instance, η may
include hyperparameters of the inner update (Bengio, 2000)
or even their per-weight versions (Sutton, 1992).

In this paper, we first analyse standard implementations for
Truncated-BPTT-based bilevel gradients in modern frameworks for automated differentiation and highlight their inherent inefficiencies. We then propose Mixed-Flow MetaGradients, or MixFlow-MG – a simple reparameterization
of the inner-loop learning dynamics that exposes the underlying symmetry of the problem and uses mixed-mode automatic differentiation to seamlessly exploit it. Finally, we use
modern hardware and libraries for tensor programming to
demonstrate that the proposed algorithmic technique, whilst
requiring only minor code modifications, yields significant
performance improvements in common meta-learning scenarios. In a representative setting, MixFlow-MG demonstrates reductions up to 95% in the active memory consumption and 25% reduction in wall-clock time, thus
allowing to scale bilevel gradient setups by more than an
order of magnitude in a compute-efficient way.

This framework offers a powerful approach to automating
the design and optimisation of learning systems, leading
to significant advancements in various machine learning
domains. It has applications ranging from hyperparameter
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Iurii Kemaev <iukemaev@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

