Functional Alignment Can Mislead: Examining Model Stitching

Damian Smith 1 Harvey Mannering 1 Antonia Marcu 1
Do networks that learn to solve all these
tasks really represent the same information?

Abstract
A common belief in the representational comparison literature is that if two representations can
be functionally aligned, they must capture similar information. In this paper we focus on model
stitching and show that models can be functionally
aligned, but represent very different information.
Firstly, we show that discriminative models with
very different biases can be stitched together. We
then show that models trained to solve entirely different tasks on different data modalities, and even
representations in the form of clustered random
noise, can be successfully stitched into MNIST or
ImageNet-trained models. We proceed by showing that alignments can also be found in the case
of autoencoders where the encoder and decoder
are trained on different tasks. We end with a discussion of the wider impact of our results on the
community’s current beliefs. Overall, our paper
draws attention to the need to correctly interpret
the results of such functional similarity measures
and highlights the need for approaches that capture informational similarity.

Birdsong
ClusteredNoise
Stylized
ImageNet
ImageNet
Figure 1. Examples of inputs from 4 different tasks we consider.
We show that models trained on the first three tasks can be stitched
together with models trained on ImageNet despite depicting very
different input-level information.

different, since they also use different input patterns for their
predictions. Throughout the paper we refer to input-level
patterns as “semantic” information.
We argue that without capturing semantic similarity, some
of the existing model comparison measures can end up
considering a network that successfully distinguishes birds
based on their songs to be equivalent to one that successfully
distinguishes ImageNet images. In particular, we focus on
model stitching but we argue in our discussion section that
the same criticism might be extended to other measures and
hypotheses as well.

1. Motivation
Measuring representational similarity is a complex task and
there is no consensus on how it should be done (Sucholutsky et al., 2023). More interestingly, there seems to be no
consensus on when two representations can be considered
similar. In this paper we do not consider two representations
to be similar if they do not capture the same information.
For example, if one model learns to classify birds by their
song and another learns to classify them by their visual appearance, we consider those models to be different. Equally,
if two models learn to visually classify birds but one of
them uses the birds’ shape to make predictions, while the
other uses plumage, we would consider those models to be

As an alternative to established model comparison methods
such as CKA (Kornblith et al., 2019), functional model comparison is gaining increasing attention (Bansal et al., 2021;
Hernandez et al., 2022; Klabunde et al., 2025; Csiszárik
et al., 2021). In this paper we focus on the functional perspective as an emerging direction and will therefore not
cover CKA, SVCCA (Raghu et al., 2017), or similar methods. Broadly speaking, the functional perspective argues
that two intermediate layers should be considered similar
if they lead to matching outputs. While this perspective
seems useful, especially in a classification setting, we argue
that there is one fundamental problem with deep learning
models which raises questions about its utility: shortcut
learning (Geirhos et al., 2020).

1

Vision, Learning, and Control (VLC) Research Group, University of Southampton. Correspondence to: Antonia Marcu
<a.marcu@soton.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Shortcut learning is an umbrella term for learning decision
1

