MiraGe: Editable 2D Images using Gaussian Splatting

Joanna Waczyńska 1 2 Tomasz Szczepanik 1 Piotr Borycki 1 Sławomir Tadeja 3 Thomas Bohné 3
Przemysław Spurek 1 4

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) approximate discrete data through continuous functions
and are commonly used for encoding 2D images.
Traditional image-based INRs employ neural networks to map pixel coordinates to RGB values,
capturing shapes, colors, and textures within the
network’s weights. Recently, GaussianImage has
been proposed as an alternative, using Gaussian
functions instead of neural networks to achieve
comparable quality and compression. Such a solution obtains a quality and compression ratio
similar to classical INR models but does not allow
image modification. In contrast, our work introduces a novel method, MiraGe, which uses mirror
reflections to perceive 2D images in 3D space
and employs flat-controlled Gaussians for precise
2D image editing. Our approach improves the
rendering quality and allows realistic image modifications, including human-inspired perception
of photos in the 3D world. Thanks to modeling
images in 3D space, we obtain the illusion of
3D-based modification in 2D images. We also
show that our Gaussian representation can be easily combined with a physics engine to produce
physics-based modification of 2D images. Consequently, MiraGe allows for better quality than the
standard approach and natural modification of 2D
images.

Figure 1. MiraGe encodes 2D images with parameterized Gaussians, enabling high-quality reconstruction and real-life-like modifications. The selected parts of the image can be transformed in
3D space, creating a 3D effect with a physics engine controlling
movement and interactions.

(Lu, 2019; Davoodi et al., 2023). In line with this trend, we
introduce a model that encodes 2D images by simulating
human interpretation. Specifically, our model perceives a
2D image as a human would view a photograph or a sheet
of paper, treating it as a flat object within a 3D space. This
approach allows for intuitive and flexible image editing,
capturing the nuances of human perception while enabling
complex transformations (Fig. 1).

1. Introduction
Recent research has increasingly emphasized human perception and the understanding of the world through this lens
1
Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Mathematics and
Computer Science 2 Doctoral School of Exact and Nat4
ural Sciences 3 University of Cambridge
IDEAS Research Institute.
Correspondence to: Joanna Waczyńska
<joanna.waczynska@doctoral.uj.edu.pl>, Przemysław Spurek
<przemyslaw.spurek@uj.edu.pl>.

Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) framework models the structure
of a 3D scene using Gaussian components (Kerbl et al.,
2023). In the 2D domain, GaussianImage (Zhang et al.,
2024) has shown promising results in image reconstruction by efficiently encoding images in the 2D space, with a
strong focus on model efficiency and reduced training time.
Unfortunately, GaussianImage does not support user-driven
adjustments of scene objects, which is a key feature of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

