Hybrid Quantum-Classical Multi-Agent Pathfinding

Thore Gerlach 1 2 Loong Kuan Lee 2 Frederic Barbaresco 3 Nico Piatkowski 2

Abstract

The scalability of optimal state-of-the-art MAPF solvers is
limited, since finding optimal solutions is NP-hard (Sharon
et al.). Thus one often falls back to suboptimal or anytime
methods (Li et al., a;b; Huang et al.; Okumura, 2023b;a;
Li et al., 2021). Even though such methods are computationally efficient in finding a feasible solution, the solution quality can be insufficient which implies the urge for
optimal solution methods. By reformulating MAPF as a
multi-commodity flow problem, it can be solved optimally
via Integer Linear Programming (ILP). However, the reduction uses an inefficient representation of the problem
setting in terms of space complexity and is only effective
on small instances. More popular techniques for optimal
MAPF include Conflict-based Search (CBS) (Sharon et al.)
and Branch-and-Cut-and-Price (BCP) (Lam et al., b). CBS
is a two-level procedure, with splitting a search tree based
on detected conflicts between agents and subsequent replanning. This tree is explored with best-first search until a
collision-free node is found. BCP takes a different approach
of considering a (possibly infeasible) solution which is then
refined iteratively by successively adding paths and constraints. Similarly to CBS, BCP is a two-level algorithm: on
the low level it solves a series of single-agent pathfinding
problems, while the high level uses ILP to assign feasible
paths to agents. While low level single agent pathfinding
can be performed efficiently, the high level problems of both
CBS and BCP remain NP-hard.

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) focuses on determining conflict-free paths for multiple agents
navigating through a shared space to reach specified goal locations. This problem becomes computationally challenging, particularly when handling
large numbers of agents, as frequently encountered in practical applications like coordinating
autonomous vehicles. Quantum Computing (QC)
is a promising candidate in overcoming such limits. However, current quantum hardware is still in
its infancy and thus limited in terms of computing power and error robustness. In this work, we
present the first optimal hybrid quantum-classical
MAPF algorithms which are based on branch-andcut-and-price. QC is integrated by iteratively solving QUBO problems, based on conflict graphs.
Experiments on actual quantum hardware and
results on benchmark data suggest that our approach dominates previous QUBO formulations
and state-of-the-art MAPF solvers.

1. Introduction
Emerging domains of large-scale resource allocation problems, such as assigning road capacity to vehicles, warehouse management or 3D airspace to Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs), often require Multi-Agent Pathfinding (MAPF) (Stern et al.; Choudhury et al.; Li et al., c) to
determine feasible allocations. MAPF involves calculating
non-colliding paths for a large number of agents simultaneously, presenting significant computational challenges in
realistically sized scenarios. These challenges are becoming
increasingly relevant in case of large-scale real-world applications. E.g., future UAV traffic in urban environments,
driven by parcel delivery demands, is expected to involve
managing thousands of flight paths (Doole et al., 2020).

Quantum Computing (QC) is considered promising for
tackling certain NP-hard Combinatorial Optimization (CO)
problems. This is due to its potential to leverage quantum
phenomena to solve certain types of problems faster than
classical methods. The quantum mechanical effect of superposition enables exploration of a vast solution space in
parallel, which is particularly advantageous for finding the
best solution from a large set of possibilities. During this
exploration quantum entanglement allows the encoding of
high-order relationships among problem variables, leading
to an effective exploration of the solution space. In particular, QC is suited for solving Quadratic Unconstrained
Binary Optimization (QUBO) problems (Punnen, 2022)

1

University of Bonn 2 Fraunhofer IAIS 3 Thales Land and Air
Systems. Correspondence to: Thore Gerlach <gerlach@iai.unibonn.de>.

min

z∈{0,1}n

z ⊤ Qz ,

(1)

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

where Q is an n × n real matrix and n is the number of
qubits. Despite this simple problem structure, it is NP1

