MA-LoT: Model-Collaboration Lean-based Long Chain-of-Thought
Reasoning enhances Formal Theorem Proving

Ruida Wang * 1 Rui Pan * 1 Yuxin Li * 2 Jipeng Zhang 2 Yizhen Jia 1
Shizhe Diao 3 Renjie Pi 2 Junjie Hu 4 Tong Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Formal reasoning is a cornerstone of human intelligence
and a key objective in machine learning (Newell & Simon,
1956), often evaluated through rigorous mathematical derivations (Yang et al., 2024a). With the rise of Large Language
Models (LLMs), Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting has
emerged to formalize reasoning by generating intermediate
steps. This approach improves interpretability and enhances
reasoning performance (Wei et al., 2022).

Solving mathematical problems using computerverifiable languages like Lean has significantly
impacted the mathematical and computer science communities. State-of-the-art methods utilize a single Large Language Model (LLM) to
generate complete proof or perform tree search,
but they fail to balance these tasks. We propose MA-LoT: Model-CollAboration Lean-based
Long Chain-of-Thought, a comprehensive framework for Lean4 theorem proving to solve this issue. It separates the cognition tasks of general NL
for whole-proof generation and error analysis for
proof correction using the model-collaboration
method. We achieve this by structured interaction of the LLM and Lean4 verifier in Long CoT.
To implement the framework, we propose the
novel LoT-Transfer Learning training-inference
pipeline, which enables the Long CoT thinking capability to LLMs without special data annotation.
Extensive experiment shows that our framework
achieves a 61.07% accuracy rate on the Lean4 version of the MiniF2F-Test dataset, largely outperforming DeepSeek-V3 (33.61%), single-model
tree search (InternLM-Step-Prover, 50.70%), and
whole-proof generation (Godel-Prover, 55.33%)
baselines. Furthermore, our findings highlight the
potential of combining Long CoT with formal
verification for a more insightful generation in a
broader perspective.

Initial state

Theorem
Statement

Return
last state

Prover
LLM

Wrong state

Analysis +
Complete
proof

✅
Proof Done

Tree-Search Method:
✅ Use ITP to check
✅ Find non-trivial proof
❌ Expensive
❌ No Long-term NL planning

Another
generation
❌

✅

Whole-proof generation
✅ LLM NL planning and reasoning
✅ Controllable cost
❌ No intermediate feedback
❌ Usually trivial solution

Figure 1. Two main directions of FL theorem proving using LLMs:
Single model tree-search and whole-proof generation with their
advantages/disadvantages.

However, the ambiguity of Natural Language (NL) complicates verifying intermediate steps, particularly in advanced
mathematics, where there is no answer to check but theorems to prove. This challenge is exacerbated by the growing
complexity of modern mathematics, which makes proof verification highly demanding and can lead to errors, as seen in
the prolonged validation of Fermat’s Last Theorem (Wang
et al., 2024). Researchers propose grounding reasoning in
rigorous first-order logic to address this, enabling automated
verification via Formal Language (FL) verifiers. This framework ensures rigor and has led to the development of tools
like Lean (De Moura et al., 2015; Moura & Ullrich, 2021),
Isabelle (Paulson, 1994), and HOL Light (Harrison, 2009)
for verifiable theorem proving.

*

First Authors 1 Department of Computer Science, University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 3 NVIDIA 4 Department of Computer Science,
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Ruida
Wang <ruidaw@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, writing mathematical proofs in FL requires significant expertise and effort, as most proofs involve extensive
1

