Stability and Generalization Analysis of Decentralized SGD: Sharper Bounds
Beyond Lipschitzness and Smoothness

Shuang Zeng 1 Yunwen Lei 1

Abstract

gree of the connection. Then, each local model iteratively
conducts a weighted average and a gradient descent.

Decentralized SGD (D-SGD) is a popular optimization method to train large-scale machine
learning models. In this paper, we study the generalization behavior of D-SGD for both smooth
and nonsmooth problems by leveraging the algorithm stability. For convex and smooth problems,
we develop stability bounds involving the training
errors to show the benefit of optimization in generalization. This improves the existing results by
removing the Lipschitzness assumption and implying fast rates in a low-noise condition. We also
develop the first optimal stability-based generalization bounds for D-SGD applied to nonsmooth
problems. We further develop optimization error
bounds which imply minimax optimal excess risk
rates. Our novelty in the analysis consists of an
error decomposition to use the co-coercivity of
functions as well as the control of a neighboringconsensus error.

The impressive success of D-SGD in practice motivates a
lot of theoretical studies to understand their behaviour, for
which a challenge lies in the control of a consensus error.
Most of these studies focus on the convergence analysis
to show the behavior on the training datasets (Lian et al.,
2017; 2018; Koloskova et al., 2020; Xin et al., 2020). As
a comparison, there is far less work on the generalization
analysis to understand the performance on testing datasets,
which is a central topic in learning theory. Indeed, generalization analysis sheds insights on how different factors
contribute to the prediction, which helps the construction of
early-stopping rule to avoid overfitting (Hardt et al., 2016).
Richards and Rebeschini (2020) initialized the generalization analysis of D-SGD by leveraging the concept of uniform stability. Several works improve the generalization
analysis by considering another stability concept called onaverage model stability (Zhu et al., 2022; Le Bars et al.,
2024; Taheri and Thrampoulidis, 2023). While these results
are interesting to understand the generalization behavior
of D-SGD, there is still room for further improvements.
For example, these stability analyses often impose restrictive assumptions such as bounded gradient assumption and
bounded variance assumption. Furthermore, they fail to
imply optimal generalization bounds that can fully capture
low-noises conditions for fast rates. In this paper, we aim to
improve these discussions by removing restrictive assumptions and getting optimistic risk bounds. Our contributions
are summarized as follows.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning often involves large-scale datasets
which contain private information of users. This asks for
the development of scalable optimization methods that can
preserve the private information (Lian et al., 2017; 2018).
An efficient methodology to meet these requirements is to
distribute the datasets over several agents, each of which
only processes its own local datasets. In this way, the private information of a local dataset is not revealed to other
agents. Decentralized stochastic gradient descent (D-SGD)
is a representative distributed optimization method where
each agent updates its own local model by building stochastic gradient using its own local dataset. These agents are
connected via a communication graph which shows the de-

• We present the generalization and convergence analysis for
D-SGD on smooth and convex problems, for both of which
we remove the existing Lipschitzness assumptions and get
fast rates under a low noise condition. We build on-average
model stability bounds, which involve the training errors
to show the benefit of optimization in generalization. We
present a clear comparison (Table 1) to show the advantage
of our stability analysis as compared to existing results.

1

Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Yunwen Lei
<leiyw@hku.hk>.

• We also consider nonsmooth problems with Hölder continuous gradients, for which we present a comprehensive
analysis to show the effect of a smoothness parameter and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

