Intersectional Fairness in Reinforcement Learning
with Large State and Constraint Spaces

Eric Eaton 1 * Marcel Hussing 1 * Michael Kearns 1 * Aaron Roth 1 * Sikata Bela Sengupta 1 * Jessica Sorrell 2 *

1. Introduction

Abstract

There are a number of reinforcement learning (RL) settings
in which states correspond to either individuals or groups,
each with their own properties, and actions correspond to the
provision of goods or services among the states (Wen et al.,
2021; Satija et al., 2023). For example, we could consider a
road network of neighborhoods and the sequential distribution of disaster relief over the region (Li et al., 2024), a set
of critical locations and touring these locations to provide
surveillance, or hospital resources (e.g., beds, ventilators)
and their allocation. In scenarios like these, what should
we optimize for? If we optimize for a single objective, then
the benefits of the actions may accrue disproportionately to
some groups of people or locations over others. If there are
natural groupings of states whose welfare we are concerned
about (such as neighborhood demographics or disease subpopulations), then a natural fairness-motivated objective
is minimax optimization: to maximize the reward that accrues to the group obtaining the minimum reward. Minimax
objectives over groups have recently been studied in classification problems (Martinez et al., 2020; Diana et al., 2021),
and have the attractive property that they Pareto-dominate
solutions that seek to equalize reward across groups; every
group will have higher reward in a minimax solution than
they would in any equal reward solution. Problems like
this are examples of RL problems with constraints (CalvoFullana et al., 2023; Dudı́k et al., 2020).

In traditional reinforcement learning (RL), the
learner aims to solve a single objective optimization problem: find the policy that maximizes expected reward. However, in many real-world settings, it is important to optimize over multiple
objectives simultaneously. For example, when we
are interested in fairness, states might have feature
annotations corresponding to multiple (intersecting) demographic groups to whom reward accrues,
and our goal might be to maximize the reward of
the group receiving the minimal reward. In this
work, we consider a multi-objective optimization
problem in which each objective is defined by a
state-based reweighting of a single scalar reward
function. This generalizes the problem of maximizing the reward of the minimum reward group.
We provide oracle-efficient algorithms to solve
these multi-objective RL problems even when the
number of objectives is very large — for tabular MDPs, as well as for large MDPs when the
group functions have additional structure. The
contribution of this paper is that we are able to
solve this class of multi-objective RL problems
with a possibly exponentially large class of constraints over intersecting groups in both tabular
and large state space MDPs in an oracle-efficient
manner. Finally, we experimentally validate our
theoretical results and demonstrate applications
on a preferential attachment graph MDP.

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to: Sikata Sengupta
<sikata@seas.upenn.edu>.

However, as noted by Kearns et al. (2018) (in a classification setting), especially in fairness motivated problems, it is
insufficient to satisfy these kinds of constraints marginally.
For example, suppose we have demographic groups defined
by race, gender, and income, which are not mutually exclusive in that no attribute determines the value of any other.
Satisfying constraints marginally on, e.g., racial groups does
not guarantee that the corresponding constraints are satisfied on intersectional groups, defined by race and gender or
gender and income. In general, if we have d groupings of individuals, there are 2d intersectional groups — an enormous
number for even modestly large values of d.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we study a constrained RL problem in the
episodic setting that generalizes the problem of minimax
group fairness, and is able to efficiently handle exponen-

*

1

