Ensemble Learned Bloom Filters: Two Oracles are Better than One
Ming Lin 1 Lin Chen 2

Abstract

lookup tables (Goodrich & Mitzenmacher, 2011) etc.
Boosted by the proliferation of machine learning, learned
Bloom filters (LBF) were recently proposed (Kraska et al.,
2018; Mitzenmacher, 2018), with the design rationale that
we can leverage the specific structure exhibited by data items
to reduce the space of BFs without sacrificing lookup accuracy. Technically, a pre-filter is constructed by implementing a learning model, termed as the learned oracle or simply
oracle for brevity, to filter the queried items. The items with
negative responses at the filter are then passed to a backup
BF for final check. As the backup filter only needs to deal
with filtered items, we can reduce its size and come up with
a more compact learning-augmented data structure, even
after taking into account the space overhead brought by the
oracle. Along this direction, Mitzenmacher (Mitzenmacher,
2018) proposed a sandwich structure to further improve the
performance. Under the condition that the score distribution
of the oracle is available, several variants attempted to make
the best use of the oracle to improve the overall lookup performance: Vaidya et al. (Vaidya et al., 2021) segmented the
score space of the oracle into multiple regions by using multiple thresholds, and uses separate backup Bloom filters for
each region; Sato et al. (Sato & Matsui, 2023) accelerated
the construction while maintaining the same memory efficiency as Vaidya et al. (Vaidya et al., 2021); Dai et al. (Dai
& Shrivastava, 2020) attributed different number of hash
functions in different regions.

Bloom filters (BF) are space-efficient probabilistic data structures for approximate membership
testing. Boosted by the proliferation of machine
learning, learned Bloom filters (LBF) were recently proposed by augmenting the canonical BFs
with a learned oracle as a pre-filter, the size of
which is crucial to the compactness of the overall
system. In this paper, inspired by ensemble learning, we depart from the state-of-the-art singleoracle LBF structure by demonstrating that, by
leveraging multiple learning oracles of smaller
size and carefully optimizing the accompanied
backup filters, we can significantly boost the performance of LBF under the same space budget.
We then design and optimize ensemble learned
Bloom filters for mutually independent and correlated learning oracles respectively. We also empirically demonstrate the performance improvement
of our propositions under three practical data analysis tasks.

1. Introduction
Originally proposed by and named after Bloom in the seminal paper (Bloom, 1970), Bloom filters (BF) are spaceefficient data structures for solving the membership lookup
problem by compactly recording a given set I of data items
in a bit array and outputting a binary answer when queried.
As a structural property, the space compactness of BFs is
achieved at the price of limited false positives but no false
negative. Due to the neat structure with profound theoretic
and practical implications, BFs have received significant
research attention, leading to a palette of extensions and
variants including Bloomier filters (Chazelle et al., 2004),
counting BF (Bonomi et al., 2006), and invertible Bloom

In virtually all the state-of-the-art LBF design, the oracle has
crucial impact on the performance of the system as a whole.
A more accurate oracle results in smaller false positive rate
(FPR). However, it has been well-demonstrated (Thompson
et al., 2021) that the accuracy of learning models exhibit
diminishing performance improvement w.r.t. the model size.
Therefore, the size of the learning model may become a
potential bottleneck of the LBF if the overall space budget is limited. To quantitatively demonstrate this point, we
build an LBF for identifying malicious URLs from 200,000
URLs with a backup BF of 500K bits. We tune the size of
the oracle to vary the FPR, as illustrated in Figure 1. We can
observe that the size of the oracle occupies non-negligible
part of the total memory space and that the accuracy improvement of the oracle paces down significantly with the
increase of its size.

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. 2 Engineering Research Centre
of Applied Technology on Machine Translation and Artificial Intelligence, Macao Polytechnic University, Macao SAR, China.
Correspondence to: Lin Chen <lchen@mpu.edu.mo>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The above observation resonates with the technical diffi1

