PAK-UCB Contextual Bandit: An Online Learning Approach to
Prompt-Aware Selection of Generative Models and LLMs

Xiaoyan Hu 1 Ho-fung Leung 2 Farzan Farnia 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) and text-guided generative
AI models have found numerous applications in various
engineering tasks. A prompt-guided generative AI represents a conditional generative model that produces output
samples given an input text prompt. Over the past few years,
several frameworks have been developed to train generative
models and perform text-guided sample generation in various domains, including text, image, and video (Touvron
et al., 2023; Gemini-Team et al., 2025; OpenAI et al., 2024;
DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Rombach et al., 2022; Bao et al.,
2023b; Podell et al., 2024; Singer et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2024). The great number of available LLMs
and prompt-guided generative models has led to significant
interest in developing evaluation mechanisms to rank the existing models and find the best model from a group of available ones. To address this task, several evaluation metrics
have been proposed to quantify the fidelity of samples generated by prompt-based generative models, such as CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2021) and PickScore (Kirstain et al.,
2023) for prompt-guided image and video generation, and
BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) and BERTscore (Zhang
et al., 2020) for LLMs.

Selecting a sample generation scheme from multiple prompt-based generative models, including large language models (LLMs) and promptguided image and video generation models, is typically addressed by choosing the model that maximizes an averaged evaluation score. However, this
score-based selection overlooks the possibility
that different models achieve the best generation
performance for different types of text prompts.
An online identification of the best generation
model for various input prompts can reduce the
costs associated with querying sub-optimal models. In this work, we explore the possibility of
varying rankings of text-based generative models for different text prompts and propose an online learning framework to predict the best data
generation model for a given input prompt. The
proposed PAK-UCB algorithm addresses a contextual bandit (CB) setting with shared context
variables across the arms, utilizing the generated
data to update kernel-based functions that predict the score of each model available for unseen
text prompts. Additionally, we leverage random
Fourier features (RFF) to accelerate the online
learning process of PAK-UCB. Our numerical
experiments on real and simulated text-to-image
and image-to-text generative models show that
RFF-UCB performs successfully in identifying
the best generation model across different sample
types. The code is available at: github.com/
yannxiaoyanhu/dgm-online-select.

The existing model selection methodologies commonly aim
to identify the generative model with the highest averaged
fidelity score over the distribution of text prompts, producing samples that, on average, align the most with input text
prompts. A well-known example is the averaged CLIPScore
for text-to-image models, measuring the expected alignment
between the input text and output image of the model using
the CLIP embedding (Radford et al., 2021b). While the
best-averaged score model selection strategy has been frequently utilized in generative AI applications, this approach
does not consider the possibility that the involved models
can perform differently across text prompts.
However, we highlight the possibility that one model outperforms another model in responding to text prompts from
certain categories, while that model performs suboptimally
in responding to prompts from other categories. Figure 1
shows examples of both LLMs and text-to-image models,
where two widely-used models exhibit different rankings
across the text prompts from different categories (code gen-

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: Xiaoyan Hu <xyhu21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Farzan
Farnia <farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

