Probabilistic Factorial Experimental Design for Combinatorial Interventions

Divya Shyamal * 1 2 Jiaqi Zhang * 1 3 Caroline Uhler 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
In many domains, it is often of interest to consider the simultaneous application of multiple treatments/actions. For
example, in cell biology, perturbing several genes is often
necessary to induce a transition in cell state (Takahashi &
Yamanaka, 2006). While a single treatment is constrained to
a limited range of possible effects, a combinatorial intervention – comprising multiple treatments applied to the same
unit – can result in a much wider array of outcomes. Much
of this potential stems from the interactive effects between
treatments, rather than merely the additive contributions of
each. For example, perturbing paralogs (a pair of genes) can
have a surprisingly larger effect than the sum of perturbing
each gene individually, as one gene may compensate for the
other, and only perturbing both simultaneously will effectively disrupt the pathway (Koonin, 2005). However, these
interactions make the study of combinatorial interventions
considerably more challenging than understanding single
interventions alone, as each set of treatments may exhibit
distinct interactions.

A combinatorial intervention, consisting of multiple treatments applied to a single unit with potentially interactive effects, has substantial applications in fields such as biomedicine, engineering,
and beyond. Given p possible treatments, conducting all possible 2p combinatorial interventions can
be laborious and quickly becomes infeasible as
p increases. Here we introduce the probabilistic
factorial experimental design, formalized from
how scientists perform lab experiments. In this
framework, the experimenter selects a dosage for
each possible treatment and applies it to a group
of units. Each unit independently receives a random combination of treatments, sampled from a
product Bernoulli distribution determined by the
dosages. Additionally, the experimenter can carry
out such experiments over multiple rounds, adapting the design in an active manner. We address the
optimal experimental design problem within an
intervention model that imposes bounded-degree
interactions between treatments. In the passive
setting, we provide a closed-form solution for
the near-optimal design. Our results prove that
a dosage of 1/2 for each treatment is optimal up
to a factor of 1 + O(ln(n)/n) for estimating any
k-way interaction model,
 regardless of k, and imply that O kp3k ln(p) observations are required
to accurately estimate this model. For the multiround setting, we provide a near-optimal acquisition function that can be numerically optimized.
We also explore several extensions of the design
problem and finally validate our findings through
simulations.

From the design perspective, the problem of testing combinatorial interventions to analyze the combined effects of
various treatments is known as a factorial design (Fisher
et al., 1966). Given p possible treatments with large p, it
is often infeasible to conduct all possible 2p combinatorial
interventions, which corresponds to a full factorial design.
To address the scalability challenge, fractional factorial designs are introduced, which test only a subset of possible
combinations. However, selecting this subset is difficult
when prior knowledge is limited. Choosing a suboptimal
subset may lead to a biased understanding of the experimental landscape. In addition, performing a large and specified
subset of combinatorial interventions can be laborious and
impractical, as each combination must be precisely assembled. In the perturbation example, this involves synthesizing
a unique guide sequence for each combination that targets
the specific genes involved (Rood et al., 2024). However,
when the combination size is large, this becomes infeasible
as a longer guide sequence may lack sufficient penetrance to
effectively enter the targeted cells. To tackle these issues, we
here formalize and study a scalable and unbiased approach
to design factorial experiments.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, MIT 2 Department of Mathematics, MIT 3 Eric
and Wendy Schmidt Center, Broad Institute. Correspondence
to: Jiaqi Zhang <viczhang@mit.edu>, Caroline Uhler <cuhler@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Inspired by how scientists perform library designs in the
1

