Concept Reachability in Diffusion Models: Beyond Dataset Constraints

Marta Aparicio Rodriguez 1 Xenia Miscouridou 1 2 Anastasia Borovykh 1

Abstract

(see Figure 1). In addition to learning the visual and spatial
components of concepts in images, text-to-image models
must correctly associate the concept in an image with its
corresponding semantic description in the caption (Huang
et al., 2023; Ghosh et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2025). When
this alignment fails, even overspecifying and re-prompting
may fail to generate the target image.

Despite significant advances in quality and complexity of the generations in text-to-image models, prompting does not always lead to the desired outputs. Controlling model behaviour by
directly steering intermediate model activations
has emerged as a viable alternative allowing to
reach concepts in latent space that may otherwise remain inaccessible by prompt. In this work,
we introduce a set of experiments to deepen our
understanding of concept reachability. We design a training data setup with three key obstacles:
scarcity of concepts, underspecification of concepts in the captions, and data biases with tied
concepts. Our results show: (i) concept reachability in latent space exhibits a distinct phase
transition, with only a small number of samples
being sufficient to enable reachability, (ii) where
in the latent space the intervention is performed
critically impacts reachability, showing that certain concepts are reachable only at certain stages
of transformation, and (iii) while prompting ability rapidly diminishes with a decrease in quality of
the dataset, concepts often remain reliably reachable through steering. Model providers can leverage this to bypass costly retraining and dataset
curation and instead innovate with user-facing
control mechanisms.

Prior work has shown that, as an alternative to prompt-based
sampling, one can operate directly on a model’s representation level (Kwon et al., 2023; Ilharco et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024). In particular, by editing specific activations, the sampling trajectory of diffusion models
can be adjusted towards a particular target (Epstein et al.,
2023; Samuel et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a). While these
works show that it is possible to steer towards certain output
concepts, we lack a concrete framework to understand the
complexity of guidance, or in other words the reachability of concepts. When can a concept be reliably accessed
through prompting? If prompting fails, under what conditions can steering reliably reach the concept? And ultimately, what factors render a concept entirely unreachable
despite it being in some way present in the training data?

an image of a beaker

1. Introduction
The scaling of diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) has
significantly expanded their capacity to store and generate
vast amounts of complex concepts. While prompts have become the de-facto manner to control the model output, there
are numerous examples when simply prompting falls short

an image of a person
walking left

an image of a rainbow
in black and white

Figure 1: Images generated by Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022) that fail to produce the desired outcome due
to hypothesised dataset limits: (L) a scarce concept, (C)
underspecification in a caption, (R) biases. See Appendix
F.2 for details.
Existing work has shown that the dataset structure plays a
key role in reachability. For GANs and VAEs, Zhao et al.
(2018) conclude that biases in the train set will influence the
generation ability of models, regardless of the architecture
or training algorithm implemented. In diffusion models,
Chang et al. (2025) show that certain characteristics such
as balanced datasets help mitigate the failure of a generated

1
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London,
UK 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of
Cyprus, Cyprus. Correspondence to: Marta Aparicio Rodriguez
<marta.aparicio-rodriguez22@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

