Breaking the Curse of Multiagency in
Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Laixi Shi * 1 Jingchu Gai * 2 Eric Mazumdar 3 Yuejie Chi 4 Adam Wierman 3

1

Abstract

Introduction

A flurry of problems naturally involve decision-making
among multiple players, whether human, artificial intelligence, or both, with strategic objectives. Multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) serves as a powerful framework to address these challenges, demonstrating potential in
various applications such as social dilemmas (Leibo et al.,
2017; Baker, 2020; Zhang et al., 2024), autonomous driving
(Lillicrap et al., 2015), robotics (Kober et al., 2013; Rusu
et al., 2017), and games (Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals et al.,
2019). Despite the recent success of standard MARL, its
transition from prototypes to reliable production is hindered
by robustness concerns due to the complexity and variability
of both the real-world environment and human behaviors.
Specifically, environmental uncertainty can arise from simto-real gaps (Tobin et al., 2017), unexpected disturbance
(Pinto et al., 2017), system noise, and adversarial attacks
(Mahmood et al., 2018); agents’ behaviors are subject to
unknown bounded rationality and variability (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974). The solution learned at training can fail
catastrophically when faced with a slightly shifted MARL
problem during deployment, resulting in a significant drop
in overall outcomes and each agent’s individual payoff
(Balaji et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a; Zeng et al., 2022;
Yeh et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2024b; Slumbers et al., 2023).

Standard multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) algorithms are vulnerable to sim-to-real
gaps. To address this, distributionally robust
Markov games (RMGs) have been proposed to
enhance robustness in MARL by optimizing the
worst-case performance when game dynamics
shift within a prescribed uncertainty set. RMGs
remains under-explored, from reasonable problem formulation to the development of sampleefficient algorithms. Two notorious and open challenges are the formulation of the uncertainty set
and whether the corresponding RMGs can overcome the curse of multiagency, where the sample
complexity scales exponentially with the number
of agents. In this work, we propose a natural
class of RMGs inspired by behavioral economics,
where each agent’s uncertainty set is shaped by
both the environment and the integrated behavior of other agents. We first establish the wellposedness of this class of RMGs by proving the
existence of game-theoretic solutions such as robust Nash equilibria and coarse correlated equilibria (CCE). Assuming access to a generative model,
we then introduce a sample-efficient algorithm
for learning the CCE whose sample complexity
scales polynomially with all relevant parameters.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm to break the curse of multiagency for RMGs,
regardless of the uncertainty set formulation.

To address robustness challenges, a promising and flexible framework is (distributionally) robust Markov games
(RMGs) (Littman, 1994; Shapley, 1953). It is a robust counterpart to the common playground of standard MARL problems — Markov games (MGs) (Zhang et al., 2020c; Kardeş
et al., 2011). In standard MGs, agents consider (competitive) personal objectives and simultaneously interact with
each other within a shared unknown environment. The goal
is to learn some rationally optimal solution concepts called
equilibria, which are joint strategies/policies of agents that
all of them stick with rationally with other agents fixed;
for instance, Nash equilibria (NE) (Nash, 1951; Shapley,
1953), correlated equilibria (CE), and coarse correlated equilibria (CCE) (Aumann, 1987; Moulin & Vial, 1978). To
promote robustness, RMGs differ from standard MGs by
defining each agent’s payoff (objective) as its worst-case
performance when the dynamics of the game shift within a

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, MD, USA 2 Machine
Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA
3
Department of Computing Mathematical Sciences, California
Institute of Technology, CA, USA 4 Department of Statistics and
Data Science, Yale University, CT, USA. Correspondence to: Laixi
Shi <shilaixi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

