Rethinking Confidence Scores and Thresholds in Pseudolabeling-based SSL

Harit Vishwakarma * 1 Yi Chen * 2 Satya Sai Srinath Namburi GNVV 3 Sui Jiet Tay 4
Ramya Korlakai Vinayak 2 Frederic Sala 1

Abstract

& Hoos, 2019). While SSL dates back decades and includes a wide variety of approaches, modern SSL methods
frequently rely on a pair of ideas: self-training or pseudolabeling – where model generated labels are assigned to
unlabeled data for further training (McLachlan, 1975; Amini
et al., 2023; Rosenberg et al., 2005; Lee, 2013; Rizve et al.,
2021) – and consistency regularization to enforce stability
in predictions across perturbed inputs (Laine & Aila, 2017;
Bachman et al., 2014; Sajjadi et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2021;
Kukačka et al., 2017). SSL techniques with these ideas have
strongly performed on several benchmark datasets.

Modern semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods
rely on pseudolabeling and consistency regularization. Pseudolabeling is typically performed
by comparing the model’s confidence scores and
a predefined threshold. While several heuristics
have been proposed to improve threshold selection, the underlying issues of overconfidence and
miscalibration in confidence scores remain largely
unaddressed, leading to inaccurate pseudolabels,
degraded test accuracy, and prolonged training.
We take a first-principles approach to learn confidence scores and thresholds with an explicit
knob for error. This flexible framework addresses
the fundamental question of optimal scores and
threshold selection in pseudolabeling. Moreover,
it gives practitioners a principled way to control
the quality and quantity of pseudolabels. Such
control is vital in SSL, where balancing pseudolabel quality and quantity directly affects model
performance and training efficiency. Our experiments show that, by integrating this framework
with modern SSL methods, we achieve significant
improvements in accuracy and training efficiency.
In addition, we provide novel insights on the tradeoffs between the choices of the error parameter
and the end model’s performance.

While pseudolabeling is a powerful technique, its effectiveness hinges on a fundamental question: which points should
be labeled using the model’s predictions? Since pseudolabels are derived from a model being trained, they can be
highly unreliable. A naive approach that assigns pseudolabels too liberally risks injecting noisy labels into training,
amplifying the model’s existing errors – a phenomenon
known as confirmation bias. Conversely, an overly conservative approach that selects only the correct predictions
severely limits the amount of useful training data. Both extremes can degrade SSL performance, leading to either poor
generalization or slow convergence. To fully harness the
potential of pseudolabeling, we need a principled approach
for pseudolabeling with explicit control on these trade-offs.
A widely used strategy pseudolabels points on which the
model’s confidence score exceeds a threshold. This approach provides a simple mechanism for selecting points
while controlling the quality and quantity of pseudolabels via thresholds. However, the prior works based on
this approach suffer from two key limitations that restrict
their effectiveness. First, thresholding techniques are often
heuristic-driven, lacking precise control for a target error
level (Sohn et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2023; Xu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023).
Second, commonly used scores, such as the model’s softmax
outputs, tend to be unreliable. Recent studies in this vein
(Loh et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2024; Rizve et al., 2021) have
highlighted issues of overconfidence and miscalibration in
these scores, leading to inefficiencies in pseudolabeling.

1. Introduction
The lack of high-quality labeled data is a major bottleneck
in training high-accuracy models. The semi-supervised
learning (SSL) paradigm tackles this problem by leveraging
abundant unlabeled data alongside a limited set of labeled
examples (Chapelle et al., 2006; Zhu, 2005; van Engelen
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI,
USA 3 GE HealthCare 4 NYU Courant Institute. Correspondence
to: Harit Vishwakarma <hvishwakarma@cs.wisc.edu>, Yi Chen
<yi.chen@wisc.edu>.

In addition to these problems with the choices of scores
and thresholds, an equally important question remains: how

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

