LMRL Gym: Benchmarks for Multi-Turn Reinforcement Learning
with Language Models

Marwa Abdulhai 1 Isadora White 1 Charlie Snell 1 Charles Sun 1
Joey Hong 1 Yuexiang Zhai 1 Kelvin Xu 2 Sergey Levine 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable abilities when naturally conversing with humans (OpenAI, 2023; 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Google, 2023), answering questions and responding to requests (Shuster et al.,
2022b;a; Qin et al., 2023), and even performing coding
tasks (Chen et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2023b). Many of
these capabilities are enabled by learning to emulate humans from large datasets of text from the web (Völske et al.,
2017; Shuster et al., 2022a; Yao et al., 2023), learning from
examples “in context” (Brown et al., 2020), as well as learning from other sources of supervision such as instruction
datasets (Mishra et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022b) and preference fine-tuning with RLHF (Ziegler et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). However, directly applying
LLMs in settings that require planning or multi-turn interactions presents new challenges. LLMs are not explicitly
goal-directed, as they are not optimized to directly solve
particular tasks, but rather to produce text that resembles
the distribution of human-provided examples or accords
with human preferences (Ziegler et al., 2020; Stiennon et al.,
2020; Wu et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022a). This challenge
is apparent in solving temporally extended tasks, such as
multi-turn dialogue (Irvine et al., 2023; , FAIR), complex
tool use (Wang et al., 2022a), multi-step games (Hendrycks
et al., 2021b), and other interactive applications. In principle, LLMs should contain the knowledge necessary to
succeed in such settings: if the multi-turn interactions center
around problem domains that are well represented in the
model’s training data (such as dialogue), well-trained LLMs
should already serve as powerful predictive models in such
settings. However, leveraging this predictive knowledge
to derive effective actions and strategies requires not just
emulating humans, but also planning and optimization.

Large language models (LLMs) provide excellent
text-generation capabilities, but standard prompting and generation methods generally do not lead
to intentional or goal-directed agents and might
necessitate considerable prompt tuning. Even the
best current LLMs rarely ask clarifying questions,
engage in explicit information gathering, or take
actions that lead to better decisions after multiple turns. Reinforcement learning has the potential to leverage the powerful modeling capabilities of LLMs, as well as their internal representation of textual interactions, to create capable
goal-directed language agents. This can enable
intentional and temporally extended interactions,
such as with humans, the emergence of complex
skills such as persuasion, and long-horizon strategic behavior, such as in the context of games. Enabling this requires the community to develop reliable reinforcement learning algorithms for training LLMs. Developing such algorithms requires
tasks that can gauge progress on algorithm design,
provide accessible and reproducible evaluations
for multi-turn interactions, and cover a range of
task properties and challenges in improving reinforcement learning algorithms. Our paper introduces the LMRL-Gym benchmark for evaluating
multi-turn RL for LLMs, together with an opensource research framework for getting started on
multi-turn RL with offline value-based and online
policy-based RL methods. Our benchmark consists of 3 Interactive Dialogue tasks and 5 RL Capability tests for a total of 8 tasks, which require
multiple rounds of language interaction and cover
tasks in open-ended dialogue and text games.

Multi-turn reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto,
2018) in principle offers a path to enable LLMs to do just
that. RL could enable goal-directed reasoning and planning in interactive multi-turn settings, including complex
dialogue, games, and tool use. We hypothesize that RL
could serve as a powerful tool for LLM training, not only
for training models to accord with human preferences, but

1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Google. Correspondence
to: Marwa Abdulhai <marwa abdulhai@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

