Whitened CLIP as a Likelihood Surrogate of Images and Captions

Roy Betser 1 Meir Yossef Levi 1 Guy Gilboa 1

Abstract
Likelihood approximations for images are not
trivial to compute and can be useful in many applications. We examine the use of Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) to assess
the likelihood of images and captions. We introduce Whitened CLIP, a novel transformation of
the CLIP latent space via an invertible linear operation. This transformation ensures that each feature in the embedding space has zero mean, unit
standard deviation, and no correlation with all
other features, resulting in an identity covariance
matrix. We show that the whitened embeddings
statistics can be well approximated as a standard
normal distribution, thus, the log-likelihood is
estimated simply by the square Euclidean norm
in the whitened embedding space. The whitening procedure is completely training-free and performed using a pre-computed whitening matrix,
hence, is very fast. We present several preliminary
experiments demonstrating the properties and applicability of these likelihood scores to images
and captions. Our code is available here.

Figure 1. Raw, centered and whitened CLIP geometry. The
whitened CLIP space is isotropic, transforming the original ellipsoid shaped space into an hypersphere. In this space, the embedding norm reflects likelihood level. Higher norms correspond to
lower probabilities.

dual text-image semantics. However, its potential as a likelihood surrogate remains unexplored. This paper introduces
Whitened CLIP (W-CLIP), a linear whitening transformation
of the CLIP latent space, where each feature is standardized to have zero mean and identity covariance. In this
whitened space, we validate by statistical tests that the embeddings approximate normal distribution, hence negative
log-likelihood estimations are a function of the Euclidean
norm in the transformed space.
To the best of our knowledge, this represents the first direct
computation of likelihood functions for images and text
prompts under the CLIP-learned distribution.

1. Introduction
Computing likelihoods for images is a challenging yet valuable task with numerous applications in computer vision,
such as image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022) and editing
(Kawar et al., 2023). Traditional approaches, including diffusion models, primarily rely on the likelihood gradient or
score function, limiting direct likelihood computation (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020).

Our main contributions are as follows:
1. We propose Whitened CLIP (W-CLIP), based on an
invertible linear operation, allowing likelihood assessments while retaining the generative and semantic capabilities of CLIP.

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford
et al., 2021) has become a widely adopted embedding for

2. We perform quantitative statistical experiments using
Anderson-Darling and D’Agostino-Pearson tests, indicating the features in the whitened space can be well
approximated by a normal distribution.

1

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.. Correspondence to: Roy Betser <roybe@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Meir Yossef Levi <me.levi@campus.technion.ac.il>, Guy Gilboa
<guy.gilboa@ee.technion.ac.il>.

3. We are the first to propose a direct computation of
likelihood functions for images and text prompts, under
the CLIP learned distribution. For images, to the best
of our knowledge, this is the first direct likelihood
computation with semantic capabilities.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

