Statistical Hypothesis Testing for Auditing Robustness in Language Models

Paulius Rauba 1 Qiyao Wei 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

inherent variability due to the stochastic sampling process, a
process controlled via parameters such as temperature or topk (Renze & Guven, 2024). This means that evaluating how
interventions—such as input perturbations, model variant
changes, prompt system modifications—affect the output, is
not straightforward (Romero-Alvarado et al., 2024). Understanding and quantifying the effects of such perturbations is
crucial in high-stakes applications—such as legal document
drafting or medical diagnosis—where errors or unintended
behavior could have significant consequences (Meskó &
Topol, 2023; Helberger et al., 2023).

Consider the problem of testing whether the outputs of a large language model (LLM) system
change under an arbitrary intervention, such as
an input perturbation or changing the model variant. We cannot simply compare two LLM outputs since they might differ due to the stochastic
nature of the system, nor can we compare the
entire output distribution due to computational
intractability. While existing methods for analyzing text-based outputs exist, they focus on fundamentally different problems, such as measuring bias or fairness. To this end, we introduce
distribution-based perturbation analysis, a framework that reformulates LLM perturbation analysis
as a frequentist hypothesis testing problem. We
construct empirical null and alternative output distributions within a low-dimensional semantic similarity space via Monte Carlo sampling, enabling
tractable inference without restrictive distributional assumptions. The framework is (i) modelagnostic, (ii) supports the evaluation of arbitrary
input perturbations on any black-box LLM, (iii)
yields interpretable p-values; (iv) supports multiple perturbations via controlled error rates; and (v)
provides scalar effect sizes. We demonstrate the
usefulness of the framework across multiple case
studies, showing how we can quantify response
changes, measure true/false positive rates, and
evaluate alignment with reference models. Above
all, we see this as a reliable frequentist hypothesis
testing framework for LLM auditing.

Systematic evaluation of output responses to input perturbation is fundamental to comprehending LLM behavior. It
provides quantitative insights into model robustness and
output consistency across diverse input conditions. Statistical hypothesis testing of model responses can be used for
quantifying these effects and isolating the effects of random variability. There are multiple examples where this is
directly relevant. First, it helps with vulnerability identification by quantifying potential vulnerabilities to adversarial
attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Second, it aids with bias
discovery, whereby latent biases or unintended behaviors
may not become apparent through single-dimension auditing approaches (Ribeiro et al., 2016). Third, it can work
within a compliance framework. Measurable frameworks
for assessing model behavior are essential for compliance
with emerging ethical and legal accountability regulations
(Doshi-Velez et al., 2017). In the context of language models, subtle changes in patient history could lead to wildly
different diagnoses; and patients with nearly identical health
records might receive drastically different treatment plans
due to minor grammatical changes. Given these critical
functions, there is a clear need for a comprehensive LLM
auditing framework centered around reliable statistics tools.

1. Introduction

Current methods for analyzing LLM behavior changes often focus on simplistic metrics, such as word overlap or
direct log-probability comparisons. While effective in certain cases, these approaches fail to account for the nuanced,
high-dimensional nature of semantic information processed
by LLMs (Bhandari et al., 2020; Lin, 2004). Moreover,
existing methods typically lack rigorous statistical foundations, making it difficult to disentangle meaningful changes
in model behavior from intrinsic randomness in the output
generation process. Efforts to address this have included

Large language models (LLMs) generate outputs conditioned on textual inputs by iteratively sampling from a distribution of tokens. Therefore, the outputs of LLMs exhibit
1
University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Paulius Rauba
<pr501@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

