Mixture of Hidden-Dimensions:
Not All Hidden-States’ Dimensions are Needed in Transformer
Yilong Chen 1 2 Junyuan Shang 3 Zhenyu Zhang 3 Jiawei Sheng 1 2 Tingwen Liu 1 2
Shuohuan Wang 3 Yu Sun 3 Hua Wu 3 Haifeng Wang 3

Abstract

MoHD
Parameters Efficiency

Activation Magnitude

Transformer models encounter inefficiency when
scaling hidden dimensions due to the uniform expansion of parameters. When delving into the
sparsity of hidden dimensions, we observe that
only a small subset of dimensions are highly activated, where some dimensions are commonly
activated across tokens, and some others uniquely
activated for individual tokens. To leverage this,
we propose M O HD (Mixture of Hidden Dimensions), a sparse architecture that combines shared
sub-dimensions for common features and dynamically routes specialized sub-dimensions per token. To address the potential information loss
from sparsity, we introduce activation scaling
and group fusion mechanisms. M O HD efficiently expands hidden dimensions with minimal
computational increases, outperforming vanilla
Transformers in both parameter efficiency and
task performance across 10 NLP tasks. M O HD
achieves 1.7% higher performance with 50%
fewer activated parameters and 3.7% higher performance with 3× total parameters expansion at
constant activated parameters cost. M O HD offers
a new perspective for scaling the model, showcasing the potential of hidden dimension sparsity.

34% Activate

Hidden Dimension 0~2000
Shared Sub-Dims Specialized Sub-Dims

𝐖!!
MoHD

Router
Embedding

Figure 1. We observe that Transformer hidden states have both
token-shared and token-specific activated dimensions. Based on
this, we propose M O HD, which combines shared and specialized
sub-dimensions for mixed activation. Compared to Transformers,
M O HD offers significantly higher parameter efficiency.

can enhance their capabilities with sufficient data. However,
the large number of parameters in LLMs often results in high
training and inference costs. To address this, flexible model
architectures (Jiang et al., 2024b; Cai et al., 2024b;c) are
sought to enable parameter scaling while maintaining computational efficiency. In Transformers, the parameters are
determined by hidden and intermediate dimensions. Some
studies (Qiu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024) identify the sparsity of intermediate-dimensional activations, and use them
to design adaptive networks, such as MoE (Cai et al., 2024c;
Dai et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2024a), or apply pruning (Xia
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023b) and local
activation mechanisms (Liu et al., 2023a) to boost efficiency.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Anthropic, 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a) have achieved impressive
performance in various natural language processing tasks.
Recent study (Kaplan et al., 2020) suggests that scaling models by increasing parameters and computational resources

Although elastic scaling of the intermediate dimension has
been studied, scaling hidden dimensions with controllable
computational costs remains underexplored (Figure 9). In
general, the hidden dimension reflects the embedding size of
all tokens, and expanding it can increase the model capacity
to capture intricate patterns. However, existing Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2023) treat all token dimensions equally,
resulting in significant computational and memory overhead
as the hidden dimensions scale.

1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 3 Baidu Inc. Correspondence to: Tingwen Liu <liutingwen@iie.ac.cn>. Project lead: Junyuan Shang <shangjunyuan@baidu.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

