Position: Generative AI Regulation Can Learn from Social Media Regulation

Ruth E. Appel 1

Abstract

and when President Trump was banned from Twitter (now
X) and Facebook (Barrett & Sims, 2021). This shows that
the content moderation challenges that emerging technologies face are not entirely new. Media scholars have called
attention to the fact that new technologies often elicit similar
questions and concerns as their predecessors (Wartella &
Reeves, 1985). Generative AI is the latest technology to garner widespread attention and raise societal and regulatory
concerns, but so have social media and other technologies
before it.

There is strong agreement that generative AI
should be regulated, but strong disagreement on
how to approach regulation. While some argue
that AI regulation should mostly rely on extensions of existing laws, others argue that entirely
new laws and regulations are needed to ensure
that generative AI benefits society. In this position paper, we argue that the debates on generative AI regulation can be informed by evidence
on social media regulation. For example, AI companies have faced allegations of political bias
which resemble the allegations social media companies have faced. First, we compare and contrast
the affordances of generative AI and social media to highlight their similarities and differences.
Then, we discuss four specific policy recommendations based on the evolution of social media
and their regulation: (1) counter bias and perceptions thereof (e.g., via transparency, oversight
boards, researcher access, democratic input), (2)
address specific regulatory concerns (e.g., youth
wellbeing, election integrity) and invest in trust
and safety, (3) promote computational social science research, and (4) take on a more global perspective. Applying lessons learnt from social media regulation to generative AI regulation can save
effort and time, and prevent avoidable mistakes.

In this paper, we argue that generative AI regulation can
learn from social media regulation, which has evolved
over the past two decades. While there is strong agreement that generative AI should be regulated—evidenced by
the large number of recent regulatory efforts across countries and stakeholders (Zaidan & Ibrahim, 2024)—, there is
strong disagreement on how to approach regulation. Some
argue that AI regulation should mostly rely on extensions
of existing laws (Huttenlocher et al., 2023), while others
argue that entirely new laws and regulations are needed and
have proposed laws and regulations such as the EU AI Act
(European Parliament and Council, 2024), White House
Executive Orders on AI (Executive Office of the President,
2023; 2025), or California’s vetoed AI Safety Bill SB 1047
(Wiener et al., 2024). Analyzing the evolution of social media regulation can provide insights into which approaches
to regulation are promising when it comes to generative
AI, which in turn can prevent avoidable mistakes, and save
effort and time.
Learning from social media regulation is imperative because
AI regulation is urgent. Misused or misaligned generative
AI can cause severe harms (Weidinger et al., 2021; Marchal
et al., 2024; MITRE Corporation, 2021), and the risks become even greater as generative AI advances (Hendrycks
et al., 2025). Yet, despite a patchwork of emerging global
regulations, effective global regulation of generative AI is
lacking (Alanoca et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
When Google’s generative AI model Gemini produced images of racially diverse Nazis in early 2024, it led to a public
outcry and allegations of anti-conservative bias (Robertson, 2024). Almost a decade earlier, the first allegations
of anti-conservative bias were made against social media
platforms like Facebook (Barrett & Sims, 2021), and they
have persisted e.g. during Senate hearings (Romm, 2019)

Specific learnings for generative AI regulation based on the
evolution of social media regulation include investments
in (1) efforts to counter bias and perceptions thereof (e.g.,
via transparency, researcher access, oversight boards, democratic input), (2) specific areas of regulatory concern and
trust and safety, (3) computational social science research,

1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States. Correspondence to: Ruth E. Appel <rappel@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

