Unlocking Post-hoc Dataset Inference with Synthetic Data

Bihe Zhao 1 Pratyush Maini 2 3 Franziska Boenisch 1 Adam Dziedzic 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have recently achieved
remarkable success in a broad range of tasks, fueled by
the availability of massive high-quality text corpora often
scraped from the internet (Weber et al., 2024; Penedo et al.,
2024). While this practice enables LLMs to generate highquality text and to excel on benchmarks, it also raises serious concerns related to intellectual property rights (Reuters,
2023; Gry, 2023; Sil, 2023), data privacy (Duan et al.,
2023a;b; Hanke et al., 2024; Hayes et al., 2025), and transparency (Rahman & Santacana, 2023; Wu et al., 2023). The
reliance on potentially unauthorized data creates an urgent
need for methods that allow independent authors to verify
whether a given dataset has been used to train an LLM without the explicit consent of the model provider.

The remarkable capabilities of Large Language
Models (LLMs) can be mainly attributed to their
massive training datasets, which are often scraped
from the internet without respecting data owners’
intellectual property rights. Dataset Inference (DI)
offers a potential remedy by identifying whether
a suspect dataset was used in training, thereby
enabling data owners to verify unauthorized use.
However, existing DI methods require a private
set—known to be absent from training—that
closely matches the compromised dataset’s distribution. Such in-distribution, held-out data is
rarely available in practice, severely limiting the
applicability of DI. In this work, we address this
challenge by synthetically generating the required
held-out set. Our approach tackles two key obstacles: (1) creating high-quality, diverse synthetic
data that accurately reflects the original distribution, which we achieve via a data generator trained
on a carefully designed suffix-based completion
task, and (2) bridging likelihood gaps between
real and synthetic data, which is realized through
post-hoc calibration. Extensive experiments on
diverse text datasets show that using our generated data as a held-out set enables DI to detect
the original training sets with high confidence,
while maintaining a low false positive rate. This
result empowers copyright owners to make legitimate claims on data usage and demonstrates our
method’s reliability for real-world litigations. Our
code is available at https://github.com/s
printml/PostHocDatasetInference.

A promising approach to addressing these concerns is
dataset inference (DI) (Maini et al., 2021; Dziedzic et al.,
2022a;b; Maini et al., 2024; Dubiński et al., 2025; Kowalczuk et al., 2025), which aims to determine whether a suspect dataset has contributed to a model’s training. This
puts power in the hands of data owners to monitor and exercise their intellectual property rights. Despite its potential,
DI currently faces a critical bottleneck: it requires a heldout set—a dataset known to be absent from training—that
shares the same distribution as the suspect dataset (Zhang
et al., 2024a). In practice, however, such an in-distribution
held-out set is rarely available. Data creators do not typically reserve a dedicated held-out set for legal or auditing
purposes, and any disclosed held-out data could itself be repurposed for future training, further complicating the verification process. Moreover, even when a dataset owner can
provide some held-out samples, any slight distributional discrepancy from the original suspect data can undermine DI
by inflating false positives (Das et al., 2024; Duan et al.,
2024; Meeus et al., 2024; Maini & Suri, 2024).
To illustrate the brittleness of using seemingly IID (Independent and Identically Distributed) held-out data, we demonstrate in Section 3 that even in a simple scenario—where an
LLM is fine-tuned on blog posts from a single author—there
exists a distributional shift between training data (members)
and randomly held-out blog posts from the same author.
This highlights how even subtle variations in held-out data
can undermine DI. Malicious actors may exploit this vul-

1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security 2 Carnegie
Mellon University 3 DatologyAI. Correspondence to: Bihe
Zhao <bihe.zhao@cispa.de>, Pratyush Maini <pratyushmaini@cmu.edu>, Franziska Boenisch <boenisch@cispa.de>,
Adam Dziedzic <adam.dziedzic@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

