A General Representation-Based Approach to Multi-Source Domain Adaptation

Ignavier Ng * 1 Yan Li * 2 Zijian Li 1 2 Yujia Zheng 1 Guangyi Chen 1 2 Kun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

testing data distributions differ substantially. In a multisource domain adaptation (MSDA) setup, each source domain u ∈ {1, . . . , M } provides access to a labeled dataset
(u) (u)
u
(x(u) , y(u) ) = {(xk , yk )}m
k=1 , where mu represents the
number of samples in domain u. Here, the i-th dimension
(u)
of the feature vector X is denoted as Xi , and xik corresponds to the value of the i-th feature for the k-th sample in
domain u. The goal is to train a classifier that generalizes to
an unlabeled target domain, where only the feature vectors
xτ = {xτk }m
k=1 are available.

A central problem in unsupervised domain adaptation is determining what to transfer from labeled
source domains to an unlabeled target domain. To
handle high-dimensional observations (e.g., images), a line of approaches use deep learning to
learn latent representations of the observations,
which facilitate knowledge transfer in the latent
space. However, existing approaches often rely on
restrictive assumptions to establish identifiability
of the joint distribution in the target domain, such
as independent latent variables or invariant label
distributions, limiting their real-world applicability. In this work, we propose a general domain
adaptation framework that learns compact latent
representations to capture distribution shifts relative to the prediction task and address the fundamental question of what representations should be
learned and transferred. Notably, we first demonstrate that learning representations based on all
the predictive information, i.e., the label’s Markov
blanket in terms of the learned representations,
is often underspecified in general settings. Instead, we show that, interestingly, general domain
adaptation can be achieved by partitioning the
representations of Markov blanket into those of
the label’s parents, children, and spouses. Moreover, its identifiability guarantee can be established. Building on these theoretical insights, we
develop a practical, nonparametric approach for
domain adaptation in a general setting, which can
handle different types of distribution shifts.

τ
Determining the joint distribution PX,Y
in the target domain
τ
based solely on the marginal distribution PX
is a fundamentally underdetermined problem. In the absence of additional
assumptions, there are infinitely many possible joint disτ
tributions PX,Y
that can align with the observed marginal
distribution. Therefore, assumptions that connect the source
and target domain distributions are essential for identifying
the target joint distribution. Common approaches impose
constraints to ensure a degree of similarity across these distributions. A widely adopted assumption is covariate shift
(Pan & Yang, 2009), which asserts that the conditional distribution PY |X remains consistent across domains while
the marginal feature distribution PX varies. Alternatively,
other frameworks account for variations in PY or assume
that transformations between the source and target features
are linear (Zhang et al., 2015), offering additional ways to
model domain relationships.

To avoid restrictive parametric assumptions about the relationships between domains, the principle of minimal
changes is often considered (Schölkopf et al., 2012; Zhang
et al., 2013). This perspective is particularly effective when
analyzed through the lens of the data generating process. For
instance, when the underlying process is Y → X, the conditional distributions PY and PX|Y can vary independently
across domains. By factoring the joint distribution in this
way, domain shifts can be represented in a parsimonious and
structured manner. Moreover, changes in PX|Y are often
constrained to lie on a low-dimensional manifold, further
simplifying the problem (Stojanov et al., 2019). Advances
in domain adaptation frameworks, particularly those leveraging multiple-domain data, have demonstrated the feasibility
of uncovering the data-generating process and capturing
these domain shifts (Huang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation aims to transfer knowledge from labeled source domains to an unlabeled target
domain, particularly in scenarios where the training and
*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

