Joker: Joint Optimization Framework for Lightweight Kernel Machines

Junhong Zhang 1 Zhihui Lai 1 2

Abstract

ability challenges with large datasets due to the induced
large-scale quadratic programming (Wen et al., 2018).

Kernel methods are powerful tools for nonlinear
learning with well-established theory. The scalability issue has been their long-standing challenge.
Despite the existing success, there are two limitations in large-scale kernel methods: (i) The memory overhead is too high for users to afford; (ii)
existing efforts mainly focus on kernel ridge regression (KRR), while other models lack study. In
this paper, we propose Joker, a joint optimization
framework for diverse kernel models, including
KRR, logistic regression, and support vector machines. We design a dual block coordinate descent
method with trust region (DBCD-TR) and adopt
kernel approximation with randomized features,
leading to low memory costs and high efficiency
in large-scale learning. Experiments show that
Joker saves up to 90% memory but achieves comparable training time and performance (or even
better) than the state-of-the-art methods.

Numerous researchers have dedicated their efforts to tackling the scalability issues. Nyström method (Williams &
Seeger, 2000) and randomized features (Rahimi & Recht,
2007) are two representative techniques to reduce the computation of kernel methods. Nevertheless, researchers preferred the former one (Yang et al., 2012). Based on Nyström
method, Rudi et al. (2017) proposed a KRR model, Falkon,
for large-scale data. Its variants (Rudi et al., 2018; Meanti
et al., 2020) still hold the state-of-the-art performance and
efficiency for large-scale kernel methods. However, the
outstanding performance is priced at the expense of high
memory usage. Meanti et al. (2020) suggests that a good
performance of Falkon-based methods necessitates a large
number of Nyström centers. Yet, they require O(M 2 ) memory to store the preconditioner for acceleration, where M is
the number of Nyström centers. This leads to a dilemma between memory consumption and performance. To perform
Falkon with M = 1.2 × 105 on the HIGGS dataset as in
(Meanti et al., 2020) using single precision, one needs at
least 55GB of memory, which is unaffordable for most users.
In other words, memory resources become a bottleneck for
large kernel machines (Abedsoltan et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Kernel methods, a formidable paradigm in nonlinear learning, stand alongside deep learning as a prominent approach
in the machine learning landscape. Recently, theoretical
progress that connects the modern deep neural network with
the kernel machines has been made (Jacot et al., 2018; Geifman et al., 2020; Chen & Xu, 2020), highlighting the great
potential of kernel methods. In the big data era, kernel
methods’ scalability has become a concern. Kernel ridge regression (KRR) is the simplest kernel model. However, it is
associated with a linear system potentially requiring O(n3 )
operations, where n is the size of the training set. Another
instance is the kernel support vector machine (SVM) (Cortes
& Vapnik, 1995). Despite its prevalence, it also faces scal-

We also note that the existing large-scale kernel methods
mainly focus on KRR while other models lack study. For
classification models, to our knowledge, the recent references about large-scale kernel logistic regression (KLR) and
SVM 1 , which are two classifiers commonly used in practice, are relatively sparse. (Marteau-Ferey et al., 2019) and
(Wen et al., 2018) are the two latest influential works about
KLR and SVM, respectively. However, they still meet the
bottlenecks of either high memory or time consumption.
In short, this paper aims to address two issues of the largescale kernel methods: expensive memory requirement and
limited model diversity. We propose a joint optimization
framework for kernel machines, Joker, which significantly
reduces memory footprint while keeping comparable performance and efficiency to the state of the art, and covers a
broad range of models with a unified optimization scheme.
The contributions, some backgrounds, and a detailed review

1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China 2 Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen, 518060, China. Correspondence to: Zhihui Lai
<lai zhi hui@163.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
SVM includes SVC and SVR, where “C ” and “R” stand for
classification and regression, respectively. Here we refer to SVC.

1

