Outlier-Aware Post-Training Quantization for Discrete Graph Diffusion Models

Zheng Gong 1 Ying Sun* 1

Abstract

𝐺𝑇

𝐺 𝑇−1

𝐺

…

(a)
Discrete Graph Diffusion Models (DGDMs) mark
a pivotal advancement in graph generation, effectively preserving sparsity and structural integrity,
thereby enhancing the learning of graph data distributions for diverse generative applications. Despite their potential, DGDMs are computationally
intensive due to the numerous low-parameter yet
high-computation operations, thereby increasing
the need of inference acceleration. A promising solution to mitigate this issue is model quantization. However, existing quantization techniques for Image Diffusion Models (IDMs) face
limitations in DGDMs due to differing diffusion
processes, while Large Language Model (LLM)
quantization focuses on reducing memory access latency of loading large parameters, unlike
DGDMs, where inference bottlenecks are computations due to smaller model sizes. To fill this
gap, we introduce Bit-DGDM, a post-training
quantization framework for DGDMs which incorporates two novel ideas: (i) sparse-dense activation quantization sparsely modeling the activation outliers through adaptively selected, datafree thresholds in full-precision and quantizing
the remaining to low-bit, and (ii) ill-conditioned
low-rank decomposition decomposing the weights
into low-rank component enable faster inference
and an α-sparsity matrix that models outliers. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Bit-DGDM
not only reducing the memory usage from the
FP32 baseline by up to 2.8× and achieve up to
2.5× speedup, but also achieve comparable performance to ultra-low precision of up to 4-bit.

𝑞(𝐺 1 |𝐺)

𝑝𝜃 (𝐺 𝑇−1 |𝐺 𝑇 )

sampling noise

recursive denoising

(b)

Figure 1. (a) An illustration of DGDM in the generation of a graph.
(b) A comparison of the representative models widely used in
DGDMs, IDMs, and LLMs, including Digress (Vignac et al.,
2023), SD1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) and Gemma2-2b (Team
et al., 2024), in terms of parameter sizes, computation time, and
inference time. The LLM is evaluated with 512 context tokens and
256 output tokens, while DGDM and IDM are assessed over 50
diffusion steps.

1. Introduction
Graph generation plays a pivotal role in graph learning (Li
et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2023c; Gong et al., 2023), with
applications spanning drug design (Wu et al., 2018), code
completion (Brockschmidt et al., 2018), and social network
analysis (Newman, 2006). Recently, diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2024) have emerged as a
cutting-edge and effective approach for generative tasks,
with significant attention being directed toward graph diffusion models (Jo et al., 2022; Vignac et al., 2023). A notable
development is the emergence of Discrete Graph Diffusion Models (DGDMs) (Yi et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024),
which employ discretized diffusion processes, as illustrated
in Fig. 1(a). These approaches exhibit particular capability
in preserving sparsity and structural integrity of the generated graphs. However, DGDMs face computational challenges due to their reliance on a recursive denoising process,
thereby necessitating dedicated acceleration techniques.

1

Artificial Intelligence Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Ying Sun <yings@hkust-gz.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

