Multi-Session Budget Optimization for Forward Auction-based
Federated Learning

Xiaoli Tang 1 Han Yu 1 Zengxiang Li 1 Xiaoxiao Li 2 3
Auctioneer-oriented problem

Abstract

Model user-oriented
problem

Data owner-oriented
problem

DATA OWNER

Data Resources
& Asking Price

AUCTIONEER
Oversights

Auction-based Federated Learning (AFL) has
emerged as an important research field in recent
years. The prevailing strategies for FL data consumers (DCs) assume that the entire team of the
required data owners (DOs) for an FL task must
be assembled before training can commence. In
practice, a DC can trigger the FL training process multiple times. DOs can thus be gradually recruited over multiple FL model training
sessions. Existing bidding strategies for AFL
DCs are not designed to handle such scenarios.
Therefore, the problem of multi-session AFL remains open. To address this problem, we propose
the Multi-session Budget Optimization Strategy
for forward Auction-based Federated Learning
(MBOS-AFL). Based on hierarchical reinforcement learning, MBOS-AFL jointly optimizes intersession budget pacing and intra-session bidding
for AFL DCs, with the objective of maximizing
the total utility. Extensive experiments on six
benchmark datasets show that it significantly outperforms seven state-of-the-art approaches. On
average, MBOS-AFL achieves 12.28% higher utility, 14.52% more data acquired through auctions
for a given budget, and 1.23% higher test accuracy
achieved by the resulting FL model compared to
the best baseline. To the best of our knowledge, it
is the first budget optimization decision support
method with budget pacing capability designed
for DCs in multi-session forward AFL.

Payment
Owns useful but
potentially sensitive
data

AFL Ecosystem

Training Task

MODEL USER

Bid Price
Needs data to build
AI models

Figure 1. An overview of auction-based federated learning (AFL).

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (Fan et al., 2025; Rendle, 2012;
Yang, 2020; Meng et al., 2024) has gained great attention for
its ability to safeguard data privacy and user confidentiality
in both academia (Qi et al., 2025b;a; Tang et al., 2024c)
and industry (Sun et al., 2024). Traditional FL approaches
often assume that data owners (DOs), also known as FL
clients, are willing participants in FL tasks, assisting data
consumers (DCs), or FL servers, in training models. However, this assumption may not always hold in practice, as
DOs often weigh their participation against self-interest
and cost-benefit considerations. To address this challenge,
auction-based Federated Learning (AFL) has emerged as
a promising solution (Jiao et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2021; He et al., 2024).
As shown in Fig. 1, the key participants in AFL are the auctioneer, DOs, and DCs. The data trading process between
DOs and DCs is modeled as an auction, coordinated by the
auctioneer. The auctioneer facilitates the flow of asking
prices from DOs and bid prices from DCs. After receiving
the bids, the auctioneer consolidates the results, notifies
participants of the match-making outcomes, and determines
the auction winners. Through these auction processes, DCs
recruit DOs for FL training tasks. Once FL teams (i.e., DOs
recruited for the FL training tasks) are formed, DCs proceed
with the FL model training following standard FL protocols.

1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia,
Canada 3 Vector Institute, Canada. Correspondence to: Han Yu
<han.yu@ntu.edu.sg>.

AFL methods can be divided into three categories (Tang
et al., 2024a; Tang & Yu, 2023c): 1) data owner-oriented
(DO-oriented), 2) auctioneer-oriented, and 3) data consumeroriented (DC-oriented). DO-oriented AFL methods focus
on helping DOs determine the amount of resources to com-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

