Position: Algebra Unveils Deep Learning
An Invitation to Neuroalgebraic Geometry

Giovanni Luca Marchetti * 1 Vahid Shahverdi * 1 Stefano Mereta * 1 Matthew Trager * 2 Kathlén Kohn * 1

Abstract
In this position paper, we promote the study of
function spaces parameterized by machine learning models through the lens of algebraic geometry. To this end, we focus on algebraic models,
such as neural networks with polynomial activations, whose associated function spaces are semialgebraic varieties. We outline a dictionary between algebro-geometric invariants of these varieties, such as dimension, degree, and singularities, and fundamental aspects of machine learning, such as sample complexity, expressivity,
training dynamics, and implicit bias. Along the
way, we review the literature and discuss ideas
beyond the algebraic domain. This work lays the
foundations of a research direction bridging algebraic geometry and deep learning, that we refer
to as neuroalgebraic geometry.

Figure 1. A neural variation of a celebrated doodle from the algebraic geometry literature (Grothendieck, 1968).

model towards an estimate of the ground-truth function.
Consequently, geometric problems over neuromanifolds,
such as nearest point problems, govern the training dynamics and provide insights into how neural networks learn.
Therefore, understanding the geometry of neuromanifolds
offers a twofold potential. First, it serves as a powerful
theoretical framework for analyzing and explaining empirical phenomena in machine learning. Second, it can lead
to the design of novel machine learning architectures. By
establishing precise relationships between architectural parameters and the resulting neuromanifold geometry, we can
systematically design models that exhibit desired theoretical and practical properties.

1. Introduction
Parametric machine learning models, such as neural networks, define a space of functions as their parameters
vary. These spaces are often referred to as neuromanifolds
(Kohn, 2024; Calin, 2020).

1.1. The Power of Algebraic Geometry

The geometry of neuromanifolds is intimately related to a
number of questions at the heart of machine learning. Some
geometric properties of neuromanifolds, such as their dimension, control statistical and computational aspects of
the corresponding model, including sample complexity and
expressivity. Moreover, neural networks learn through a
process of gradient flow of their objective function. This
optimization can be interpreted as minimizing a functional
distance over the neuromanifold, effectively attracting the

A rich class of machine learning models are (semi)algebraic, meaning that the corresponding function is
(piece-wise) polynomial in both the input and the parameters. Examples include deep neural networks with polynomial or Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function.
For (semi-) algebraic models, the neuromanifold can be defined by a finite set of polynomial equalities and inequalities, i.e., it is a semi-algebraic variety. The study of these
spaces is central to algebraic geometry, a field with a rich
mathematical history that offers a wealth of ideas, tools,
and invariants. Many of these, as we will argue, can be
interpreted from the perspective of machine learning, shedding light on important questions in the field. For example,
a fundamental invariant of algebraic varieties is their degree, which is characteristic of algebraic geometry since it

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 AWS AI Labs, New
York, USA (Work done outside Amazon). Correspondence to:
Giovanni Luca Marchetti <glma@kth.se>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

