Learning multivariate Gaussians with imperfect advice

Arnab Bhattacharyya * 1 Davin Choo * 2 Philips George John * 3 Themis Gouleakis * 4

Abstract

in modern applications is on high-dimensional distributions,
with the goal being to understand when one can escape
the curse of dimensionality. The survey by (Diakonikolas,
2016) gives an excellent overview of classical and modern
techniques for distribution learning, especially when there
is some underlying structure to be exploited.

We revisit the problem of distribution learning
within the framework of learning-augmented algorithms. In this setting, we explore the scenario
where a probability distribution is provided as potentially inaccurate advice on the true, unknown
distribution. Our objective is to develop learning
algorithms whose sample complexity decreases
as the quality of the advice improves, thereby
surpassing standard learning lower bounds when
the advice is sufficiently accurate. Specifically,
we demonstrate that this outcome is achievable
for the problem of learning a multivariate Gaussian distribution N (µ, Σ) in the PAC learning
setting. Classically, in the advice-free setting,
e
Θ(d2 /ε2 ) samples are sufficient and worst case
necessary to learn d-dimensional Gaussians up to
TV distance ε with constant probability. When we
e as advice,
are additionally given a parameter Σ
O(d2−β /ε2 ) samples suffice whenwe show that e
e −1/2 ΣΣ
e −1/2 − Id ∥1 ≤ εd1−β (where
ever ∥Σ
∥ · ∥1 denotes the entrywise ℓ1 norm) for any
β > 0, yielding a polynomial improvement over
the advice-free setting.

In this work, we investigate how to go beyond worst case
sample complexities for learning distributions by considering situations where one is also given the aid of possibly
imperfect advice regarding the input distribution. We position our study in the context of algorithms with predictions,
where the usual problem input is supplemented by “predictions” or “advice” (potentially drawn from modern machine
learning models). The algorithm’s goal is to incorporate the
advice in a way that improves performance if the advice is of
high quality, but if the advice is inaccurate, there should not
be degradation below the performance in the no-advice setting. Most previous works in this setting are in the context of
online algorithms, e.g. for the ski-rental problem (Gollapudi
& Panigrahi, 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Angelopoulos et al.,
2020), non-clairvoyant scheduling (Purohit et al., 2018),
scheduling (Lattanzi et al., 2020; Bamas et al., 2020a; Antoniadis et al., 2022), augmenting classical data structures
with predictions (e.g. indexing (Kraska et al., 2018) and
Bloom filters (Mitzenmacher, 2018)), online selection and
matching problems (Antoniadis et al., 2020; Dütting et al.,
2021; Choo et al., 2024), online TSP (Bernardini et al.,
2022; Gouleakis et al., 2023), and a more general framework of online primal-dual algorithms (Bamas et al., 2020b).
However, there have been some recent applications to other
areas, e.g. graph algorithms (Chen et al., 2022; Dinitz et al.,
2021), causal learning (Choo et al., 2023), and mechanism
design (Gkatzelis et al., 2022; Agrawal et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The problem of approximating an underlying distribution
from its observed samples is a fundamental scientific problem. The distribution learning problem has been studied
for more than a century in statistics, and it is the underlying
engine for much of applied machine learning. The emphasis
*
Equal contribution. Part of work done while the authors were affiliated with the National University of Singa1
pore, Singapore.
University of Warwick, United Kingdom 2 Harvard University, United State of America 3 CNRSCREATE & National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Arnab Bhattacharyya <arnab.bhattacharyya@warwick.ac.uk>,
Davin Choo <davinchoo@seas.harvard.edu>, Philips George
John <philips.george.john@u.nus.edu>, Themis Gouleakis
<themis.gouleakis@ntu.edu.sg>.

We apply the algorithms with predictions perspective to the
classical problem of learning high-dimensional Gaussian
distributions. For a d-dimensional Gaussian N (µ, Σ), it is
known (e.g. see Appendix C of (Ashtiani et al., 2020)) that
(1) When Σ = Id , e
Θ(d/ε2 ) i.i.d. samples suffice to learn a
d
b ∈ R such that dTV (N (µ, Id ), N ( b
µ
µ, Id )) ≤ ε.
2 2
e
b
(2) In general, Θ(d /ε ) i.i.d. samples suffice to learn µ
b such that dTV (N (µ, Σ), N ( b
b ≤ ε.
and Σ
µ, Σ))
Here, dTV denotes the total variation distance, and the algorithm for both cases is the most natural one: compute the
empirical mean and empirical covariance. Meanwhile, note

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

