R EPOAUDIT: An Autonomous LLM-Agent for Repository-Level Code Auditing

Jinyao Guo∗ 1 Chengpeng Wang∗ 1 Xiangzhe Xu 1 Zian Su 1 Xiangyu Zhang 1

Abstract

LLM-powered IDE plugins, such as Copilot, enable agile
code generation by facilitating flexible interactions with
LLMs (Barke et al., 2023). However, in the era of LLMs,
auditing the rapidly expanding codebase presents a more
formidable challenge than writing code. Traditional program analysis techniques, such as dynamic and static analysis, focus primarily on observing runtime behaviors or symbolically reasoning about intermediate code generated during compilation (King, 1976; Cadar et al., 2008; Calcagno
et al., 2009; Sui and Xue, 2016; Shi et al., 2018a). Unfortunately, software systems are often non-executable and
even uncompilable during the human-LLM collaborative
development phase. Moreover, existing analysis techniques
demand substantial expertise, such as a deep understanding
of compiler internals (Zhang et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024).
Therefore, current program analysis approaches often fall
short in meeting the practical requirements of code auditing
in real-world contexts (Johnson et al., 2013).

Code auditing is the process of reviewing code
with the aim of identifying bugs. Large Language
Models (LLMs) have demonstrated promising capabilities for this task without requiring compilation, while also supporting user-friendly customization. However, auditing a code repository
with LLMs poses significant challenges: limited
context windows and hallucinations can degrade
the quality of bug reports, and analyzing largescale repositories incurs substantial time and token costs, hindering efficiency and scalability.
This work introduces an LLM-based agent, R E POAUDIT , designed to perform autonomous
repository-level code auditing. Equipped with
agent memory, R EPOAUDIT explores the codebase on demand by analyzing data-flow facts
along feasible program paths within individual
functions. It further incorporates a validator module to mitigate hallucinations by verifying dataflow facts and checking the satisfiability of path
conditions associated with potential bugs, thereby
reducing false positives. R EPOAUDIT detects 40
true bugs across 15 real-world benchmark projects
with a precision of 78.43%, requiring on average only 0.44 hours and $2.54 per project.Also,
it detects 185 new bugs in high-profile projects,
among which 174 have been confirmed or fixed.
We have open-sourced R EPOAUDIT at https:
//github.com/PurCL/RepoAudit.

In recent years, extensive research has focused on leveraging LLMs for code auditing via prompt engineering (Fang
et al., 2024; Hao et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2024). Unlike
traditional analysis techniques, LLM-driven code auditing
directly analyzes source code without program compilation
or execution. By describing analysis requirements through
natural language and few-shot examples in prompts, the customization of analysis is also significantly simplified. However, many existing LLM-driven code auditing techniques
are largely restricted to small-scale codebases, such as smart
contracts (Sun et al., 2024; Zhang and Zhang, 2024), and
lack the capability to support repository-level code auditing
in complex, real-world scenarios.
Direct Prompting Hardly Works. A straightforward solution is to break down a repository into smaller pieces and
prompt the model with individual pieces. This approach
often falls short for non-local bugs, which may require reasoning across a large number of interconnected code snippets spanning multiple functions, classes, and files. Even
with significant future advancements in model reasoning
capacity, the fundamental differences between programs
and natural language texts for which transformer models
were designed make LLMs insufficient for comprehensive
repository analysis. In particular, a code repository can be
conceptualized as an enormous graph, with nodes representing individual statements and edges capturing intricate

1. Introduction
The rapid innovation of large language models (LLMs) has
remarkably enhanced the productivity of software developers (Wang et al., 2021; Rozière et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024).
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence
to: Jinyao Guo <guo846@purdue.edu>, Chengpeng Wang
<wang6590@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

