Generalized Additive Models via Direct Optimization
of Regularized Decision Stump Forests

Magzhan Gabidolla 1 Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán 1

Abstract

feature interactions, they can be visualized by plotting each
shape function fd (xd ), making them highly interpretable.

We explore ensembles of axis-aligned decision
stumps, which can be viewed as a generalized additive model (GAM). In this model, stumps utilizing the same feature are grouped to form a shape
function for that feature. Instead of relying on
boosting or bagging, we employ alternating optimization to learn a fixed-size stump forest. We
optimize the parameters of each stump exactly
through enumeration, given the other stumps are
fixed. For fixed stump splits, the leaf values
are optimized jointly by solving a convex problem. To address the overfitting issue inherent
in naive optimization of stump forests, we propose effective regularization techniques. Our regularized stump forests achieve accuracy comparable to state-of-the-art GAM methods while using
fewer parameters. This work is the first to successfully learn stump forests without employing
traditional ensembling techniques like bagging or
boosting.

Recently, GAMs have seen renewed interest in the machine
learning community. One effective approach to constructing GAMs is through a forest of decision stumps. Because
a stump (depth-one, axis-aligned decision tree) uses only
a single feature, those using the same feature xd can be
grouped, and this forms a shape function fd (xd ) for that
one feature xd . As building blocks for GAMs, stumps have
the advantage of being flexible in choosing the feature, and
during learning they can adapt to the data distribution by
using more of themselves for more complex shapes while
choosing less the simpler ones.
Boosting and bagging are by far the most widely used methods for learning tree ensembles, including stump forests.
A recent, state-of-the-art implementation of GAMs, Explainable Boosting Machine (EBM), is based on these techniques of boosting and bagging. However, unlike the majority of established methods in machine learning, these techniques do not optimize a desired objective function over
a parametric model of fixed size. Because no explicit objective function nor a learning problem is defined, they
are more difficult to be analyzed theoretically, and have
no guarantees of optimality. The way tree ensembles are
learned using boosting and bagging is in stark contrast to
the vast majority of established models in machine learning such as SVMs and neural networks. These are learned
by defining an optimization problem over parameters of a
fixed-sized model, and using an algorithm (e.g. gradient descent) to optimize it. In this paper, we propose, for the first
time, to learn stump forests using this established machine
learning paradigm: we define an objective function over a
fixed number of stumps and optimize all parameters iteratively from an initial point (random, or an existing forest,
which makes it possible to retrain the forest at any time in
the future, e.g. with updated data). Since these models are
non-differentiable, gradient-based methods are not applicable; instead, we effectively employ alternating optimization. Despite their simplicity, optimized stump forests are
highly susceptible to overfitting. We analyze this behavior,
and propose effective regularization based on the complexity of resulting GAM shape functions. Our optimized, reg-

1. Introduction
Machine learning has become increasingly prevalent, with
many widely used, accurate methods being black box in nature such as tree ensembles and neural networks. Simpler
models such as decision trees and rules, are usually less
accurate, but have the advantage of being intelligible and
interpretable. They are especially important for missioncritical systems such as in healthcare where models must
be trusted. The focus of our paper is on one particularly
important class of interpretable methods, a generalized additive model (GAM), which learns (nonlinear) functions
over each individual feature, and additively combines them:
F (x) = f1 (x1 )+· · ·+f (xD ). Because these do not model
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Merced, USA. Correspondence to: Miguel Á.
Carreira-Perpiñán <mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

