Staged and Physics-Grounded Learning Framework with Hyperintensity Prior
for Pre-Contrast MRI Synthesis

Dayang Wang * 1 Srivathsa Pasumarthi * 1 Ajit Shankaranarayanan 1 Greg Zaharchuk 2
Pre-Contrast

Abstract
Contrast-enhanced MRI enhances pathological
visualization but often necessitates Pre-Contrast
images for accurate quantitative analysis and comparative assessment. However, Pre-Contrast images are frequently unavailable due to time, cost,
or safety constraints, or they may suffer from
degradation, making alignment challenging. This
limitation hinders clinical diagnostics and the
performance of tools requiring combined image
types. To address this challenge, we propose a
novel staged, physics-grounded learning framework with a hyperintensity prior to synthesize
Pre-Contrast images directly from Post-Contrast
MRIs. The proposed method can generate highquality Pre-Contrast images, thus, enabling comprehensive diagnostics while reducing the need
for additional imaging sessions, costs, and patient
risks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first Pre-Contrast synthesis model capable of generating images that may be interchangeably used
with standard-of-care Pre-Contrast images. Extensive evaluations across multiple datasets, sites,
anatomies, and downstream tasks demonstrate the
model’s robustness and clinical applicability, positioning it as a valuable tool for contrast-enhanced
MRI workflows.

Low-dose
Simulation

Pre-Contrast

Pre-Contrast
Missing/
Corrupted

Diagnosis

Diagnosis

Dose
Enhance

Post-Contrast

(A). Clinical Settings

Low-dose
Simulation

Image
Synthesis

Post-Contrast

(B). Data Missing

Dose
Enhance

Post-Contrast

(C). Image Synthesis Assitance

Figure 1. (A). Utilization of both Pre-Contrast and Post-Contrast
images in clinical workflows. (B). Challenges arise when PreContrast images are missing or significantly corrupted. (C). Synthesized images enable the successful completion of these tasks.

enhanced visualization of specific structures, Pre-Contrast
images are often required for comparative assessment, baseline evaluation, and quantitative analysis. For example,
Pre-Contrast image is used as an inevitable reference for
the brain tumor imaging starting from diagnosis, through
therapy planning, to treatment response and/or recurrence
assessment (Villanueva-Meyer et al., 2017; Martucci et al.,
2023). Zheng et. al. proposed a 4D deep learning model
leveraging Pre-Contrast, arterial, and portal venous phases
of dynamic contrast enhanced MRI to improve hepatocellular carcinoma lesion segmentation (Zheng et al., 2022). In
clinical practice, Pre- and Post-Contrast images are typical
used in a combined fashion for real settings such as low
dose simulations (Sourbron & Buckley, 2011; Wang et al.,
2023), diagnosis (Villanueva-Meyer et al., 2017; Zheng
et al., 2022), dose enhancement (Bône et al., 2022; Subedi
et al., 2012; OCHI et al., 2014; Pasumarthi et al., 2021), etc.
as shown in Fig. 1(A).

1. Introduction
Contrast enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is
a critical tool in clinical diagnostics. It is widely used to
highlight pathological regions such as tumors, lesions, and
vascular abnormalities. While Post-Contrast images provide
*
Equal contribution 1 Subtle Medical, 883 Santa Cruz
Ave Suite 205, Menlo Park, CA, 94025 2 Department of
Neuroradiology, Stanford University, 1201 Welch Rd, MC
5488, Stanford, CA, 94305. Correspondence to: Dayang
Wang <dayang@subtlemedical.com>, Srivathsa Pasumarthi
<sri@subtlemedical.com>.

However, as shown in Fig. 1(B), Pre-Contrast images are often unavailable or severely degraded due to various factors,
including motion, aliasing, and streaking artifacts caused by
patient movement or technical issues during data acquisition
(Zaitsev et al., 2015; Graves & Mitchell, 2013). These challenges hinder the reliability and quality of imaging, which
can subsequently affect diagnostic accuracy and clinical

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

