Unbiased Recommender Learning from Implicit Feedback
via Weakly Supervised Learning

Hao Wang 1 Zhichao Chen 1 Haotian Wang 2 Yanchao Tan 1 Licheng Pan 1 Tianqiao Liu 3 Xu Chen 4
Haoxuan LiB 5 Zhouchen LinB 6 7 8

Abstract

et al., 2018), and entertainment (Gomez-Uribe and Hunt,
2016). By accurately predicting user preferences, recommendation systems play a pivotal role in enhancing user
experience and increasing business revenues (Gao et al.,
2022a;b; Zhang et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025).

Implicit feedback recommendation is challenged
by the missing negative feedback essential for
effective model training. Existing methods often resort to negative sampling, a technique that
assumes unlabeled interactions as negative samples. This assumption risks misclassifying potential positive samples within the unlabeled data,
thereby undermining model performance. To
address this issue, we introduce WeaklyRec, a
model-agnostic framework that reframes implicit
feedback recommendation as a weakly supervised
learning task, eliminating the need for negative
samples. However, its unbiasedness hinges on
the accurate estimation of the class prior. To address this challenge, we propose Progressive Proximal Transport (PPT), which estimates the class
prior by minimizing the proximal transport cost
between positive and unlabeled samples. Experiments on three real-world datasets validate the efficacy of WeaklyRec in terms of improved recommendation quality. Code is available at https:
//github.com/HowardZJU/weakrec.

The core of recommendation system is the handling of user
feedback, which can be broadly categorized into explicit and
implicit types. Explicit feedback, such as ratings, comments,
or like/dislike tags, reflects user preferences faithfully but
is challenging to collect, as it requires active user participation, potentially diminishing user experience. Conversely,
implicit feedback, such as page views or click logs, is readily available and does not require active user participation.
Therefore, recommendation with implicit feedback, termed
as ImplicitRec, has gained significant attention in industrial
applications (Togashi et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022).
A unique challenge in ImplicitRec is missing negative feedback (MNF) (Lim et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2018). Specifically, the available data only consists of positive and unlabeled samples. This absence of negative feedback complicates the task of differentiating between items that are
either disliked or simply unexposed to the user across the
unlabeled interactions (Zhou et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2021). For instance, a user’s failure to click on a
video might not necessarily indicate disinterest; it could simply mean the user was not exposed to that particular video.
Treating unlabeled interactions as negative instances (Zhou
et al., 2022; Kang and McAuley, 2018) ignores the existence of positive samples within the unlabeled data, thereby
introducing bias and compromising recommendation performance (Wang et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Recommendation systems aim to capture user preferences
through their feedback, subsequently offering personalized
content or product suggestions. They find extensive applications across various domains, including e-commerce (Smith
and Linden, 2017; Wang et al., 2022), advertising (Zhou

To counteract the MNF issue, one line of works advocate
downweighting unobserved samples (Hu et al., 2008; Liang
et al., 2016), employing pairwise ranking loss (Rendle et al.,
2009). While promising, these methods are largely heuristic
and lack a solid theoretical foundation for unbiasedness.
Recent works have shifted focus towards the construction of
theoretically unbiased estimators of the ideal risk, using only
positive and unlabeled samples. Representative methods
such as RMF (Saito et al., 2020), UBPR (Saito, 2020) and
CJMF (Zhu et al., 2020) primarily leverage propensity re-

1
Zhejiang University, 2 National University of Defense Technology 3 TAL Education Group 4 Renmin University of China 5 Center
for Data Science, Peking University 6 State Key Lab of General
AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 7 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
8
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Haoxuan Li <hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Zhouchen Lin
<zlin@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

