Preconditioned Riemannian Gradient Descent Algorithm for
Low-Multilinear-Rank Tensor Completion

Yuanwei Zhang 1 Fengmiao Bian 2 Xiaoqun Zhang 1 3 Jian-Feng Cai 2
the underlying three-order tensor X∗ ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 from its
partially observed entries:

Abstract
Tensors play a crucial role in numerous scientific and engineering fields. This paper addresses
the low-multilinear-rank tensor completion problem, a fundamental task in tensor-related applications. By exploiting the manifold structure inherent to fixed-multilinear-rank tensor set,
we introduce a simple yet highly effective preconditioned Riemannian metric and propose the
Preconditioned Riemannian Gradient Descent
(PRGD) algorithm. Compared to the standard
Riemannian Gradient Descent (RGD), PRGD
achieves faster convergence while maintaining
the same order of per-iteration computational
complexity. Theoretically, we provide the recovery guarantee for PRGD under near-optimal
sampling complexity. Numerical results highlight the efficiency of PRGD, outperforming
state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic data
and real-world video inpainting tasks. Code
is available at https://github.com/Jiushanqing0418/PRGD-Tucker.

X∗ (i, j, k),

(i, j, k) ∈ Ω,

where Ω is the index set of observed entries. However, without any assumptions, the problem is ill-possed since the
number of observed entries |Ω| is usually much smaller than
the ambient dimension n1 n2 n3 . One commonly adopted
assumption is the low-rankness of X∗ . Compared to matrices, tensors possess a richer variety of rank notions, each
associated with different tensor decomposition structures.
Examples include the CP decomposition (Hitchcock, 1927),
Tucker decomposition (Tucker, 1966), Tensor-Train decomposition (Oseledets, 2011) and several others (Kolda &
Bader, 2009). In this work, we focus on the Tucker decomposition and its associated multilinear rank. The lowmultilinear-rank tensor completion problem is formulated
as follows:
min

X ∈Rn1 ×n2 ×n3

1
∥PΩ (X ) − PΩ (X∗ )∥2F
2
s.t. rank(X ) = r,

f (X ) :=

(1)

where r = (r1 , r2 , r3 ) is the multilinear rank satisfies
ri ≤ ni for all i = 1, 2, 3, PΩ is a projection operator
for element-wisely sampling and ∥ · ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm.

1. Introduction
Tensors are multidimensional arrays, which are routinely
arising in different fields, such as community detection (Jing
et al., 2021; Zhen & Wang, 2023), multi-dimensional recommendation system (Zhou et al., 2024), video and hyperspectral image processing (Zhang et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023),
signal processing (Chang & Wu, 2022) and quantum state
tomography (Qin et al., 2024). In this paper, we consider the
tensor completion problem, where the goal is to reconstruct

1.1. Related Works
Compared with low-rank matrix completion, low-rank tensor completion presents unique challenges due to its more
sophisticated algebraic structure. For instance, while nuclear norm minimization achieves near-optimal sampling
complexity for low-rank matrix completion (Candès & Tao,
2010), computing the tensor nuclear norm is NP-hard (Friedland & Lim, 2018) and applying nuclear norm minimization
on tensor’s unfolding matrices results in suboptimal sampling complexity O(n2 ) (where n = maxi=1,2,3 ni and
assume ri = O(1), i = 1, 2, 3) (Mu et al., 2014; Huang
et al., 2015). The state-of-the-art sampling complexity of
polynomial-time algorithms is O(n3/2 ) (Cai et al., 2022b;
Tong et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023), which is considered
near-optimal given the conjecture that no polynomial-time

1

School of Mathematical Sciences and Institute of Natural Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
2
Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China. 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Jian-Feng Cai <jfcai@ust.hk>, Xiaoqun Zhang
<xqzhang@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

