Divide and Conquer: Learning Label Distribution with Subtasks

Haitao Wu 1 2 Weiwei Li 2 Xiuyi Jia 1
dyx ) to each label of each instance. This form introduces a
quantitative manner to address label polysemy and extends
LDL’s practical applications to a wider range, e.g., counting
(or grading) (Geng et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2019), sentiment
analysis (Chen et al., 2020; Le et al., 2023), segmentation
(Gao et al., 2017; Li et al., 2023b), etc.

Abstract
Label distribution learning (LDL) is a novel learning paradigm that emulates label polysemy by
assigning label distributions over the label space.
However, recent LDL work seems to exhibit a
notable contradiction: 1) existing LDL methods
employ auxiliary tasks to enhance performance,
which narrows their focus to specific applications,
thereby lacking generalizability; 2) conversely,
LDL methods without auxiliary tasks rely on
losses tailored solely to the primary task, lacking beneficial data to guide the learning process.
In this paper, we propose S-LDL, a novel and
minimalist solution that generates subtask label
distributions, i.e., a form of extra supervised information, to reconcile the above contradiction.
S-LDL encompasses two key aspects: 1) an algorithm capable of generating subtasks without
any prior/expert knowledge; and 2) a plug-andplay framework seamlessly compatible with existing LDL methods, and even adaptable to derivative tasks of LDL. Our analysis and experiments
demonstrate that S-LDL is effective and efficient.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper represents the first endeavor to address LDL via subtasks.

However, LDL encounters a spectrum of challenges: 1)
dyx s interfere with each other since d is subject to two constraints,
non-negativity (i.e., dyx ≥ 0) and sum-to-one (i.e.,
P
y
y∈Y dx = 1), and d is often formed from mixture distributions, posing significant hurdles for fitting, particularly
when employing a maximum entropy model (Shen et al.,
2017); 2) ds are usually obtained via crowdsourcing, which
is time-consuming and labor-intensive, so one often copes
with scarce and low-quality datasets (Wang et al., 2023).
These two key issues stand as formidable barriers to performance improvement in LDL.
With the widespread use of multi-task learning, some LDL
work tries to compensate for performance from the perspective of auxiliary tasks, which are learned concurrently alongside the primary task, thereby refining its representations
and ultimately boosting performance. Unfortunately, though
these methods can exploit additional supervised information,
they 1) neglect the first key issue mentioned above; and 2)
require prior/expert knowledge (e.g., facial characteristics
(Chen et al., 2020), pathology criteria (Wu et al., 2019),
emotion wheel theory in psychology (Yang et al., 2017a),
etc.), limiting their generalizability to those corresponding
specific applications. Conversely, LDL methods that do not
take advantage of auxiliary tasks, despite their efforts in loss
function engineering and network structure design, they 1)
neglect the second key issue mentioned above; and 2) focus
solely on one aspect of label correlations (e.g., correlation
of local instances (Jia et al., 2019), ranking relation (Jia
et al., 2023), suboptimal label (Wang, Jing and Geng, Xin,
2019), etc.), each with its own set of limitations.

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) (Zhang & Zhou, 2013) handles
label polysemy in a binary manner, whereas label distribution learning (LDL) (Geng, 2016) offers a more nuanced
perspective by answering: “How much does each label y
describe the instance x?”. This is accomplished through the
concept of a label distribution d, which is a form of probability simplex that assigns a real value (i.e., description degree

The generalizability appears to conflict with the ability to exploit additional data, so benefiting from both simultaneously
seems elusive. However, we can still see the light from some
MLL methods, which partition the label space and apply
operations on the subspaces (Tsoumakas et al., 2008; 2010).
These methods construct subtasks without involving extra
knowledge. Intuitively, in the context of LDL, reliable su-

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China 2 College of
Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to:
Xiuyi Jia <jiaxy@njust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

