Multi-Timescale Dynamics Model Bayesian Optimization for Plasma
Stabilization in Tokamaks
Rohit Sonker * 1 Alexandre Capone * 1 Andrew Rothstein 2 Hiro Josep Farre Kaga 2 Egemen Kolemen 2 3
Jeff Schneider 1

Abstract

are especially pronounced when controlling tokamaks, a
form of nuclear fusion reactor. For tokamaks, good models
are unavailable, safety is paramount, and instabilities are
notoriously hard to control. These issues are further complicated by the fact that the dynamics may fluctuate strongly
due to various reasons: tokamaks experience dozens of experiments on any given day, some of which deliberately
change its base configurations, e.g., by introducing impurities into the plasma, potentially affecting the dynamics
of posterior experiments. Moreover, tokamaks frequently
undergo hardware changes or outages, e.g., wall repairs or
beam failures, making any single specific model unreliable.
However, despite these challenges, designing good control
policies for tokamaks is highly desirable due to their promise
to generate abundant clean energy via nuclear fusion.

Machine learning algorithms often struggle to control complex real-world systems. In the case of
nuclear fusion, these challenges are exacerbated,
as the dynamics are notoriously complex, data is
poor, hardware is subject to failures, and experiments often affect dynamics beyond the experiment’s duration. Existing tools like reinforcement
learning, supervised learning, and Bayesian optimization address some of these challenges but
fail to provide a comprehensive solution. To overcome these limitations, we present a multi-scale
Bayesian optimization approach that integrates a
high-frequency data-driven dynamics model with
a low-frequency Gaussian process. By updating
the Gaussian process between experiments, the
method rapidly adapts to new data, refining the
predictions of the less reliable dynamical model.
We validate our approach by controlling tearing
instabilities in the DIII-D nuclear fusion plant.
Offline testing on historical data shows that our
method significantly outperforms several baselines. Results on live experiments on the DIIID tokamak, conducted under high-performance
plasma scenarios prone to instabilities, shows a
50% success rate — marking a 117% improvement over historical outcomes.

In many real-world control applications, model-free reinforcement learning is a promising solution and has seen
successful applications (He et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2021;
Lee et al., 2020). However, most of these methods rely on
a prohibitive amount of policy rollouts for training, which
is typically only achievable with reliable simulation environments. In complex environments like tokamaks, this is
particularly problematic, as operation costs typically only
permit a handful of rollouts, and existing simulators do not
reflect the true dynamics for many aspects of the plasma
(Char et al., 2023a). Offline RL seeks to overcome these
issues by learning a policy from offline data that conservatively stays within the bounds of the observed data (Levine
et al., 2020). However, the performance of offline RL methods depends crucially on high-quality expert data that contains advantageous states. If these are not present, then
offline RL can suffer from extrapolation errors (Fujimoto
et al., 2019). This is a major drawback for tokamak control, where significant exploration and improvement are still
required to achieve energy production.

1. Introduction
Controlling real-world systems is inherently challenging,
even when powerful machine-learning tools are employed:
nonlinearities are often pronounced, data is scarce, and
safety issues impose severe limitations. These challenges

Alternatively, model-based reinforcement learning offers a
solution where dynamics models are trained from historic
data and rollouts from the model are then used for policy
learning or planning (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Chua
et al., 2018; Osinski et al., 2020). In the past, machine learning algorithms have been used to directly model plasma
dynamics (Char et al., 2023b; Abbate et al., 2021; Boyer

*
Equal contribution 1 Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ,
USA 3 Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, Princeton, NJ, US.
Correspondence to: Rohit Sonker <rsonker@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

