Towards Lifelong Model Editing via Simulating Ideal Editor

Yaming Guo 1 Siyang Guo 2 Hengshu Zhu 3 4 Ying Sun 1

Abstract
Standard methods

Model editing plays a crucial role in the costeffective development of large language models,
and the challenge of evolving knowledge facilitates its sequential extension, namely lifelong
model editing. However, progress on standard
and lifelong editing has historically followed separate tracks, overlooking the potential of generalizing standard methods to lifelong scenarios.
By establishing this bridge, we can provide robust
baselines in lifelong scenarios and ensure that lifelong editing benefits from the ongoing advancements in standard editing technologies. In response, this paper proposes a general framework,
Simulating Ideal Editor (SimIE), which restores
the strong performance of parameter-modifying
methods from standard model editing in a lifelong context. SimIE formulates the ideal parameter shift as the minimum-norm solution to a linear system, constructed using the Moore-Penrose
inverse, and subsequently enables recursive updates by truncating the limiting expression of the
Moore-Penrose inverse under two mild assumptions. Theoretically, we demonstrate that if either
assumption is not met, the solution provided by
SimIE remains near-optimal in a statistical sense
or stable against perturbations introduced by the
sequential editing, but a trade-off between optimality and stability arises when both assumptions
fail. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of SimIE, which allows standard algorithms
to achieve performance comparable to specialized
lifelong model editing methods. Our code is available at SimIE.

Ideal editor
Ideal Editor

Adjust parameter updates
using Equation (5)

Adjust parameter updates
using Equation (5)

Figure 1. Illustration of SimIE, which enables the post-edit model
to closely approximate the ideal state achieved by the ideal editor.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) acquire extensive knowledge across various domains during pre-training, which
may include outdated or harmful information (Petroni et al.,
2019; Zhao et al., 2023). Given the prohibitively high costs
of re-training and fine-tuning, model editing has emerged
as an efficient approach for updating and correcting specific
knowledge within LLMs (Sinitsin et al., 2020; De Cao et al.,
2021). The goal of model editing is to adjust the LLM’s
predictions for specific inputs to match the desired outputs,
based on the provided edit examples, while preserving its
behavior on unrelated inputs. Existing model editing techniques generally fall into two main categories: parametermodifying and parameter-preserving (Yao et al., 2023).
This work focuses on parameter-modifying approaches.
To accommodate evolving knowledge, the extension of
model editing—lifelong model editing—is proposed,
which involves performing sequential edits (Yao et al., 2023).
Lifelong editing presents two inherent challenges: 1) The
sequential updates gradually deviate the model from its
initial state, leading to degradation in its general abilities
and editability (Ma et al., 2024; Gupta et al., 2024b). 2)
The model typically encounters catastrophic forgetting during sequential edits, where previously edited examples are
forgotten (Wang et al., 2024a; Gupta et al., 2024a). Consequently, preliminary efforts have been made to tackle this
more challenging scenario (Huang et al., 2023; Hartvigsen

1

Artificial Intelligence Thrust, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China 2 School
of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China 3 Computer Network Information Center, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 4 University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China . Correspondence to: Ying
Sun <yings@hkust-gz.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

