NextCoder: Robust Adaptation of Code LMs to Diverse Code Edits

Tushar Aggarwal * 1 Swayam Singh * 1 Abhijeet Awasthi 1 Aditya Kanade 1 Nagarajan Natarajan 1

Abstract
Software engineering activities frequently involve
edits to existing code. However, contemporary
code language models (LMs) lack the ability to
handle diverse types of code-edit requirements.
In this work, we attempt to overcome this shortcoming through (1) a novel synthetic data generation pipeline and (2) a robust model adaptation algorithm. Starting with seed code examples
and diverse editing criteria, our pipeline generates high-quality samples comprising original and
modified code, along with natural language instructions in different styles and verbosity. Today’s code LMs come bundled with strong abilities, such as code generation and instruction following, which should not be lost due to finetuning. To ensure this, we propose a novel adaptation algorithm, SeleKT, that (a) leverages a
dense gradient-based step to identify the weights
that are most important for code editing, and (b)
does a sparse projection onto the base model to
avoid overfitting. Using our approach, we obtain a new series of models NextCoder (adapted
from QwenCoder-2.5) that achieves strong results
on five code-editing benchmarks, outperforming
comparable size models and even several larger
ones. We show the generality of our approach on
two model families (DeepSeekCoder and QwenCoder), compare against other fine-tuning approaches, and demonstrate robustness by showing
retention of code generation and general problemsolving abilities post adaptation. We opensource
the models, synthetic dataset, and implementation
at aka.ms/nextcoder.

Figure 1. Performance of state-of-the-art code LMs, in the parameter range 6.7B-16B, on code editing benchmarks. NextCoder-7B
is our code-editing model with QwenCoder-2.5-7B as the base,
fine-tuned using the proposed SeleKT algorithm on synthetic and
real code editing tasks. For NoFunEval, we consider instances
with binary oracles to ensure consistency with other benchmarks.
We present detailed results in Section 5.2, Table 4.

1. Introduction
Code editing is a fundamental ability with pervasive use in
automating software engineering activities. Recent benchmarks reveal that contemporary code language models
(LMs), particularly the smaller and open-weight LMs, struggle to edit code based on natural language instructions
(Muennighoff et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024b; Cassano et al.,
2023; Singhal et al., 2024). This is despite many of them
incorporating commit-data from GitHub in pre-training (Li
et al., 2023; Lozhkov et al., 2024) or fine-tuning (Muennighoff et al., 2023; Cassano et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2025),
where the commit messages are used as instructions.

*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research India. Correspondence to: Tushar Aggarwal <tushar.aggarwal53@gmail.com>,
Swayam Singh <t-swsingh@microsoft.com>,
Abhijeet
Awasthi <abawasthi@microsoft.com>,
Aditya Kanade
<kanadeaditya@microsoft.com>, Nagarajan Natarajan <nagarajn@microsoft.com>.

In this work, we aim to enhance the ability of code LMs to
handle diverse types of code-edit requirements. This poses
two challenges: (1) lack of high-quality fine-tuning data and
(2) the risk of losing the strong and general abilities (such
as code comprehension, code generation and instruction following, acquired during pre-training and instruction tuning)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

