Neural Guided Diffusion Bridges

Gefan Yang 1 Frank van der Meulen 2 Stefan Sommer 1
registration problems (Arnaudon et al., 2022; Baker et al.,
2024b; Yang et al., 2025). Additionally, diffusion bridges
play a crucial role in Bayesian inference and parameter estimations based on discrete-time observations. (Delyon & Hu,
2006; van der Meulen & Schauer, 2017; 2018; Pieschner &
Fuchs, 2020)

Abstract
We propose a novel method for simulating conditioned diffusion processes (diffusion bridges) in
Euclidean spaces. By training a neural network
to approximate bridge dynamics, our approach
eliminates the need for computationally intensive
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
or score modeling. Compared to existing methods, it offers greater robustness across various
diffusion specifications and conditioning scenarios. This applies in particular to rare events and
multimodal distributions, which pose challenges
for score-learning- and MCMC-based approaches.
We introduce a flexible variational family, partially specified by a neural network, for approximating the diffusion bridge path measure. Once
trained, it enables efficient sampling of independent bridges at a cost comparable to sampling the
unconditioned (forward) process.

Simulation of diffusion bridges in either Euclidean space or
manifolds is nontrivial since, in general, there is no closedform expression for transition densities, which is key to constructing the conditioned dynamics via Doob’s h-transform
(Rogers & Williams, 2000). This task has gained a great
deal of attention in the past decades (Beskos et al., 2006;
Delyon & Hu, 2006; Schauer et al., 2017; Whitaker et al.,
2016; Bierkens et al., 2021; Mider et al., 2021; Heng et al.,
2022; Chau et al., 2024; Baker et al., 2024a). Among them,
one common approach is to use a proposed bridge process
(called guided proposal) as an approximation to the true
bridge. Then either MCMC or Sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) methods are deployed to sample the true bridge
via the tractable likelihood ratio between the true and proposed bridges. Another solution is to use the score-matching
technique (Hyvarinen, 2005; Vincent, 2011) to directly approximate the intractable score of the transition probability
using gradient-based optimization. Here, a neural network is
trained with samples from the unconditioned process (Heng
et al., 2022) or adjoint process (Baker et al., 2024a), and
plugged into numerical solving schemes, for example, EulerMaruyama. Several recent studies deal with the extension
of bridge simulation techniques beyond Euclidean spaces to
manifolds (Sommer et al., 2017; Jensen & Sommer, 2023;
Grong et al., 2024; Corstanje et al., 2024). All of these rely
on either a type of guided proposal or score matching.

1. Introduction
Diffusion processes play a fundamental role in various fields
such as mathematics, physics, evolutionary biology, and, recently, generative models. In particular, diffusion processes
conditioned to hit a specific point at a fixed future time,
which are often referred to as diffusion bridges, are of great
interest in situations where observations constrain the dynamics of a stochastic process. For example, in generative
modeling, stochastic imputation between two given images,
also known as the image translation task, uses diffusion
bridges to model dynamics (Zhou et al., 2024; Zheng et al.,
2025). In the area of stochastic shape analysis and computational anatomy, random evolutions of biological shapes of
organisms are modeled as non-linear diffusion bridges, and
simulating such bridges is critical to solving inference and

Both guided-proposal-based and score-learning-based
bridge simulation methods have certain limitations: the
guided proposal requires a careful choice of a certain “auxiliary process”. (Mider et al., 2021) provided various strategies, but it is fair to say that guided proposals are mostly useful when combined with MCMC or Sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) methods. In case of a strongly nonlinear diffusion
or high-dimensional diffusion, the simulation of bridges using guided proposals combined with MCMC (most notably
the preconditioned Crank-Nicolson (pCN) scheme (Cotter
et al., 2013)) or SMC may be computationally demanding.
On the other hand, score-matching relies on sampling un-

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen,
Universitetsparken 1, 2100 København, Denmark 2 Department of
Mathematics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1111,
1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Gefan
Yang <gy@di.ku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

