Latent Preference Coding:
Aligning Large Language Models via Discrete Latent Codes

Zhuocheng Gong 1 Jian Guan 2 Wei Wu 2 Huishuai Zhang 1 Dongyan Zhao 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Alignment has emerged as a key step in the development of
large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024). The
goal of alignment is to leverage human feedback to gauge
the generative distributions of LLMs, steering their outputs
to be helpful, honest, and harmless (Askell et al., 2021).
To this end, human annotators are tasked with expressing
preferences among human-curated or machine-generated
texts, and these preference annotations serve as supervision
signals to further optimize LLMs. Amid the surge in alignment research, significant attention has been focused on
optimization objectives, considering both online (Schulman
et al., 2017; Munos et al., 2023; Calandriello et al., 2024;
Yang et al., 2024b) and offline (Rafailov et al., 2024; Zhao
et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024; Tang et al.,
2024) environments as well as different types of preference
annotations, such as scalar ratings (Richemond et al., 2024)
and pairwise rankings (Rafailov et al., 2024). Optimization
with the well-designed objectives has been widely validated
for effectively reducing toxicity (Dai et al., 2024) while
significantly improving the truthfulness and coherence of
LLM outputs (Touvron et al., 2023). In this work, we study
the alignment of LLMs from a different perspective: Can
we exploit the supervision signals more effectively through
fine-grained modeling of complex human preference?

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved
remarkable success, yet aligning their generations with human preferences remains a critical
challenge. Existing approaches to preference
modeling often rely on an explicit or implicit
reward function, overlooking the intricate and
multifaceted nature of human preferences that
may encompass conflicting factors across diverse
tasks and populations. To address this limitation,
we introduce Latent Preference Coding (LPC),
a novel framework that models the implicit factors as well as their combinations behind holistic preferences using discrete latent codes. LPC
seamlessly integrates with various offline alignment algorithms, automatically inferring the underlying factors and their importance from data
without relying on pre-defined reward functions
and hand-crafted combination weights. Extensive
experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate
that LPC consistently improves upon three alignment algorithms (DPO, SimPO, and IPO) using
three base models (Mistral-7B, Llama3-8B, and
Llama3-8B-Instruct). Furthermore, deeper analysis reveals that the learned latent codes effectively
capture the differences in the distribution of human preferences and significantly enhance the
robustness of alignment against noise in data. By
providing a unified representation for the multifarious preference factors, LPC paves the way towards developing more robust and versatile alignment techniques for the responsible deployment
of powerful LLMs.

The common practice for preference modeling typically
involves estimating a single reward function from human
annotations as a proxy for human preference (Schulman
et al., 2017; Gulcehre et al., 2023). Recently, human annotations have also been used directly as supervision signals in
optimization (Rafailov et al., 2024). These approaches, however, often overlook the challenges in preference modeling
that arise from the inherent complexity of human preference (Casper et al., 2023): (1) Human preference may
hinge on multiple factors. The multifaceted factors entailed by a prompt may not be easily represented by a single
reward function, especially when some factors conflict with
one another. A typical example is the divergence between
“helpfuness” and “safty,” which differ dramatically in their
preferred response patterns, making it difficult for a single
reward model to achieve the best of both worlds (Mu et al.,

1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking
University 2 Ant Group 3 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence.
Correspondence to:
Wei
Wu
<congyue.ww@antgroup.com>,
Dongyan
Zhao
<zhaody@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

