MMedPO: Aligning Medical Vision-Language Models with Clinical-Aware
Multimodal Preference Optimization

Kangyu Zhu * 1 2 Peng Xia * 1 Yun Li 1 Hongtu Zhu 1 Sheng Wang 3 Huaxiu Yao 1

Abstract
The advancement of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) has propelled their application in
medicine. However, Medical LVLMs (MedLVLMs) encounter factuality issues due to modality misalignment, where the models prioritize textual knowledge over visual input, causing hallucinations that conflict with medical images. Previous attempts on preference optimization have
inadequately mitigated clinical relevance in preference data, making these samples easily distinguishable and reducing alignment effectiveness.
To address this challenge, we propose MMedPO,
a novel multimodal medical preference optimization approach that considers the clinical relevance
of preference samples to enhance Med-LVLM
alignment. MMedPO curates multimodal preference data by introducing two types of dispreference: (1) plausible hallucinations injected through
target Med-LVLMs or GPT-4o to produce medically inaccurate responses, and (2) lesion region
neglect achieved through local lesion-noising, disrupting visual understanding of critical areas. We
then calculate clinical relevance for each sample
based on scores from Med-LLMs and visual tools,
and integrate these scores into the preference optimization process as weights, enabling effective
alignment. Our experiments demonstrate that
MMedPO significantly enhances factual accuracy,
achieving improvements over existing baseline
methods by averaging 14.2% and 51.7% across
the Med-VQA and report generation tasks. Our
code are available in https://github.com/aiminglab/MMedPO.

Figure 1. An illustration of preference data pair. The dispreferred
response contains nonfactual and clinically meaningless content.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence is increasingly being applied in the
medical field (Tăuţan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2019; Ye
et al., 2021; Tu et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024c; Wang et al.,
2025; Hu et al., 2024; 2023; Li et al., 2024), including areas
such as disease diagnosis and treatment planning. With the
recent surge in popularity of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) (Liu et al., 2024b;a; Zhu et al., 2023), Medical
LVLMs (Med-LVLMs) have begun to develop rapidly, drawing significant attention (Li et al., 2023a; Moor et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023c; Xia et al., 2024f;e).
However, these models still face the challenge of factuality,
which is largely due to modality misalignment issues (Cui
et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024a; Sun et al., 2024). Models
with poor modality alignment tends to prioritize the textual
knowledge learned during training over the actual visual
input. As a result, Med-LVLMs often produce hallucinations, generating text that appears coherent but contradicts
the information in the corresponding medical image (Xia
et al., 2024a; Royer et al., 2024).
To tackle this issue, several studies have employed preference optimization on Med-LVLMs, aiming to improve
alignment between medical image and text modalities with
factuality improvement (Hein et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024;
Banerjee et al., 2024). However, these methods simply
leverage the preference data generation process used for
aligning general LVLMs on natural images, overlooking
the clinical relevance of the generated preference samples.
Consequently, these preference samples become relatively
easily distinguishable, reducing their effectiveness in align-

*

Equal Contribution. Work was done during Kangyu Zhu’s
internship at UNC. 1 UNC Chapel-Hill 2 Brown University
3
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Kangyu Zhu
<kangyu@unc.edu>, Peng Xia <pxia@cs.unc.edu>, Huaxiu Yao
<huaxiu@cs.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

