Polynomial-Time Approximability of Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Jeremy McMahan 1

Abstract

expectation-constrained policies, leaving many popular settings with longstanding open problems. Even chance constraints, arguably a close second in popularity, still lack any
polynomial-time, even approximate, algorithms despite being introduced over a decade ago (Xu and Mannor, 2011).
Other settings for which polynomial-time algorithms are
open include deterministic policies under multiple expectation constraints, policies under non-homogeneous constraints (i.e., constraints of different types), and policies
under constraints for continuous-state processes. Consequently, we study the computational complexity of general
constrained problems to resolve many of these fundamental
open questions.

We study the computational complexity of approximating general constrained Markov decision processes. Our primary contribution is the
design of a polynomial time (0, ϵ)-additive bicriteria approximation algorithm for finding optimal constrained policies across a broad class
of recursively computable constraints, including
almost-sure, chance, expectation, and their anytime variants. Matching lower bounds imply our
approximation guarantees are optimal so long as
P ̸= N P . The generality of our approach results in answers to several long-standing open
complexity questions in the constrained reinforcement learning literature. Specifically, we are the
first to prove polynomial-time approximability
for the following settings: policies under chance
constraints, deterministic policies under multiple expectation constraints, policies under nonhomogeneous constraints (i.e., constraints of different types), and policies under constraints for
continuous-state processes.

Formally, we study the solution of Constrained Markov
Decision Processes (CMDPs). Here, we define a CMDP
through three fundamental parts: (1) an MDP M that accumulates both rewards and costs, (2) a general cost criterion
C, and (3) a budget vector B. Additionally, we allow the
agent to specify whether they require their policy to be deterministic or stochastic, formalized through a goal policy
π
class Π. The agent’s goal is to solve maxπ∈Π VM
subject
π
π
π
to CM ≤ B, where VM denotes the agent’s value and CM
denotes the agent’s cost under π. This model can capture
very general problems, including minimum time routes for
self-driving vehicles that must satisfy 1) an anytime constraint on fuel consumption, 2) an expectation constraint on
CO2 consumption, and 3) a chance constraint on vehicle
wear and tear. Our main question is the following:

1. Introduction
Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) is growing increasingly crucial for managing complex, real-world applications such as medicine (Coronato et al., 2020; Paragliola et al., 2018; Kolesar, 1970), disaster relief (Fan et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2019; Tsai et al., 2019), and resource
management (Mao et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018; Peng and
Shen, 2021; Bhatia et al., 2021). Various constraints, including expectation (Altman, 1999), chance (Xu and Mannor, 2011), almost-sure (Castellano et al., 2022), and anytime constraints (McMahan and Zhu, 2024b), were each
proposed to address new challenges. Despite the richness of the literature, most works focus on stochastic,

Can general CMDPs be approximated in polynomial time?
Hardness. Solving general CMDPs is notoriously challenging. When restricted to deterministic policies, solving
a CMDP with just one constraint is NP-hard (Feinberg,
2000; Xu and Mannor, 2011; McMahan and Zhu, 2024b;
McMahan, 2024). This difficulty increases with the number of constraints: with at least two constraints, finding a
feasible deterministic policy, let alone a near-optimal one,
becomes NP-hard (McMahan and Zhu, 2024b). Even if we
relax the deterministic requirement, this hardness remains
for all constraint types other than expectation. Computational hardness aside, standard RL techniques fail to apply
due to the combinatorial nature induced by many constraint

1

Department of Computer Science, University of WisconsinMadison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to: Jeremy McMahan
<jmcmahan@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

