Temporal Distance-aware Transition Augmentation for
Offline Model-based Reinforcement Learning
Dongsu Lee 1 2 Minhae Kwon 2 3

Abstract
The goal of offline reinforcement learning (RL)
is to extract a high-performance policy from the
fixed datasets, minimizing performance degradation due to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. Offline model-based RL (MBRL) is a
promising approach that ameliorates OOD issues
by enriching state-action transitions with augmentations synthesized via a learned dynamics
model. Unfortunately, seminal offline MBRL
methods often struggle in sparse-reward, longhorizon tasks. In this work, we introduce a novel
MBRL framework, dubbed Temporal DistanceAware Transition Augmentation (TempDATA),
that generates augmented transitions in a temporally structured latent space rather than in raw
state space. To model long-horizon behavior,
TempDATA learns a latent abstraction that captures a temporal distance from both trajectory and
transition levels of state space. Our experiments
confirm that TempDATA outperforms previous
offline MBRL methods and achieves matching
or surpassing the performance of diffusion-based
trajectory augmentation and goal-conditioned RL
on the D4RL AntMaze, FrankaKitchen, CALVIN,
and pixel-based FrankaKitchen.

(a) AntMaze Umaze

(b) Experimental Results

Figure 1. Performance comparison overview. (a) Umaze environment, the most naive level among AntMaze. The 8-DoF ant
robot navigates the maze to reach the goal state, marked as a yellow
star. (b) Comparison between the proposed solution and previous
MBRL on two D4RL benchmark datasets. TempDATA (proposed)
achieves the best performance in two benchmarks.

interactions. The offline paradigm allows RL to control its
limitations by leveraging the offline dataset without realtime interactions, achieving notable successes in several
domains (Snell et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2022; Lee et al.,
2024a; Lee & Kwon, 2023; 2025; Eo et al., 2023).
Previous off-policy RL often suffers from evaluating OOD
actions taken by the learned policy when estimating a stateaction value. Although online RL does not need to consider
OOD, offline setups cannot consider additional data through
online interactions. Therefore, offline RL aims to extract the
best possible policy from the fixed offline dataset by considering how to handle OOD. One promising workaround
is offline model-free RL (MFRL), which imposes conservative regularization on policies or value functions toward the
distribution of state–action pairs in the offline data (Kumar
et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2022).

https://dongsuleetech.github.io/
projects/tempdata/

1. Introduction
RL has long been recognized as a powerful paradigm for
sequential decision-making. However, it is hindered in
real-world applications by its reliance on trial-and-error
This work was partly done at 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Intelligent Semiconductors, Soongsil
University, Seoul, South Korea 3 School of Electronic Engineering, Soongsil University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Minhae Kwon <minhae@ssu.ac.kr>.

An alternative option is offline MBRL methods that learn a
dynamic model. They alleviate the OOD issue by synthesizing new transitions via planning with the learned dynamics
model and a behavior policy (Yu et al., 2020; 2021; Rigter
et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023). These methods have covered OOD samples efficiently, achieving better performance
than offline MFRL baselines on dense-reward, short-horizon

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

