BECAME: BayEsian Continual Learning with Adaptive Model MErging

Mei Li * 1 Yuxiang Lu * 1 Qinyan Dai 1 Suizhi Huang 1 Yue Ding 1 Hongtao Lu 1

Abstract
Stability

Continual Learning (CL) strives to learn incrementally across tasks while mitigating catastrophic forgetting. A key challenge in CL is balancing stability (retaining prior knowledge) and
plasticity (learning new tasks). While representative gradient projection methods ensure stability, they often limit plasticity. Model merging
techniques offer promising solutions, but prior
methods typically rely on empirical assumptions
and carefully selected hyperparameters. In this
paper, we explore the potential of model merging to enhance the stability-plasticity trade-off,
providing theoretical insights that underscore its
benefits. Specifically, we reformulate the merging mechanism using Bayesian continual learning principles and derive a closed-form solution
for the optimal merging coefficient based on the
Laplace approximation that adapts to the diverse
characteristics of tasks. To validate our approach,
we introduce a two-stage framework named BECAME, which synergizes the expertise of gradient projection and adaptive merging. Extensive experiments show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art CL methods and existing
merging strategies. Code is available at https:
//github.com/limei0818/BECAME.

Adaptive Merging

Plasticity

Figure 1. (Left) The training loss landscape for task 1 and task
2, represented by red and blue contours, respectively. Darker color
denotes lower loss value. (Right) The training loss values for
task 1, task 2, and their sum. Both figures are based on the
NSCL-based experiment on the 10-split CIFAR-100 dataset. The
model initially learns task 1, reaching θ1∗ , which minimizes the loss
L1 . When learning task 2, the model first obtains θ2GP using the
gradient projection, with minor forgetting indicated by the increase
in L1 . This solution shows limited plasticity, as L2 remains high.
The model then proceeds to train without constraints, reaching
θ̂2 , the minimum of L2 . By analyzing the trajectory from θ2GP
to θ̂2 , our method can determine the optimal merging coefficient,
achieving the minimal cumulative loss at θ2∗ .

gradient descent using gradients computed solely from the
current task data, the loss on prior tasks can increase drastically (Hadsell et al., 2020). This phenomenon, known as
catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French,
1999), poses a major challenge in CL. Generally, CL models target to mitigate catastrophic forgetting by retaining
knowledge from prior tasks (stability) while also being able
to assimilate new tasks (plasticity). A balance between stability and plasticity is necessitated to achieve strong overall
performance across both old and new tasks (Chaudhry et al.,
2018; Mermillod et al., 2013; Kim & Han, 2023).

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) aims to equip models to learn incrementally, similar to human learning (Wang et al., 2024;
De Lange et al., 2021; Mundt et al., 2023; Masana et al.,
2022; Van de Ven et al., 2022). In the typical CL setting,
models can only access the data of the current task due to
privacy or storage constraints, yet they are expected to perform well on both the current and previously learned tasks.
Since neural network models are typically optimized via

Projecting gradients of new data onto the subspace orthogonal to the feature space of previous tasks is a prominent
method to ensure stability (Zeng et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2021b; Saha et al., 2021). Nevertheless, this approach often
restricts plasticity, as it imposes strict constraints on parameter optimization, reducing the range of feasible gradient
directions (Zhao et al., 2023). A promising solution involves
merging the model’s parameters with those of a complementary model specialized in the current task (Lin et al., 2022a).
This idea of merging models of old and new tasks has also
been empirically shown to enhance overall performance

*
Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Yue Ding <dingyue@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

