R E F OCUS: Visual Editing as a Chain of Thought for Structured Image
Understanding

Xingyu Fu * 1 Minqian Liu 2 Zhengyuan Yang 3 John Corring 3 Yijuan Lu 3 Jianwei Yang 3
Dan Roth 1 Dinei Florencio 3 Cha Zhang 3

https://zeyofu.github.io/ReFocus/
1. Introduction

Abstract
Structured image understanding, such as interpreting tables and charts, requires strategically refocusing across various structures and texts within
an image, forming a reasoning sequence to arrive
at the final answer. However, current multimodal
large language models (LLMs) lack this multihop
selective attention capability. In this work, we
introduce R E F OCUS, a simple yet effective framework that equips multimodal LLMs with the ability to generate “visual thoughts” by performing
visual editing on the input image through code,
shifting and refining their visual focuses. Specifically, R E F OCUS enables multimodal LLMs to
generate Python codes to call tools and modify
the input image, sequentially drawing boxes, highlighting sections, and masking out areas, thereby
enhancing the visual reasoning process. We experiment upon a wide range of structured image
understanding tasks involving tables and charts.
R E F OCUS largely improves performance on all
tasks over GPT-4o without visual editing, yielding an average gain of 11.0% on table tasks and
6.8% on chart tasks. We present an in-depth analysis of the effects of different visual edits, and
reasons why R E F OCUS can improve the performance without introducing additional information.
Further, we collect a 14k training set using R E F O CUS , and prove that such visual chain-of-thought
with intermediate information offers a better supervision than standard VQA data, reaching a
8.0% average gain over the same model trained
with QA pairs and 2.6% over CoT.

Structured images, such as tables and charts (Kafle et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; Masry et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024), are essential
for the efficient communication of information in our daily
lives (Chang et al., 2008; Groom et al., 2016). Understanding these structured images requires multiple reasoning steps
– each paying selective attention (Duncan, 1984; Johnston
& Dark, 1986; Rizzolatti et al., 1994) to focus on particular
pieces of related information while ignoring less pertinent
details and distractions, to facilitate multi-hop visual reasoning and arrive at the final answer. For instance, What’s
total wins by Belgian riders in Figure 1? To answer
this, we might 1) identify the teams with Country being
Belgium, 2) find the wins of each team, 3) locate the wins
of the teams from Belgium, and 4) sum the wins together.
One major limitation of current multimodal models is their
lack of selective attention and multi-hop visual reasoning
ability – they limit intermediate reasoning to textual formats only. Most methods often extract the information from
the image to text first, and then rely on language model’s
chain-of-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) reasoning to solve
the real problems (Masry et al., 2023; Han et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2023c; Zhang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Surís
et al., 2023; Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023), never looking back
at the image again. Recent work Visual Sketchpad (Hu et al.,
2024) for the first time attempts to create visual artifacts as
thoughts using vision tools. However, it only works on natural images and mainly benefits from additional information
brought by tools instead of from visual reasoning.
In this work, we explore an improved representation of intermediate thoughts, to boost the visual reasoning ability of
multimodal large language models (LLMs) on structured
image understanding. We demonstrate that simple visual
editing actions generated as Python code from multimodal
LLMs–such as drawing boxes, highlighting areas, or masking regions–can significantly improve model performance
by directing selective attention.

*

Work done during internship at Microsoft. 1 University of Pennsylvania 2 Virginia Tech 3 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Xingyu
Fu <xingyuf2@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To this end, we introduce R E F OCUS: a framework that en1

