The Synergy of LLMs & RL Unlocks Offline Learning of Generalizable
Language-Conditioned Policies with Low-fidelity Data

Thomas Pouplin * 1 Katarzyna Kobalczyk * 1 Hao Sun 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

tion data is infeasible. Moreover, current RL-based agents
often struggle to generalize to new goals and environments
beyond their training data (Yang et al., 2023). These challenges underline the need for a change of focus in the area
of instruction-following agents: from reliance on online
interactions in environments with rich forms of feedback to
the learning of generalizable policies from unlabeled observational data. We illustrate the problem setting considered
with the following hypothetical scenario:

Developing autonomous agents capable of performing complex, multi-step decision-making
tasks specified in natural language remains a significant challenge, particularly in realistic settings
where labeled data is scarce and real-time experimentation is impractical. Existing reinforcement learning (RL) approaches often struggle
to generalize to unseen goals and states, limiting their applicability. In this paper, we introduce TEDUO, a novel training pipeline for offline language-conditioned policy learning in symbolic environments. Unlike conventional methods,
TEDUO operates on readily available, unlabeled
datasets and addresses the challenge of generalization to previously unseen goals and states. Our approach harnesses large language models (LLMs)
in a dual capacity: first, as automatization tools
augmenting offline datasets with richer annotations, and second, as generalizable instructionfollowing agents. Empirical results demonstrate
that TEDUO achieves data-efficient learning of
robust language-conditioned policies, accomplishing tasks beyond the reach of conventional RL
frameworks or out-of-the-box LLMs alone.

Imagine recording a human using their smartphone in
daily tasks, such as text messaging or calendar management. How can we train an an AI assistant following
natural language instructions, e.g.“Book a restaurant
for 7 PM” or “Send an email to John.”, by just recording the actions taken by the human and not having to
manually label each state or action recorded? How can
we make the learned policies generalize to commands
that have not been explicitly observed in the data?
Problem setting. We formalize our setup by framing it as
an offline language-conditioned policy learning problem.
We assume access to a pre-collected dataset of state-action
transitions, D consisting of triplets (x, a, x′ ), where x and
x′ belong to an observable state space X , and a represents
actions within an action space A. To enable the grounding
of the environment dynamics with the space of natural language we additionally require: 1) that the individual states
and actions are representable in a textual format; 2) access to
an unordered list of goals, G expressed in natural language
that are plausibly achievable within the environment of interest. We posit that both D and G are often easy to obtain by
simply recording agents interact with the environment and
curating a list of natural language commands corresponding
to the tasks typically performed within that environment.
Without constraining assumptions regarding the optimality
of the data collection policy with respect to the goals G,
nor access to the ground-truth state-transition dynamics or
rewards, our aim is to learn a language-conditioned policy,
π ∗ , that can determine optimal actions with respect to new
states x ∈
/ D and new goals g ∗ ̸∈ G tr , where G tr ⊂ G is the
subset of goals used for training (see section 2 for details).

1. Introduction
Motivation. Enabling AI agents to follow human-provided
natural language instructions is a critical step toward building intelligent systems that can perform complex, multi-step
tasks in dynamic environments. However, existing methods
often require vast quantities of annotated data or rely on
costly online interactions with the environment to train effective policies. Such requirements limit their scalability to
real-world scenarios where collecting annotated or interac*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics
and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Thomas Pouplin <tp531@cam.ac.uk>,
Katarzyna Kobalczyk <knk25@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Challenges. The task of learning π ∗ from D and G tr alone
1

