Beyond Self-Interest: How Group Strategies Reshape Content Creation
in Recommendation Platforms?
Yaolong Yu 1 Fan Yao 2 Sinno Jialin Pan 1

Abstract

2024). Driven by platforms’ rewarding mechanisms, creators can generate income proportional to their output and
often strive to maximize their earnings by optimizing their
content, such as selecting formats or topics that yield higher
profitability (Glotfelter, 2019; Hodgson, 2021). To maximize user utility, leading platforms like Instagram, TikTok,
and YouTube employ sophisticated algorithms to match
users with the most relevant content. This process involves
calculating relevance scores and applying top-K ranking
methods to prioritize and display content that aligns closely
with user preferences.

We employ a game-theoretic framework to study
the impact of a specific strategic behavior among
creators—group behavior—on recommendation
platforms. In this setting, creators within a group
collaborate to maximize their collective utility.
We show that group behavior has a limited effect
on the game’s equilibrium when the group size
is small. However, when the group size is large,
group behavior can significantly alter content distribution and user welfare. Specifically, in a topK recommendation system with exposure-based
rewards, we demonstrate that user welfare can suffer a significant loss due to group strategies, and
user welfare does not necessarily increase with
larger values of K or more random matching, contrasting sharply with the individual creator case.
Furthermore, we investigate user welfare guarantees through the lens of the Price of Anarchy
(PoA). In the general case, we establish a negative result on the bound of PoA with exposure
rewards, proving that it can be arbitrarily large.
We then investigate a user engagement rewarding
mechanism, which mitigates the issues caused by
large group behavior, showing that PoA ≤ K + 1
in the general case and PoA ≤ 2 in the binary
case. Empirical results from simulations further
support the effectiveness of the user engagement
rewarding mechanism.

However, recent studies have shown that user utility cannot be maximized solely by optimizing matching rules, as
creators can act strategically, leading to dynamic shifts in
content distribution (Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz, 2018; Yao
et al., 2024c;b; Jagadeesan et al., 2023; Hron et al., 2022).
Previous works mainly study this problem under self-played
content creators’ strategic behavior, where every content
creator only focuses on maximizing its utility. As online recommendation platforms become extremely prevalent these
days, despite individual creators, some creators form a group
to strategically act in this content creation competition, usually united by a media company, such as an MCN (Gardner
& Lehnert, 2016; Gardner, 2015; Boyle & Boyle, 2018;
Liang & Ji, 2024). To this group of creators, the company
needs to consider assigning and adjusting topics for each
creator in this group to maximize the group’s utility.
Within a group of creators, competition among members can
be strategically reduced to enhance collective utility. Importantly, the strategies that maximize group utility often differ
significantly from those that maximize individual utilities
when creators act in a self-interested manner. The implications of group behavior extend beyond merely improving
group utility: such strategic collaboration can alter the equilibrium of the content creation competition, resulting in a
content distribution that diverges from the equilibrium observed when only individual creators are present. This shift
in content distribution can influence user satisfaction with
recommended content and may potentially diminish overall
user welfare. For instance, consider a scenario where the
user base consists predominantly of sports fans, with only
a small fraction interested in niche topics. When creators
collaborate to boost revenue, they may shift from sports

1. Introduction
With the increasing popularity of online media, content
creation has emerged as a prominent profession in contemporary society (Bobadilla et al., 2013; Hoose & Rosenbohm,
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Sinno Jialin Pan
<sinnopan@cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

