Censor Dependent Variational Inference

Chuanhui Liu 1 Xiao Wang 1

Abstract

such data effectively.
Deep learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm to advance survival analysis (Wiegrebe et al., 2024). Recent
studies focus on modeling the individual time-to-event distributions using expressive latent variable survival models
(LVSMs). For example, Ranganath et al. (2016) assumed
that the prior of Z belongs to the class of deep exponential
family distributions (Brown, 1986). Deep survival machine
(Nagpal et al., 2021a) considered the finite discrete latent
space, modeling the logarithm of time-to-event as the finite
Gumbel or normal mixtures. Xiu et al. (2020) modeled a
discrete time-to-event as a softmax-activated neural network
incorporating the Nelson-Aalen estimator (Aalen, 1978).
Apellániz et al. (2024) followed a similar setup, developing variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) (VAE) for continuous time-to-event.
Importantly, these models outperform Accelerated Failure
Time (AFT) (Miller, 1976) and Cox Proportional Hazards
(CoxPH) (Cox, 1972) models across multiple metrics, enabling downstream tasks through latent features (Manduchi
et al., 2022).

This paper provides a comprehensive analysis
of variational inference in latent variable models
for survival analysis, emphasizing the distinctive
challenges associated with applying variational
methods to survival data. We identify a critical
weakness in the existing methodology, demonstrating how a poorly designed variational distribution may hinder the objective of survival analysis tasks—modeling time-to-event distributions.
We prove that the optimal variational distribution, which perfectly bounds the log-likelihood,
may depend on the censoring mechanism. To
address this issue, we propose censor-dependent
variational inference (CDVI), tailored for latent
variable models in survival analysis. More practically, we introduce CD-CVAE, a V-structure
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) designed for the
scalable implementation of CDVI. Further discussion extends some existing theories and training
techniques to survival analysis. Extensive experiments validate our analysis and demonstrate significant improvements in the estimation of individual survival distributions. Codes can be found
at https://github.com/ChuanhuiLiu/CDVI.

A unique aspect of LVSM optimization is its reliance on
variational inference (VI) (Jordan et al., 1999) to approximate intractable likelihoods arising from flexible parametric
generative models. As a result, the performance of latent
variable models depends heavily on the optimality of VI and
associated design choices (Cremer et al., 2018).

1. Introduction

In our opinion, the role of VI in modeling time-to-event
distributions remains inadequately explored. It is unclear
what form the optimal variational distribution should take
under censoring or which posterior it is meant to approximate. Existing designs are largely heuristic, with limited
theoretical grounding in the presence of censoring.

Survival analysis, a fundamental topic in statistics, finds
wide-ranging applications across healthcare, insurance, quality management, and finance (Harrell et al., 2001; Nelson,
2005; Frees, 2009). It focuses on modeling the relationship between time-to-event outcomes and individual demographic covariates, where the event of interest could be
death, disease progression, or similar occurrences. A key
challenge in survival analysis arises from censored observations, which provide only partial information about the
survival time, necessitating specialized methods to handle

To address these gaps, this paper advances the understanding of VI in survival analysis by providing a theoretical
analysis of its optimality under censoring and introducing a
principled variational framework for LVSM. At a high level,
our main contributions are

1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Wang <wangxiao@purdue.edu>.

1. In Section 3, we motivate and introduce the core ideas of
censor-dependent variational inference (CDVI). We establish conditions under which vanilla VI for survival models
fails to achieve inference optimality under non-informative

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

