A Reasoning-Based Approach to Cryptic Crossword Clue Solving

Martin Andrews 1 Sam Witteveen 1
'Proved' answer

clue: Cut up over politician on the French case (7)
ad:
down

answer: EXAMPLE

answer candidate
generator
(Gemma2-9B FT)
20 candidates:

10 suggestions (1 shown here):
definition: Cut up over politician on the French {case}
wordplay:
(AXE)< (cut, <up), MP, LE (the, in French)
For each

suggestion

formalisation to Python (Gemini-1.5-Flash or Gemma2-9B-it)
Retry formalisation up
to max_rewrites times

answer: SNIPPED
answer: EXAMPLE
answer: LUGGAGE
...

definition and wordplay suggestions (Gemma2-9B FT)

assert is_synonym("cut", "AXE")
assert is_action("INITIAL", "up")
assert "AXE"[::-1] == "EXA"
assert is_abbreviation("politician", "MP")
assert is_synonym("the, in French", "LE")
assert "EXA"+"MP"+"LE"
assert is_synonym("case", "EXAMPLE", pattern='7')

SUCCESS : Report answer as proved

Cryptic crossword clues are challenging language
tasks for which new test sets are released daily by
major newspapers on a global basis. Each cryptic
clue contains both the definition of the answer to
be placed in the crossword grid (in common with
regular crosswords), and ‘wordplay’ that proves
that the answer is correct (i.e. a human solver
can be confident that an answer is correct without
needing crossing words as confirmation). This
work describes an LLM-based reasoning system
built from open-licensed components that solves
cryptic clues by (i) hypothesising answers; (ii)
proposing wordplay explanations; and (iii) using
a verifier system that operates on codified reasoning steps. Overall, this system establishes a new
state-of-the-art performance on the challenging
Cryptonite dataset of clues from The Times and
The Telegraph newspapers in the UK. Because
each proved solution is expressed in Python, interpretable wordplay reasoning for proven answers
is available for inspection.

Cryptic Crossword Question

For each answer
candidate

Abstract

Python verification (uses AST and simulates functions)
Error output (with hinting):
* assertion failure : "up" does not suggest
"INITIAL", could be: "REVERSE"

SUCCESS

Figure 1. Proving process: answer candidate → wordplay →
LLM formalisation

• There are decades of solved puzzles (each one containing
over 20 clues) from multiple major newspapers available,
and new puzzles are published daily. This contrasts with
(for instance) IMO/AIME problems, where there is a
much lower number of novel problems available.

1. Introduction

• The method in this work explicitly reveals the reasoning
(i.e. validated wordplay) required to solve each problem. By construction, there is one ‘true’ reasoning path,
although it might be expressed in different ways by different solvers.

There has been significant work in reasoning in the fields
of mathematics (Jiang et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Trinh
et al., 2024) and code generation (Ni et al., 2023; Ridnik
et al., 2024) which benefit from having strong verifiers to
validate their answers. This work tackles the relatively
under-studied reasoning task of cryptic crossword solving,
which has the following qualities:

1.1. An example Cryptic Clue
As a concrete example, and to clarify the terminology used,
consider the following moderately complex cryptic clue1 :
“Cut up over politician on the French case (7)”.

• Thousands of people find Cryptic Crosswords a satisfying intellectual challenge on a daily basis. Solving these
puzzles requires understanding multi-layered language
constructs, blending logic, wordplay, and contextual nuance. This provides a unique challenge for evaluating and
improving LLMs’ capabilities in NLU and reasoning.

Solvers must parse the clue carefully to separate the
definition (which acts as a regular crossword clue)
and the supporting wordplay that can be used to arrive
at the same answer from two directions. Arriving at the
same answer by two paths constitutes the necessary proof
that the correct answer has been found. See Figure 2a for a
visual depiction of the reasoning involved.

1
Red Dragon AI, Singapore. Correspondence to: Martin Andrews <martin@reddragon.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

The Times UK (6-March-2024), Cryptic #28857 clue 4D

