Interchangeable Token Embeddings for Extendable Vocabulary and
Alpha-Equivalence

İlker Işık 1 Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis 1 Ebru Aydin Gol 2

Abstract

perform well in neurosymbolic reasoning tasks, such as
theorem proving (Han et al., 2021) and mathematical reasoning (Rabe et al., 2020). The formal reasoning capabilities
of these models were once doubted, but Liu et al. (2023)
demonstrated the ability of Transformer models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) to learn shortcuts to automata. Of particular interest is the generalization ability of such models to unseen,
out-of-distribution data (Sanh et al., 2022), enhancing their
appeal for logical reasoning (Abbe et al., 2023).

Language models lack the notion of interchangeable tokens: symbols that are semantically equivalent yet distinct, such as bound variables in formal
logic. This limitation prevents generalization to
larger vocabularies and hinders the model’s ability
to recognize alpha-equivalence, where renaming
bound variables preserves meaning. We formalize this machine learning problem and introduce
alpha-covariance, a metric for evaluating robustness to such transformations. To tackle this task,
we propose a dual-part token embedding strategy:
a shared component ensures semantic consistency,
while a randomized component maintains token
distinguishability. Compared to a baseline that relies on alpha-renaming for data augmentation, our
approach demonstrates improved generalization
to unseen tokens in linear temporal logic solving, propositional logic assignment prediction,
and copying with an extendable vocabulary, while
introducing a favorable inductive bias for alphaequivalence. Our findings establish a foundation
for designing language models that can learn interchangeable token representations, a crucial step
toward more flexible and systematic reasoning in
formal domains. Our code and project page are
available at necrashter.github.io/interchangeabletoken-embeddings

Another application area is linear-time temporal logic (LTL),
which is heavily utilized by the formal verification community (Clarke et al., 2018; Baier & Katoen, 2008) for reasoning about how logical propositions change over time (Pnueli,
1977). Through the use of temporal operators, LTL formulae can specify, for example, that a proposition p must hold
at all time steps (Gp), or at least one time step (Fp). LTL
formulae operate on traces, which describe how the propositions change over time.
Solving a given LTL formula involves finding a satisfying
trace, and it proved essential for generating examples for
system specifications in the literature. This field was dominated by the methods that use classical algorithms, such as
spot (Duret-Lutz et al., 2022) and aalta (Li et al., 2014).
However, following the success of Transformer models on
end-to-end symbolic integration (Lample & Charton, 2019),
Hahn et al. (2021) attacked the LTL solving problem using
the same approach. Their capability to generalize to longer
formulae is especially noteworthy, and it was made possible
thanks to tree-positional encoding (Shiv & Quirk, 2019).
However, generalization to longer formula lengths is not
the only concern. In particular, each LTL formula features
a set of atomic propositions (henceforth APs), and it’s desirable for the model to generalize to more APs. But the
architecture of the model does not even accept new APs that
are not seen during training, despite the fact that all APs
represent semantically equivalent concepts while being distinguishable from each other. This situation arises in many
other application areas, such as mathematical expressions
and lambda calculus (alp, 1984), where renaming the bound
variables does not change the meaning. This phenomenon
is described as alpha-equivalence. Alpha-conversion (or
alpha-renaming) refers to the process of creating alpha-

1. Introduction
Following the deep learning revolution that affected numerous application areas (Dargan et al., 2020), recent literature shows that deep learning based approaches also
1

Department of Computer Engineering, Middle East Technical
University, Ankara, Turkey 2 Microsoft, İstanbul, Turkey. Correspondence to: İlker Işık <ilker@ceng.metu.edu.tr>, Ramazan
Gokberk Cinbis <gcinbis@ceng.metu.edu.tr>, Ebru Aydin Gol
<ebruaydingol@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

