Efficiently Serving Large Multimodal Models Using EPD Disaggregation

Gursimran Singh 1 Xinglu Wang 2 Yifan Hu 1 Timothy Yu 1 Linzi Xing 1 Wei Jiang 3 Zhefeng Wang 3
Xiaolong Bai 3 Yi Li 3 Ying Xiong 1 Yong Zhang 1 Zhenan Fan 1

Abstract

E1

LLM1

2

E2

LLM2

3

E3

Aggregated

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) extend Large
Language Models (LLMs) by handling diverse
inputs such as images, audio, and video, but at
the cost of adding a multimodal encoding stage
that increases both computational and memory
overhead. This step negatively affects key Service
Level Objectives (SLOs), such as time to first token (TTFT) and time per output token (TPOT).
We introduce Encode-Prefill-Decode (EPD) Disaggregation, a novel framework that separates the
encoding, prefill, and decode stages onto dedicated resources. Unlike current systems, which
bundle encoding and prefill together, our approach
decouples these steps, unlocking new opportunities and optimizations. These include a mechanism to cache multimedia tokens for efficient
transfer, a novel way to parallelize the encoding load within a request, a module for optimal resource allocation for disaggregated serving, and a novel role-switching method to handle
changing workload characteristics. Experimental evaluations with popular LMMs show substantial gains in memory efficiency (up to 15×
lower peak memory utilization), batch sizes (up
to 22× larger), 10× more images per request,
and 2.2× larger KV caches. Furthermore, it
leads to significant improvements in SLO attainment (up to 90–100% improvement) and TTFT
(up to 71% reduction), compared to systems that
do not disaggregate. The code is available at
https://github.com/vbdi/epdserve.

4

LLM3

LLM4

E4

DP=4

1

LLM5

E5

P=3; E=1

E5

E4

1

E1
E2
E3

Disaggregated

2
3

4

LLM1

LLM4

LLM2

LLM5
LLM3

Figure 1: Aggregated (top) vs. disaggregated (bottom) system architectures. In the aggregated setup, the encoder (E)
and LLM share the same GPUs, leading to interference between encode and prefill stages (e.g., LLM-4 delays E5).
Disaggregation isolates these stages across GPUs, reducing contention and improving utilization. This separation
enables better performance under multimodal workloads,
addressing key limitations of existing systems.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized language understanding and reasoning, achieving superhuman
performance on a variety of tasks (Achiam et al., 2023;
Chang et al., 2024). Recently, the scope of these models has
expanded to include multiple modalities, such as images,
audio, and videos, leading to the emergence of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) (Yao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024). LMMs enable users to interact with
diverse data types, such as posing questions about visual
scenes or analyzing audio clips, thereby unlocking novel applications across fields like healthcare, autonomous systems,
and creative industries (Luo et al., 2025).
However, serving LMMs in an efficient manner presents
unique challenges. Meeting strict Service Level Objectives
(SLOs), such as time to first token (TTFT) and time per output token (TPOT), becomes increasingly difficult given the
added computational and memory demands of processing
multimodal data (Alvar et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024). Unlike
LLMs, where inference involves prefill and decoding stages,
LMMs require an additional encoding stage to process raw
multimodal inputs (e.g., images or videos) into tokenized

1
Huawei Technologies Canada, BC, Canada 2 Simon Fraser
University, BC, Canada 3 Huawei Cloud, China. Correspondence
to: Zhenan Fan < zhenanfan@gmail.com>, Gursirman Singh
<gursimran.singh1@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

