Empowering World Models with Reflection for Embodied Video Prediction

Xiaowei Chi * 1 Chun-Kai Fan * 2 Hengyuan Zhang * 2 Xingqun Qi 1 Rongyu Zhang 2 Anthony Chen 2
Chi-Min Chan 1 Wei Xue 1 Qifeng Liu 1 Shanghang Zhang 2 Yike Guo 1

Abstract

Observation Encode Module
DINO

VLM

Pose Encoder

Input:
Instruction，
Observation

Output:
Multimodalprediction

Understand
n
Reflection

Generation

Action
How to ?

Prediction

O

er

bs

va

sh

?
xt
Ne
e
at

Observation Prediction Module

ni

St

Fi

tio

?

…

t’s

Action Encoder

ha

W

Video generation models have made significant
progress in simulating future states, showcasing their potential as world simulators in embodied scenarios. However, existing models often lack robust understanding, limiting their ability to perform multi-step predictions or handle
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) scenarios. To address this challenge, we propose the Reflection of
Generation (RoG), a set of intermediate reasoning strategies designed to enhance video prediction. It leverages the complementary strengths
of pre-trained vision-language and video generation models, enabling them to function as a
world model in embodied scenarios. To support
RoG, we introduce Embodied Video Anticipation Benchmark(EVA-Bench), a comprehensive
benchmark that evaluates embodied world models across diverse tasks and scenarios, utilizing
both in-domain and OOD datasets. Building on
this foundation, we devise a world model, Embodied Video Anticipator (EVA), that follows a
multistage training paradigm to generate highfidelity video frames and apply an autoregressive strategy to enable adaptive generalization
for longer video sequences. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of EVA in various downstream tasks like video generation and
robotics, thereby paving the way for large-scale
pre-trained models in real-world video prediction
applications. The video demos are available at
https://sites.google.com/view/icml-eva.

CLIP

Video Generation Model
Action Model

Pose Model

Text Tokenizer

…

Figure 1. The illustration of the Reflection of Generation(RoG).
Giving the instruction and observation as input, the world model
gives a proper output with the combination of understanding, prediction, and generation.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of video generation technologies
has brought predictive models to the forefront of building
embodied world simulators (Agarwal et al., 2025), where
the ability to anticipate future status is critical in embodied
scenarios (Wang et al., 2024b). These generated predictive videos can serve as interactive guidelines, mixed-reality
product manuals, driving instructors (Gao et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2023b), gaming assistants (Bruce et al., 2024), or even
a robot’s planning imagination (Du et al., 2023a; Yang et al.,
2023). By imagining how the world evolves as an agent
behaves, this prediction capability significantly enhances
decision-making in embodied scenarios, providing a foundation for robust world models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018).
However, existing video generation models for
robotics (Zhou et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023) primarily focus on conditional simulation, neglecting the
critical role of understanding both current and predicted
states. Therefore, these models are limited to generating
fixed-frame sequences and single-round predictions.
Moreover, they lack the ability to detect flawed outputs,
relying heavily on human intervention. These limitations
severely degrade their performance in Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) scenarios and undermine the fundamental goal of an
embodied world simulator.

*

Equal contribution . The research was supported by Themebased Research Scheme (T45- 205/21-N) from Hong Kong RGC,
NSFC (No. 62206234), the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (62476011), and Generative AI Research and Development Centre from InnoHK. 1 Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 2 State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information
Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University. Correspondence to: Shanghang Zhang <shanghang@pku.edu.cn>,
Yike Guo <yikeguo@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address these challenges, we propose Reflection-ofGeneration (RoG), inspired by recent advances in reasoning
1

