Importance Sampling for Nonlinear Models

Prakash P. Rajmohan 1 Fred Roosta 2 3

Abstract

out this paper, we make the umbrella assumption that n ≥ p,
i.e., we operate in the underparameterized setting.

While norm-based and leverage-score-based
methods have been extensively studied for identifying “important” data points in linear models,
analogous tools for nonlinear models remain significantly underdeveloped. By introducing the
concept of the adjoint operator of a nonlinear map,
we address this gap and generalize norm-based
and leverage-score-based importance sampling to
nonlinear settings. We demonstrate that sampling
based on these generalized notions of norm and
leverage scores provides approximation guarantees for the underlying nonlinear mapping, similar
to linear subspace embeddings. As direct applications, these nonlinear scores not only reduce
the computational complexity of training nonlinear models by enabling efficient sampling over
large datasets but also offer a novel mechanism for
model explainability and outlier detection. Our
contributions are supported by both theoretical
analyses and experimental results across a variety
of supervised learning scenarios.

For example, in the simple linear regression, fi (θ) =
⟨θ, xi ⟩ − yi , where (xi , yi ) is the ith input-output pair. Using the squared loss ℓ(t) = t2 gives rise to the familiar
2
linear least-squares problem L(θ) = ∥Xθ − y∥ , where
X ∈ Rn×d is the input data matrix whose ith row is xi , and
y ∈ Rn is the output vector whose ith component is yi .
The growth of ML over the past decade has been largely
driven by the explosion in the availability of data. However, this exponential increase in data volume presents significant computational challenges, particularly in solving
(1) and developing diagnostic tools for post-training analysis. These challenges have been extensively studied and
addressed in simpler linear settings. In this context, randomized numerical linear algebra (RandNLA) has emerged as
a powerful paradigm for approximating underlying matrices and accelerating computations. RandNLA has led to
significant advancements in algorithms for fundamental matrix problems, including matrix multiplication, least-squares
problems, least-absolute deviation, and low-rank matrix approximation, among others. For further reading, see the
lecture notes and surveys on this topic, such as Mahoney
et al. (2011); Woodruff et al. (2014); Drineas & Mahoney
(2018); Martinsson & Tropp (2020); Murray et al. (2023);
Dereziński & Mahoney (2024).

1. Introduction
The process of training in machine learning (ML) typically
boils down to solving an optimization problem of the form
(
)
n
X
minp L(θ) =
ℓ(fi (θ)) ,
(1)
θ∈R

Arguably, linear least-squares problems have been among
the most well-studied problems in RandNLA (Sarlos, 2006;
Nelson & Nguyên, 2013; Meng & Mahoney, 2013; Clarkson & Woodruff, 2017). Various randomized approximation
techniques, ranging from data-independent oblivious methods (e.g., sketching and projections) to data-dependent nonoblivious sampling methods (e.g., non-uniform leverage
score or row-norm sampling), have emerged as powerful
tools to speed up computations directly (Woodruff et al.,
2014) or to construct preconditioners for downstream linear
algebra subroutines (Avron et al., 2010). While these tools
have proven remarkably successful in accelerating computations for linear least-squares problems, extending them to
more general problems of the form (1) remains challenging.
Efforts to push these boundaries into the nonlinear realm
often remain ad hoc and limited in scope (Gajjar & Musco,
2021; Erdélyi et al., 2020; Avron et al., 2019; 2017). A key

i=1

where ℓ is a loss function, and fi : Rp → R is a potentially
nonlinear mapping, parametrized by θ, that represents the
ML model evaluated at the ith training data point. Through1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. 2 School of
Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia. 3 ARC Training Centre for Information Resilience
(CIRES), Brisbane, Australia. Correspondence to: Prakash
P. Rajmohan <p.palanivelurajmohan@uq.net.au>, Fred Roosta
<fred.roosta@uq.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

