Improving Multimodal Learning Balance and Sufficiency
through Data Remixing

Xiaoyu Ma 1 2 Hao Chen 1 2 Yongjian Deng 3

Abstract
Different modalities hold considerable gaps in
optimization trajectories, including speeds and
paths, which lead to modality laziness and modality clash when jointly training multimodal models, resulting in insufficient and imbalanced multimodal learning. Existing methods focus on enforcing the weak modality by adding modalityspecific optimization objectives, aligning their optimization speeds, or decomposing multimodal
learning to enhance unimodal learning. These
methods fail to achieve both unimodal sufficiency
and multimodal balance. In this paper, we, for
the first time, address both concerns by proposing
multimodal Data Remixing, including decoupling
multimodal data and filtering hard samples for
each modality to mitigate modality imbalance;
and then batch-level reassembling to align the
gradient directions and avoid cross-modal interference, thus enhancing unimodal learning sufficiency. Experimental results demonstrate that
our method can be seamlessly integrated with
existing approaches, improving accuracy by approximately 6.50%↑ on CREMAD and 3.41%↑
on Kinetic-Sounds, without training set expansion or additional computational overhead during
inference. The source code is available at Data
Remixing.

Initial Data Distribution
Directions are interfered
with by the other modality.

Decouple Multimodal Data

Reassemble Unimodal Data

Directions are still
being interfered with.

Directions are
NOT interfered
with.

Batch A

Batch A

NEW Batch A

Mask the strong modality
of each sample pair.

Batch B
▲: Modality 1 (the strong modality)

Batch B
■: Modality 2 (the weak modality)

* The weak modality is exposed to more
samples.

⊕: Optimization center of Modality 1

NEW Batch B

: Optimization center of Modality 2

Same colors represent different modalities from a single multimodal data pair.
Column 3 illustrates the composition of modalities within batches, not the batch size.

Figure 1. We decouple the multimodal data to assign samples to
each modality’s training and then reassemble the inputs to control
the consistency of modalities within the batch. By regulating
the number of samples, we mitigate modality laziness, and by
adjusting the batch composition, we alleviate modality clash.

perception and decision-making capabilities of models by
integrating data from diverse modalities, including vision,
sound, and text (Zhu et al., 2024). However, existing multimodal learning methods often face challenges in fully integrating rich multimodal knowledge across different modalities. Due to the inherent differences in data representation
and distribution across modalities, their optimization trajectories differ significantly, resulting in imbalanced learning
when multiple modalities are jointly trained under a unified
objective. Specifically, multimodal models often prioritize
learning the most discriminative features from the strong
modality, suppressing the training of the weak modality
and causing it to become lazy, known as modality laziness
(Wang et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022; Du et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning (Ngiam et al., 2011) is a rapidly evolving field in artificial intelligence, aimed at enhancing the
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education,
China 3 College of Computer Science, Beijing University of
Technology, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Hao Chen
<haochen303@seu.edu.cn>.

Several methods have been proposed to address these issues. Some focus on alleviating modality laziness by enforcing the weak modality through modality-specific optimization objectives, such as adjusting task-specific supervision
(Wang et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023), introducing prototype learning (Fan et al., 2023), or using

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

