Goal-Oriented Skill Abstraction for Offline Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning

Jinmin He 1 2 Kai Li 1 2 Yifan Zang 1 2 Haobo Fu 3 Qiang Fu 3 Junliang Xing 4 Jian Cheng 1 5

Abstract

Task Set

Offline multi-task reinforcement learning aims
to learn a unified policy capable of solving multiple tasks using only pre-collected task-mixed
datasets, without requiring any online interaction
with the environment. However, it faces significant challenges in effectively sharing knowledge
across tasks. Inspired by the efficient knowledge
abstraction observed in human learning, we propose Goal-Oriented Skill Abstraction (GO-Skill),
a novel approach designed to extract and utilize
reusable skills to enhance knowledge transfer
and task performance. Our approach uncovers
reusable skills through a goal-oriented skill extraction process and leverages vector quantization to
construct a discrete skill library. To mitigate class
imbalances between broadly applicable and taskspecific skills, we introduce a skill enhancement
phase to refine the extracted skills. Furthermore,
we integrate these skills using hierarchical policy learning, enabling the construction of a highlevel policy that dynamically orchestrates discrete
skills to accomplish specific tasks. Extensive experiments on diverse robotic manipulation tasks
within the MetaWorld benchmark demonstrate the
effectiveness and versatility of GO-Skill.

door-open

drawer-open

Unicycle Motorcycle
Grab Handle
Bicycle

Automobile

button-press

coffee-button

Balance
Press Button
Pedal
bin-picking

Ignition
(a) Skill Set in Vehicles

pick-out-of-hole

Pick Up
(b) Skill Set in Manipulation

Figure 1. Skill sets shared across different domains. (a) Skill set
for human learning to operate four types of vehicles: bicycles and
motorcycles share the skill of balancing on two wheels; unicycles
and bicycles share the pedal-driven skill; motorcycles and automobiles share the ignition-to-move skill. (b) Skill set in robotic
manipulation tasks: grabbing various handles, pressing buttons at
different heights, and picking up objects from diverse locations.

address these challenges, offline RL (Levine et al., 2020) has
emerged as a data-driven approach, enabling policy learning entirely from pre-collected datasets, thereby eliminating
the need for real-time interaction. Recent advancements in
offline RL have expanded its applicability to single-task
domains, such as robotics (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; 2021)
and healthcare (Guez et al., 2008; Killian et al., 2020). In
contrast, offline multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL)
seeks to effectively master a set of offline RL tasks using the
pre-collected task-mixed dataset. Joint multi-task learning
generally enhances adaptability and performance compared
to training each task individually.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant
progress in recent decades, demonstrating its effectiveness
in diverse domains such as game playing (Mnih et al., 2015;
Ye et al., 2020) and robotic control (Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Levine et al., 2016). However, its deployment in real-world
scenarios is often limited by the high costs and risks associated with directly interacting with the environment. To
1

C2 DL, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 3 Tencent AI Lab 4 Tsinghua University 5 AiRiA. Correspondence to: Kai Li <kai.li@ia.ac.cn>, Junliang Xing <jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

A critical challenge in offline MTRL lies in effectively sharing knowledge between tasks. Recent research has proposed
some approaches by leveraging network parameter sharing, incorporating carefully designed architectures (Yang
et al., 2020; He et al., 2024b; Hu et al., 2024), task-specific

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

