What Limits Virtual Agent Application?
OmniBench: A Scalable Multi-Dimensional Benchmark for Essential Virtual
Agent Capabilities

Wendong Bu 1 2 * Yang Wu 2 * Qifan Yu 1 * Minghe Gao 1 Bingchen Miao 1 Zhenkui Zhang 1 Kaihang Pan 1
Yunfei Li 2 Mengze Li 3 Wei Ji 4 Juncheng Li 1 B Siliang Tang 1 Yueting Zhuang 1

Abstract

2024b; Gao et al., 2024a; Miao et al., 2025) have demonstrated promising performance in web navigation (Shen
et al., 2024), mobile device control (Ge et al., 2024), and
computer interaction (Hu et al., 2024). To explore real-world
values of visual agents, current research mainly evaluates
their performance based on offline trajectory similarity with
human demonstrations (Rawles et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024;
Deng et al., 2024) or by using expert-crafted functions in
interactive online environments (Xie et al., 2024; Zhou et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2022).

As multimodal large language models (MLLMs)
advance, MLLM-based virtual agents have
demonstrated remarkable performance. However, existing benchmarks face significant limitations, including uncontrollable task complexity, extensive manual annotation with limited scenarios, and a lack of multidimensional evaluation. In response to these challenges, we introduce OmniBench, a self-generating, crossplatform, graph-based benchmark with an automated pipeline for synthesizing tasks of controllable complexity through subtask composition. To
evaluate the diverse capabilities of virtual agents
on the graph, we further present OmniEval, a
multidimensional evaluation framework that includes subtask-level evaluation, graph-based metrics, and comprehensive tests across 10 capabilities. Our synthesized dataset contains 36k
graph-structured tasks across 20 scenarios, achieving a 91% human acceptance rate. Training on
our graph-structured data shows that it can more
efficiently guide agents compared to manually
annotated data. We conduct multidimensional
evaluations for various open-source and closedsource models, revealing their performance across
various capabilities and paving the way for future advancements. Our project is available at
https://omni-bench.github.io/.

However, these two types of benchmarks mentioned above
still have notable limitations: 1) Uncontrollable and fixed
task complexity. Existing benchmarks typically propose
tasks entirely rather than progressively with fine-grained
guidance, which results in uncontrollable and fixed task
complexity. Uncontrollable task complexity makes it hard
to design fine-grained test data for various capabilities, while
fixed complexity makes it challenging for benchmarks to
keep up with agents’ growing capabilities. 2) Extensive
manual labor and limited task scenarios. The existing benchmarks rely on manual annotations to synthesize
demonstration trajectories or evaluation functions, making
the cost of designing benchmarks unaffordable and hindering the expansion of scale. Moreover, the annotated data
with a limited amount is influenced by human prior experience, making it difficult to cover comprehensive scenarios. 3) Absence of multidimensional evaluation: Existing
benchmarks commonly evaluate agents based on the final
state of tasks, lacking an evaluation of the intermediate steps
in task execution. Additionally, the various capabilities required by virtual agents to complete tasks (e.g., planning,
instruction understanding, etc.) cannot be quantified by
coarse task success rates, failing to provide sufficient feedback for potential future improvements. In summary, an
ideal benchmark should include not only diverse task scenarios with controllable complexity, but also a comprehensive
evaluation across multiple dimensions.

1. Introduction
With the development of MLLMs (Fei et al., 2024c; Wu
et al., 2024a), recent MLLM-based virtual agents (Xu et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China 3 The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China 4 Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Juncheng Li
<junchengli@zju.edu.cn>.
2

To cost-effectively construct diverse task scenarios with
complexity at multiple granularities for comprehensive
agent evaluation, we propose a novel self-generating, graph-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

