Graph Inverse Style Transfer for Counterfactual Explainability

Bardh Prenkaj 1 2 * Efstratios Zaradoukas 1 * Gjergji Kasneci 1

Abstract
Counterfactual explainability seeks to uncover
model decisions by identifying minimal changes
to the input that alter the predicted outcome. This
task becomes particularly challenging for graph
data due to preserving structural integrity and semantic meaning. Unlike prior approaches that
rely on forward perturbation mechanisms, we introduce Graph Inverse Style Transfer (GIST), the
first framework to re-imagine graph counterfactual generation as a backtracking process, leveraging spectral style transfer. By aligning the global
structure with the original input spectrum and preserving local content faithfulness, GIST produces
valid counterfactuals as interpolations between
the input style and counterfactual content. Tested
on 8 binary and multi-class graph classification
benchmarks, GIST achieves a remarkable +7.6%
improvement in the validity of produced counterfactuals and significant gains (+45.5%) in faithfully explaining the true class distribution. Additionally, GIST’s backtracking mechanism effectively mitigates overshooting the underlying predictor’s decision boundary, minimizing the spectral differences between the input and the counterfactuals. These results challenge traditional
forward perturbation methods, offering a novel
perspective that advances graph explainability.

Figure 1. The “gist” of GIST. Starting from an initial graph
G ∈ G \ G ′ , we overshoot to the other side of Φ’s boundary
on a randomly chosen graph Gε ∈ G ′ . We then learn a reverse process to backtrack from Gε to a never-seen-before graph G∗ ∈ G ′
while imitating the global structure or style (Lstyle ) of G and maintaining faithful local structure and preserve content (Lcont ) with
Gε . Notice how Lstyle pulls the generation towards G, satisfying
the similarity condition in Equation (3). Meanwhile, Lcont pulls
G∗ to Gε since we do not want to cross the decision boundary
again and produce an invalid counterfactual.

equipping their users and service providers with explainable
components, usually post-hoc, allowing them to make informed and reliable decisions (Guidotti et al., 2018). However, deep neural networks, commonly used for generating predictions, often suffer from a lack of interpretability,
widely referred to as the black-box problem (Petch et al.,
2021), hindering their wide adoption in these domains. Regulations such as the GDPR (European Union, 2016) and the
EU AI Act (European Union, 2023) emphasize the demand
for models that provide interpretable and actionable insights
into their predictions. Alas, black-box models demonstrate
superior performance and generalization capabilities when
dealing with high-dimensional data to their inherently interpretable counterparts (Aragona et al., 2021; Diko et al.,
2025; Flaborea et al., 2023a;b; Prenkaj et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Explainability is no longer a luxury but a necessity.
(European Union, 2023)

High-stake domains such as healthcare (Amann et al., 2020),
finance (Černevičienė & Kabašinskas, 2024), and digital
forensics (Shamoo, 2025) have seen an abrupt interest in

Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al.,
2008) have achieved remarkable results in graph prediction tasks, such as community detection (Wu et al., 2022),
link prediction (Wei et al., 2022), and session-based recommendations (Wu et al., 2019). Despite their remarkable
performance, GNNs are black boxes, making them unsuitable for high-impact and high-risk scenarios. The literature

*

Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Munich, Germany
2
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Correspondence to: Bardh
Prenkaj <bardhprenkaj95@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

