Revisiting Differentially Private Algorithms for Decentralized Online Learning

Xiaoyu Wang 1 Wenhao Yang 2 Chang Yao 1 3 Mingli Song 3 Yuanyu Wan 1 3

Abstract

data. To be precise, it is commonly characterized as a repeated game between an adversary and n local learners
connected by an undirected graph G = ([n], E), where
E ⊆ [n] × [n] denotes the edge set. At each round t, each
local learner i ∈ [n] first needs to select a local decision
xi (t) from a feasible set K ⊆ Rd , and then receives a
local loss function ft,i (·) : K 7→ R determined by the adversary. The goal of each local learner i is to choose a
sequence of decisions to minimize
the regret in terms of the
Pn
global function ft (x) = j=1 ft,j (x) at each round t, i.e.,
PT
PT
RT,i = t=1 ft (xi (t)) − minx∈K t=1 ft (x), where T
is the number of total rounds.

Although the differential privacy (DP) of decentralized online learning has garnered considerable attention recently, existing algorithms are
unsatisfactory due to their inability to achieve
(ϵ, 0)-DP over all T rounds, recover the optimal regret in the non-private case, and maintain
the lightweight computation under complex constraints. To address these issues, we first propose
a new decentralized online learning algorithm satisfying (ϵ, 0)-DP over T rounds, and show
√ that
−1/4
−1 1/4
e
it can achieve O(n(ρ
+ ϵ ρ ) T ) and
−1/2
e
O(n(ρ
+ ϵ−1 )) regret bounds for convex and
strongly convex functions respectively, where n
is the number of local learners and ρ is the spectral gap of the communication matrix. As long as
√
ϵ = Ω( ρ), these bounds nearly match existing
lower bounds in the non-private case, which implies that (ϵ, 0)-DP of decentralized online learning may be ensured nearly for free. Our key idea
is to design a block-decoupled accelerated gossip
strategy that can be incorporated with the classical tree-based private aggregation, and also enjoys
a faster average consensus among local learners.
Furthermore, we develop a projection-free variant
of our algorithm to keep the efficiency under complex constraints. As a trade-off, the above regret
3/4
e
bounds degrade to O(n(T
+ ϵ−1 T 1/4 )) and
2/3
−1
e
O(n(T
+ ϵ )) respectively, which however
are even better than the existing private centralized projection-free online algorithm.

To this end, each local learner i needs to estimate global
information by communicating with its neighbors. Note
that as a common protocol, the communications between
these learners occur via only a single gossip step (Xiao &
Boyd, 2004) based on a weight matrix P ∈ Rn×n at each
round. Moreover, to make this problem more tractable, it
is common to assume that the decision set K and all local
loss functions ft,i (·) are convex. This setting is known as
decentralized online convex optimization (D-OCO), and has
been extensively studied (Yan et al., 2013; Hosseini et al.,
2013; Zhang et al., 2017; Wan et al.,
√ 2020; 2022; 2024a;b),
−1/4
−1/2
e
e
yielding nearly optimal O(nρ
T ) and O(nρ
) regret for convex and strongly convex functions, respectively,
where ρ < 1 is the spectral gap of P .1
It is worth noting that one critical appeal of D-OCO is the
intrinsic privacy-preserving property, as it prevents each
local learner from sharing any sensitive data directly (Yan
et al., 2013). However, for traditional D-OCO algorithms,
the privacy-preserving ability is limited in the sense that
they are still vulnerable to adversarial attacks, such as membership inference attack (Shokri et al., 2017) and model
inversion attack (Fredrikson et al., 2015). For this reason,
there has been a growing research interest (Li et al., 2018;
Hou et al., 2019; Lü et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Cheng
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024b) in designing D-OCO algorithms with differential privacy (DP), which prevents any
attacker from identifying whether a particular individual is
included in a dataset (Dwork et al., 2006).

1. Introduction
Decentralized online learning (Li et al., 2023) is a popular way to solve distributed applications with streaming
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo,
China 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 3 State Key Laboratory of
Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. Correspondence to: Yuanyu Wan <wanyy@zju.edu.cn>.

1

e notation hides constant factors as well as the polyThe O(·)
logarithmic factors.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

