Causal Effect Identification in lvLiNGAM from Higher-Order Cumulants

Daniele Tramontano 1 Yaroslav Kivva 2 Saber Salehkaleybar 3 Negar Kiyavash 2 Mathias Drton 1 4

Abstract

is associated with a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Each vector component is associated with a node in the graph and
is a function of the random variables corresponding to its
parents in the graph and some exogenous noise.

This paper investigates causal effect identification
in latent variable Linear Non-Gaussian Acyclic
Models (lvLiNGAM) using higher-order cumulants, addressing two prominent setups that are
challenging in the presence of latent confounding: (1) a single proxy variable that may causally
influence the treatment and (2) underspecified instrumental variable cases where fewer instruments
exist than treatments. We prove that causal effects
are identifiable with a single proxy or instrument
and provide corresponding estimation methods.
Experimental results demonstrate the accuracy
and robustness of our approaches compared to
existing methods, advancing the theoretical and
practical understanding of causal inference in linear systems with latent confounders.

In general, latent confounders, i.e., unobserved variables
affecting the treatment and the outcome of interest, often
render the causal effect non-identifiable from the observational distribution (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006). However, in
some cases and under further assumptions on the causal
mechanisms, the causal effect may still be identifiable from
observational data (Barber et al., 2022).
Linear models are among the most well-studied mechanisms
and serve as a foundational abstraction in many scientific
disciplines because they offer simple qualitative interpretations and can be learned with moderate sample sizes (Pe’er
& Hacohen, 2011, Principle 1). When the exogenous noises
in a linear SCM are Gaussian, the entire distributional information is contained in the variables’ covariance matrix.
Consequently, the higher-order cumulants of the distribution
are uninformative (Marcinkiewicz, 1939, Thm. 2). As a result, the causal structure and other causal quantities are often
not identifiable from mere observational data. For instance,
in the context of causal structure learning, this means the
causal graph is identifiable only up to an equivalence class
(e.g., Drton, 2018, §10). This motivated the widespread use
of the linear non-Gaussian acyclic model (LiNGAM).

1. Introduction
Predicting the impact of an unseen intervention in a system is a crucial challenge in many fields, such as medicine
(Sanchez et al., 2022; Michoel & Zhang, 2023), policy evaluation (Athey & Imbens, 2017), fair decision-making (Kilbertus et al., 2017), and finance (de Prado, 2023). Randomized
experiments/interventional studies are the gold standard for
addressing this challenge but are often infeasible due to a
variety of reasons, such as ethical concerns or prohibitively
high costs. Thus, when merely observational data is available, additional assumptions on the underlying causal system are needed to compensate for the lack of interventional
data. The field of causal inference seeks to formalize such
assumptions. One notable approach in causal inference is
modeling causal relationships through structural causal models (SCM) (Pearl, 2009). In this framework, a random vector

The seminal work of Shimizu et al. (2006) showed that in
the setting of LiNGAM, the true underlying causal graph
is uniquely identifiable when all the variables are observed.
Since then, a rich literature on this topic has emerged, focusing mainly on the identification and the estimation of
the causal graph; see, e.g., Adams et al. (2021); Shimizu
(2022); Yang et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023); Wang &
Drton (2023) for recent results that allow for the presence
of hidden variables.

1
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 2 Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Netherlands 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning,
Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Daniele Tramontano
<daniele.tramontano@tum.de>.

Within the LiNGAM literature, causal effect identification
has received less attention; a complete characterization of
the identifiable causal effects was provided only recently
by Tramontano et al. (2024b). The drawback of this characterization is that it is based on solving an overcomplete
independent component analysis (OICA) problem, known
to be non-separable (Eriksson & Koivunen, 2004). Hence,
the approach of Tramontano et al. (2024b) does not translate

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

