Emergent Response Planning in LLMs

Zhichen Dong∗ 1 Zhanhui Zhou∗ 2 Zhixuan Liu 1 Chao Yang 1 Chaochao Lu 1

Abstract

Prompt 𝑥: Write a science fiction story of an animal character.

In this work, we argue that large language models (LLMs), though trained to predict only the
next token, exhibit emergent planning behaviors:
their hidden representations encode future outputs beyond the next token. Through simple
probing, we demonstrate that LLM prompt representations encode global attributes of their entire
responses, including structure attributes (e.g., response length, reasoning steps), content attributes
(e.g., character choices in storywriting, multiplechoice answers at the end of response), and behavior attributes (e.g., answer confidence, factual
consistency). In addition to identifying response
planning, we explore how it scales with model
size across tasks and how it evolves during generation. The findings that LLMs plan ahead for
the future in their hidden representations suggest
potential applications for improving transparency
and generation control.

LLM
Input

Probing Hidden
Representations

Layer 0

…

𝐻!!

…

𝐻!"

…

𝐻!#

"

Layer 𝑙$

📏 Response Length:

~150 Token

"

🦊 Character Choice:

Layer 𝑙&…

Hidden
Represent
-ations

Generate the
Next Token

𝑡=0
Once

🎯Answer Confidence:
High (Prompt Adherence)

…

Layer 𝐿

Timeline

Fox

"

Layer 𝑙%

Generation

Anticipated Future
Output Attributes

MLP
Probes

Structure / Content / Behavior
Attributes

Anticipate
Future Outputs
at 𝒕 = 𝟎

…
𝑡"
𝑡#
𝑡=1 …
𝑡!
…
upon … a fox named … exit the spaceship … .[EOS]

Figure 1. Illustration of probing LLMs for emergent response planning. After processing a prompt, hidden representations (H) are
extracted from the LLM’s layers. MLP probes analyze these representations to predict future global attributes, including structure
(length), content (“Fox”), and behavior attributes (answer confidence). LLMs can anticipate their future outputs—like the “Fox”
appearing at ta or the final length at tN —long before generation.

1. Introduction

the model’s internal plan for outputs.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated powerful capabilities across various tasks (Brown et al., 2020;
Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Anthropic,
2024). However, their next-token-prediction training objective leads to the view that they generate text through local, per-token prediction, without considering future outputs
beyond the next immediate token (Bachmann & Nagarajan, 2024; Cornille et al., 2024) . This makes controlling
the generation process challenging: we are blind to the
model’s output tendency until keywords or the full response
appear. While prompt engineering and inference-time interventions (Liu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024)
can guide responses, they lack insight and transparency into

In this work, we argue that LLMs, though trained to predict
only the next token, display emergent planning behaviors:
their hidden representations encode their future outputs beyond just the next token. Specifically, we observe that LLM
prompt representations encode interesting global attributes
of their upcoming responses. We call this phenomenon response planning and classify these global attributes into
three categories: structure attributes (e.g., response length,
reasoning steps), content attributes (e.g., character choices
in storywriting, multiple-choice answers at the end of response), and behavior attributes (e.g., answer confidence,
factual consistency).

*

We empirically identify response planning by training simple probes on LLM prompt representations to predict the
global attributes of their upcoming responses. We find
that these probes achieve non-trivial prediction accuracy,
providing strong evidence that LLMs plan at least part of
their entire response in advance when they read the prompt.
Through further ablations, we find that planning abilities
positively scale with model size, peak at the beginning and
end of responses, share certain planning patterns across

1

Equal contribution Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Work done while at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Chao Yang <yangchao@pjlab.org.cn>,
Zhichen Dong <dongzhichen@pjlab.org.cn>, Zhanhui Zhou
<asap.zzhou@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

