Position: Political Neutrality in AI Is Impossible —
But Here Is How to Approximate It

Jillian Fisher 1 Ruth E. Appel 2 Chan Young Park 3 Yujin Potter 4 Liwei Jiang 3 Taylor Sorensen 3
Shangbin Feng 3 Yulia Tsvetkov 3 Margaret E. Roberts 5 Jennifer Pan 2 Dawn Song 4 Yejin Choi 6

Abstract
AI systems often exhibit political bias, influencing users’ opinions and decisions. While political neutrality—defined as the absence of bias—is
often seen as an ideal solution for fairness and
safety, this position paper argues that true political
neutrality is neither feasible nor universally desirable due to its subjective nature and the biases
inherent in AI training data, algorithms, and user
interactions. However, inspired by Joseph Raz’s
philosophical insight that “neutrality [...] can be
a matter of degree” (Raz, 1986), we argue that
striving for some neutrality remains essential for
promoting balanced AI interactions and mitigating user manipulation. Therefore, we use the term
“approximation” of political neutrality to shift the
focus from unattainable absolutes to achievable,
practical proxies. We propose eight techniques
for approximating neutrality across three levels
of conceptualizing AI, examining their trade-offs
and implementation strategies. In addition, we
explore two concrete applications of these approximations to illustrate their practicality. Finally, we
assess our framework on current large language
models (LLMs) at the output level, providing a
demonstration of how it can be evaluated. This
work seeks to advance nuanced discussions of
political neutrality in AI and promote the development of responsible, aligned language models.

Ecosystem-Level

System-Level

Output-Level

Neutrality Through
Diversity

Uniform Neutrality

Refusal

“The election is on
Tuesday”

Location:
CA

Location:
TX

Re ective Neutrality
Liberal
User

Conservative
User

Pros of gun
control
include…

Cons of gun
control
include…

System Transparency
Economic
Social
fl

“I cannot ful ll this
request.”

Avoidance
“To decide whether to
support this law,
consider…”

Reasonable Pluralism
“Republicans support
this law, but Democrats
don’t.”

Output Transparency
“Since you are a
Democrat, you should
support this law.”

fi

Figure 1: Approximations of political neutrality in AI by levels:
the output-level focuses on a model’s response, the system-level
pertains to all input-output pairs of a single AI system, and the
ecosystem-level encompasses all AI models in use.

1. Introduction

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 2 Department of Communication, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 3 Department of Computer Science,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 4 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 5 Department of Political Science, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA 6 Department of
Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Correspondence to: Jillian Fisher <jrfish@uw.edu>.

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have been
repeatedly shown to exhibit political bias (Feng et al., 2023;
Röttger et al., 2024a; Yang et al., 2024; Potter et al., 2024b).
Moreover, recent studies have shown that interacting with
politically biased LLMs can shape users’ political opinions
and influence their decision-making (Fisher et al., 2025; Li,
2023; Hackenburg & Margetts, 2024; Durmus et al., 2024a;
Potter et al., 2024b). Even so, these models are widely integrated in everyday applications, ranging from political news
summarization (Zhang et al., 2024; Goyal et al., 2023) to
detecting fake news (Chen & Shu, 2024), raising ethical
concerns about independent opinion formation of users. A
seemingly logical solution is to develop more politically
neutral models (Rotaru et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025; Durmus et al., 2024b; Pit et al., 2024). However, in this paper
we argue that true political neutrality is neither fully
attainable nor universally desirable. This brings us to the
critical question: If true political neutrality is unattainable,
how should we address the problem of political bias in AI?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In the context of this paper, political neutrality means being
impartial, that is, not favoring some political viewpoints
over others. The theoretical impossibility of achieving ab-

*

1

