Bayesian Inference for Correlated Human Experts and Classifiers

Markelle Kelly 1 Alex Boyd 2 Sam Showalter 3 Mark Steyvers 4 Padhraic Smyth 1

Abstract

and expert predictions when both are available (Steyvers
et al., 2022; Choudhary et al., 2023).

Applications of machine learning often involve
making predictions based on both model outputs
and the opinions of human experts. In this context,
we investigate the problem of querying experts
for class label predictions, using as few human
queries as possible, and leveraging the class probability estimates of pre-trained classifiers. We
develop a general Bayesian framework for this
problem, modeling expert correlation via a joint
latent representation, enabling simulation-based
inference about the utility of additional expert
queries, as well as inference of posterior distributions over unobserved expert labels. We apply
our approach to two real-world medical classification problems, as well as to CIFAR-10H and
ImageNet-16H, demonstrating substantial reductions relative to baselines in the cost of querying
human experts while maintaining high prediction
accuracy.

In this paper we focus on the problem of predicting the
class labels that a group of human experts will produce,
leveraging the output of pre-trained classifiers. Consider
the following example: a radiology department at a hospital has five expert radiologists, who are responsible for
classifying X-ray images of patients into one of K classes.
The experts do not necessarily agree on each image, given
that the images are noisy and that the experts have different
backgrounds and levels of expertise. Ideally, for each X-ray,
the hospital would elicit class labels from all five radiologists and aggregate their predictions (e.g., via majority vote)
(Owen & Grofman, 1986; Surowiecki, 2005). From the hospital’s perspective this aggregate acts as ground truth, but it
is too expensive to obtain on a routine basis. Now suppose
that the hospital gains access to a pre-trained machine learning classifier with a minimal query cost per image. A natural
question in this context is: how can the classifier be used to
learn a policy that can minimize the average querying cost
while accurately predicting the final majority vote?
We address this problem in a general setting for K-way classification with H experts, where the experts produce hard
labels—i.e., “votes.” Examples x are generated in an IID
manner from some underlying unknown distribution p(x).
Also available per example x are K-ary class probabilities
from one or more pre-trained classifiers. Conditioned on
model predictions and observed expert votes, we wish to
predict the remaining unobserved expert votes, and further,
to predict an aggregate function of these votes, e.g., corresponding to expert consensus or their unanimous agreement
(or not). Throughout the paper we will primarily focus on
the consensus function, and will use the term “consensus” to
refer to the class label with the most votes (with ties broken
randomly), which can include cases where the consensus
vote is not a strict majority (e.g., with three labels and ten
experts the consensus could be a label that gets four votes,
with the other two getting three votes each).

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are now commonly deployed
across a variety of real-world applications, including medical diagnosis, autonomous driving, and scientific discovery.
In many of these applications there is significant interest in
developing semi-autonomous workflows, where the predictive abilities of both human experts and machine learning
models are harnessed to perform more effectively in combination than either experts or models on their own (Beck et al.,
2018; Bien et al., 2018; De-Arteaga et al., 2020; Jarrett et al.,
2022; Gal et al., 2022; Straitouri et al., 2023; Corvelo Benz
& Rodriguez, 2024). A number of different problems have
been explored in this context, including building models
that “learn to defer” to human experts (Madras et al., 2018;
Verma & Nalisnick, 2022) and optimally combining model
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Irvine, USA 2 GE HealthCare, USA 3 Stripe, USA 4 Department of
Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine, USA. Correspondence to: Markelle Kelly <kmarke@uci.edu>.

The classifiers do not need to be trained specifically to predict the votes of the H experts. In fact, our setup is particularly well-suited to situations where the classifier was
trained on some labeled dataset that was generated independently from the H experts, with the potential for significant

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

