Do We Really Need Message Passing in Brain Network Modeling?

Liang Yang 1 Yuwei Liu 1 Jiaming Zhuo 1 Di Jin 2 Chuan Wang 3 Zhen Wang 4 Xiaochun Cao 5

Abstract

1. Introductions
Brain network analysis provides a deep understanding of
human brain organizations and assists in neurological disease diagnosis (Fornito et al., 2016; Cui et al., 2022). As a
general-purpose language to model complex relationships,
the research on graphs has a long history, ranging from
graph theory (Bondy & Murty, 2008), to network science
(Barabási, 2013), to network embedding (Cui et al., 2019).
Along with the concept of the brain network, graph mining is
widely used in brain network analysis, including concepts,
characteristics, and models (Fornito et al., 2016; Chung,
2019). Network motif (Sporns & Kötter, 2004), small-world
property (Bassett & Bullmore, 2006), and modularity (Meunier et al., 2009) are identified from the perspective of characteristics, while the persistent homology (Bendich et al.,
2016), community detection (Garcia et al., 2018) and null
model (Váša & Mišić, 2022) are employed to analyze brain
network from the perspective of the model.

Brain network analysis plays a critical role in
brain disease prediction and diagnosis. Graph
mining tools have made remarkable progress.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) and Transformers, which rely on the message-passing scheme,
recently dominated this field due to their powerful
expressive ability on graph data. Unfortunately,
by considering brain network construction using
pairwise Pearson’s coefficients between any pairs
of ROIs, model analysis and experimental verification reveal that the message-passing under both
GNNs and Transformers can NOT be fully explored and exploited. Surprisingly, this paper observes the significant performance and efficiency
enhancements of the Hadamard product compared
to the matrix product, which is the matrix form
of message passing, in processing the brain network. Inspired by this finding, a novel Brain
Quadratic Network (BQN) is proposed by incorporating quadratic networks, which possess better
universal approximation properties. Moreover,
theoretical analysis demonstrates that BQN implicitly performs community detection along with
representation learning. Extensive evaluations
verify the superiority of the proposed BQN compared to the message-passing-based brain network
modeling. Source code is available at https:
//github.com/LYWJUN/BQN-demo.

Graph Learning (Xia et al., 2021) plays an important role in
diverse machine learning fields. (1) For tasks on graph data,
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which combine graph
topology and node attribute for representation, recently
dominated this field (Wu et al., 2021b). They follow the
message-passing scheme (Gilmer et al., 2017) by propagating node representation as a message over the graph. (2) For
the domains without explicit graph structure, such as natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV),
implicit graph learning also shows amazing performance.
The key component Multi-Heads Self-Attention (MHSA)
in Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and its variant ViT
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) constructs a fully connected graph
between all token pairs and performs a holistic aggregation
(Section 3.3). In conclusion, the message-passing scheme
dominates many machine learning fields.

1

Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Calculation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology,
Tianjin, China 2 Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing
and Application, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, China 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing JiaoTong University, Beijing, China 4 School of
Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), School
of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
China 5 School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence
to: Jiaming Zhuo <jiaming.zhuo@outlook.com>.

Interactions between brain regions are regarded as the key
factors for neural development and disorder analysis. Functional MRI (fMRI) provides valuable information for exploring connectivity by capturing correlations between signal
sequences of brain regions. Thus, it is direct to analyze
brain networks, which are often constructed using pairwise
Pearson correlation coefficients between any pairs of ROIs,
using powerful graph learning tools, such as GNNs (Li
et al., 2021; Cui et al., 2022; Bessadok et al., 2023) and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

