LOB-Bench: Benchmarking Generative AI for Finance
– an Application to Limit Order Book Data

Peer Nagy * 1 2 Sascha Frey * 3 Kang Li 4 Bidipta Sarkar 2 Svitlana Vyetrenko 5 Stefan Zohren 1
Anisoara Calinescu 3 Jakob Foerster 2

Abstract

frequency domain due to high noise, heavy tails, and multiagent interactions. Generative AI (GenAI) is currently revolutionizing different fields, ranging from natural language
processing to image generation and real world applications.
Perhaps surprisingly, the backbone of these methods is simply self-supervised pre-training on large datasets using a
next-token prediction loss on autoregressive sequence models (Nie et al., 2024; Dubey & et. al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024).

While financial data presents one of the most
challenging and interesting sequence modelling
tasks due to high noise, heavy tails, and strategic interactions, progress in this area has been
hindered by the lack of consensus on quantitative evaluation paradigms. To address this, we
present LOB-Bench, a benchmark, implemented
in python, designed to evaluate the quality and
realism of generative message-by-order data for
limit order books (LOB) in the LOBSTER format. Our framework measures distributional differences in conditional and unconditional statistics between generated and real LOB data, supporting flexible multivariate statistical evaluation.
The benchmark also includes commonly used
LOB statistics such as spread, order book volumes, order imbalance, and message inter-arrival
times, along with scores from a trained discriminator network. Lastly, LOB-Bench contains “market impact metrics”, i.e. the cross-correlations
and price response functions for specific events
in the data. We benchmark generative autoregressive state-space models, a (C)GAN, as well as a
parametric LOB model, and find that the autoregressive GenAI approach beats traditional model
classes. Code and generated data are available at:
https://lobbench.github.io/.

Recently, Nagy et al. (2023) applied this paradigm to limit
order books (LOB), the mechanism through which stock
markets keep track of buy and sell orders to determine
any-time prices. Specifically, in contrast to prior works,
which model only high level features (Cont et al., 2010;
Coletta et al., 2022; Byrd et al., 2020), this approach learns
a token-level distribution over messages in the LOBSTER
dataset (Huang & Polak, 2011).
An accurate, low level generative model of the financial system is extremely valuable from a societal and commercial
point of view. For example, it could unlock better mechanism design, stability analysis, or learned-algorithms (e.g.
order execution (Frey et al., 2023)) by providing counterfactuals.
A key question then is how to determine the realism and
trustworthiness of GenAI, and of other generative financial models. On the one hand, for high-level approaches
and “old school” agent-based modelling (Byrd et al., 2020;
Chiarella & Iori, 2002; Paulin, 2019; Llacay & Peffer, 2018)
the evaluation is usually based on a qualitative analysis of

1. Introduction
Practitioners have long been interested in high-quality synthetic financial data, which is especially difficult in the high*
Equal contribution 1 Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative
Finance, University of Oxford 2 Foerster Lab for AI Research,
University of Oxford 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford 4 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford 5 J.P. Morgan AI Research. Correspondence to: Peer Nagy
<peer.nagy@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Figure 1: Schematic of LOB-Bench methodology for conditional distributional evaluation
1

