Position: Uncertainty Quantification Needs Reassessment
for Large-language Model Agents

Michael Kirchhof 1 Gjergji Kasneci 2 Enkelejda Kasneci 2

Abstract
Large-language models (LLMs) and chatbot
agents are known to provide wrong outputs at
times, and it was recently found that this can never
be fully prevented. Hence, uncertainty quantification plays a crucial role, aiming to quantify
the level of ambiguity in either one overall number or two numbers for aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainty. This position paper argues that this
traditional dichotomy of uncertainties is too limited for the open and interactive setup that LLM
agents operate in when communicating with a
user, and that we need to research avenues that
enrich uncertainties in this novel scenario. We review the literature and find that popular definitions
of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties directly
contradict each other and lose their meaning in interactive LLM agent settings. Hence, we propose
three novel research directions that focus on uncertainties in such human-computer interactions:
Underspecification uncertainties, for when users
do not provide all information or define the exact task at the first go, interactive learning, to ask
follow-up questions and reduce the uncertainty
about the current context, and output uncertainties, to utilize the rich language and speech space
to express uncertainties as more than mere numbers. We expect that these new ways of dealing
with and communicating uncertainties will lead
to LLM agent interactions that are more transparent, trustworthy, and intuitive.

Epistemic Uncertainty

Aleatoric Uncertainty

Uncertainty due to the model
not knowing something,
which can be reduced.

Uncertainty due to the data
being fundamentally unclear,
which cannot be reduced.

Apple Confidential–Internal Use Only

Figure 1. The traditional view on uncertainties suggests a clear
black-and-white dichotomy between aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. We argue that recent developments show this dichotomy
is not that simple, and not helpful for developing LLM agents.

reiro et al., 2023), that is, to make up a response that is
incorrect. Recent research has shown that this behaviour
is rooted in their very generative nature, such that we can
not expect LLM agents to stop hallucinating in the future
(Banerjee et al., 2024; Kalai & Vempala, 2024; Xu et al.,
2024b). Instead, there are numerous approaches to quantify the uncertainty that an LLM agent has in each of its
statement, in order to bring transparency to which responses
can be trusted and which require further investigation (Kadavath et al., 2022; Kapoor et al., 2024). Such uncertainty
quantification methods either output one total uncertainty
or, more recently, attempt to output individual values for
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty (Wimmer et al., 2023;
Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021). Epistemic uncertainty
is reducible uncertainty, such as when an agent could be
trained with more data from new regions of the input manifold to produce more definite outputs. Aleatoric uncertainty
is irreducible uncertainty, when the data itself is too noisy or
lacks features to make predictions that come without a risk
of error, regardless of how good the model is. While these
uncertainty quantification approaches that assign numerical
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty scalars to each output
have been useful more structured tasks such as classification (Murphy, 2012), we argue that they fail to capture the
nuanced, multi-turn, and interactive nature of LLM-agent
uncertainty in real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Large language model (LLM) agents such as chatbots are
notorious for hallucinating at times (Bang et al., 2023; Guer1

University of Tübingen. Now at Apple. 2 Technical University
of Munich.. Correspondence to: Michael Kirchhof <mail address
see website>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

LLM agents can and must handle uncertainties in a more
advanced way. This is because they leave traditional well1

2

