GRAM: A Generative Foundation Reward Model
for Reward Generalization
Chenglong Wang 1 Yang Gan 1 Yifu Huo 1 Yongyu Mu 1 Qiaozhi He 1 Murun Yang 1 Bei Li 2 Tong Xiao 1 3
Chunliang Zhang 1 Tongran Liu 4 Jingbo Zhu 1 3
Code
Datasets&Models

Abstract

approach is to learn reward models that capture human
preferences and fine-tune the LLMs to generate outputs
that align with these preferences. Reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF) is an early example of such
approaches (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020).
Now, work in this area is underway more broadly. One
recent example is a series of models by OpenAI (2024), in
which human-like thinking and complex reasoning can be
achieved through large-scale reinforcement learning.

In aligning large language models (LLMs), reward models have played an important role, but
are standardly trained as discriminative models
and rely only on labeled human preference data.
In this paper, we explore methods that train reward models using both unlabeled and labeled
data. Building on the generative models in LLMs,
we develop a generative reward model that is first
trained via large-scale unsupervised learning and
then fine-tuned via supervised learning. We also
show that by using label smoothing, we are in fact
optimizing a regularized pairwise ranking loss.
This result, in turn, provides a new view of training reward models, which links generative models
and discriminative models under the same class
of training objectives. The outcome of these techniques is a foundation reward model, which can
be applied to a wide range of tasks with little or no
further fine-tuning effort. Extensive experiments
show that this model generalizes well across several tasks, including response ranking, reinforcement learning from human feedback, and task
adaptation with fine-tuning, achieving significant
performance improvements over several strong
baseline models.

While quite successful, reward models are costly to apply.
This is in part because of the complexity of reinforcement
learning algorithms and in part because of the difficulty in
annotating training data. There has been much work on
simplifying the use of reward models and improving alignment efficiency. One strand of research explores more direct
ways to align LLMs with human feedback, employing either
supervised fine-tuning methods (Rafailov et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023) or inference-time alignment methods (Lee
et al., 2021). Another strand of research focuses on replacing human feedback with AI-generated feedback, which is
cheaper to obtain (Dubois et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024).
However, although applying reward models to LLMs is
a compelling direction, training these models still relies
heavily on labeled data. For example, we generally need to
collect or create a significant amount of task-specific human
preference data and optimize the models with considerable
training effort (Stiennon et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2024). If
we think about the problem a bit closer from the LLM
perspective, we might expect that reward models can be
trained on unlabeled data in such a way as to produce a
single pre-trained reward model that can be easily adapted
to tasks of interest. This would change the way we align
LLMs: we can pre-train a foundation model that assembles
a broad general knowledge of how to reward, and a single
such pre-trained model can be deployed for many particular
rewarding tasks with only small costs of further fine-tuning
or prompting.

1. Introduction
Reward models are a fundamental concept in reinforcement
learning and define what an agent optimizes for. For large
language models (LLMs), fine-tuning with reward models
is a common post-training step to align the model outputs
with desired behaviors and objectives. A widely adopted
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern
University, Shenyang, China 2 Meituan Inc. 3 NiuTrans Research,
Shenyang, China 4 CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science,
Institute of Psychology, CAS, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Chenglong Wang <clwang1119@gmail.com>, Tong Xiao
<xiaotong@mail.neu.edu.cn>.

This idea is appealing but challenging. The difficulty arises
from the fact that the systems cannot directly generate their
own supervision signals from text for training reward models, as self-supervision methods do. One approach is to

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

