ELoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation for Equivariant GNNs

Chen Wang 1 2 Siyu Hu 1 2 Guangming Tan 1 2 Weile Jia 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based potentials hold significant promise in
addressing the accuracy-efficiency trade-off in DFT calculations and can expand the spatial and temporal scales of
molecular dynamics simulations (Gong et al., 2023). A variety of deep learning potentials (Behler & Parrinello, 2007;
Smith et al., 2017; Schütt et al., 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2018; Unke & Meuwly, 2019; Unke et al.,
2021; Klicpera et al., 2021) have demonstrated the ability
to predict total energies and atomic forces for given material structures. Recently, with the continuous generation of
ab initio datasets and a deeper understanding of symmetry,
pre-trained potentials have emerged in large numbers, such
as MACE (Batatia et al., 2022b), M3GNet (Chen & Ong,
2022), Equiformerv2 (Liao et al., 2023), Uni-Mol (Zhou
et al., 2023), CHGNet (Deng et al., 2023), SevenNet (Park
et al., 2024), GPTFF (Xie et al., 2024), and Orb (Neumann
et al., 2024). Among these, equivariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) stand out as particularly effective for modeling physical systems. By leveraging equivariance, these
models achieve high performance, even with limited firstprinciples data (Satorras et al., 2021; Batzner et al., 2022;
Batatia et al., 2022b; Pelaez et al., 2024). This is particularly
valuable because generating first-principles training data is
often extremely resource intensive. Equivariant pre-trained
models have been increasingly employed in research in
finding symmetry-breaking order parameters (Smidt et al.,
2021) and predicting molecular properties (Miller et al.,
2020), phonon density of states (Chen et al., 2021), etc.

Pre-trained interatomic potentials have become
a new paradigm for atomistic materials simulations, enabling accurate and efficient predictions
across diverse chemical systems. Despite their
promise, fine-tuning is often required for complex tasks to achieve high accuracy. Traditional
parameter-efficient fine-tuning approaches are effective in NLP and CV. However, when applied to
SO(3) equivariant pre-trained interatomic potentials, these methods will inevitably break equivariance—a critical property for preserving physical
symmetries. In this paper, we introduce ELoRA
(Equivariant Low-Rank Adaptation), a novel finetuning method designed specifically for SO(3)
equivariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), the
backbones in multiple pre-trained interatomic potentials. ELoRA adopts a path-dependent decomposition for weights updating which offers two
key advantages: (1) it preserves SO(3) equivariance throughout the fine-tuning process, ensuring physically consistent predictions, and (2) it
leverages low-rank adaptations to significantly
improve data efficiency. We prove that ELoRA
maintains equivariance and demonstrate its effectiveness through comprehensive experiments. On
the rMD17 organic dataset, ELoRA achieves a
25.5% improvement in energy prediction accuracy and a 23.7% improvement in force prediction accuracy compared to full-parameter finetuning. Similarly, across 10 inorganic datasets,
ELoRA achieves average improvements of 12.3%
and 14.4% in energy and force predictions, respectively. Code will be made publicly available
at https://github.com/hyjwpk/ELoRA.

However, due to the diversity of material structures and the
significant variations of atomic interactions across different
materials, pre-trained interatomic potentials may not achieve
the desired accuracy when dealing with material structures
that are not well learned during training. Moreover, obtaining accurate labels for such configurations typically requires
costly first-principles calculations, which further limits the
diversity of data available for training. These potentials can
only be applied to general downstream tasks without finetuning. For example, the accuracy of pre-trained MACEMP (Batatia et al., 2023) is insufficient to study molecular
crystal polymorphs (Kaur et al., 2025).

1

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Siyu Hu
<husiyu@ict.ac.cn>, Guangming Tan <tgm@ict.ac.cn>, Weile
Jia <jiaweile@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Fine-tuning the pre-trained model with downstream data
helps refine the interatomic potential to better predictions.
1

