Arbitrarily-Conditioned Multi-Functional Diffusion for Multi-Physics Emulation

Da Long 1 Zhitong Xu 1 Guang Yang 2 Akil Narayan 2 3 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract

approaches (Zienkiewicz et al., 1977; Mitchell & Griffiths,
1980), while offering strong theoretical guarantees, are often
complex to implement and computationally expensive to
run. In contrast, machine learning-based surrogate models
— also known as emulators — are trained on simulation or
measurement data and can significantly reduce computational costs, making them a promising alternative (Kennedy
& O’Hagan, 2000; Razavi et al., 2012).

Modern physics simulation often involves multiple functions of interests, and traditional numerical approaches are known to be complex and
computationally costly. While machine learningbased surrogate models can offer significant cost
reductions, most focus on a single task, such
as forward prediction, and typically lack uncertainty quantification — an essential component
in many applications. To overcome these limitations, we propose Arbitrarily-Conditioned MultiFunctional Diffusion (ACM-FD), a versatile probabilistic surrogate model for multi-physics emulation. ACM-FD can perform a wide range of
tasks within a single framework, including forward prediction, various inverse problems, and
simulating data for entire systems or subsets of
quantities conditioned on others. Specifically, we
extend the standard Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) for multi-functional generation by modeling noise as Gaussian processes
(GP). We propose a random-mask based, zeroregularized denoising loss to achieve flexible and
robust conditional generation. We induce a Kronecker product structure in the GP covariance matrix, substantially reducing the computational cost
and enabling efficient training and sampling. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of ACM-FD across
several fundamental multi-physics systems. The
code is released at https://github.com/
BayesianAIGroup/ACM-FD.

1

However, modern physical simulations often involve multiple functions of interest, such as initial and boundary conditions, solution or state functions, parameter functions,
source functions, and more. Current machine learning-based
surrogate models, such as neural operators (Li et al., 2020a;
Lu et al., 2021; Kovachki et al., 2023), primarily focus on
a single prediction task, for instance, forward prediction
of the solution function. To perform other tasks, one typically needs to retrain a surrogate model from scratch. In
addition, most existing methods do not support uncertainty
quantification, which is important in practice. For example,
confidence intervals are important to assess the reliability of
emulation results, and in inverse problems, a posterior distribution is required since such problems are often ill-posed.
To address these limitations, we propose ArbitrarilyConditioned Multi-Functional Diffusion (ACM-FD), a versatile probabilistic surrogate model for multi-physics emulation. Within a single framework, ACM-FD can handle a
wide range of tasks, including forward prediction with different input functions, various inverse problems conditioned
on different levels of information, simulating data for entire
systems, and generating a subset of quantities of interest
conditioned on others. As a generative model, ACM-FD
produces predictive samples, naturally supporting uncertainty quantification across all contexts. The contributions
of our work are summarized as follows.

Introduction

• Multi-Functional Diffusion Framework: We propose a multi-functional diffusion framework based
on the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020). By modeling the noise
as multiple Gaussian processes (GPs), we perform diffusion and denoising in functional spaces, enabling
the generation of multiple functions required in multiphysics systems.
• Innovative Denoising Loss: We introduce a denois-

Physical simulation plays a crucial role in numerous scientific and engineering applications. Traditional numerical
1
Kahlert School of Computing, University of Utah 2 Department
of Mathematics, University of Utah 3 Scientific Computing and
Imaging Institute, University of Utah. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

