A Mixed-Curvature based Pre-training Paradigm for Multi-Task Vehicle
Routing Solver

Suyu Liu 1 Zhiguang Cao 2 Shanshan Feng 3 Yew-Soon Ong 1 4

Abstract

Kernighan-Helsgaun (LKH) (Lin & Kernighan, 1973; Helsgaun, 2017), Hybrid Genetic Search (HGS) (Vidal, 2022)
and OR-Tools (Perron & Didier, 2024). Despite the fact
that these solvers have achieved remarkable performances,
their reliance on hand-crafted rules and specialized domain
knowledge may severely limit their abilities to generalize to
more general problem types, especially the emerging VRP
variants. Additionally, these solvers may become computationally prohibitive when applied on large-scale instances.

Solving various types of vehicle routing problems (VRPs) using a unified neural solver has
garnered significant attentions in recent years. Despite their effectiveness, existing neural multi-task
solvers often fail to account for the geometric
structures inherent in different tasks, which may
result in suboptimal performance. To address
this limitation, we propose a curvature-aware pretraining framework. Specifically, we leverage
mixed-curvature spaces during the feature fusion
stage, encouraging the model to capture the underlying geometric properties of each instance.
Through extensive experiments, we evaluate the
proposed pre-training strategy on existing neural
multi-task solvers across a variety of testing scenarios. The results demonstrate that the curvatureaware pre-training approach not only enhances the
generalization capabilities of existing neural VRP
solvers on synthetic datasets but also improves
solution quality on real-world benchmarks.

On the other hand, deep learning based neural solvers such
as (Kool et al., 2019; Kwon et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023b;a;
Goh et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025) require minimal handcrafted rules and offer significantly much faster inference
speeds. Typically, following the architecture of POMO
(Kwon et al., 2020), these neural solvers often contain selfattention modules and utilize reinforcement learning as their
optimization algorithms. Besides, hard masks are integrated
into the attention mechanism to eliminate infeasible actions.
Despite their efficiency and flexibility, these solvers primarily address relatively simple VRPs, and extending current
frameworks to handle more complex problem types remains
as an under-explored area.
Recently, there has been a growing trend towards building multi-task foundation models for solving various types
of VRPs (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Berto et al.,
2024; Huang et al., 2025). Although these models have
demonstrated promising results, they largely overlook the
geometric structures that widely exist in different tasks. As
shown in Figure 1, VRP instances, despite being defined in
Euclidean coordinates, exhibit node-level curvature distributions that cannot be faithfully captured in flat spaces: the
Ollivier-Ricci curvature (defined in Eq. (15), Appendix.1)
which effectively quantifies geometric structures on discrete spaces like graphs or networks, reveals that almost
every node carries either negative or positive curvature, indicating that the underlying data contains structures in a
mixed-curvature space rather than a purely Euclidean one.
Specifically, we observe that nodes are frequently situated
in regions of either positive (contractive) or negative (expansive) curvature spaces, which correlate with delivery
patterns such as customer clustering or route divergence in
the delivery map (Figure 5, Appendix.1). All of these factors

1. Introduction
Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) owing to its broad applicability among various domains such as transportation
service (Ge et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2023a) and trajectory
planning (Dantzig & Ramser, 1959; Min, 1989), have garnered great attentions in recent years. However, because of
its NP-Hard complexity, obtaining optimal solutions within
a reasonable time is almost infeasible. Regarding to this,
several heuristic solvers have been proposed, such as Lin1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 School of Computing and Information
Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 3 Centre
for Frontier AI Research, The Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore 4 Centre for Frontier AI Research, Institute
of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore. Correspondence to: Zhiguang Cao
<zgcao@smu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

