Position: When Incentives Backfire, Data Stops Being Human

Sebastin Santy 1 Prasanta Bhattacharya 2 Manoel Horta Ribeiro 3 Kelsey Allen 4 Sewoong Oh 1

Abstract
Progress in AI has relied on human-generated
data, from annotator marketplaces to the wider
Internet. However, the widespread use of large
language models now threatens the quality and
integrity of human-generated data on these very
platforms. We argue that this issue goes beyond
the immediate challenge of filtering AI-generated
content – it reveals deeper flaws in how data collection systems are designed. Existing systems
often prioritize speed, scale, and efficiency at the
cost of intrinsic human motivation, leading to declining engagement and data quality. We propose
that rethinking data collection systems to align
with contributors’ intrinsic motivations – rather
than relying solely on external incentives – can
help sustain high-quality data sourcing at scale
while maintaining contributor trust and long-term
participation.

Figure 1. Perpetual Donkey Machine. It looks like the donkey
could walk forever with the carrot just out of reach. But it won’t,
not forever. Reward a task the donkey would never do otherwise,
and you get shortcuts – actions optimized only to reach the carrot.
Reward a task it already does, and you risk erasing the inner drive
that moved it in the first place – making it less donkey. Good
incentives shape action. Flawed ones break the actor.

rise of generative language models like ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2023), the very sources of human data that fueled prior
breakthroughs are getting destabilized. Contributors on
annotation platforms are increasingly relying on LLMs to
complete or expedite annotation tasks (Veselovsky et al.,
2023; 2025), while the broader Internet is inundated with
synthetic content (Brooks et al., 2024). As signals of authentic human behavior become harder to discern, the supply
of high-quality data that was once the bedrock of progress
in AI is at a risk of collapse. To compensate, much of ML
research has started to lean on synthetic data – either to emulate human annotations (Dubois et al., 2024) or to mimic
human behavior (Argyle et al., 2023; Park et al., 2022; 2023).
However, these approaches have yet to reach the highest
quality (Geng et al., 2024) and face significant challenges,
such as model collapse (Taori & Hashimoto, 2023; Shumailov et al., 2024), keeping the ember of human-generated
data still alive (Ashok & May, 2024).

1. Human Data in Crisis
Artificial Intelligence relies heavily on human-generated
data to develop ever more capable models and systems
that emulate human-like intelligent behavior. The primary sources of such data include: (1) human annotations
from crowdsourcing platforms (e.g., Amazon MTurk), and
(2) raw Internet data from communities like Wikipedia
and Reddit. These two sources underpinned the last
two major eras in AI: the deep learning era that began
with AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), powered by ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) built via MTurk; and the pretrained language model era ushered in by BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019) and enabled by large-scale Internet data.
This trajectory has reached an inflection point. With the
1
University of Washington, USA 2 Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR), 1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis, Singapore 138632, Republic of Singapore 3 Princeton University, USA
4
University of British Columbia. Correspondence to: Sebastin
Santy <ssanty@cs.washington.edu>.

We argue that the core issue is not new. Data collection
platforms have long struggled with declining contributor engagement and quality. But the advent of LLMs has amplified
these problems to the point where their continued viability
has become uncertain (Pieces, 2025). At the heart of this
crisis lies the question of human motivation: what drives
people to contribute high-quality data in the first place?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

