Avoiding Catastrophe in Online Learning by Asking for Help

Benjamin Plaut 1 Hanlin Zhu 1 Stuart Russell 1

Abstract

ble harm. In addition to the large-scale risks above, our
definition also covers smaller-scale (yet still unacceptable)
incidents such as serious medical errors (Rajpurkar et al.,
2022), crashing a robotic vehicle (Kohli & Chadha, 2020),
and discriminatory sentencing (Villasenor & Foggo, 2020).

Most learning algorithms with formal regret guarantees assume that all mistakes are recoverable
and essentially rely on trying all possible behaviors. This approach is problematic when some
mistakes are catastrophic, i.e., irreparable. We
propose an online learning problem where the
goal is to minimize the chance of catastrophe.
Specifically, we assume that the payoff in each
round represents the chance of avoiding catastrophe in that round and try to maximize the product
of payoffs (the overall chance of avoiding catastrophe) while allowing a limited number of queries to
a mentor. We also assume that the agent can transfer knowledge between similar inputs. We first
show that in general, any algorithm either queries
the mentor at a linear rate or is nearly guaranteed
to cause catastrophe. However, in settings where
the mentor policy class is learnable in the standard
online model, we provide an algorithm whose
regret and rate of querying the mentor both approach 0 as the time horizon grows. Although our
focus is the product of payoffs, we provide matching bounds for the typical additive regret. Conceptually, if a policy class is learnable in the absence
of catastrophic risk, it is learnable in the presence
of catastrophic risk if the agent can ask for help.

The gravity of these risks contrasts starkly with the dearth
of theoretical understanding of how to avoid them. Nearly
all of learning theory explicitly or implicitly assumes that
no single mistake is too costly. We focus on online learning,
where an agent repeatedly interacts with an unknown
environment and uses its observations to gradually improve
its performance. Most online learning algorithms essentially
try all possible behaviors and see what works well. We do
not want autonomous weapons or surgical robots to try all
possible behaviors.
More precisely, trial-and-error-style algorithms only work
when catastrophe is assumed to be impossible. This assumption can take multiple forms, such as that the agent’s actions
do not affect future inputs (e.g., Slivkins, 2011), that no action has irreversible effects (e.g., Jaksch et al., 2010) or that
the environment is reset at the start of each “episode” (e.g.,
Azar et al., 2017). One could train an agent entirely in a controlled lab setting where one of those assumptions does hold,
but we argue that sufficiently general agents will inevitably
encounter novel scenarios when deployed in the real world.
Machine learning models often behave unpredictably in unfamiliar environments (see, e.g., Quiñonero-Candela et al.,
2022), and we do not want AI biologists or robotic vehicles
to behave unpredictably.

1. Introduction

The goal of this paper is to understand the conditions under which it is possible to formally guarantee avoidance of
catastrophe in online learning. Certainly some conditions
are necessary, because the problem is hopeless if the agent
must rely purely on trial-and-error: any untried action could
lead to paradise or disaster and the agent has no way to predict which. In the real world, however, one need not learn
through pure trial-and-error: one can also ask for help. We
think it is critical for high-stakes AI applications to employ a
designated supervisor who can be asked for help. Examples
include a human doctor supervising AI doctors, a robotic
vehicle with a human driver who can take over in emergencies, autonomous weapons with a human operator, and
many more. We hope that our work constitutes a step in the

There has been mounting concern over catastrophic risk
from AI, including but not limited to autonomous weapon
accidents (Abaimov & Martellini, 2020), bioterrorism (Mouton et al., 2024), cyberattacks on critical infrastructure
(Guembe et al., 2022), and loss of control (Bengio et al.,
2024). See Critch & Russell (2023) and Hendrycks et al.
(2023) for taxonomies of societal-scale AI risks. In this
paper, we use “catastrophe” to refer to any kind of irrepara1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Benjamin Plaut <plaut@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

