Hierarchical Overlapping Clustering on Graphs: Cost Function, Algorithm and
Scalability

Yicheng Pan 1 Renjie Chen 1 Pengyu Long 1 Bingchen Fan 1

Abstract

each structure in isolation, the hybrid structure of hierarchical overlapping clustering (HOC) that permits overlaps
between hierarchical clusters offers a more accurate representation of complex relational data observed in real-world
scenarios. For instance, in social networks, an individual
may belong to multiple distinct groups, and these groups
can form larger overlapping communities centered around
different themes. In cooperation networks, the coauthors
of a paper can be regarded as a base-level cluster, and this
cluster may belong to more than one research field due to
the diversity of topics. The inherent complexity of the hybrid structure presents a formidable challenge in clustering
research. While HC and OC have been extensively studied
as separate paradigms, the critical domain of HOC remains
largely unexplored. In this paper, we address this problem.

Hierarchical and overlapping clustering are two
prevalent phenomena that often coexist in realworld system. While numerous studies have examined these two structures separately, characterizing and evaluating their hybrid forms remains
an open challenge. To bridge this gap, we initiate
the study of hierarchical overlapping clustering
on graphs by introducing a new cost function and
establishing its rationality through several intuitive properties. We further develop an approximation algorithm that achieves a constant approximation factor for its dual version. Our approach
employs a recursive overlapping bipartition framework based on local search, enabling a highly
scalable speed-up variant. Experimental results
demonstrate that this speed-up algorithm outperforms all baseline methods significantly in both
effectiveness (across synthetic and real datasets)
and scalability.

Constructing a cost function is a usual starting point for
the research on both HC and OC. Similarly, a proper cost
function is helpful to evaluate the quality of HOC, which
formulates the HOC problem as an optimization task. In
this paper, we propose a new cost function for HOC, and
present an approximation algorithm for it. Our contributions
are summarized as follows.

1. Introduction

(1) Cost function. We propose a cost function (Definition
2.8) that is the first one for HOC to our best knowledge. The
cost function is evaluated on HOC graphs, and can be unified
with Dasgupta’s cost function for HC trees in the specific
case of non-overlap. We give a comprehensive study on the
rationality of this cost function by providing examples and a
series of properties including compatibility (Property 2.11),
additivity of nodes (Property 2.12) and binary optimality
(Property 2.13).

Clustering on graphs is a major task in machine learning and
has a wide range of applications in many areas. Two fundamental categories have attracted in-depth study. The first is
hierarchical clustering (HC) that requires a recursive partitioning of a graph into smaller clusters to form a cluster tree
(Dasgupta, 2016; Li & Pan, 2016; Cohen-Addad et al., 2019;
Charikar & Chatziafratis, 2017; Moseley & Wang, 2017;
Naumov et al., 2021). The other is overlapping clustering
(OC) that allows data points to belong to multiple clusters
(Orecchia et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2007; Shen et al., 2009;
Chen et al., 2010; Nicosia et al., 2009; Whang et al., 2016;
Li et al., 2017; Yang & Leskovec, 2012a). Both structural
patterns are prevalent in real systems. Compared to using

(2) Approximation algorithm. Based on our cost function,
we formulate the primal and the dual versions of the HOC
2
problem, respectively. We provide an a = 3√
− Θ( 1+ϵ
n )6
approximation algorithm (Algorithm 2) for the dual k-HOC
problem, where k ∈ Z+ is an upper bound of key clusters
(explained in Definition 2.10), n is the number of graph
nodes, and ϵ is an arbitrarily small positive constant. We
also show that our algorithm achieves an approximation
factor (1−a)(1+dmax /davg ) for the primal 2-OC problem.

1

State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University. Correspondence to: Yicheng Pan
<yichengp@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

(3) Effectiveness and scalability. We accelerate our ap1

