Socialized Coevolution: Advancing a Better World
through Cross-Task Collaboration

Xinjie Yao 1 2 3 Yu Wang 1 2 3 Pengfei Zhu 1 2 3 Wanyu Lin 4 Ruipu Zhao 1 Zhoupeng Guo 5 Weihao Li 6
Qinghua Hu 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract
Traditional machine societies rely on data-driven
learning, overlooking interactions and limiting
knowledge acquisition from model interplay. To
address these issues, we revisit the development
of machine societies by drawing inspiration from
the evolutionary processes of human societies.
Motivated by Social Learning (SL), this paper
introduces a practical paradigm of Socialized Coevolution (SC). Compared to most existing methods focused on knowledge distillation and multitask learning, our work addresses a more challenging problem: not only enhancing the capacity to solve new downstream tasks but also improving the performance of existing tasks through
inter-model interactions. Inspired by cognitive
science, we propose Dynamic Information Socialized Collaboration (DISC), which achieves
SC through interactions between models specialized in different downstream tasks. Specifically,
we introduce the dynamic hierarchical collaboration and dynamic selective collaboration modules to enable dynamic and effective interactions
among models, allowing them to acquire knowledge from these interactions. Finally, we explore potential future applications of combining
SL and SC, discuss open questions, and propose
directions for future research, aiming to spark
interest in this emerging and exciting interdisciplinary field. Our code will be publicly available
at https://github.com/yxjdarren/SC.

Figure 1: Social learning in human society versus socialized
coevolution in machine society.
Similar to human society (Humphrey, 1976; Dunbar, 1998),
each model in machine society evolves through knowledge
acquisition, as illustrated in Figure 1. Traditional learning paradigms largely depend on data-driven, single-mode
learning. While some paradigms (Caruana, 1997; Hinton,
2015; Zhu et al., 2024) allow knowledge transfer from other
models, they are limited by blind imitation and difficulty in
retaining specialized expertise. In human history, cultural
evolution has been driven by continuous capability enhancement, surpassing existing critical skills for survival (Henrich,
2016; Laland, 2017). This enhancement is achieved through
ongoing interaction with the environment, rather than extensive trial and data collection. This effective learning
paradigm, known as socialized coevolution (SC), has been
studied in cognitive science (Thompson et al., 2022).

1

In machine learning, Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton,
2015) is closely related to SC, as it overcomes the limitation
of relying solely on data for knowledge acquisition. However, KD often blindly mimics the teacher model’s predictions, which may not always represent valuable knowledge.
Unlike humans, KD lacks mutual teaching and learning. An
alternative is Multi-Task Learning (MTL) (Caruana, 1997),
a shared learning paradigm. While MTL improves performance by leveraging task correlations, it often sacrifices
task-specific expertise for generalization, making it hard to
maintain performance on individual tasks, particularly when

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China 2 Engineering Research Center of City Intelligence
and Digital Governance, Ministry of Education of the People’s
Republic of China, Tianjin, China 3 Haihe Lab of ITAI, Tianjin,
China 4 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong, China 5 School of Automation, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China 6 School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to:
Pengfei Zhu <zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

