Learning Time-Aware Causal Representation for
Model Generalization in Evolving Domains

Zhuo He 1 Shuang Li 1 Wenze Song 1 Longhui Yuan 1 Jian Liang 2 Han Li 2 Kun Gai 2

Abstract

Category Distribution

Endowing deep models with the ability to generalize in dynamic scenarios is of vital significance
for real-world deployment, given the continuous
and complex changes in data distribution. Recently, evolving domain generalization (EDG) has
emerged to address distribution shifts over time,
aiming to capture evolving patterns for improved
model generalization. However, existing EDG
methods may suffer from spurious correlations
by modeling only the dependence between data
and targets across domains, creating a shortcut between task-irrelevant factors and the target, which
hinders generalization. To this end, we design a
time-aware structural causal model (SCM) that incorporates dynamic causal factors and the causal
mechanism drifts, and propose Static-DYNamic
Causal Representation Learning (SYNC), an approach that effectively learns time-aware causal
representations. Specifically, it integrates specially designed information-theoretic objectives
into a sequential VAE framework which captures
evolving patterns, and produces the desired representations by preserving intra-class compactness
of causal factors both across and within domains.
Moreover, we theoretically show that our method
can yield the optimal causal predictor for each
time domain. Results on both synthetic and realworld datasets exhibit that SYNC can achieve
superior temporal generalization performance. §

time

Attention Map
True label

Evening
No Car

Night
Car

Day
No Car

Evening
Car

LSSAE

Prediction

Car

✘

No Car

✘

Car

✘

No Car ✘

Ours

Prediction

No Car

Car

No Car

Car

Figure 1: We plot the category distribution of training domains on Caltran. The lower part shows visualization of
attention maps of the convolutional Layer. Compared with
LSSAE, it can be observed that our method better focuses
on target-related features and makes accurate predictions.
eralization (DG) (Liu et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2023; Fan
et al., 2024) can effectively address the issue of distribution
shift, but it still struggles to handle the dynamic scenarios
that are widespread in the real world (Yao et al., 2022a; Qin
et al., 2022). In order to adapt to changing environments
over time, evolving domain generalization (EDG) (Nasery
et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023b; Bai et al.,
2023; Xie et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2023a; Qin et al., 2023)
has emerged in recent years and is garnering increasing attention, aiming to capture the underlying evolving patterns
in data distribution to generalize well to the near future.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved excellent
performance in various applications, yet suffer from performance degradation when the i.i.d. assumption is violated (Recht et al., 2019; Taori et al., 2020). Domain Gen-

Despite promising results, existing EDG methods may suffer
from spurious correlations by solely modeling the statistical
correlation between data and targets. Fig. 1 illustrates the
behavior of the baseline model (Qin et al., 2022) trained on
the Caltran dataset (Hoffman et al., 2014), tasked with determining whether a vehicle is present in an image. Among the
images captured by the camera, most of those containing
vehicles were taken during the day, while images without
vehicles were captured at evening or night. Therefore, there

1
Independent Researcher, China 2 Kuaishou Technology, China.
Correspondence to: Shuang Li <shuangliai@buaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

