Steer LLM Latents for Hallucination Detection
Seongheon Park 1 Xuefeng Du 1 Min-Hsuan Yeh 1 Haobo Wang 2 Yixuan Li 1
(a) Pre-trained embeddings

Abstract
Hallucinations in LLMs pose a significant concern to their safe deployment in real-world applications. Recent approaches have leveraged the
latent space of LLMs for hallucination detection,
but their embeddings, optimized for linguistic coherence rather than factual accuracy, often fail
to clearly separate truthful and hallucinated content. To this end, we propose the Truthfulness
Separator Vector (TSV), a lightweight and flexible steering vector that reshapes the LLM’s representation space during inference to enhance the
separation between truthful and hallucinated outputs, without altering model parameters. Our twostage framework first trains TSV on a small set
of labeled exemplars to form compact and wellseparated clusters. It then augments the exemplar
set with unlabeled LLM generations, employing
an optimal transport-based algorithm for pseudolabeling combined with a confidence-based filtering process. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that TSV achieves state-of-the-art performance
with minimal labeled data, exhibiting strong generalization across datasets and providing a practical solution for real-world LLM applications.

(b) Steered embeddings by TSV

+
❄ Pre-trained LLM

🔥 TSV v

❄ Pre-trained LLM

Figure 1. T-SNE visualization (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) of
the last-token embeddings from the final layer of LLaMA-3.1-8B
on the TruthfulQA test set. (a) Pre-trained model’s embeddings
exhibit significant overlap, whereas (b) adding TSV to latent states
of an intermediate LLM layer effectively separates the embeddings
of truthful and hallucinated data.

consistent with user prompts but also possess the ability to
detect hallucinations and alert users when they occur.
Recent work has explored leveraging the latent space of
LLMs to identify hallucinations (Burns et al., 2023; Azaria
& Mitchell, 2023; Marks & Tegmark, 2024; Yin et al.,
2024a; Du et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024;
Kossen et al., 2024; Orgad et al., 2025). These approaches
typically rely on the embeddings of off-the-shelf LLMs to
classify outputs as truthful or hallucinated. However, pretrained LLMs are optimized for linguistic coherence using
a next-token prediction objective, often prioritizing fluency
and syntactic correctness over factual accuracy (Radford
et al., 2019). As a result, their internal representations, while
powerful for general text generation, can fail to provide a
clear separation between truthful and hallucinated content
(see real-world example in Figure 1a). This motivates a key
question:

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in natural language understanding and generation, showcasing their potential as general-purpose task
solvers (Zhao et al., 2023). Despite their success, LLMs
can generate hallucinated outputs—statements that appear
plausible but factually inaccurate or unsupported. Such hallucinations can undermine user trust and lead to potentially
harmful consequences, especially in high-stake applications
(Zhang et al., 2023; Pal et al., 2023). Therefore, to be truly
trustworthy, an LLM must not only generate text that is

How can we shape the latent space of an LLM for
hallucination detection?

1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison 2 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University.
Correspondence to: Yixuan Li <sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.

Instead of fine-tuning the LLMs, which is computationally
expensive and alters the model’s parameters (Gekhman et al.,
2024), we propose learning a lightweight vector, called
Truthfulness Separator Vector (TSV). As illustrated in Figure 1b, this learnable vector is introduced during inference

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

