MELON: Provable Defense Against Indirect Prompt Injection
Attacks in AI Agents

Kaijie Zhu 1 Xianjun Yang 1 Jindong Wang 2 Wenbo Guo 1 William Wang 1

Attack Success Rate (ASR) (%)

Abstract
Recent research has explored that LLM agents
are vulnerable to indirect prompt injection (IPI)
attacks, where malicious tasks embedded in toolretrieved information can redirect the agent to take
unauthorized actions. Existing defenses against
IPI have significant limitations: either require essential model training resources, lack effectiveness against sophisticated attacks, or harm the
normal utilities. We present MELON (Masked
re-Execution and TooL comparisON), a novel IPI
defense. Our approach builds on the observation
that under a successful attack, the agent’s next
action becomes less dependent on user tasks and
more on malicious tasks. Following this, we design MELON to detect attacks by re-executing the
agent’s trajectory with a masked user prompt modified through a masking function. We identify an
attack if the actions generated in the original and
masked executions are similar. We also include
three key designs to reduce the potential false positives and false negatives. Extensive evaluation
on the IPI benchmark AgentDojo demonstrates
that MELON outperforms SOTA defenses in both
attack prevention and utility preservation. Moreover, we show that combining MELON with a
SOTA prompt augmentation defense (denoted as
MELON-Aug) further improves its performance.
We also conduct a detailed ablation study to validate our key designs. Code is available at https:
//github.com/kaijiezhu11/MELON.

25

No Defense
Delimiting
Repeat Prompt
Tool filter
DeBERTa Detector
LLM Detector
MELON
MELON-Aug

20
15
10
5
0

0

20

Ideal Performance

40
60
80
Utility under Attack (UA) (%)

100

Figure 1. Comparison of averaged Utility under Attack (UA, higher
is better) performance and Attack Success Rate (ASR, lower
is better) on GPT-4o, o3-mini, and Llama-3.3-70B across different defense methods. Our proposed methods (MELON and
MELON-Aug) achieve superior performance with extremely low
ASR while maintaining high UA, outperforming all the baseline
defense methods. Detailed comparisons among these defenses are
in Section 4.2.

tion attacks (IPI) (Naihin et al., 2023; Ruan et al., 2024;
Yuan et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Zhan et al., 2024;
Debenedetti et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). Attackers
exploit the agent’s interaction with external resources by
embedding malicious tasks in tool-retrieved information
such as database (Zhong et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2024) and
websites (Liao et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024a).
These malicious tasks will force the agent to take unauthorized actions, leading to severe consequences.
Defending against IPI attacks is significantly challenging.
First, unlike jailbreaking LLMs, the injected malicious
prompts and their resultant behaviors can be legitimate tasks.
Second, implementing effective defenses requires a careful
balance between security guarantees and utility maintenance.
Existing IPI defenses either require essential model training
resources, are only applicable to simple attacks, or harm normal utilities under attack scenarios. Specifically, resourceexpensive defenses retrain the LLM in the agent (Chen et al.,
2024a; Wallace et al., 2024) or train an additional model
to detect injected prompts in the retrieved data (ProtectAI,

1. Introduction
Together with the recent success of LLM agents (OpenAI,
2024; Anthropic, 2024; Llama, 2024; DeepSeek, 2025)
comes the serious security concern of indirect prompt injec1
University of California, Santa Barbara 2 William & Mary.
Correspondence to: Kaijie Zhu <kaijiezhu@ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

