BSemiFL: Semi-supervised Federated Learning via a Bayesian Approach

Haozhao Wang 1 Shengyu Wang 2 Jiaming Li 1 Hao Ren 3 Xingshuo Han 4 Wenchao Xu 2 Shangwei Guo 5
Tianwei Zhang 6 Ruixuan Li 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Semi-supervised Federated Learning (SSFL) allows clients to collaboratively train a global
model in the absence of their local data labels.
The key step of SSFL is the re-labeling where
each client adopts two types of available models, namely global and local models, to re-label
the local data. While various technologies such
as using the global model or the average of
two models have been proposed to conduct the
re-labeling step, little literature delves deeply
into the performance dominance and limitations
of the two models. This paper first theoretically and empirically demonstrate that the local
model achieves higher re-labeling accuracy over
local data while the global model can progressively improve the re-labeling performance by
introducing the extra knowledge of other clients.
Based on these, we propose BSemiFL which
re-labels the local data via the collaboration between the local and global model in a Bayesian
approach. Specifically, to re-label any given local
sample, BSemiFL first uses Bayesian inference
to assess the closeness of the local/global model
to the sample. Then, it applies a weighted combination of their pseudo labels, using the closeness as the weights. Theoretical analysis shows
that the labeling error of our method is smaller
than that of simply using the global model, the local model, or their simple average. Experiments
show that BSemiFL improves the performance
by up to 9.8% as compared to existing methods.

Federated learning (FL) enables the collaboration of multiple clients to train a global model without sharing their
private dataset (Hu et al., 2024a; Huang et al., 2024a; Qi
& et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024), gaining much attention
recently and being applied to a wide range of applications
such as traffic prediction(Zhang et al., 2024a), recommendation (Yang et al., 2024), and IoT (Liu et al., 2021a). However, typical FL (McMahan et al., 2017) presumes that each
client possesses labels for their data, a requirement which
may not align with practical realities in numerous applications, especially when most clients may not be experts in
the task of interest or may not be well motivated to label
their data. To tackle this challenge, Semi-supervised FL
(SSFL) (Diao et al., 2022; Jeong et al., 2021; Zhuang et al.,
2021) comes to the rescue, by allowing clients to have access to purely unlabeled data while maintaining a small
amount of labeled data in the server.
SSFL typically runs the re-labeling and local training steps
in each client and then conducts the aggregation step in the
server, as shown in Figure 1. Although the process is easy
to implement, the re-labeling error of the local data is inevitable, thus degrading the performance. To improve the
SSFL performance, many approaches have been proposed
from the re-labeling step (Diao et al., 2022), local training
step (Malaviya et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024), and aggregation step (Wang et al., 2023b) separately. In this paper, we
mainly focus on the re-labeling step by considering that it
can directly reduce the error of pseudo labels.
The representative re-labeling technique (Diao et al., 2022)
is to adopt the global model to re-label the local data. While
easy to implement, the upper bound of its performance
is inevitably limited by adaptation error of global model,
which arises from the substantial gap between the global
and the local data distribution (Hu et al., 2024b; Huang
et al., 2024b; Qi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Tang et al.,
2022). To reduce the adaptation error, a natural solution is
to adopt the local model re-label the local data, where the
local model is trained with the local data and adapts better
than the global model. Yet, we find that merely utilizing
the local model leads to a less optimal global model than
using the global model. We identify that the underlying
principle behind this is that the data knowledge embodied
by the local model is inherently solidified to its own small

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 Division of Integrative Systems and Design, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hongkong, China 3 School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 4 College of
Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China 5 College of Computer
Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China 6 College of
Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Ruixuan Li
<rxli@hust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

