Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models

Amin Nejatbakhsh 1 Yixin Wang 2

Abstract

dynamics when certain edges are functionally removed from
the circuit. This powerful strategy enables testing sophisticated neural hypotheses. For example, O’Shea et al. (2022)
used perturbations to understand whether dynamics in the
motor cortex are path-following (driven by an upstream
brain region), low-dimensional, or high-dimensional. Another example by Feulner et al. (2022) uses a similar strategy
to investigate whether feedback drives plasticity for rapid
learning in the motor cortex. Another study by Sanzeni et al.
(2023) uses optogenetic perturbations to uncover the degree
of coupling in the visual cortex of mice and monkeys. They
demonstrate through modeling that under strong network
coupling, perturbations lead to a reshuffling of responses
within the circuit.

Neural circuits produce signals that are complex
and nonlinear. To facilitate the understanding
of neural dynamics, a popular approach is to fit
state space models (SSM) to the data and analyze
the dynamics of the low-dimensional latent variables. Despite the power of SSM to explain the
dynamics of neural circuits, these models have
been shown to merely capture statistical associations in the data and cannot be causally interpreted. Therefore, an important research problem
is to build models that can predict neural dynamics under causal manipulations. Here, we propose
interventional state-space models (iSSM), a class
of causal models that can predict neural responses
to novel perturbations. We draw on recent advances in causal dynamical systems and present
theoretical results for the identifiability of iSSM.
In simulations of the motor cortex, we show that
iSSM can recover the true latents and the underlying dynamics. In addition, we illustrate two applications of iSSM in biological datasets. First, we
applied iSSM to a dataset of calcium recordings
from ALM neurons in mice during photostimulation. Second, we applied iSSM to a dataset of electrophysiological recordings from macaque dlPFC
during micro-stimulation. In both cases, we show
that iSSM outperforms SSM and results in identifiable parameters. The code is available at https:
//github.com/amin-nejat/issm.

The main insight of these works is that in the absence of
perturbations (i.e. observational regime), neural dynamics are confined to low-dimensional spaces, and models
that are built upon observational data are not able to capture neural dynamics outside of the low-dimensional space.
However, during perturbations (i.e. interventional regime),
the neural state is driven outside of the task space, providing
more information about dynamics in the global neural state
space (Jazayeri & Afraz, 2017). This insight allows us to
build sophisticated hypotheses that can only be tested using
perturbations (Fig. 1). Interventional studies are critical for
determining the causal contribution of neural dynamics to
behavior and perception. For example, a study by Shahbazi
et al. (2022) used targeted electrical stimulation to manipulate a monkey’s perception.
Furthermore, many of the popular models used in neuroscience suffer from identifiability issues (Maheswaranathan
et al., 2019). In one line of work, researchers have developed
similarity metrics that are agnostic to non-identifiability
transformations (see Sucholutsky et al. (2023) for a review).
However, in many cases, the model parameters or latent
variables are biologically meaningful, and recovering them
is desired. Therefore, the need for developing identifiable
models for neuroscience data analysis is an overarching goal.
For example, Zhou & Wei (2020) used an identifiable VAE
as opposed to a vanilla VAE and inferred latent variables
that encode the geometry of the task in an unsupervised
manner.

1. Introduction
Understanding neural data requires identifying the dynamics that underlie it. The principled way to achieve this is
through causal perturbations. When a perturbation is delivered, the activity of perturbed neurons is dissociated from
their upstream neurons, facilitating inspection of the circuit
1

Center for Computation Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute, New
York, US 2 University of Michigan, Michigan, US. Correspondence
to: Amin Nejatbakhsh <anejatbakhsh@flatironinstitute.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

