A Unified Theoretical Analysis of Private and Robust Offline Alignment:
from RLHF to DPO
Xingyu Zhou 1 Yulian Wu 2 Francesco Orabona 2

Abstract

Ouyang et al., 2022), which learns an intermediate reward
model before optimizing the policy. The second is the direct
approach, exemplified by Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023), which directly optimizes the
policy via supervised learning on the preference dataset.

In this paper, we theoretically investigate the effects of noisy labels in offline alignment, with a
focus on the interplay between privacy and robustness against adversarial corruption. Specifically,
under linear modeling assumptions, we present
a unified analysis covering both reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) and direct
preference optimization (DPO) under different
privacy-corruption scenarios, such as Local differential privacy-then-Corruption (LTC), where human preference labels are privatized before being
corrupted by an adversary, and Corruption-thenLocal differential privacy (CTL), where labels are
corrupted before privacy protection. Our analysis
leverages a reduction framework that reduces the
offline alignment problem under linear modeling
assumptions to parameter estimation in logistic
regression. This framework allows us to establish
an interesting separation result between LTC and
CTL, demonstrating that LTC presents a greater
challenge than CTL in offline alignment, even under linear models. As important by-products, our
findings also advance the state-of-the-art theoretical results in offline alignment under privacy-only
or corruption-only scenarios.

It is clear that the performance of both RLHF and DPO
is significantly influenced by the quality of the preference
labels in the dataset. However, in practice, these labels are
often noisy due to various factors (Lambert et al., 2023).
One potential noise source is corruption or misspecification during label generation or data collection, e.g., data
poisoning attack (Casper et al., 2023). Additionally, privacy concerns in human preference (as illustrated in Feng
et al. (2024)) may prompt individuals to provide noisy or
privatized preferences rather than their true rankings.
From a theoretical perspective, understanding the impact
of these noisy labels—resulting from both corruption and
privacy—is essential for improving offline alignment. Recent studies have made some initial attempts to address
this issue (Mandal et al., 2024; Chowdhury et al., 2024;
2023; Bukharin et al., 2024), but they face two fundamental limitations: (1) They often treat corruption and privacy
separately and focus exclusively on either RLHF or DPO,
while, in practice, noisy labels can stem from both factors
simultaneously; (2) The theoretical guarantees provided by
these studies are often suboptimal, even when privacy and
corruption are separately considered. Motivated by these
limitations and practical scenarios, we are particularly interested in the following question:

1. Introduction

Can we provide a unified analysis of the interplay between
privacy and robustness in both RLHF and DPO?

The alignment training process in language models that
utilizes a human-labeled preference dataset has been instrumental in producing more helpful, harmless, and honest
responses (Bai et al., 2022). Leveraging an offline preference dataset, two prominent paradigms have emerged. The
first is the indirect approach, such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2019;

We provide an affirmative answer to the above question by
presenting the following contributions:
1. A Unified Theoretical Framework. We present a unified
theoretical framework for analyzing the interplay between
privacy and robustness in offline alignment, covering both
RLHF and DPO. Specifically, for privacy protection, we consider Local Differential Privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan
et al., 2011; Duchi et al., 2013) for preference labels, while
for robustness, we consider the strong adversary corruption model (Diakonikolas & Kane, 2023), where an adaptively chosen fraction of labels can be corrupted. Our frame-

1

Wayne State University, USA 2 King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to:
Xingyu Zhou <xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

