TCP-Diffusion: A Multi-modal Diffusion Model for Global Tropical Cyclone
Precipitation Forecasting with Change Awareness

Cheng Huang 1 Pan Mu 1 Cong Bai 1 2 Peter A. G. Watson 3

Abstract
Deep learning methods have made significant
progress in regular rainfall forecasting, yet the
more hazardous tropical cyclone (TC) rainfall has
not received the same attention. While regular
rainfall models can offer valuable insights for
designing TC rainfall forecasting models, most
existing methods suffer from cumulative errors
and lack physical consistency. Additionally, these
methods overlook the importance of meteorological factors in TC rainfall and their integration with
the numerical weather prediction (NWP) model.
To address these issues, we propose Tropical Cyclone Precipitation Diffusion (TCP-Diffusion), a
multi-modal model for forecasting TC precipitation given an existing TC in any location globally.
It forecasts rainfall around the TC center for the
next 12 hours at 3 hourly resolutions based on
past rainfall observations and multi-modal environmental variables. Adjacent residual prediction
(ARP) changes the training target from the absolute rainfall value to the rainfall trend and gives
our model the capability of rainfall change awareness, reducing cumulative errors and ensuring
physical consistency. Considering the influence
of TC-related meteorological factors and the useful information from NWP model forecasts, we
propose a multi-model framework with specialized encoders to extract richer information from
environmental variables and results provided by
NWP models. The results of extensive experiments show that our method outperforms other
DL methods and the NWP method from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF).

Figure 1. The difference between the regular precipitation forecasting (a) and TC (b) precipitation forecasting. Regular precipitation
forecasting (a) usually focuses on a specific fixed region, where
the predicted area (blue box) does not move with the rainfall area
(black dashed boxes). In TC precipitation forecasting (b), the primary region of interest (blue boxes) moves with the TC. Sub-figure
(c) represents the main prediction process of our model. The light
blue box represents historical data, which is considered to be the
input of the forecasting model. The light orange box represents
the TC rainfall that should be predicted. This paper just focuses
on the prediction of TC rainfall.

1. Introduction
Tropical cyclone (TC) precipitation refers to substantial rainfall events that accompany the formation, development, and
movement of TCs. These precipitation events can lead to
severe disasters in the affected regions, like flooding, mudslides, and landslides. These TC rainfall-related disasters
cause more economic losses and deaths than strong winds
(Wendler-Bosco & Nicholson, 2022), yet most TC forecasting research focuses only on TC track and intensity while
neglecting the TC precipitation. If the TC precipitation can
be accurately predicted, preemptive measures may be taken
to mitigate the disasters brought by TC rainfall, protecting
people’s lives and property. Therefore, it is important to
accurately predict the precipitation around the TC center.

1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China 2 Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual
Information Intelligent Processing, Hangzhou, China 3 School of
Geographical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Cong Bai <congbai@zjut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Numerical weather prediction (NWP) is widely used for
various weather forecasting tasks, including TC rainfall
1

