ALMTokenizer: A Low-bitrate and Semantic-rich Audio Codec Tokenizer for
Audio Language Modeling

Dongchao Yang 1 Songxiang Liu 2 Haohan Guo 1 Jiankun Zhao 1 Yuanyuan Wang 1 Helin Wang 2 Zeqian Ju 2
Xubo Liu 2 Xueyuan Chen 1 Xu Tan 2 Xixin Wu 1 Helen Meng 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The field of generative modeling has witnessed remarkable
progress, largely driven by the success of autoregressive
(AR) models in the development of large language models
(LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023). Inspired by the success of LLMs
in the fields of natural language processing (NLP), recent
works have begun to employ AR transformers for audio generation (Borsos et al., 2023a; Agostinelli et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2023c), such as using the AR transformer paradigm to
solve text-to-speech task (Wang et al., 2023), or expanding
the text LLM into multimodal LLM by integrating the audio
modality into the original LLM (Défossez et al., 2024). Audio tokenizer plays an important role in all of these models,
which converts audio signals into discrete token sequence
for AR audio language modeling.

Recent advancements in audio language models
have underscored the pivotal role of audio tokenization, which converts audio signals into discrete tokens, thereby facilitating the application
of language model architectures to the audio domain. In this study, we introduce ALMTokenizer,
a novel low-bitrate and semantically rich audio
codec tokenizer for audio language models. Prior
methods, such as Encodec, typically encode individual audio frames into discrete tokens without
considering the use of context information across
frames. Unlike these methods, we introduce a
novel query-based compression strategy to capture holistic information with a set of learnable
query tokens by explicitly modeling the context
information across frames. This design not only
enables the codec model to capture more semantic
information but also encodes the audio signal with
fewer token sequences. Additionally, to enhance
the semantic information in audio codec models,
we introduce the following: (1) A masked autoencoder (MAE) loss, (2) Vector quantization
based on semantic priors, and (3) An autoregressive (AR) prediction loss. As a result, ALMTokenizer achieves competitive reconstruction performance relative to state-of-the-art approaches
while operating at a lower bitrate. Within the
same audio language model framework, ALMTokenizer outperforms previous tokenizers in audio
understanding and generation tasks.1

In the literature, audio codec models, such as SoundStream
(Zeghidour et al., 2021) and Encodec (Défossez et al., 2022),
have been widely adopted as audio tokenizers for audio language models. These generative models aim to represent
audio data in a quantized discrete latent space, where the
codec’s decoder is then used to reconstruct the audio signals from the generated discrete token sequences. Recently,
there has been significant interest in the audio community
regarding audio codec tokenizers, leading to the proposal
of several novel models (Kumar et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2024;
Défossez et al., 2024; Parker et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023).
Despite the advancements in audio codec models, an important research question remains unanswered: which type
of audio codec is most suitable for audio language modeling? Inspired by previous works (Borsos et al., 2023a;
Parker et al., 2024; Ji et al., 2024; Défossez et al., 2024),
these studies investigate two key properties of audio codec
models: low bitrate and semantic richness. We first conduct
a set of evaluation experiments to explore the influence of
bitrate and semantic information on audio language modeling. Specifically, we train three audio codec models with
varying bitrates, while keeping the number of vector quantization (VQ) layers constant and adjusting the frame rates
to 50 Hz, 25 Hz, and 12.5 Hz. We then train the audio language model using different audio tokenizers on the same
dataset. To assess the impact of semantic information, we

1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China 2 Independent Researchers.
Correspondence to:
Dongchao Yang <dcyang@se.cuhk.edu.hk>, Helen Meng
<hmmeng@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
http://dongchaoyang.top/ALMTokenizer/

1

