Transolver++: An Accurate Neural Solver for PDEs on Million-Scale Geometries
Huakun Luo * 1 Haixu Wu * 1 Hang Zhou 1 Lanxiang Xing 1 Yichen Di 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

industrial manufacturing (Kopriva, 2009; Roubı́ček, 2013).
However, it is hard and usually impossible to obtain the
analytic solution of PDEs. Thus, numerical methods (Ŝolı́n,
2005) have been widely explored, whose typical solving process is first discretizing PDEs into computation meshes and
then approximating solution on discretized meshes (Grossmann et al., 2007). In real applications, such as simulating a
driving car or aircraft during takeoff, it will take several days
or even months for calculation, and the simulation accuracy
is highly affected by the fitness of discretized computation
mesh (Solanki et al., 2003; Elrefaie et al., 2024). To speed
up this process, deep models have been explored as efficient
surrogates of numerical methods, known as neural PDE
solvers (Wang et al., 2023). Training from pre-collected
simulation data, neural solvers can learn to approximate the
mapping between input and output of numerical methods
and directly infer new samples in a flash (Li et al., 2021),
posing a promising direction for industrial simulation.

Although deep models have been widely explored
in solving partial differential equations (PDEs),
previous works are primarily limited to data only
with up to tens of thousands of mesh points, far
from the million-point scale required by industrial simulations that involve complex geometries.
In the spirit of advancing neural PDE solvers
to real industrial applications, we present Transolver++, a highly parallel and efficient neural
solver that can accurately solve PDEs on millionscale geometries. Building upon previous advancements in solving PDEs by learning physical states via Transolver, Transolver++ is further equipped with an extremely optimized parallelism framework and a local adaptive mechanism to efficiently capture eidetic physical states
from massive mesh points, successfully tackling
the thorny challenges in computation and physics
learning when scaling up input mesh size. Transolver++ increases the single-GPU input capacity
to million-scale points for the first time and is
capable of continuously scaling input size in linear complexity by increasing GPUs. Experimentally, Transolver++ yields 13% relative promotion
across six standard PDE benchmarks and achieves
over 20% performance gain in million-scale highfidelity industrial simulations, whose sizes are
100⇥ larger than previous benchmarks, covering
car and 3D aircraft designs. Code is available at
https://github.com/thuml/Transolver plus.

Usually, industrial applications involve large and complex
geometries, requiring the model to capture intricate physics
processes underlying geometries efficiently. Although previous works have made some progress in handling complex
geometries (Li et al., 2023b; Hao et al., 2023) and attempted
to speed up model efficiency, they are still far from real applications, especially in handling large geometries. Specifically, as illustrated in Figure 1(a), existing models fail to
scale up beyond 400k points, while real applications typically involves million-scale mesh points or even more. Note
that, as aforementioned, the fineness of computation meshes
is the foundation of simulation accuracy. As the comparison
of car mesh shown in Figure 1(b), limited mesh size will
seriously sacrifice the precision of the geometry, where the
originally streamlined surface becomes rough and uneven.
This will further limit the simulation accuracy of physics
processes, especially for aerodynamic applications (Elrefaie
et al., 2024). Thus, the capability of handling large geometries is indispensable for practical neural PDE solvers.

1. Introduction
Extensive physics processes can be precisely described by
partial differential equations (PDEs) (Wazwaz, 2002; Evans,
2010), such as air dynamics of driving cars or internal stress
of buildings. Accurately solving these PDEs is essential to
*

As the latest progress in neural PDE solver architectures,
Transolver (Wu et al., 2024) proposes to learn intrinsic physical states underlying complex geometries and apply the attention mechanism among learned physical states to capture
intricate physics interactions, which frees model capacities
from unwieldy mesh points and achieves outstanding performance in car and airfoil simulations. Although Transolver

1

Equal contribution School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University. Huakun Luo <luohk24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to:Mingsheng Long<mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

