Self-supervised Masked Graph Autoencoder via Structure-aware Curriculum

Haoyang Li 1 Xin Wang 1 Zeyang Zhang 1 Zongyuan Wu 1 Linxin Xiao 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous across various domains, including social networks, citation networks, and
e-commerce systems. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have
demonstrated significant success in learning meaningful representations from such data, particularly in supervised (Xu
et al., 2019) and semi-supervised (Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Hamilton et al., 2017) learning settings, where task-specific
labels are available to guide the learning process. However,
acquiring a large amount of high-quality annotations is often
expensive and impractical in real-world applications.

Self-supervised learning (SSL) on graphstructured data has attracted considerable
attention recently. Masked graph autoencoder, as
one promising generative graph SSL approach
that aims to recover masked parts of the input
graph data, has shown great success in various
downstream graph tasks. However, existing
masked graph autoencoders fail to consider the
degree of difficulty of recovering the masked
edges that often have different impacts on the
model performance, resulting in suboptimal node
representations. To tackle this challenge, in this
paper, we propose a novel curriculum based
self-supervised masked graph autoencoder that
is able to capture and leverage the underlying
degree of difficulty of data dependencies hidden
in edges, and design better mask-reconstruction
pretext tasks for learning informative node
representations. Specifically, we first design a
difficulty measurer to identify the underlying
structural degree of difficulty of edges during
the masking step. Then, we adopt a self-paced
scheduler to determine the order of masking
edges, which encourages the graph encoder
to learn from easy to difficult parts. Finally,
the masked edges are gradually incorporated
into the reconstruction pretext task, leading to
high-quality node representations. Experiments
on several real-world node classification and link
prediction datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed method over state-of-the-art graph
self-supervised learning baselines. This work is
the first study of curriculum strategy for masked
graph autoencoders, to the best of our knowledge.

Self-supervised learning (SSL), an unsupervised paradigm
widely adopted in computer vision and natural language
processing (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020), has recently gained significant attention in the field of graph learning. SSL enables models to learn informative representations by solving carefully designed pretext tasks without
requiring labeled data. Existing graph SSL methods can
be broadly categorized into contrastive and generative approaches. Contrastive methods, such as DGI (Veličković
et al., 2019), MVGRL (Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020), and
BGRL (Thakoor et al., 2022), predominate the field by leveraging instance discrimination as the primary pretext task.
Although augmentation-free variants like AFGRL (Wang
et al., 2022a) and IGCL (Li et al., 2023a) present promising alternatives, many classical contrastive methods still
depend heavily on heuristic graph augmentations. Their performance can degrade when the selected augmentations are
misaligned with the objectives of downstream tasks (Zhang
et al., 2021a). In contrast, generative SSL methods address
this limitation more naturally by reconstructing missing
components of the input graph. Representative models such
as GPT-GNN (Hu et al., 2020b), GraphMAE (Hou et al.,
2022), and S2GAE (Tan et al., 2023) demonstrate strong
performance while avoiding the need for manually crafted
augmentations.
Despite the notable progress of generative graph SSL methods, existing approaches typically ignore the varying difficulty levels of pretext tasks during training and treat all
training samples uniformly, resulting in suboptimal performance. Intuitively, pretext tasks should be designed to start
with easier data samples and gradually progress to more difficult ones. Introducing overly challenging tasks at the early

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

