Balanced Learning for Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation

Wangkai Li 1 Rui Sun 1 Bohao Liao 1 Zhaoyang Li 1 Tianzhu Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic segmentation aims to transfer knowledge
from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain. Despite the effectiveness of selftraining techniques in UDA, they struggle to learn
each class in a balanced manner due to inherent
class imbalance and distribution shift in both data
and label space between domains. To address this
issue, we propose Balanced Learning for Domain
Adaptation (BLDA), a novel approach to directly
assess and alleviate class bias without requiring
prior knowledge about the distribution shift. First,
we identify over-predicted and under-predicted
classes by analyzing the distribution of predicted
logits. Subsequently, we introduce a post-hoc
approach to align the logits distributions across
different classes using shared anchor distributions.
To further consider the network’s need to generate
unbiased pseudo-labels during self-training, we
estimate logits distributions online and incorporate logits correction terms into the loss function.
Moreover, we leverage the resulting cumulative
density as domain-shared structural knowledge
to connect the source and target domains. Extensive experiments on two standard UDA semantic segmentation benchmarks demonstrate that
BLDA consistently improves performance, especially for under-predicted classes, when integrated
into various existing methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/Woof6/BLDA.

Figure 1: Demonstration of factors that cause class bias.
(a) The inherent class imbalance problem in segmentation
datasets. (b) The differences in transfer difficulty across
classes in cross-domain settings. “Oracle’ represents the
performance under full supervision, while “Src-only’ represents training with the source domain and testing it on the
target domain. (c) The differences in logits distributions predicted for each class, including ”positive distribution” and
”negative distribution”. (d) Bias assessment for different
classes via Eq.4. The corresponding class IDs of (a), (b),
and (c) are mapped in descending order onto this figure.

et al., 2021; 2022). However, the performance of these
methods often degrades significantly when applied to new
target domains due to differences between the source and
target domains. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
techniques have been extensively studied to address this
issue by transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, aiming to bridge the
domain gap and improve the model’s performance on the
target dataset without requiring additional annotations.

1. Introduction

In previous work, self-training techniques (Tranheden et al.,
2021; Hoyer et al., 2022a) have been naturally introduced
into UDA tasks to fully utilize the large amount of unlabeled
target domain data, becoming a mainstream paradigm. This
paradigm constructs a teacher network using a temporal
aggregation mechanism, treats its predictions on the target
domain as pseudo-labels, and gradually guides the student
network’s learning. Despite achieving remarkable results,
these methods struggle to learn each class in a balanced
manner. Generally, the inherent class imbalance in segmentation datasets (Cordts et al., 2016) (Fig.1(a)) leads networks

Semantic segmentation, which assigns semantic labels to
each pixel in an image, has made remarkable progress in
recent years (Long et al., 2015a; Chen et al., 2017b; Cheng
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception
and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory. Correspondence to: Tianzhu
Zhang <tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

