Mixture of Experts Made Intrinsically Interpretable

Xingyi Yang 1 2 Constantin Venhoff 1 Ashkan Khakzar 1 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1 Puneet K. Dokania 1
Adel Bibi 1 Philip Torr 1

Abstract
Neurons in large language models often exhibit
polysemanticity, simultaneously encoding multiple unrelated concepts and obscuring interpretability. Instead of relying on post-hoc methods, we
present MoE-X, a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) language model designed to be intrinsically interpretable. Our approach is motivated by the observation that, in language models, wider networks with sparse activations are more likely to
capture interpretable factors. However, directly
training such large sparse networks is computationally prohibitive. MoE architectures offer a
scalable alternative by activating only a subset of
experts for any given input, inherently aligning
with interpretability objectives. In MoE-X, we
establish this connection by rewriting the MoE
layer as an equivalent sparse, large MLP. This
approach enables efficient scaling of the hidden
size while maintaining sparsity. To further enhance interpretability, we enforce sparse activation within each expert and redesign the routing
mechanism to prioritize experts with the highest
activation sparsity. These designs ensure that only
the most salient features are routed and processed
by the experts. We evaluate MoE-X on chess and
natural language tasks, showing that it achieves
performance comparable to dense models while
significantly improving interpretability. MoE-X
achieves a perplexity better than GPT-2, with interpretability surpassing even sparse autoencoder
(SAE)-based approaches.

Interpretability
Sparsified
Expert & Routing

Sparsity-Aware Router

MoE-X Layer

Figure 1. MoE-X introduces a sparse and wide network architecture designed for interpretability. Compared to dense MLPs, it
incorporates both sparsity and a wider structure. Unlike traditional
MoE models, it enforces sparsity within each expert and routes
tokens to the sparsest experts.

workings remain poorly understood. This lack of understanding often leads to unexpected and potentially harmful
behaviors (Hendrycks et al., 2023; Ngo et al., 2022), posing
risks in their deployment. To address this, mechanistic interpretability (Elhage et al., 2022c) seeks to uncover how these
models process information and reduce potential risks.
A central obstacle to mechanistic interpretability is polysemanticity, where individual neurons encode multiple, unrelated concepts (Olah et al., 2020). Specifically, we refer to
the hidden neurons from the multi-layer perceptron (MLPs)
in Transformers. Such polysemantic neurons lack clear,
singular roles, making it difficult to identify disentangled
features or factors in neural networks.
A common strategy to address this issue is to decompose entangled neuron activity into interpretable vectors using posthoc methods like Sparse Auto-Encoders (SAEs) (Huben
et al., 2023). However, these approaches are computationally expensive (Gao et al., 2024; Lieberum et al., 2024),
require additional analysis after training, and often do not
explain all the features of the model (Menon et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Waswani et al., 2017)
have achieved remarkable progress. However, their internal
1

Wide & Sparse MLP

Dense MLP

University of Oxford 2 National University of Singapore.

Instead, we advocate for designing interpretability directly
into the model architecture in which the resultant discourages polysemanticity during training. While some works
explore architectural changes for interpretability, they often

st

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

