Contradiction Retrieval via Contrastive Learning with Sparsity

Haike Xu * 1 Zongyu Lin * 2 Kai-Wei Chang 2 Yizhou Sun 2 Piotr Indyk 1

Abstract

dings are mainly tailored to similarity retrieval, while as
far as we know, there hasn’t been sentence embeddings for
non-similarity based retrieval. In this paper, we study the
problem of contradiction retrieval, a typical case of nonsimilarity based retrieval. Given a large document corpus
and a query passage, the goal is to retrieve document(s) in
the corpus that contradict the query, assuming they exist.
This problem has a large number of applications, including counter-argument detection (Wachsmuth et al., 2018)
and fact verification (Thorne et al., 2018). The standard
approaches to retrieving contradictions are two-fold. One
is to use a bi-encoder (Xiao et al., 2023; Li & Li, 2023; Li
et al., 2023) that maps each document to a feature space
such that two contradicting documents are mapped close
to each other (e.g., according to the cosine metric) and use
nearest neighbor search algorithms. The second approach
is to train a cross-encoder model (Xiao et al., 2023) that
determines whether two documents contradict each other,
and apply it to each document or passage in the corpus.

Contradiction retrieval refers to identifying and
extracting documents that explicitly disagree with
or refute the content of a query, which is important
to many downstream applications like fact checking and data cleaning. To retrieve contradiction
argument to the query from large document corpora, existing methods such as similarity search
and cross-encoder models exhibit different limitations. To address these challenges, we introduce
a novel approach: SparseCL that leverages specially trained sentence embeddings designed to
preserve subtle, contradictory nuances between
sentences. Our method utilizes a combined metric of cosine similarity and a sparsity function to
efficiently identify and retrieve documents that
contradict a given query. This approach dramatically enhances the speed of contradiction detection by reducing the need for exhaustive document comparisons to simple vector calculations.
We conduct contradiction retrieval experiments
on Arguana, MSMARCO, and HotpotQA, where
our method produces an average improvement of
11.0% across different models. We also validate
our method on downstream tasks like natural language inference and cleaning corrupted corpora.
This paper outlines a promising direction for nonsimilarity-based information retrieval which is
currently underexplored.

Unfortunately, both methods suffer from limitations. The
first approach (cosine similarity search on sentence embeddings) is inherently incapable of representing the “contradiction relation” between the documents, due to the fact that
the cosine metric is “transitive” (See Appendix B for formal
analysis): if A is similar to B, and B is similar to C, then
A is also similar to C. As an example, consider an original sentence and its paraphrase in Table 12. Both of them
contradict the sentence in the third column but they are not
contradicting each other. The second approach, which uses a
cross-encoder model, can capture the contradiction between
sentences to some extent, but it is much more computationally expensive. Our experiment in Appendix F shows
that compared with standard vector computation, running a
cross-encoder is at least 200 times slower.

1. Introduction
Training sentence embedding for similarity retrieval has
been well studied in the literature (Gao et al., 2021; Xiong
et al., 2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020), where a standard
practice is to use contrastive learning to map those similar sentences together and those dissimilar sentences far
from each other. However, these existing sentence embed-

In this paper, we propose to overcome these limitations by
introducing S PARSE CL for efficient contradiction retrieval
using sparse-aware sentence embeddings. The key idea behind our approach is to train a sentence embedding model
to preserve sparsity of differences between the contradicted
sentence embeddings. When answering a query, we calculate a score between the query and each document in the
corpus, based on both the cosine similarity and the sparsity
of the difference between their embeddings, and retrieve
the ones with the highest scores. Our specific measure of

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Haike Xu <haikexu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

