Designing Cyclic Peptides via Harmonic SDE with Atom-Bond Modeling

Xiangxin Zhou * 1 2 3 Mingyu Li * 4 5 Yi Xiao 4 Jiahan Li 4 Dongyu Xue 1 Zaixiang Zheng 1
Jianzhu Ma 4 6 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

Linear peptides

Cyclic peptides offer inherent advantages in pharmaceuticals. For example, cyclic peptides are
more resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis compared
to linear peptides and usually exhibit excellent
stability and affinity. Although deep generative
models have achieved great success in linear peptide design, several challenges prevent the development of computational methods for designing
diverse types of cyclic peptides. These challenges
include the scarcity of 3D structural data on target proteins and associated cyclic peptide ligands,
the geometric constraints that cyclization imposes,
and the involvement of non-canonical amino acids
in cyclization. To address the above challenges,
we introduce C P SDE, which consists of two key
components: ATOM SDE, a generative structure
prediction model based on harmonic SDE, and
R ES ROUTER, a residue type predictor. Utilizing a
routed sampling algorithm that alternates between
these two models to iteratively update sequences
and structures, C P SDE facilitates the generation
of cyclic peptides. By employing explicit all-atom
and bond modeling, C P SDE overcomes existing
data limitations and is proficient in designing a
wide variety of cyclic peptides. Our experimental results demonstrate that the cyclic peptides
designed by our method exhibit reliable stability
and affinity.

Target
Degradation

Flexible

Function

Cyclic peptides
Protease

Target

Rigid
Reduced
degradation

Higher affinity

Higher stability

Protease

Enhanced
function

Figure 1. Comparative advantages of cyclic peptides over linear
peptides. Linear peptides are easily degraded, whereas cyclic
peptides are protected against enzyme hydrolysis, allowing them to
function more effectively within the human body. Cyclic peptides
generally exhibit better stability and affinity.

1

Introduction

Therapeutic peptides are a distinct group of pharmaceutical
compounds comprising a sequence of precisely arranged
amino acids (Driggers et al., 2008; Tsomaia, 2015; Zorzi
et al., 2017). Peptide drugs tend to exhibit lower toxicity, enhanced biological activity, and high target specificity
compared to small molecules, superior cellular permeability,
lower cost, lower immunogenicity compared to antibody
drugs (Driggers et al., 2008). However, conventional linear
peptides suffer from a short half-life, limited stability, and
susceptibility to hydrolase degradation (Tsomaia, 2015), restricting their therapeutic potential and broader use. Unlike
linear peptides, as shown in Figure 1, cyclic peptides are
chains of residues that typically form one or two closed
loops, often incorporating non-natural residues. For example, a single loop can be created by connecting the N- and
C-termini with a peptide bond or linking two internal cysteines through a disulfide bond (Camarero & Muir, 1999;
Giordanetto & Kihlberg, 2014; Kale et al., 2018). Such cyclization enhances their resistance to digestive enzymes and
enables them to bind protein surfaces with high affinity in
more stable conformations. Traditional methods for discovering cyclic peptides involve chemical synthesis and highthroughput screening, both of which are labor-intensive and
costly. This has led to adopting in silico approaches such as

*
Equal contribution 1 ByteDance Seed (Work was done during
Xiangxin’s internship at ByteDance Seed.) 2 School of Artificial
Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 New
Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), State Key Laboratory
of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA) 4 Institute for
AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University 5 School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 6 Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<quanquan.gu@bytedance.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

