Conditioning Diffusions Using Malliavin Calculus

Jakiw Pidstrigach * 1 Elizabeth L. Baker * 2 Carles Domingo-Enrich 3 George Deligiannidis 1 Nikolas Nüsken * 4

Abstract
In generative modelling and stochastic optimal
control, a central computational task is to modify
a reference diffusion process to maximise a given
terminal-time reward. Most existing methods require this reward to be differentiable, using gradients to steer the diffusion towards favourable outcomes. However, in many practical settings, like
diffusion bridges, the reward is singular, taking
an infinite value if the target is hit and zero otherwise. We introduce a novel framework, based on
Malliavin calculus and centred around a generalisation of the Tweedie score formula to nonlinear
stochastic differential equations, that enables the
development of methods robust to such singularities. This allows our approach to handle a broad
range of applications, like diffusion bridges, or
adding conditional controls to an already trained
diffusion model. We demonstrate that our approach offers stable and reliable training, outperforming existing techniques. As a byproduct, we
also introduce a novel score matching objective.
Our loss functions are formulated such that they
could readily be extended to manifold-valued and
infinite dimensional diffusions.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: The figure depicts particle trajectories in a double well potential, with the background color indicating
potential intensity. The potential has two metastable states
at x = 1 and x = −1. In (a) we observe that under the
diffusion dynamics, particles initialised at x = 1 typically
remain confined to their well, rarely crossing the barrier to
x = −1. On the right, in (b), the diffusion is conditioned on
the rare event of transitioning between the two metastable
states.
and generative modelling (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho &
Salimans, 2021), including guidance for generative models
(Zhang et al., 2023; Denker et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

Reference System. To demonstrate some of the core ideas,
let us consider a diffusion process of the form

Simulating conditioned diffusions is a central computational
task in many applications, ranging from molecular dynamics
and physical chemistry (Dellago et al., 2002; Bolhuis et al.,
2002; Vanden-Eijnden et al., 2010) and genetics (Wang et al.,
2011) to finance, econometrics (Bladt & Sørensen, 2014;
Elerian et al., 2001; Durham & Gallant, 2002), evolutionary
biology (Arnaudon et al., 2023; 2017; Baker et al., 2024),

dXt = b(Xt ) dt + dBt ,

(1)

where the drift vector field b is given–either from a learned
generative model or from physically or financially motivated considerations. Samples from (1) can be obtained by
straightforward numerical simulation.
Guidance and Control. In many applications, it is desirable to condition the reference process (1). For instance, in
generative modeling, a large pretrained model may not offer
the necessary task-specific controls. One may then seek to
impose such controls post hoc—for example, to generate
images matching a desired edge map or human pose, or
to sample proteins with properties tailored to a particular
application. Similarly, when the reference process models weather dynamics, interest may lie in rare or extreme

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 3 Microsoft Research New England, Cambridge,
USA 4 Department of Mathematics, King’s College, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Jakiw Pidstrigach <mail@jakiw.com>, Elizabeth L. Baker <eloba@dtu.dk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

