Position: Constants are Critical in Regret Bounds for Reinforcement Learning

Simone Drago 1 Marco Mussi 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

Abstract

2017), RL has been subject to a lot of attention from the
research community from the theoretical standpoint, obtaining significant understanding on its fundamental statistical
challenges (Azar et al., 2017; Domingues et al., 2021).

Mainstream research in theoretical RL is currently
focused on designing online learning algorithms
with regret bounds that match the corresponding
regret lower bound up to multiplicative constants
(and, sometimes, logarithmic terms). In this position paper, we constructively question this trend,
arguing that algorithms should be designed to
at least minimize the amount of unnecessary exploration, and we highlight the significant role
constants play in algorithms’ actual performances.
This trend also exacerbates the misalignment between theoretical researchers and practitioners.
As an emblematic example, we consider the case
of regret minimization in finite-horizon tabular
MDPs. Starting from the well-known UCBVI
algorithm, we improve the bonus terms and the
corresponding regret analysis. Additionally, we
compare our version of UCBVI with both its
original version and the state-of-the-art MVP algorithm. Our empirical validation successfully
demonstrates how improving the multiplicative
constants has significant positive effects on the
actual empirical performances of the algorithm under analysis. This raises the question of whether
ignoring constants when assessing whether algorithms match is the proper approach.

Taking inspiration from the multi-armed bandit (MAB) literature (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), theoretical research
in RL has focused on characterizing online RL algorithms
through the cumulative regret, which represents the suboptimality of the played policy summed over a given horizon
of interaction. This performance index is particularly meaningful as it quantifies how quickly the learning algorithm
converges to the optimal policy. The conventional path in
this literature consists of (i) characterizing the statistical
complexity of the problem by deriving regret lower bounds
and (ii) designing and analyzing algorithms to provide regret upper bounds. The comparison between upper bounds
and lower bounds allows to establish whether the problem
is closed. It is conventionally accepted that a problem is
closed when upper and lower bounds match in the characteristic parameters of the problem, apart from constant (and,
sometimes, logarithmic) multiplicative factors.
Consider, for instance, the emblematic case of finite-horizon
tabular RL, where ?
we have a well-established lower bound
in the order of Ωp HSAT q, where S is the number of
states, A is the number of actions, H is the horizon of
the episode, and T “ HK where K is the number of
episodes (Domingues et al., 2021).1 At present, we have
learning algorithms that match this lower bound. The first
approach that succeeded in achieving order-optimal regret
is UCBVI (Azar et al., 2017), combining the classical value
iteration approach with the famous optimism in the face
of uncertainty mechanism, borrowed from bandits. The
algorithm is very intuitive (although its analysis is quite
convoluted)
and manages to achieve the same order of
?
r
Op HSAT q under the assumption that the time horizon
T is sufficiently large (T ě OpH 3 S 3 Aq).2 This latter limitation has been recently overcome by MVP (Zhang et al.,

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
emerged as a powerful methodology for addressing sequential decision-making problems under uncertainty. Besides
the successful applications of RL in the last decades, including robotic locomotion (Kober et al., 2013), continuous system control (Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al.,
2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018), autonomous driving (Kiran
et al., 2021), and games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al.,

1

In this paper, we consider stage-independent transition probabilities. For
? stage-dependent ones, the lower bound presents an
additional H multiplicative term. From the algorithmic perspective, we can easily adapt the upper bound results by considering
an MDP with an augmented state space of size SH.
2
The Op¨q notation ignores constants, while r
Op¨q also ignores
logarithmic factors.

1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Simone Drago <simone.drago@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

