Federated Incomplete Multi-view Clustering with Globally Fused Graph
Guidance
Guoqing Chao* 1 Zhenghao Zhang 1 Lei Meng 2 Jie Wen 3 Dianhui Chu 1

Abstract

ing in multi-view data (Chao et al., 2025a). Multi-view
clustering (MVC) is a popular machine learning paradigm
designed to group data using complementary and consistent information from multiple views. In recent years, deep
learning has been widely used in MVC, known as deep
multi-view clustering, which has achieved state-of-the-art
clustering performance due to its excellent representation
learning ability (Chen et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2024). In practice, due to the complexity of the data
collection and transmission process, data may be missing for
some views, leading to the Incomplete Multi-view Problem
(IMP) (Lin et al., 2021). To address IMP, some incomplete
multi-view clustering methods adopt data recovery methods
to predict missing data. Recently, graph neural networks
have received much attention for their ability to capture
structural information. In incomplete multi-view clustering
field, graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs) can compute missing data features with the help of graph structural
information and neighboring node attributes, reducing the
impact of missing data (Chao et al., 2024).

Federated multi-view clustering has been proposed to mine the valuable information within
multi-view data distributed across different devices and has achieved impressive results while
preserving the privacy. Despite great progress,
most federated multi-view clustering methods
only used global pseudo-labels to guide the downstream clustering process and failed to exploit
the global information when extracting features.
In addition, missing data problem in federated
multi-view clustering task is less explored. To
address these problems, we propose a novel Federated Incomplete Multi-view Clustering method
with globally Fused Graph guidance (FIMCFG).
Specifically, we designed a dual-head graph convolutional encoder at each client to extract two
kinds of underlying features containing global
and view-specific information. Subsequently, under the guidance of the fused graph, the two underlying features are fused into high-level features, based on which clustering is conducted
under the supervision of pseudo-labeling. Finally, the high-level features are uploaded to the
server to refine the graph fusion and pseudolabeling computation. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of FIMCFG. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/PaddiHunter/FIMCFG.

Federated learning is a distributed machine learning
paradigm that allows multiple clients to jointly train an ensemble model without exposing raw data information (Liu
et al., 2020; Qi et al., 2025b). It aims for dual optimization objectives of global generalization and local personalization(Meng et al., 2024), and focuses on addressing the
challenges posed by heterogeneous data distributions and
missing classes(Qi et al., 2023; 2025a). Federated multiview learning is designed to learn a global model from
multi-view data distributed across different clients. The
main challenges are formulated from privacy preservation
and the heterogeneity of multi-view data. In addition, multiview data distributed on different clients is often incomplete
and some views may be missing, exacerbating the complexity (Chen et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
With the fast development of information collection techniques, data can be obtained from different views, result1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China 2 School of Software, Shandong
University, Jinan, China 3 Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual
Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Guoqing Chao <guoqingchao@hit.edu.cn>.

There exist some research works combining graph neural
networks (GNN) with federated multi-view clustering (Yan
et al., 2024). However, most of current GNN-based federated multi-view learning only used the graph structure
information accompanied by noise and didn’t tackle the
missing data problem. In addition, in most federated multiview clustering models, the client tends to extract features
for a single view and on the server, the features are fused

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

