Reward Modeling with Ordinal Feedback: Wisdom of the Crowd

Shang Liu * 1 Yu Pan * 2 Guanting Chen 3 Xiaocheng Li 1

Abstract

However, there is an inconsistency between current ways
of collecting human preference data and the training of
reward models. For example, the Llama team collects finegrained human feedback: the annotations are made to 4
levels named “significantly better”, “better”, “slightly better”, and “marginally better” (Llama Team, 2024), while
the post-training of Llama 3 treats “significantly better” and
“better” as the same and discard all the others. Such a process
wastes the potentially useful samples that cost the human annotators additional time and discards the useful information
hidden in the preference level.

The canonical setup of learning a reward model
(RM) from human preferences with binary feedback discards potentially useful samples (such as
“tied” between the two responses) and loses finegrained information (such as “slightly better”).
This paper proposes a framework for learning
RMs under ordinal feedback, generalizing the binary feedback to arbitrary granularity. We first
identify a marginal unbiasedness condition, which
generalizes the existing assumption of the binary
feedback. The condition is validated via the sociological concept called “wisdom of the crowd”.
Under this condition, we develop a natural probability model and prove the benefits of fine-grained
feedback in terms of reducing the Rademacher
complexity, which may be of independent interest
to another problem: the bias-variance trade-off in
knowledge distillation. The framework also sheds
light on designing guidelines for human annotators. Our numerical experiments validate that: (1)
fine-grained feedback leads to better RM learning
for both in- and out-of-distribution settings; (2)
incorporating a certain proportion of tied samples
boosts RM learning.

In this paper, we study the problem of reward modeling under ordinal feedback. We relate the annotator’s preference
feedback with the probability that one response is better than
the other on a population level. We introduce a marginal
unbiasedness condition that validates the probability setup
of the ordinal feedback system. The assumption is justified
in two ways: (1) its restricted version in the binary feedback
case is already widely adopted; (2) the assumption corresponds to the “wisdom of the crowd” concept in sociology.
Under the assumption, we build a probability model of ordinal feedback. We also propose a learning objective as a
generalized version of the binary feedback by, for example,
replacing the binary-valued empirical probability with more
fine-grained values in the cross-entropy loss. Theoretically,
we establish the advantage of ordinal feedback, which draws
an interesting connection with the literature on soft labeling
and knowledge distillation.

1. Introduction

Our paper is organized as follows:

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
(Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Askell et al.,
2021; Ouyang et al., 2022) is vital to aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences. The RLHF
involves either explicitly training a reward model (RM)
from human preferences data (Ouyang et al., 2022) or implicitly using the LLM itself as one (Rafailov et al., 2024).

In Section 2, we model the feedback by the probability that
one response is better than the other on a population level.
The binary feedback (Z = {0, 1}) is extended to the general
ordinal feedback (Z = {zj }m
j=1 for 0 ≤ z1 < · · · < zm ≤
1), providing a way to transform the qualitative label into
quantitative ones.

*
Equal contribution 1 Imperial College Business School, Imperial College London, UK 2 The University of Sydney Business
School, The University of Sydney, Australia 3 Department of Statistics and Operations Research, UNC at Chapel Hill, USA. Correspondence to: Guanting Chen <guanting@unc.edu>, Xiaocheng
Li <xiaocheng.li@imperial.ac.uk>.

In Section 3, we build up the probability model of ordinal
feedback. We present the assumption (Assumption 3.1) that
the annotators are labeling the human preference data in
a marginally unbiased sense to the population-wise oracle.
Such an assumption (which we call “wisdom of the crowd”)
is only a generalization of the Bernoulli feedback. In this
light, we suggest revising the annotation guideline by providing a direct quantitative description of the qualitative

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

