Ab Initio Nonparametric Variable Selection for
Scalable Symbolic Regression with Large p

Shengbin Ye 1 2 Meng Li 1

Abstract

the 1600s when Johannes Kepler used astronomical data
to discover that Mars’ orbit was elliptical. This discovery,
along with Kepler’s other parsimonious and analytically
tractable laws of planetary motion, helped launch a scientific
revolution.

Symbolic regression (SR) is a powerful technique
for discovering symbolic expressions that characterize nonlinear relationships in data, gaining
increasing attention for its interpretability, compactness, and robustness. However, existing SR
methods do not scale to datasets with a large number of input variables (referred to as extreme-scale
SR), which is common in modern scientific applications. This “large p” setting, often accompanied by measurement error, leads to slow performance of SR methods and overly complex expressions that are difficult to interpret. To address
this scalability challenge, we propose a method
called PAN+SR, which combines a key idea of
ab initio nonparametric variable selection with
SR to efficiently pre-screen large input spaces
and reduce search complexity while maintaining accuracy. The use of nonparametric methods
eliminates model misspecification, supporting a
strategy called parametric-assisted nonparametric
(PAN). We also extend SRBench, an open-source
benchmarking platform, by incorporating highdimensional regression problems with various
signal-to-noise ratios. Our results demonstrate
that PAN+SR consistently enhances the performance of 19 contemporary SR methods, enabling
several to achieve state-of-the-art performance on
these challenging datasets.

With the recent progress in theoretical modeling and experimental instrumentation, researchers have entered a new
era of big data. The development of SR models is particularly important, as they have emerged as a powerful tool
for developing machine learning models that are intelligible,
interpretable, and compact. Unlike large numerical models,
the mathematical expressions used in SR models enable an
easy understanding of their behavior, making them valuable
in fields such as physics, where they can connect newly discovered physical laws with theory to facilitate subsequent
theoretical developments (Wu & Tegmark, 2019). Moreover,
SR models offer a safe and responsible option for machine
learning applications with high societal stakes, such as those
related to human lives, as they are well-suited for human
interpretability and in-depth analysis. As such, SR models
have found successful applications across a range of fields,
including astrophysics (Lemos et al., 2023), chemistry and
materials science (Hernandez et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020;
2022), control (Derner et al., 2020), economics (Verstyuk &
Douglas, 2022), mechanical engineering (Kronberger et al.,
2018), medicine (Virgolin et al., 2020), and space exploration (Märtens & Izzo, 2022), among others (Matsubara
et al., 2024).
SR literature has traditionally focused on datasets with lowdimensional inputs, often with p ≤ 10, and primarily considered only relevant variables—those used in the ground
truth (La Cava et al., 2021; Kamienny et al., 2022; Shojaee et al., 2023; Tenachi et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). In
these settings, variable selection has not been critical, as SR
has largely been viewed as an optimization problem under
low-noise conditions. However, modern scientific applications increasingly involve datasets with far larger numbers
of variables (p = 102 to 459 in this work), often including
irrelevant variables, rendering variable selection a critical
yet underexplored concept in SR pipelines.

1. Introduction
Symbolic regression (SR) is a mathematical technique for
finding a symbolic expression that matches data from an
unknown function. An early example of SR dates back to
1
Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, TX,
USA 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Meng
Li <meng@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

While variable selection is a well-established topic in statistics, its adoption in SR has been limited and its effective1

