Direct Prediction Set Minimization via Bilevel Conformal Classifier Training

Yuanjie Shi * 1 Hooman Shahrokhi * 1 Xuesong Jia 1 Xiongzhi Chen 2 Janardhan Rao Doppa 1 Yan Yan 1

Abstract

2016). However, to safely deploy deep machine learning
(ML) classifiers in high-stakes applications (e.g., medical
diagnosis (Begoli et al., 2019; Yang & Fevens, 2021)) and
to build efficient human-ML collaborative systems (e.g., a
classifier produces a small set of decisions and a human
selects from them (Cresswell et al., 2024; Straitouri et al.,
2023; Babbar et al., 2022)), we need reliable uncertainty
quantification (UQ) (Abdar et al., 2021). UQ could take the
form of a prediction set (a subset of classes) for classification tasks. For example, in medical diagnosis (Begoli et al.,
2019; Yang & Fevens, 2021), such prediction sets allow a
doctor to rule out harmful diagnoses such as stomach cancer,
even if the most likely diagnosis is a stomach ulcer.

Conformal prediction (CP) is a promising uncertainty quantification framework which works as a
wrapper around a black-box classifier to construct
prediction sets (i.e., subset of candidate classes)
with provable guarantees. However, standard calibration methods for CP tend to produce large
prediction sets which makes them less useful in
practice. This paper considers the problem of integrating conformal principles into the training
process of deep classifiers to directly minimize
the size of prediction sets. We formulate conformal training as a bilevel optimization problem
and propose the Direct Prediction Set Minimization (DPSM) algorithm to solve it. The key insight behind DPSM is to minimize a measure of
the prediction set size (upper level) that is conditioned on the learned quantile of conformity
scores (lower level). We analyze
that DPSM has
√
a learning bound of O(1/ n) (with n training
samples), while prior conformal training methods based on stochastic approximation for the
quantile has a bound
√of Ω(1/s) (with batch size s
and typically s ≪ n). Experiments on various
benchmark datasets and deep models show that
DPSM significantly outperforms the best prior
conformal training baseline with 20.46% ↓ in the
prediction set size and validates our theory.

Conformal prediction (CP) is a general framework that provides finite-sample guarantees of valid prediction sets to
include the correct output, which are agnostic to the ML
model and data distribution (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021). As a result, CP is increasingly used
for UQ in real-world problems (Cresswell et al., 2024; Lu
et al., 2022b;a). The general principle behind CP is to convert the output of an ML model on a given input example
(e.g., softmax scores of a deep classifier) into a prediction set
(Romano et al., 2020) that contains the true label with a userspecified probability (e.g., 90% probability) referred to as
coverage via a calibration step. One of the main limitations
of standard CP is that it tends to produce large prediction
sets, which may not be useful in practice (Vovk et al., 2016;
Babbar et al., 2022; Straitouri et al., 2023). Recent prior
work focused on how to improve the predictive efficiency of
CP (Fisch et al., 2021a;b; Angelopoulos et al., 2021; Huang
et al., 2023a; Ding et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024). However,
their focus is on the calibration step only by considering the
underlying ML model as a black-box.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved high prediction accuracy and enabled numerous applications in diverse domains
including computer vision (He et al., 2016; 2017) and natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Kumar et al.,

Recent work has considered integrating CP into classifier training to trade-off between prediction accuracy and
conformal alignment (e.g., minimizing the size of prediction sets) in an end-to-end fashion (Stutz et al., 2021; Einbinder et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2024). For instance, ConfTr
(Stutz et al., 2021) incorporates a stochastic approximation
(SA) of the average prediction set size into the training
objective function based on empirical quantiles over minibatches. To achieve accurate conditional coverage, conformal uncertainty-aware training (CUT) (Einbinder et al.,
2022) employs a similar SA approach to acquire the empiri-

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, USA 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Yan Yan <yan.yan1@wsu.edu>, Janardhan Rao Doppa
<jana.doppa@wsu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

