Compress then Serve:
Serving Thousands of LoRA Adapters with Little Overhead

Rickard Brüel Gabrielsson 1 Jiacheng Zhu 1 Onkar Bhardwaj 2 Leshem Choshen 1 2 Kristjan Greenewald 2
Mikhail Yurochkin 2 Justin Solomon 1

Abstract
Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) with
low-rank adaptations (LoRAs) has become common practice, often yielding numerous copies of
the same LLM differing only in their LoRA updates. This paradigm presents challenges for systems that serve real-time responses to queries that
each involve a different LoRA. Prior works optimize the design of such systems but still require continuous loading and offloading of LoRAs, as it is infeasible to store thousands of LoRAs in GPU memory. To mitigate this issue,
we investigate the efficacy of compression when
serving LoRAs. We propose a method for the
joint compression of LoRAs into a shared basis
paired with LoRA-specific scaling matrices. We
extend our algorithm to learn clusters of LoRAs
that are amenable to joint compression, allowing
it to scale gracefully to large LoRA collections.
Our experiments with up to 1000 LoRAs demonstrate that compressed LoRAs preserve performance while offering major throughput gains in
realistic serving scenarios with over a thousand
LoRAs, maintaining 80% of the throughput of
serving a single LoRA.

Figure 1: Throughput gains when serving 1000s of compressed LoRAs with vLLM.
low-rank parameterization, these matrices (called adapter
weights) contain orders of magnitude fewer parameters
than the base model. Still, LoRA can achieve performance
on par with full fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2021).
LoRA’s popularity has triggered a growing need to serve
large collections of LoRA adapters at scale. Proprietary
and open-source LLM providers offer fine-tuning services
(OpenAI, 2024; TogetherAI, 2024; Predibase, 2024) with
user bases likely in the thousands or even hundreds of
thousands. As each user wants to use their own finetuned version of the LLM, serving a dedicated fine-tuned
LLM per user becomes infeasible. To this end, S-LoRA
(Sheng et al., 2023) proposes a system where only the base
LLM is placed on an inference server and individual LoRA
adapters are switched as needed at inference time. S-LoRA
optimizes the system’s inner workings via custom CUDA
kernels and memory management to increase throughput
when serving multiple LoRAs. Multi-LoRA system design
has also been adopted in vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023), a stateof-the-art LLM serving engine. Despite optimized system
designs, serving LoRAs still has a fundamental limitation:
when the number of adapters is large, they need to be constantly loaded and offloaded from GPU memory to accommodate incoming requests, degrading throughput.

1. Introduction
The myriad uses for foundation models (FMs) have led to
a proliferation of specialized models, each fine-tuned to
perform a downstream task. To avoid fine-tuning foundation models with billions of parameters, parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) algorithms were proposed. An especially successful PEFT method is low-rank adaptation
(LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021), which learns low-rank additive changes to neural network matrices. Because of the
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.
Correspondence to: Rickard Brüel Gabrielsson <brg@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The problem of accommodating multiple LoRA adapters
is also apparent when placing LLMs on edge devices,
1

