Diversified Flow Matching with Translation Identifiability

Sagar Shrestha 1 Xiao Fu 1

Abstract

et al., 2023), medical imaging (Kong et al., 2021; Song
et al., 2024), and single-cell data analysis (Tong et al., 2023;
Kapuśniak et al., 2024).

Diversified distribution matching (DDM) finds
a unified translation function mapping a diverse
collection of conditional source distributions to
their target counterparts. DDM was proposed to
resolve content misalignment issues in unpaired
domain translation, achieving translation identifiability. However, DDM has only been implemented using GANs due to its constraints on the
translation function. GANs are often unstable to
train and do not provide the transport trajectory
information—yet such trajectories are useful in
applications such as single-cell evolution analysis
and robot route planning. This work introduces
diversified flow matching (DFM), an ODE-based
framework for DDM. Adapting flow matching
(FM) to enforce a unified translation function as in
DDM is challenging, as FM learns the translation
function’s velocity rather than the translation function itself. A custom bilevel optimization-based
training loss, a nonlinear interpolant, and a structural reformulation are proposed to address these
challenges, offering a tangible implementation.
To our knowledge, DFM is the first ODE-based
approach guaranteeing translation identifiability.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
validate the proposed method.

UDT is commonly realized by transporting the distribution of the source domain to that of the target domain (see,
e.g., (Zhu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2023b)). Distribution
transport is a core task in modern machine learning. It is
heavily studied in the context of domain adaptation, transfer
learning, and generative models. Distribution transport can
be realized by popular tools such as MMD (Long et al.,
2016), GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), Shrödinger Bridge
(De Bortoli et al., 2021), and continuous normalizing flows
(CNF) (Lipman et al., 2023). However, it has been noted
that UDT often loses control of the content to be produced
in the target domain. For example, in writing style translation, a handwritten digit “7” could be translate to printed “3”
under perfect distribution transport (Moriakov et al., 2020;
Shrestha & Fu, 2024). Similar issues are seen in Fig. 1,
where source pictures are translated to cartoons of unrelated persons. This “content misalignment” issue arises as
UDT does not have identifiability of the intended translation
function (i.e., the function that translates handwritten “7” to
printed “7” and the function that converts profile pictures
to cartoon faces without losing identities). There could be
an infinite number of translation functions that can attain
perfect distribution transport among the domains (Moriakov
et al., 2020; Shrestha & Fu, 2024).
Many attempts have been made to address the content misalignment issue; see, e.g., (de Bézenac et al., 2019; Zhu
et al., 2017; Taigman et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Xu et al.,
2022) for various regularization strategies to empirically
enforce translation identifiability. Notably, the recent work
(Shrestha & Fu, 2024) proposed the so-called diversified
distribution matching (DDM) approach, which showed that
UDT can be made identifiable if the translation function
is learned from simultaneously transporting a number of
diverse conditional distribution pairs.

1. Introduction
Unpaired domain translation (UDT) aims to translate samples from one domain to another (e.g., photographs to cartoons) while keeping the high-level semantic meaning (or
“content”). Here, “unpaired” means that the translation is
done without using paired cross-domain samples. UDT has
achieved significant empirical successes in various applications, such as unpaired image-to-image translation (Zhu
et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2018; Yang

Challenges. The DDM criterion provides a theory-driven
approach to avoid translation non-identifiability. However,
similar as many works in this domain (e.g., (Zhu et al., 2017;
Xu et al., 2022; de Bézenac et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2023)),
the DDM approach imposes a structural regularization on
the translation function realized by GANs. GAN-based

1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. Correspondence to:
Xiao Fu <xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

