Oscillation-Reduced MXFP4 Training for Vision Transformers

Yuxiang Chen 1 2 Haocheng Xi 3 Jun Zhu 1 Jianfei Chen 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Low-precision training has emerged as a promising technique for accelerating the training process of large-scale
neural networks. By quantizing tensors in both the forward and backward passes to lower-precision formats, lowprecision training leverages specialized compute units in
modern hardware to enhance computational efficiency significantly. While BF16 and FP16 precision remain the most
widely used formats for deep learning training (Narang et al.,
2017; Kalamkar et al., 2019), FP8 training (Sun et al., 2019;
Micikevicius et al., 2022; NVIDIA, 2024c; Xi et al., 2025)
is becoming increasingly mature in these years, with successful application in training state-of-the-art large language
models (Liu et al., 2024).

Pre-training Transformers in FP4 precision is becoming a promising approach to gain substantial speedup, but it comes with a considerable
loss of accuracy. Microscaling (MX) data format provides a fine-grained per-group quantization method to improve the representation ability
of the FP4 format and is supported by the nextgeneration Blackwell GPU architecture. However, training with MXFP4 data format still results in significant degradation and there is a
lack of systematic research on the reason. In
this work, we propose a novel training method
TetraJet for a more accurate FP4 training. We
comprehensively evaluate all of the quantizers
involved in the training, and identify the weight
oscillation problem in the forward pass as the
main source of the degradation in MXFP4 training. Therefore, we introduce two novel methods,
EMA Quantizer (Q-EMA) and Adaptive Ramping Optimizer (Q-Ramping), to resolve the oscillation problem. Extensive experiments on Vision
Transformers demonstrate that TetraJet consistently outperforms the existing 4-bit training methods, and Q-EMA & Q-Ramping can provide additional enhancement by effectively reducing oscillation. We decreased the accuracy degradation by
more than 50% compared to the baseline, and can
even achieve competitive performance compared
to full precision training. The codes are available at https://github.com/thu-ml/
TetraJet-MXFP4Training

There is a growing interest in pushing the training precision
down to 4-bit. While earlier works attempt to train the network with FP4 (Sun et al., 2020), logarithm format (Chmiel
et al., 2021), and INT4 (Xi et al., 2023), these works have
rather large accuracy degradation (e.g., 1-2%) even on simple tasks such as ResNet training, and are not practically
favorable. Recently, a Microscaling (MX) data format has
been proposed for accurate low-precision training and inference (Rouhani et al., 2023b;a). MX applies fine-grained
per-group quantization, where each small group of 32 elements shares a scaling factor. This fine-grained quantization
scheme significantly mitigates the impact of outliers, and
thus reduces quantization error. Particularly, the MXFP4
format utilizes an E2M1 (Exponent / Mantissa) FP4 with
an E8M0 scaling factor. MXFP4 is supported on the latest
Nvidia Blackwell architecture and is 2 times faster than
FP8/MXFP6 and 4 times faster than FP16/BF16 (NVIDIA,
2024a;b) when doing matrix multiplications. However, the
low-precision training method proposed in the original Microscaling paper uses MXFP6 activation/gradient, which is
as slow as FP8 training. The fast pure MXFP4 training still
has major accuracy degradation as tested in our experiments,
which makes it infeasible to use in practice.

1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist
Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua
University 2 Zhili College, Tsinghua University 3 University of
California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Jianfei Chen <jianfeic@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this work, we propose TetraJet, a novel training method
for transformer (Vaswani, 2017) with MXFP4 computation
in both forward and backward pass. All weight/activation/gradient tensors in linear layers are quantized to MXFP4
to fully unlock the acceleration potential of the hardware.
We propose several techniques to improve the accuracy of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

