How to Synthesize Text Data without Model Collapse?

Xuekai Zhu 1 2 Daixuan Cheng 2 Hengli Li 2 3 Kaiyan Zhang 4 Ermo Hua 4 Xingtai Lv 4 Ning Ding 4
Zhouhan Lin† 1 5 Zilong Zheng† 2 Bowen Zhou† 4 5

Abstract

lent in research and industry, synthetic data will proliferate
throughout the web data ecosystem. Consequently, future
training of GPT-{n} on a mixture of synthetic and humanproduced data will be inevitable. Thus, model collapse is
a critical concern that must be considered when training
models on synthetic data.

Model collapse in synthetic data indicates that
iterative training on self-generated data leads to
a gradual decline in performance. With the proliferation of AI models, synthetic data will fundamentally reshape the web data ecosystem. Future
GPT-{n} models will inevitably be trained on a
blend of synthetic and human-produced data. In
this paper, we focus on two questions: what is the
impact of synthetic data on language model training, and how to synthesize data without model collapse? We first pre-train language models across
different proportions of synthetic data, revealing
a negative correlation between the proportion of
synthetic data and model performance. We further conduct statistical analysis on synthetic data
to uncover distributional shift phenomenon and
over-concentration of n-gram features. Inspired
by the above findings, we propose token editing
on human-produced data to obtain semi-synthetic
data. As a proof of concept, we theoretically
demonstrate that token-level editing can prevent
model collapse, as the test error is constrained by
a finite upper bound. We conduct extensive experiments on pre-training from scratch, continual
pre-training, and supervised fine-tuning. The results validate our theoretical proof that token-level
editing improves model performance.

Model collapse refers to a degenerative process in which the
output data of learned generative models contaminates the
training sets of subsequent generations. As shown in Figure 1, iterative training coupled with data synthesis induces
a progressive accumulation of test errors (Shumailov et al.,
2024; Dohmatob et al., 2024a). Consequently, generative
models increasingly overfit to synthetic data distributions,
failing to capture the complexity in human-produced data.
Through successive iterations in Figure 1, these distortions
accumulate, finally undermining the model’s capacity.
Recent studies focus on two aspects. First, theoretical foundations of model collapse. Shumailov et al. (2024) and
Dohmatob et al. (2024a) identify the model collapse phenomenon and formalize a theoretical framework based on
linear regression. Gerstgrasser et al. (2024) demonstrate
that if synthetic data is accumulated while retaining the initial real data, the test error will be bounded, thus breaking
model collapse. Dohmatob et al. (2024c;b) indicate that
missing long tails of synthetic data lead to scaling law cutoff. Second, practical implementations on synthetic datasets
by diverse prompting. Synthetic datasets (Trinh et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024) have been proven to boost the capabilities of language models. Cheng et al. (2024a;b); Maini
et al. (2024) rephrase text into more formal styles, thereby
improving the data quality. There are still two key questions
that require further investigation: (Q1) What is the impact
of synthetic data on language model training? (Q2) How
can data be synthesized without causing model collapse?

1. Introduction
As generative artificial intelligence (AI) (Rombach et al.,
2021; Achiam et al., 2023) becomes increasingly preva1

LUMIA Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 State Key
Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI 3 Institute
for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 4 Department of
Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University 5 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Zhouhan Lin
<lin.zhouhan@gmail.com>, Zilong Zheng <zlzheng@bigai.ai>,
Bowen Zhou <zhoubowen@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we address the first question by training language models on varying mixtures of synthetic and humanproduced data, demonstrating non-iterative model collapse.
Unlike the original model collapse setting which iteratively
trains on self-generated data, we directly mix synthetic and
human-produced data to create training datasets with different mixing ratios. The results show a negative correlation
between performance and the proportion of synthetic data.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

