Validating Mechanistic Interpretations: An Axiomatic Approach

Nils Palumbo 1 Ravi Mangal 2 Zifan Wang 3 Saranya Vijayakumar 4 Corina Păsăreanu 4 Somesh Jha 1

Abstract

aspects of vision as well as language models, it has found
most success in analyzing small models trained to solve
specific algorithmic tasks such as modular addition (Nanda
et al., 2023a). Although such small models are not necessarily of practical use, analyzing them has been fruitful for developing the techniques needed to mechanistically interpret.

Mechanistic interpretability aims to reverse
engineer the computation performed by a neural
network in terms of its internal components.
Although there is a growing body of research on
mechanistic interpretation of neural networks,
the notion of a mechanistic interpretation itself
is often ad-hoc. Inspired by the notion of abstract
interpretation from the program analysis literature
that aims to develop approximate semantics for
programs, we give a set of axioms that formally
characterize a mechanistic interpretation as
a description that approximately captures the
semantics of the neural network under analysis
in a compositional manner. We demonstrate
the applicability of these axioms for validating
mechanistic interpretations on an existing, wellknown interpretability study as well as on a new
case study involving a Transformer-based model
trained to solve the well-known 2-SAT problem.

Despite the broad interest in mechanistic interpretability, we
observe that the notion of a mechanistic interpretation has
so far been primarily defined in an ad-hoc manner. In this
work, we propose a collection of axioms that characterize
a mechanistic interpretation.1 Our view on mechanistic
interpretability is inspired by the notion of abstract interpretation from the program analysis literature (Cousot &
Cousot, 1977; 1992) that seeks to approximate the semantics
of programs in order to make their analysis computationally
feasible. Similarly, our axioms are meant to capture the
property that the mechanistic interpretation should capture
the semantics of the model. Further, our axioms also capture
the intuition that such an approximation should respect
the compositional structure of the neural network—not
only should the input-output behavior of the mechanistic
interpretation be as close as possible to the original model,
but every step in the reverse-engineered algorithm should
be as close as possible to the computation performed by the
internal components of the model (i.e., neurons and layers).
Our axioms clarify the responsibilities of an analyst; in
addition to providing a mechanistic interpretation, an
analyst also needs to present evidence to support the fact
that the provided interpretation is valid, i.e., satisfies these
axioms. Note that our axioms present a general framework
for validating mechanistic interpretations. Closest to our
work are recent papers by Geiger et al. (2021) and Chan
et al. (2022) that seek to formalize the notion of mechanistic
interpretability from a causal perspective. We believe that
these formulations are complementary to our axioms.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are notoriously opaque. Mechanistic interpretability seeks to reverse-engineer the computation described by a neural network in a human-interpretable form.
Typically, the resulting mechanistic interpretation takes the
form of a circuit (i.e., program) operating over features (i.e.,
symbols). The features refer to human-interpretable properties of the input (such as edges, textures, or shapes for vision
models and part-of-speech tags, named entities, or semantic
relationships for language models) that the model represents
internally in its representations spaces whereas the circuit
refers to a chain of human-interpretable operations, encoded
by the model in its layers, such that each operation processes
and transforms the features (Millière & Buckner, 2024).
While mechanistic interpretability has been used to analyze

We demonstrate the applicability of our axioms for validating mechanistic interpretations via two case studies2 —the
existing, well-known analysis by Nanda et al. (2023a) of a
model with a Transformer-based architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) trained to solve modular addition, and a new analysis

1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Colorado State University 3 Scale AI 4 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Nils Palumbo <npalumbo@wisc.edu>, Ravi Mangal
<ravi.mangal@colostate.edu>.

1

In the same sense that group axioms characterize the notion
of an abstract group in abstract algebra.
2
Our implementation is available at https://github.
com/nilspalumbo/axiomatic-validation.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

