Provable Benefits of Unsupervised Pre-training and Transfer Learning via
Single-Index Models

Taj Jones-McCormick * 1 Aukosh Jagannath * 1 2 Subhabrata Sen * 3

Abstract

initialization. However, access to additional data opens the
door to other avenues for initializing model weights.

Unsupervised pre-training and transfer learning
are commonly used techniques to initialize training algorithms for neural networks, particularly
in settings with limited labeled data. In this paper,
we study the effects of unsupervised pre-training
and transfer learning on the sample complexity
of high-dimensional supervised learning. Specifically, we consider the problem of training a singlelayer neural network via online stochastic gradient
descent. We establish that pre-training and transfer learning (under concept shift) reduce sample
complexity by polynomial factors (in the dimension) under very general assumptions. We also uncover some surprising settings where pre-training
grants exponential improvement over random initialization in terms of sample complexity.

A prominent setting with additional data is semi-supervised
learning, where one might have an abundance of unlabeled
data. Unsupervised pre-training has emerged as a popular
strategy in this context (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown, 2020).
The core idea behind pre-training is to train a model (on
the unlabeled data) on a task that is related or, even better, a necessary precursor to the supervised task of interest.
Initializing from a pre-trained model, the hope is that the
model will have already learned useful features from the
unlabeled data and hence solve the supervised task with
reduced sample complexity. The model trained in this way
can then be used to initialize a model for the supervised
task in various ways e.g., by removing the final layer of the
network and replacing it with an output head relevant to the
labeled task, such as a classification head.
Another prominent setup with additional data is transfer
learning (Pan & Yang, 2009), where one has access to samples from related supervised tasks. In this case, a natural
idea is to initialize the model weights on the target dataset
using the model trained on the upstream task.

1. Introduction
The canonical pipeline of modern supervised learning is as
follows: given supervised data, (i) choose an appropriate
model/estimator (usually specified by a deep neural network), (ii) choose a loss function and set up a suitable empirical risk minimization problem, and (iii) minimize this
(possibly non-convex) empirical risk using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Extensions of this “basic” approach
have been successfully deployed to train state-of-the-art
models in diverse domains. As deep learning models become larger and more complex, one has to wrestle with the
issue of model weight initialization during training. Without additional information, one usually resorts to random

The precise scheme for unsupervised pre-training or transfer learning can vary significantly across applications. For
example, BERT models employ self-supervised representation learning by predicting “masked” tokens based on the
observed ones (Devlin et al., 2019). Similar self-supervised
pre-training algorithms form core components in the training of modern language models such as GPT (Radford et al.,
2019; Brown, 2020; Achiam et al., 2023) and have attracted
widespread attention recently. Many other forms of both
pre-training and transfer leaning are applied in countless
works spanning many different fields within machine learning (Wang et al., 2016; He et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019;
Schneider et al., 2019). Their popularity underscores the
importance of understanding the effects of these different
methods of weight initialization on supervised tasks.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Waterloo, Canada 2 Cheriton
School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
Canada 3 Department of Statistics, Harvard University,
United States of America. Correspondence to: Taj JonesMcCormick <tejonesmccormick@uwaterloo.ca>, Aukosh
Jagannath <a.jagannath@uwaterloo.ca>, Subhabrata Sen
<subhabratasen@fas.harvard.edu>.

The main goal of this work is to build towards a theoretical
understanding of the benefits of pre-training, particularly
in terms of the effect on sample complexity for solving
supervised learning tasks in high dimension that involve

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

