Massive Values in Self-Attention Modules are the
Key to Contextual Knowledge Understanding

Mingyu Jin 1 Kai Mei 1 Wujiang Xu 1 Mingjie Sun 2
Ruixiang Tang 1 Mengnan Du 3 Zirui Liu 4 † Yongfeng Zhang 1 †

Abstract

Nx

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved
remarkable success in contextual knowledge
understanding. In this paper, we show for the
first time that these concentrated massive values
consistently emerge in specific regions of attention queries (Q) and keys (K) while not having
such patterns in values (V) in various modern
transformer-based LLMs. Through extensive
experiments, we further demonstrate that these
massive values play a critical role in interpreting
contextual knowledge (i.e., knowledge obtained
from the current context window) rather than in
retrieving parametric knowledge stored within
the model’s parameters. Our further investigation
of quantization strategies reveals that ignoring
these massive values leads to a pronounced drop
in performance on tasks requiring rich contextual
understanding, aligning with our analysis. Finally,
we trace the emergence of concentrated massive
values and find that such concentration is caused
by Rotary Positional Encoding (RoPE) and it
appears since very first layers. These findings
shed new light on how Q and K operate in
LLMs and offer practical insights for model
design and optimization. The code is available at
https://github.com/MingyuJ666/Rope_with_LLM.

DIM

SoftMax

Ro
PE

Ro
PE

Q

K

Massive
Outlier

Causal
Mask

V
Massive
Value

푯풆
Embedding Vector
of K and Q

Figure 1. In transformer-based Large Language Models with RoPE
(like Llama, Gemma), the attention queries (Q) and keys (K) exhibit concentrated massive values in certain dimensions.

et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025). However, our understanding
of their internal mechanisms and how these mechanisms
relate to observable behaviors remains limited, posing a
challenge to improving their reliability and performance.
Researchers have explored LLM representations (Azaria
& Mitchell, 2023; Bürger et al., 2024; Gurnee & Tegmark,
2024; Jin et al., 2025) and discovered that residual stream
activations can exhibit massive values (i.e., magnitudes significantly larger than typical values (Dettmers et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2021; 2023; Sun et al., 2024; Heo et al., 2024)).
Recent studies further (Liu et al.; Hooper et al., 2024; Zhao
et al., 2024) observe that massive values appear exclusively
in Q and K while are absent in V. Here, by Q, K, and V, we
mean the representations output by the query, key, and value
layers in self-attention, respectively. These massive values
have been identified as critical factors influencing quantization (Liu et al.; Lin et al., 2024), leading to the development
of methods such as suppression techniques (Wei et al., 2021;
2023) and protection mechanisms (Lin et al., 2024; Xiao
et al., 2023). Although these studies utilize observations
of massive values for quantization, they do not explore the
rationale behind this counterintuitive phenomenon deeply.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable
success across various applications (Wei et al., 2022; Brown
et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023; Sun et al.; Jin et al.; Tang
*
The first two authors are core contributors to this project,
listed in random order † Correspondence Author 1 Rutgers University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 New Jersey Institute of Technology 4 University of Minnesota. Correspondence to: Mingyu
Jin <mingyu.jin@rutgers.edu>, Zirui Liu <zrliu@umn.edu>,
Yongfeng Zhang <yongfeng.zhang@rutgers.edu>.

To address this gap, we systematically investigate the formation of massive values and their connection to model
behaviors. Our key findings are as follows: ❶ Massive
values are concentrated in specific regions of Q and K
exclusively. This echoes the finding in "Round and Round
we go" (Barbero et al., 2025). We observe that massive
values concentrate in specific regions of Q and K compu-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

