ZeroFlow: Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting is Easier than You Think

Tao Feng 1 Wei Li 1 * Didi Zhu 2 Hangjie Yuan 2 Wendi Zheng 1 Dan Zhang 1 Jie Tang 1
https://zeroflow-bench.github.io/

Abstract

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Backpropagation provides a generalized configuration for overcoming catastrophic forgetting. Optimizers such as SGD and Adam are commonly
used for weight updates in continual learning and
continual pre-training. However, access to gradient information is not always feasible in practice due to black-box APIs, hardware constraints,
or non-differentiable systems, a challenge we refer to as the gradient bans. To bridge this gap,
we introduce ZeroFlow, the first benchmark designed to evaluate gradient-free optimization algorithms for overcoming forgetting. ZeroFlow
examines a suite of forward pass-based methods
across various algorithms, forgetting scenarios,
and datasets. Our results show that forward passes
alone can be sufficient to mitigate forgetting. We
uncover novel optimization principles that highlight the potential of forward pass-based methods
in mitigating forgetting, managing task conflicts,
and reducing memory demands. Additionally, we
propose new enhancements that further improve
forgetting resistance using only forward passes.
This work provides essential tools and insights to
advance the development of forward-pass-based
methods for continual learning.

Train

Train

Train

AI Model

AI Model

AI Model

Randomly Initialized

Ban
Pre-trained

Permission denied

Ban

Ban

ℒ! (#)
Forward Pass

ℒ" (#)
Backpropagation

ℒ# (#)
ZO Gradient Estimation

Figure 1: Illustrations of ZeroFlow. New tasks (or downstream tasks) arrive sequentially, the gradient bans block the
model from learning and memorizing using backpropagation. ZeroFlow overcome this issue via forward passes.
continual pre-training (CPT) (Shi et al., 2024; Zhu et al.,
2024b), etc. Among them, optimization algorithms play a
crucial role, e.g., SGD has become the default choice during
CL (van de Ven et al., 2022), while Adam is frequently seen
in fine-tuning FMs (Luo et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024a).
These optimization algorithms in tandem with various methods (ranging from regularization and rehearsal strategies to
architectural changes) rely on gradient information to avoid
forgetting (Zhou et al., 2023c; Bian et al., 2024). Nonetheless, in real-world scenarios, gradient information is not
always available or computable (i.e., the gradient bans), like,
Scenario i: large language models as a service (LLMaaS)
and black-box APIs. Scenario ii: hardware systems that do
not support principled backpropagation. Scenario iii: AI for
science with non-differentiable underlying systems.

1. Introduction
Catastrophic forgetting remains one of the major challenges
on the path to artificial general intelligence (AGI) (Hadsell
et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023b), i.e., models tend to forget
previously learned tasks when trained on new ones on timeevolving data flow (Feng et al., 2022b). This phenomenon
is commonly seen across various tasks, including continual
learning (CL) (Wang et al., 2023), fine-tuning of foundation
models (FMs) (Sun et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2024), and

In other words, Scenario i implies that pretrained models
are monetized (Miura et al., 2024) (model owners do not
publicly release their pretrained models but instead the service), i.e., only the inputs and outputs are accessible (Gan
et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2022). Scenarios ii/iii implies that
the limitations prevent or restrict the execution of backpropagation (Lillicrap et al., 2020), i.e., extremely high memory
demands (Mangrulkar et al., 2022), unsupported systems
and hardware (Jabri & Flower, 1992), or non-differentiable
functions, etc (Tavanaei et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2021). The
above means that typical methods for overcoming forgetting
are not available because backpropagation is banned, as
Figure 1. This yields the primary question to be explored,

*
Core contribution 1 Tsinghua University 2 Zhejiang University.
Correspondence to: Jie Tang <jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

