A Market for Accuracy: Classification under Competition

Ohad Einav 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract

In accuracy markets, firms seek to maximize their market
share by competing with other firms over who provides
more users with accurate predictions. This paper aims to
study such markets from three perspectives, namely of: (i)
the firms (or ‘learners’) that compete in the market, (ii) the
population of potential users, and (iii) the market itself. We
follow the market model proposed by Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz (2017; 2019), but focus on classification (rather than
regression), which we argue is more natural for this setting.
The main idea is that users choose a firm if it provides them
with accurate predictions; if multiple such firms exist, then
ties are broken randomly. When there is only one firm in
the market (a monopoly), then maximal market share can
be attained by maximizing accuracy directly—which is also
optimal for users. However, once there is competition, each
firm must take into account the predictions of all other firms,
as it depends on their choice of classifiers. This dependence
forms an oligopoly market in which the interests of the firms
no longer necessarily align with user welfare, defined as the
ratio of users for whom at least one firm is accurate.

Machine learning models play a key role for service providers looking to gain market share in
consumer markets. However, traditional learning approaches do not take into account the existence of additional providers, who compete with
each other for consumers. Our work aims to
study learning in this market setting, as it affects
providers, consumers, and the market itself. We
begin by analyzing such markets through the lens
of the learning objective, and show that accuracy
cannot be the only consideration. We then propose a method for classification under competition, so that a learner can maximize market share
in the presence of competitors. We show that our
approach benefits the providers as well as the consumers, and find that the timing of market entry
and model updates can be crucial. We display the
effectiveness of our approach across a range of domains, from simple distributions to noisy datasets,
and show that the market as a whole remains stable by converging quickly to an equilibrium.

The main result of Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz (2019) is that
if firms in such markets can successfully compute a best (or
better) response (i.e., find a model that maximizes market
share conditioned on all other models remaining fixed), then
dynamics will converge to a pure Nash equilibrium. This
is insightful, but leaves many questions unanswered: When
can best-response classifiers be found efficiently, and how?1
What kind of equilibria can be reached, and what will
happen on the way there? How will the market be shared
by the different firms? And will outcomes be beneficial for
users? Our goal is to shed light on these issues and others,
using theoretical analysis and empirical evaluation, and as
they relate to the learning firms, the users, and the market.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models play an essential role in consumer
markets of today. Across many domains, firms that offer
products and services can significantly gain by attaining
better predictions about their users, or providing better predictions for them. In a sense, this has made accuracy itself
a commodity which consumers pursue; consider how user
choices have come to depend on the quality of personalized
predictions in recommendation systems, media platforms,
online marketplaces, or health analytics services. The increasing demand for accurate predictions incentivizes firms
to improve their predictions, which in turn creates a ‘supply’
of accuracy—a process which results in the formation of
what we refer to as accuracy markets.
1

From the perspective of the learner, our results show that
finding the best-response classifier is as hard—but also not
harder than—solving a standard classification problem. In
fact, given the predictions (or classifiers) of all other players,
maximizing market share corresponds to maximizing a
particular weighted accuracy objective. This means that
although solving this exactly is hard, standard learning techniques (e.g., using proxy losses) can be highly effective in

Faculty of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Nir Rosenfeld <nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz (2019) give an algorithm that applies
to linear regression and relies on integer linear programming.

