AlphaQCM: Alpha Discovery in Finance with
Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Zhoufan Zhu 1 2 Ke Zhu 3

Abstract

gadeesh, 1990). Here, each alpha is a function that transforms noisy historical stock data into signals for predicting
future stock returns. However, recent studies examining the
influence of investor behavior and psychology on price dynamics have uncovered the existence of subtle and intricate
alphas that are difficult to formalize using standard financial
methods (Barberis, 2018).

For researchers and practitioners in finance, finding synergistic formulaic alphas is very important
but challenging. In this paper, we reconsider the
discovery of synergistic formulaic alphas from
the viewpoint of sequential decision-making, and
conceptualize the entire alpha discovery process
as a non-stationary and reward-sparse Markov decision process. To overcome the challenges of
non-stationarity and reward-sparsity, we propose
the AlphaQCM method, a novel distributional reinforcement learning method designed to search
for synergistic formulaic alphas efficiently. The
AlphaQCM method first learns the Q function and
quantiles via a Q network and a quantile network,
respectively. Then, the AlphaQCM method applies the quantiled conditional moment method
to learn unbiased variance from the potentially
biased quantiles. Guided by the learned Q function and variance, the AlphaQCM method navigates the non-stationarity and reward-sparsity to
explore the vast search space of formulaic alphas
with high efficacy. Empirical applications to realworld datasets demonstrate that our AlphaQCM
method significantly outperforms its competitors,
particularly when dealing with large datasets comprising numerous stocks.

Most existing AI approaches surpass traditional methods
in this field by designing alphas through the use of sophisticated machine learning (ML) models in an end-to-end
manner (Feng et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020; Koa et al.,
2023). Intuitively, the well-trained ML models are effective
alphas, since they can transform stock data into predictive
signals. However, they are inherently complex and lack simple mathematical representations, leading to the so-called
non-formulaic alphas. Yet, the non-formulaic alphas have
trust issues due to their black-box nature, so they are not
widely adopted in the industry.
For dealing with the above trust issue, emerging literature
focuses on how to automatically discover a set of synergistic formulaic alphas. The formulaic nature of these alphas
implies that they can be expressed by a simple formula, usually making them compact, interpretable, and generalizable;
meanwhile, their synergistic nature allows them to be combined into a meta-alpha via some interpretable models (e.g.,
linear models). Finding these formulaic alphas typically is
based on the genetic programming (GP) method (Lin et al.,
2019a;b; Zhang et al., 2020; Cui et al., 2021). However, the
GP method has a vast search space, which scales exponentially with the number of input features and operators.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, extensive research has investigated
the predictive power of historical stock information for
forecasting future returns, resulting in the development
of several well-known alphas, such as long-term momentum (Jegadeesh & Titman, 1993) and short-term reversal (Je-

To overcome the challenge of vast search space in the GP
method, the AlphaGen method (Yu et al., 2023) reformulates the alpha discovery problem into the task of finding
an optimal policy for a specialized Markov decision process (MDP), and then achieves this task via a reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm. Although the AlphaGen method
shows state-of-the-art performance, it has two substantial
theory-practice gaps, resulting in the inefficient and unstable
alpha discovery procedure in practice. The first gap is an unaddressed non-stationary issue (Lecarpentier & Rachelson,
2019), where the reward function in the MDP of interest
changes dynamically across decision episodes. This issue

1

Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 2 Department of Finance, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 3 Department of Statistics & Actuarial Science,
School of Computing & Data Science, University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Ke Zhu <mazhuke@hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

