Tackling Dimensional Collapse toward
Comprehensive Universal Domain Adaptation

Hung-Chieh Fang 1 Po-Yi Lu 1 Hsuan-Tien Lin 1
1.0

Abstract
Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) addresses
unsupervised domain adaptation where target
classes may differ arbitrarily from source ones,
except for a shared subset. A widely used approach, partial domain matching (PDM), aligns
only shared classes but struggles in extreme cases
where many source classes are absent in the target
domain, underperforming the most naive baseline that trains on only source data. In this work,
we identify that the failure of PDM for extreme
UniDA stems from dimensional collapse (DC)
in target representations. To address target DC,
we propose to jointly leverage the alignment and
uniformity techniques in self-supervised learning on the unlabeled target data to preserve the
intrinsic structure of the learned representations.
Our experimental results confirm that SSL consistently advances PDM and delivers new stateof-the-art results across a broader benchmark
of UniDA scenarios with different portions of
shared classes, representing a crucial step toward truly comprehensive UniDA. Project page:

| t|
t = | s t|

0.8

Invalid
Unrealistic
Widely Studied
Less Studied

Office-Home

0.6

0.4

DomainNet
Office-31
VisDA

0.2

Extreme UniDA (high s)
0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

| s|
s = | s t|

0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 1. Spectrum of UniDA: The dark region indicates invalid
cases with negative shared classes, while the light gray region
represents unrealistic scenarios with few or no shared classes. The
X-axis indicates Partial DA, and the Y-axis indicates Open-set DA.

2018; Jiang et al., 2020), which assumes that the label sets
of the source domain (Cs ) and the target domain (Ct ) are
identical (Cs = Ct ).
More flexible setups such as Open-set Domain Adaptation (Cs ⊂ Ct ) and Partial Domain Adaptation (Cs ⊃ Ct )
have been studied (Panareda Busto & Gall, 2017; Cao
et al., 2018), addressing scenarios where Ct has more
or fewer classes than Cs . Universal Domain Adaptation
(UniDA) (You et al., 2019) further loosens the limit and unifies those setups by not assuming any containment relation
between Cs and Ct . Specifically, UniDA assumes unknown
shared classes to overlap between Cs and Ct , while allowing
each set to contain its private classes. The setup is tasked
with classifying target-domain examples as either one of the
shared classes or as an unseen class over arbitrary divisions
of source-private, shared, and target-private label sets.

https://dc-unida.github.io/

1. Introduction
While deep learning and machine learning have achieved
remarkable success across a wide range of tasks, they still
struggle when there is a distribution shift between the training and testing data. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) (Pan & Yang, 2009) addresses this challenge by
transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain with
a known distribution to an unlabeled target domain that may
follow a different distribution. Arguably the simplest UDA
setting is closed-set UDA (Ganin et al., 2016; Long et al.,

Addressing the gap between two domains in UDA is commonly approached by combining a loss on the labeled source
data with another loss on domain matching, which aims to
align feature distributions between domains to enable effective knowledge transfer (Ganin et al., 2016; Courty et al.,
2016; Tzeng et al., 2017; Zellinger et al., 2017; Jiang et al.,
2020). However, in the UniDA setting, the presence of
private classes in both domains, which are unknown dur-

1

National Taiwan University. Correspondence to: HungChieh Fang <b09902106@csie.ntu.edu.tw>, Hsuan-Tien Lin
<htlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

