Principled Algorithms for Optimizing
Generalized Metrics in Binary Classification

Anqi Mao 1 Mehryar Mohri 2 1 Yutao Zhong 2

Abstract

coefficient (Sokolova & Lapalme, 2009), or the weighted
accuracy are preferred over the standard zero-one misclassification loss. These metrics are particularly relevant in
scenarios with significant class imbalance, such as fraud detection, medical diagnosis, and information retrieval (Lewis,
1995b; Drummond & Holte, 2005; He & Garcia, 2009; Gu
et al., 2009), or in settings where classification costs are
asymmetrical. However, optimizing these alternative metrics presents both computational and statistical challenges,
as they deviate from the standard single-loss expectation
framework commonly used in surrogate loss function analysis (Steinwart, 2007).

In applications with significant class imbalance
or asymmetric costs, metrics such as the Fβ measure, AM measure, Jaccard similarity coefficient, and weighted accuracy offer more suitable
evaluation criteria than standard binary classification loss. However, optimizing these metrics
present significant computational and statistical
challenges. Existing approaches often rely on
the characterization of the Bayes-optimal classifier, and use threshold-based methods that first
estimate class probabilities and then seek an optimal threshold. This leads to algorithms that
are not tailored to restricted hypothesis sets and
lack finite-sample performance guarantees. In
this work, we introduce principled algorithms
for optimizing generalized metrics, supported by
H-consistency and finite-sample generalization
bounds. Our approach reformulates metric optimization as a generalized cost-sensitive learning
problem, enabling the design of novel surrogate
loss functions with provable H-consistency guarantees. Leveraging this framework, we develop
new algorithms, METRO (Metric Optimization),
with strong theoretical performance guarantees.
We report the results of experiments demonstrating the effectiveness of our methods compared to
prior baselines.

Research on the design of algorithms for specific instances
of such metrics or the general family has largely focused on
the characterization of the Bayes-optimal classifier. For the
standard zero-one binary classification loss, it is known that
the Bayes classifier can be defined as x ↦ sign(η(x) − 12 ),
where η(x) is the probability of a positive label conditioned
on x. A similar characterization applies to the weighted
zero-one loss (Scott, 2012), where the threshold corresponds
to a weight different from 12 . For imbalanced metrics, Ye
et al. (2012) characterized the Bayes-classifier for the F1 measure, while Menon et al. (2013) characterized the Bayes
classifier for the AM measure as x ↦ sign(η(x) − δ ∗ ) for
some δ ∗ ∈ (0, 1). These results were later generalized by
Koyejo et al. (2014) to a broader family of metrics that
can be formulated as a ratio of two linear functions of true
positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN), and
false negative (FN) statistics. This family of linear-fractional
metrics includes the aforementioned weighted accuracy, Fβ measures, the AM measure, as well as the Jaccard similarity
coefficient (Sokolova & Lapalme, 2009), among others.

1. Introduction
In many applications, performance metrics such as the Fβ measure (Lewis, 1995a; Jansche, 2005; Ye et al., 2012), the
AM measure (Menon et al., 2013), the Jaccard similarity

Existing algorithms for optimizing these metrics heavily rely
on the structure of the Bayes-optimal solution (Koyejo et al.,
2014; Parambath et al., 2014). These methods generally
adopt a two-stage approach: first estimating the conditional
probability η(x) and then searching for a suitable threshold
δ ∗ specific to the metric.

1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New
York, NY; 2 Google Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to:
Anqi Mao <aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>,
Mehryar Mohri <mohri@google.com>, Yutao Zhong <yutaozhong@google.com>.

These algorithms naturally come with consistency guarantees (Koyejo et al., 2014). However, consistency is an
asymptotic property and does not provide explicit convergence rate guarantees. Moreover, it applies only to the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

