Strategy Coopetition Explains the Emergence
and Transience of In-Context Learning

Aaditya K. Singh 1 Ted Moskovitz 2 Sara Dragutinović 3 Felix Hill 4 Stephanie C. Y. Chan * 4
Andrew M. Saxe * 1

Abstract

and solve tasks not seen in training. ICL contrasts with inweights learning (IWL), which is standard learning through
weight updates. ICL is striking not only for its power, but
also because it emerges without being explicitly trained
for (as Brown et al. (2020) first observed, when training
transformer models on internet-scale language corpora.).
Newer work has shown that ICL can sometimes in fact
disappear after emerging, i.e. it can be transient over the
course of training (Singh et al., 2023; Anand et al., 2024;
He et al., 2024).

In-context learning (ICL) is a powerful ability that
emerges in transformer models, enabling them
to learn from context without weight updates.
Recent work has established emergent ICL as a
transient phenomenon that can sometimes disappear after long training times. In this work,
we sought a mechanistic understanding of these
transient dynamics. Firstly, we find that—after
the disappearance of ICL—the asymptotic strategy is a remarkable hybrid between in-weights
and in-context learning, which we term “contextconstrained in-weights learning” (CIWL). CIWL
is in competition with ICL, and eventually replaces it as the dominant strategy of the model
(thus leading to ICL transience). However, we
also find that the two competing strategies actually share sub-circuits, which gives rise to cooperative dynamics as well. For example, in our
setup, ICL is unable to emerge quickly on its own,
and can only be enabled through the simultaneous
slow development of asymptotic CIWL. CIWL
thus both cooperates and competes with ICL, a
phenomenon we term “strategy coopetition”. We
propose a minimal mathematical model that reproduces these key dynamics and interactions. Informed by this model, we were able to identify a
setup where ICL is truly emergent and persistent.

This evolving picture of ICL necessitates a deeper understanding of the dynamics of ICL emergence (and transience).
ICL is often viewed to be in competition with other strategies (Nguyen & Reddy, 2024; Park et al., 2024), such as
IWL, with the tradeoff thought to be modulated by data
properties (Chan et al., 2022; 2024), model size (Wei et al.,
2023), and/or training time (Singh et al., 2023). While competition may explain why ICL gives way to other strategies
through the course of training, the question remains: why
does it emerge in the first place (if only to fade away)?
In this work, we aim to extend the mechanistic understanding of ICL, which currently focuses on induction heads
(Olsson et al., 2022) and their emergence dynamics (Singh
et al., 2024), to a richer dynamical setting involving multiple
strategies cycling in and out over the course of learning. To
do so, we reproduce and investigate the key transience result
in a simplified synthetic data setting with a 2-layer attentiononly transformer. Using behavioral evaluators, we find the
asymptotic strategy after the disappearance of ICL is not
pure in-weights learning. Rather, it is a surprising hybrid
strategy that we term context-constrained in-weights learning (CIWL, Section 4). The implementation of CIWL takes
the form of skip-trigrams (Elhage et al., 2021) distributed
across multiple heads in a form of superposition (Elhage
et al., 2022). Perhaps even more remarkably, we find that
even though CIWL dominates over ICL asymptotically, both
strategies share critical sub-circuits (Section 5.1), indicating
cooperative dynamics between these seemingly competitive
mechanisms—a phenomenon we term “strategy coopetition.” We borrow the term “coopetition” from game theory,
where it describes situations where competitors simultane-

1. Introduction
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) show an
impressive propensity for in-context learning (ICL)—the
ability to use inputs at inference time to adapt behavior
*

Equal contribution 1 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience
Unit, University College London 2 Anthropic AI, work completed while at the Gatsby Unit, UCL 3 University of Oxford
4
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Aaditya K. Singh <aaditya.singh.21@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

