CaDA: Cross-Problem Routing Solver with Constraint-Aware Dual-Attention

Han Li * 1 Fei Liu * 2 Zhi Zheng 1 Yu Zhang 1 Zhenkun Wang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) are significant combinatorial optimization problems (COPs)
holding substantial practical importance. Recently, neural combinatorial optimization (NCO),
which involves training deep learning models on
extensive data to learn vehicle routing heuristics,
has emerged as a promising approach due to its
efficiency and the reduced need for manual algorithm design. However, applying NCO across
diverse real-world scenarios with various constraints necessitates cross-problem capabilities.
Current cross-problem NCO methods for VRPs
typically employ a constraint-unaware model, limiting their cross-problem performance. Furthermore, they rely solely on global connectivity,
which fails to focus on key nodes and leads to
inefficient representation learning. This paper
introduces a Constraint-Aware Dual-Attention
Model (CaDA), designed to address these limitations. CaDA incorporates a constraint prompt
that efficiently represents different problem variants. Additionally, it features a dual-attention
mechanism with a global branch for capturing
broader graph-wide information and a sparse
branch that selectively focuses on the key node
connections. We comprehensively evaluate our
model on 16 different VRPs and compare its performance against existing cross-problem VRP
solvers. CaDA achieves state-of-the-art results
across all tested VRPs. Our ablation study confirms that each component contributes to its crossproblem learning performance. The source code
for CaDA is publicly available at https://
github.com/CIAM-Group/CaDA.

Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) involve optimizing transportation costs for a fleet of vehicles to meet all customers’
demands while adhering to various constraints. Numerous studies have focused on VRPs due to their extensive
real-world applications in transportation, logistics, and manufacturing (Cattaruzza et al., 2017; Rodrigue, 2020). Traditional methods for solving VRPs include exact solvers and
heuristic methods. Exact solvers, however, struggle with the
NP-hard nature of the problem, making them prohibitively
expensive to implement. On the other hand, heuristic methods are more cost-effective and provide near-optimal solutions but require significant expert input in their design.
Recently, learning-based neural solvers have gained considerable attention and have been successfully applied to
VRPs (Bengio et al., 2021; Kool et al., 2019; Bogyrbayeva
et al., 2024; Berto et al., 2025). These solvers train networks
to learn a heuristic, reducing the need for extensive manual
algorithm design and minimizing computational overhead.
Despite the promising performance of neural solvers on
VRPs, the majority of existing works require training a
model for each type of routing problem (Kwon et al., 2020;
Drori et al., 2020; Duan et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020; Cappart et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021; Kool et al., 2022; Tyasnurita et al., 2017; Berto et al., 2024a). Given the diversity
of real-world vehicle routing problems with varying constraints (Tan & Yeh, 2021), developing a distinct model
for each routing problem is costly and hinders practical
application.
To tackle this challenge, recent efforts have been made to
develop cross-problem learning methods that can solve multiple VRPs with a single model (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al.,
2024a; Berto et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2024). These crossproblem methods typically employ an encoder-decoder
framework and are trained using reinforcement learning. For
example, MTPOMO (Liu et al., 2024) jointly trains a unified
model across five VRPs, each with one or two constraints,
enabling zero-shot generalization to problems that feature
combinations of these constraints. MVMoE (Zhou et al.,
2024a) employs a mixture-of-experts (MoE) (Shazeer et al.,
2017) structure in the feed-forward layer of a transformerbased model to enhance its cross-problem learning capacity. Furthermore, RouteFinder (Berto et al., 2024b) directly

*

Equal contribution 1 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fully Actuated System Control Theory and Technology, School of Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Zhenkun Wang
<wangzhenkun90@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

