Doubly Protected Estimation for Survival Outcomes
Utilizing External Controls for Randomized Clinical Trials

Chenyin Gao 1 2 Shu Yang 1 Mingyang Shan 3 Wenyu Wendy Ye 3 Ilya Lipkovich 3 Douglas Faries 3

Abstract

event or survival endpoints may not always be observed.
As a complement to clinical trials, external controls offer
a promising avenue to improve statistical inference when
recruiting more patients is challenging. However, external
controls can differ from clinical trials in many aspects due to
differences in the underlying data acquisition and generation
mechanisms. Concerns regarding the plausibility of these
assumptions have limited their broader deployment. Guidance documents from regulatory agencies, including the
recent Food and Drug Administration (FDA) draft guidance
on Considerations for the Design and Conduct of Externally
Controlled Trials for Drug and Biological Products, note
several potential issues with the use of external controls,
including selection bias, lack of concurrency, differences
in the definitions of covariates, treatments, or outcomes,
and unmeasured confounding (FDA, 2001; 2019; 2023).
Each of these concerns can result in biased treatment effect
estimates if external controls are integrated with the trial
without further scrutiny.

Censored survival data are common in clinical trials, but small control groups can pose challenges,
particularly in rare diseases or where balanced
randomization is impractical. Recent approaches
leverage external controls from historical studies
or real-world data to strengthen treatment evaluation for survival outcomes. However, using
external controls directly may introduce biases
due to data heterogeneity. We propose a doubly
protected estimator for the treatment-specific restricted mean survival time difference that is more
efficient than trial-only estimators and mitigates
biases from external data. Our method adjusts
for covariate shifts via doubly robust estimation
and addresses outcome drift using the DR-Learner
for selective borrowing. The approach can incorporate machine learning to approximate survival
curves and detect outcome drifts without strict
parametric assumptions, borrowing only comparable external controls. Extensive simulation studies and a real-data application evaluating the efficacy of Galcanezumab in mitigating migraine
headaches have been conducted to illustrate the
effectiveness of our proposed framework.

2. Related Work
Data Integration with Non-survival Outcomes To reliably leverage external data, it is crucial to address these
potential issues with the use of external data. One primary
concern is the distributional heterogeneity of the baseline
disease characteristics between the two studies, leading to
the issue of covariate shifts. Likelihood-based frameworks
have been explored to mitigate covariate shifts arising from
external datasets (Chatterjee et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2016).
Other propensity score weighting and matching methods
have been proposed to construct new external data that have
similar covariate distributions as the trial data (Li et al.,
2018). However, these frameworks often rely on the invariance assumption, which posits that the conditional outcome
distributions are identical for the trial and external controls.
This assumption can be problematic, as the distributions of
outcomes may also vary across studies given the baseline
covariates, leading to the problem of outcome drift.

1. Introduction
Understanding the risk of disease or death and how these
risks evolve over time is critical for assisting clinicians in
treatment assignment and disease diagnosis. In clinical trials or biomedical studies, evaluating the effectiveness of
drugs often suffers from limited sample sizes due to low
disease prevalence or restrictive inclusion/exclusion criteria.
This issue is exacerbated in survival analysis, as time-to1
North Carolina State University, Department of Statistics,
Raleigh, NC, USA 2 Harvard University, Department of Biostatistics, Boston, MA, USA 3 Eli Lilly & Company, Indianapolis, IN,
USA. Correspondence to: Shu Yang <syang24@ncsu.edu>.

In recent years, various adaptive learning methods have been
proposed to address the study-specific generating mechanisms for outcomes, aiming to ensure robust estimation
even when external controls differ significantly from the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

