CABS: Conflict-Aware and Balanced
Sparsification for Enhancing Model Merging

Zongzhen Yang 1 2 Binhang Qi 1 2 3 Hailong Sun 1 2 * Wenrui Long 1 2 Ruobing Zhao 1 2 Xiang Gao 1 2

Abstract

especially popular for merging homologous models, those
derived by fine-tuning the same base model on different
tasks, to create a better-performing model. Many of the bestperforming models on the LLM leaderboard (Beeching et al.,
2023) are built by fine-tuning the base models and subsequently merging them to optimize task-specific performance.
Additionally, major enterprises have employed model merging techniques in the development of pre-training models,
such as Llama3 (Dubey et al., 2024) and Qwen2 (Yang et al.,
2024a; Lu et al., 2024), to enhance generalization capabilities and improve performance across a range of tasks.

Model merging based on task vectors, i.e., the
parameter differences between fine-tuned models
and a shared base model, provides an efficient way
to integrate multiple task-specific models into a
multitask model without retraining. Recent works
have endeavored to address the conflicts between
task vectors, one of the significant challenges
faced by model merging, through sparsification;
however, two issues significantly limit their performance: high parameter overlap and unbalanced weight distribution. To address these issues, we propose a simple yet effective framework
called CABS (Conflict-Aware and Balanced Sparsification), consisting of Conflict-Aware Sparsification (CA) and Balanced Sparsification (BS).
CA can reduce parameter overlap by applying
masks during sequential pruning, ensuring that
each task vector retains distinct, non-overlapping
parameters. BS leverages n:m pruning to preserve critical weights while maintaining an even
distribution across layers. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that CABS outperforms
state-of-the-art methods across diverse tasks and
model sizes.

Recent studies have further shown that sparsifying task vectors before merging can mitigate parameter conflicts between different task vectors, leading to measurable improvements in merging performance (Yu et al., 2024; Yadav et al.,
2024; Davari & Belilovsky, 2023; He et al., 2024). These
conflicts can be categorized into two types: (a) conflicts due
to redundant parameters, where parameters that contribute
little to performance are unnecessarily retained, and (b) conflicts due to overlapping parameters, where task vectors
retain parameters that overlap, potentially with significantly
different magnitudes or signs. Such overlaps hinder the
effectiveness of the merging process.
Sparsifying task vectors, whether selectively or randomly,
aims to reduce conflicts in model merging. However, it
shares methodological similarities with one-shot pruning,
which primarily focuses on model compression. Magnitudebased pruning (Liang et al., 2021) is one of the mainstream
pruning techniques, which can estimate the importance of
weights and selectively preserve the essential weights, thus
being rightfully superior to random pruning. Inspired by
pruning techniques, recent model merging studies (Yadav
et al., 2024) applied magnitude-based pruning to sparsify
task vectors with the important weights retained. However,
as pointed out by DARE (Yu et al., 2024), the results are
counterintuitive: magnitude-based pruning underperforms
compared to random pruning methods in the context of
model merging.

1. Introduction
Model merging has gained increasing attention in the deep
learning community, particularly in the context of using
task vectors for model merging in large language models
(LLMs) (Ilharco et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Wortsman et al.,
2022; Jin et al., 2022; Matena & Raffel, 2022; Singh &
Jaggi, 2020; Akiba et al., 2024). This technique has become
1

State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment (CCSE), Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 Hangzhou
Innovation Institute of Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore . Correspondence to: Hailong Sun <sunhl@buaa.edu.cn>.

Our research explores the reasons behind this discrepancy,
especially in a setting where magnitude-based pruning is
expected to perform well. Addressing these issues is key to
developing high-performance merged models. Specifically,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

