Rank-One Modified Value Iteration
Arman S. Kolarijani 1 Tolga Ok 1 Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani 1 2 Mohamad Amin Sharifi Kolarijani 1

Abstract

value function vk at iteration k is given by

vk+1 = vk + Gk T(vk ) − vk , k = 0, 1, . . . ,

In this paper, we provide a novel algorithm
for solving planning and learning problems of
Markov decision processes. The proposed algorithm follows a policy iteration-type update
by using a rank-one approximation of the transition probability matrix in the policy evaluation
step. This rank-one approximation is closely related to the stationary distribution of the corresponding transition probability matrix, which is
approximated using the power method. We provide theoretical guarantees for the convergence of
the proposed algorithm to optimal (action-)value
function with the same rate and computational
complexity as the value iteration algorithm in the
planning problem and as the Q-learning algorithm
in the learning problem. Through our extensive
numerical simulations, however, we show that the
proposed algorithm consistently outperforms firstorder algorithms and their accelerated versions
for both planning and learning problems.

(1)

where Gk = I in the VI algorithm and Gk = (I − γPk )−1
in the PI algorithm, I is the identity matrix and Pk is the
state transition probability matrix of the MDP under the
greedy policy with respect to vk . Both algorithms are guaranteed to converge to the optimal value function and control policy; see, e.g., (Puterman, 2014, Thms. 6.3.3 and
6.4.2). When it comes to computational complexity, one
observes a trade-off between the two algorithms: VI has
a lower per-iteration complexity compared to PI, while PI
converges in a smaller number of iterations compared to VI.
The faster convergence of PI is partially explained by its
second-order nature which leads to a local quadratic convergence rate (Puterman & Brumelle, 1979; Bertsekas, 2022;
Gargiani et al., 2022), compared to the linear convergence
rate of VI (Puterman, 2014, Thms. 6.3.3).
This trade-off between the two algorithms has motivated
much research to improve the convergence rate of VI and/or
the per-iteration complexity of PI. One of the first improvements is the Relaxed VI algorithm (Kushner & Kleinman,
1971; Porteus & Totten, 1978) which allows for a greater
step size compared to the standard VI algorithm. A large
body of research in this area originates from the correspondence between VI and gradient descent method and between
PI and Newton method (Grand-Clément, 2021; Kolarijani
& Mohajerin Esfahani, 2023). Here, approaches such as accelerated gradient descent and quasi-Newton methods from
the optimization literature are adapted to develop modified
versions of VI and PI. For instance, the combination of the
VI algorithm with Nesterov acceleration (Nesterov, 1983)
and Anderson acceleration (Anderson, 1965) have been
explored in (Goyal & Grand-Clément, 2022) and (Zhang
et al., 2020), respectively, for solving the planning problem. More recently, Halpern’s anchoring acceleration
scheme (Halpern, 1967) has been used to introduce the
Anchored VI algorithm (Lee & Ryu, 2024) which in particular exhibits a O(1/k)-rate for large values of discount factor
and even for γ = 1. In the case of the learning problem,
Speedy Q-Learning (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2011), Momentum
Q-Learning (Weng et al., 2021), and Nesterov Stochastic
Approximation (Devraj et al., 2019) are among the algorithms that use the idea of momentum to achieve a better
rate of convergence compared to standard Q-learning (QL).

1. Introduction
Value iteration (VI) and policy iteration (PI) algorithms lie
at the heart of most if not all algorithms for optimal control of Markov decision processes (MDPs) in both cases of
the planning problem (i.e., with access to the true model
of the MDP) and the reinforcement learning problem (i.e.,
with access to samples of the MDP) (Sutton & Barto, 2018;
Bertsekas, 2023). Their widespread application stems from
their simple implementation and straightforward combination with function approximation schemes such as neural
networks. Both VI and PI are iterative algorithms that ultimately find the fixed-point of the Bellman (optimality)
operator T: For γ-discounted, finite state-action MDPs, the
1

Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands 2 University
of Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Arman S. Kolarijani
<a.sharifikolarijani@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

