Divide and Conquer: Exploring Language-centric Tree Reasoning for Video
Question-Answering

Zhaohe Liao * 1 4 Jiangtong Li * 2 3 Siyu Sun 1 Qingyang Liu 1 Fengshun Xiao 4 Tianjiao Li 4 Qiang Zhang 4
Guang Chen 3 Li Niu 1 Changjun Jiang 2 3 Liqing Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Video Question-Answering (VideoQA) has emerged as a
significant research area with applications in multi-modal
understanding, interactive artificial intelligence and cognitive science (Xiao et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022a; Wu et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023b; Mangalam et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2024b; Chen et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2025; Chi et al.,
2024a; Li et al., 2025; Chi et al., 2024b). The core challenge lies in advancing language-centric video understanding from perception to cognition. Specifically, low-level
perception involves understanding the spatiotemporal features of videos, such as recognizing objects, actions, and
scenes. High-level cognition, on the other hand, requires
comprehending the underlying logic of both the video content and the posed questions, enabling the system to perform
reasoning along a logical structure and provide accurate answers. To address these challenges, recent advances extend
Large Language Models (LLMs) to their multimodal variants (MLLMs), such as Video-LLaMA (Zhang et al., 2023;
Cheng et al., 2024) and Video-LLaVA (Lin et al., 2024) by
integrating visual and textual information.

Video Question-Answering (VideoQA) remains
challenging in achieving advanced cognitive reasoning due to the uncontrollable and opaque reasoning processes in existing Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs). To address this issue, we propose a novel Language-centric Tree
Reasoning (LTR) framework that targets on enhancing the reasoning ability of models. In detail,
it recursively divides the original question into
logically manageable parts and conquers them
piece by piece, enhancing the reasoning capabilities and interpretability of existing MLLMs.
Specifically, in the first stage, the LTR focuses
on language to recursively generate a languagecentric logical tree, which gradually breaks down
the complex cognitive question into simple perceptual ones and plans the reasoning path through
a RAG-based few-shot approach. In the second
stage, with the aid of video content, the LTR performs bottom-up logical reasoning within the tree
to derive the final answer along with the traceable
reasoning path. Experiments across 11 VideoQA
benchmarks demonstrate that our LTR framework
significantly improves both accuracy and interpretability compared to state-of-the-art MLLMs.
To our knowledge, this is the first work to implement a language-centric logical tree to guide
MLLM reasoning in VideoQA, paving the way
for language-centric video understanding from
perception to cognition.

However, while they can provide certain explanations when
answering questions, how to achieve System-2 reasoning
has not been fully explored. One major limitation is that
the reasoning processes of these models are often uncontrollable and lack of transparency. Such opacity makes it
challenging to analyze their reasoning steps, rendering the
results to be less trustworthy. For instance, when addressing complex questions involving multiple temporal visual
cues, the models may produce incorrect answers without
revealing the reasoning path that led to those conclusions.
Therefore, as users cannot trace back to pinpoint where the
reasoning have gone astray, they cannot trust the results.

Equal contribution , 1 MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai China; 2 Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing, Ministry
of Education, Shanghai, China; 3 School of Computer Science
and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China; 4 Bilibili
Inc, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Liqing Zhang <lqzhang@cs.sjtu.edu.cn>.
*

To overcome such issues, we propose a novel training-free,
model-agnostic Language-centric Tree Reasoning (LTR)
framework that enhances model reasoning capabilities while
improving the interpretability and verifiability of reasoning
processes. Our framework utilizes language as the central
driving force for video understanding, starting from the logical structure inherent in the question itself. Initially, by
integrating video content, we recursively generate a com-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

