Privacy Amplification by Structured Subsampling
for Deep Differentially Private Time Series Forecasting

Jan Schuchardt 1 † Mina Dalirrooyfard 2 Jed Guzelkabaagac 1
Anderson Schneider 2 Yuriy Nevmyvaka 2 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract

studies on the privacy risks of ML ((Rigaki & Garcia, 2023))
and new methods to tackle these challenges (Liu et al., 2021;
Pan et al., 2024). Among these works, Differential Privacy
(DP) (Dwork, 2006) plays a particularly prominent role as a
formal privacy model and paradigm for privacy protection.

Many forms of sensitive data, such as web traffic,
mobility data, or hospital occupancy, are inherently sequential. The standard method for training machine learning models while ensuring privacy for units of sensitive information, such as
individual hospital visits, is differentially private
stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD). However,
we observe in this work that the formal guarantees of DP-SGD are incompatible with time
series specific tasks like forecasting, since they
rely on the privacy amplification attained by training on small, unstructured batches sampled from
an unstructured dataset. In contrast, batches for
forecasting are generated by (1) sampling sequentially structured time series from a dataset, (2)
sampling contiguous subsequences from these series, and (3) partitioning them into context and
ground-truth forecast windows. We theoretically
analyze the privacy amplification attained by this
structured subsampling to enable the training of
forecasting models with sound and tight eventand user-level privacy guarantees. Towards more
private models, we additionally prove how data
augmentation amplifies privacy in self-supervised
training of sequence models. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that amplification by structured subsampling enables the training of forecasting models with strong formal privacy guarantees.

Historically, works on DP primarily focused on privately
querying unstructured databases (Dwork et al., 2010), and
later works on differentially private ML continued to focus on learning from unstructured datasets (e.g. (Abadi
et al., 2016)). Recently, there has been more attention on
structured data, such as graphs (Nissim et al., 2007; Kasiviswanathan et al., 2013; Mueller et al., 2022), text (Yue
et al., 2023; Charles et al., 2024; Chua et al., 2024), and time
series (Mao et al., 2024). Time series in particular are of
interest from both a ML and DP perspective. For example,
data from traffic sensors (Chen et al., 2001) can be used
to train forecasting models for use in tasks like transport
planning and logistics (Lana et al., 2018). Simultaneously,
traffic data and its downstream use may expose sensitive information such as individual movement profiles (Giannotti
& Pedreschi, 2008). However, most studies only focus on
releasing time series or statistics thereof, rather than training
ML models (e.g. (Shi et al., 2011; Fan & Xiong, 2014)).
A popular algorithm for private learning from unstructured datasets is DP-SGD (Song et al., 2013; Abadi
et al., 2016), which is a simple modification of SGD.
Given an unstructured set of input–target pairs x =
{(x1 , o1 ), . . . , (xN , oN )}, DP-SGD samples a batch y ⊆ x,
computes clipped per-sample gradients, and adds Gaussian
noise. This yields privacy guarantees for insertion/removal
or substitution of a single element (xn , on ). DP-SGD has
also been used to train models for time series (Mercier et al.,
2021; Imtiaz et al., 2020; Arcolezi et al., 2022). However,
these works directly apply known privacy guarantees for
DP-SGD in a black-box manner. This neglects the structured nature of the data and the structured way in which
batches are sampled in tasks like time series forecasting. It
may thus lead to an under- or over-estimation of privacy.

1. Introduction
The need for privacy in Machine Learning (ML) tasks is becoming more apparent every day with an ongoing stream of
1
Technical University of Munich & Munich Data Science Institute 2 Machine Learning Research, Morgan Stanley †Work done
during an internship at Morgan Stanley. Correspondence to: Jan
Schuchardt <j.schuchardt@tum.de>.

This work answers the following research question: How
private is DP-SGD when adapted to sequentially structured
data, and specifically time series forecasting?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

