FLAM: Frame-Wise Language-Audio Modeling

Yusong Wu 1 2 Christos Tsirigotis 2 Ke Chen 1 Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang 3 Aaron Courville 2 4 Oriol Nieto 1
Prem Seetharaman 1 Justin Salamon 1

Abstract

2022; Liu et al., 2023a; Evans et al., 2024). In the audio
domain, ALMs like CLAP (Elizalde et al., 2023; Wu* et al.,
2023) learn instance-level alignments between audio and
text. However, these global embeddings cannot precisely
localize the temporal boundaries of specific acoustic events.

Recent multi-modal audio-language models
(ALMs) excel at text-audio retrieval but struggle with frame-wise audio understanding. Prior
works use temporal-aware labels or unsupervised
training to improve frame-wise capabilities, but
they still lack fine-grained labeling capability to
pinpoint when an event occurs. While traditional
sound event detection models can precisely localize events, they are limited to pre-defined categories, making them ineffective for real-world
scenarios with out-of-distribution events. In this
work, we introduce FLAM, an open-vocabulary
contrastive audio-language model capable of localizing specific sound events. FLAM employs a
memory-efficient and calibrated frame-wise objective with logit adjustment to address spurious
correlations, such as event dependencies and label imbalances during training. To enable framewise supervision, we leverage a large-scale dataset
with diverse audio events, LLM-generated captions and simulation. Experimental results and
case studies demonstrate that FLAM significantly
improves the open-vocabulary localization capability while maintaining strong performance in
global retrieval and downstream tasks.

Enabling local alignment between audio frames and text
would significantly benefit applications like audio content
search and event detection, allowing users to pinpoint exactly when a described sound occurs. However, unlike the
image domain—where large datasets (Schuhmann et al.,
2022) and granular segmentation labels (Kirillov et al.,
2023) are more readily available—audio frame-level annotations paired with text are exceedingly scarce. Existing
Sound Event Detection (SED) datasets (Serizel et al., 2020)
often have a limited, fixed vocabulary and remain relatively
small in size due to the significant human effort required for
annotation. Although self-supervised approaches (Xu et al.,
2021; 2024; Li et al., 2024) attempt to learn local alignment from audio-text pairs, the overall data volume remains
modest relative to other domains, limiting their scalability.
In this paper, we present FLAM (Frame-Wise Language–
Audio Modeling), an ALM model designed for frame-level
open-vocabulary SED. Unlike standard ALMs, FLAM’s audio encoder provides both a global sample-level embedding
and a sequence of frame-level embeddings. By matching
each frame embedding to text embeddings, FLAM can detect not only whether a sound event is present but also when
it occurs within the clip.

1. Introduction

We train FLAM with a frame-level contrastive objective
and incorporate logit adjustment techniques (Menon et al.,
2021; Tsirigotis et al., 2023) to deal with the spurious
correlations of frame labels during training. Then, we
propose a memory-efficient training strategy, which handles
large batches of frame-wise data without compromising
computational feasibility. To overcome the lack of
frame-level audio-text annotations, we build a large-scale
data augmentation pipeline that synthesizes 10-second
audio mixtures from text-labeled acoustic events. This
approach automatically re-labels event boundaries, creating
a one-million-sample dataset of diverse, open-vocabulary
SED examples.

Multi-modal contrastive models, such as Vision–Language
Models (VLMs) (Radford et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2023) and
Audio–Language Models (ALMs) (Elizalde et al., 2023;
Wu* et al., 2023), effectively learn open-vocabulary representations that enable strong retrieval, understanding (Liu
et al., 2024), and text-conditioned generation (Ramesh et al.,
1

Adobe Research 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Yusong Wu <wu.yusong@mila.quebec>, Justin Salamon <salamon@adobe.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

