Online Learning with Unknown Constraints

Karthik Sridharan 1 Seung Won Wilson Yoo 1

Abstract

is determined by parameters of the environment that are
unknown to the learner. For example individual fairness
constraints may be defined by an unknown similarity metric
(Gillen et al., 2018), or in robotics applications, safety may
hinge on uncertainties such as an unknown payload weight
(Brunke et al., 2022). Thus in such situations, the learner
must learn the unknown parameters that characterize the
safety constraint.

We consider the problem of online learning where
the sequence of actions played by the learner must
adhere to an unknown safety constraint at every
round. The goal is to minimize regret with respect to the best safe action in hindsight while simultaneously satisfying the safety constraint with
high probability on each round. We provide a
general meta-algorithm that leverages an online
regression oracle to estimate the unknown safety
constraint, and converts the predictions of an online learning oracle to predictions that adhere to
the unknown safety constraint. On the theoretical
side, our algorithm’s regret can be bounded by the
regret of the online regression and online learning
oracles, the eluder dimension of the model class
containing the unknown safety constraint, and a
novel complexity measure that characterizes the
difficulty of safe learning. We complement our
result with an asymptotic lower bound that shows
that the aforementioned complexity measure is
necessary. When the constraints are linear, we instantiate
√ our result to provide a concrete algorithm
with T regret using a scaling transformation that
balances optimistic exploration with pessimistic
constraint satisfaction.

In this work, we study the general problem of online learning
with unknown constraints, where the learner only observes
noisy feedback of the safety constraints. We consider arbitrary decision spaces and loss functions. Our goal is to
design algorithms that can simultaneously minimize regret
while strictly adhering to the safety constraint at all time
steps. Naturally, regret is measured w.r.t. the best decision in hindsight that also satisfies the constraint on every
round. The learner only has access to an initial safe-set of
actions/decisions to begin, and must gain more information
about the safety constraint.
To solve this problem, we assume access to a general online learning oracle that has low regret (without explicit
regard to safety) and a general online regression oracle that
provides us with increasingly accurate estimations of the
unknown constraint function. The key technical insight in
this work is in exploring what complexity or geometry allows us to play actions within guaranteed safe-sets while
expanding the safe-sets and simultaneously ensuring regret
is small. We introduce a complexity measure that precisely
characterizes this inherent per-step tension between regret
minimization and information acquisition with respect to
the safety constraint (with the key challenge of remaining
within the safe set). We complement our results with a
lower bound that shows that asymptotically, whenever this
complexity measure is large, regret is also large. Our results
yield an analysis that non-constructively shows the existence
of algorithms for the general setting with arbitrary decision
sets, loss functions, and classes of safety constraints. Furthermore, we instantiate these results explicitly for various
settings, and give explicit algorithms for unknown linear
constraints and online √
linear optimization - obtaining the
first algorithm with O( T ) regret.

1. Introduction
Online learning is a key tool for many sequential decision
making paradigms. From a practical view point, it is often
the case that either due to safety concerns (Dobbe et al.,
2020), to guarantee fairness or privacy properties (Zafar
et al., 2019), (Levy et al., 2021), or in many cases, simply
due to physical restrictions in the real world (Atawnih et al.,
2016), the agent or learner often must pick actions that
are not only effective but also strictly adhering to some
constraints on every round. Often, the safety constraint
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca
NY, United States. Correspondence to: Seung Won Wilson Yoo
<sy536@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

