Deep Bayesian Filter for Bayes-Faithful Data Assimilation

Yuta Tarumi 1 Keisuke Fukuda 1 Shin-ichi Maeda 1

Abstract

systems, such as those used in weather forecasting, rely on
methods like the ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF) (Evensen,
1994; Bishop et al., 2001) for sequential state filtering (i.e.,
p(zt |o1:t )) and the four-dimensional variational method (4DVar) for retrospective state analysis (i.e., p(zt |o1:T ), t < T ).
These approaches assume Gaussianity in their test distributions q(zt |o1:t ) or q(zt |o1:T ), a simplification driven by
computational constraints. While exact methods such as
bootstrap Particle Filters (PF) or sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) (Chopin & Papaspiliopoulos, 2020; Daum & Huang,
2007; Hu & van Leeuwen, 2021) could compute the true
posterior, their performance degrades significantly when the
number of particles is insufficient (Beskos et al., 2014). This
issue is exacerbated in high-dimensional systems, making
SMC approaches impractical for many physical problems.

Data assimilation for nonlinear state space models (SSMs) is inherently challenging due to nonGaussian posteriors. We propose Deep Bayesian
Filtering (DBF), a novel approach to data assimilation in nonlinear SSMs. DBF introduces latent
variables ht in addition to physical variables zt ,
ensuring Gaussian posteriors by (i) constraining
state transitions in the latent space to be linear and
(ii) learning a Gaussian inverse observation operator r(ht |ot ). This structured posterior design enables analytical recursive computation, avoiding
the accumulation of Monte Carlo sampling errors
over time steps. DBF optimizes these operators
and other latent SSM parameters by maximizing
the evidence lower bound. Experiments demonstrate that DBF outperforms existing methods in
scenarios with highly non-Gaussian posteriors.

To address these limitations, we propose a novel variational
inference approach called Deep Bayesian Filtering (DBF)
for posterior estimation. Our strategy consists of two main
components: (i) constraining the test distribution to remain
Gaussian to ensure computational tractability, and, in cases
where the original dynamics are nonlinear, (ii) leveraging a
nonlinear mapping to enhance the expressive capability of
the test distribution.

1. Introduction
Data assimilation (DA) is a crucial technique across various
scientific domains. Its objective is to estimate the current
state and the trajectory of a system by combining partially
informative observations with a dynamics model. Specifically, given a series of observations T time steps o1:T , the
goal is to infer the posterior distribution of the system’s
physical variables zt : p(zt |o1:t ). DA has been widely applied in fields such as weather forecasting (Hunt et al., 2007;
Lorenc, 2003; Andrychowicz et al., 2023), ocean research
analysis (Ohishi et al., 2024), sea surface temperature prediction (Larsen et al., 2007), seismic wave analysis (Alfonzo
& Oliver, 2020), multi-sensor fusion localization (Bach &
Ghil, 2023), and visual object tracking (Awal et al., 2023).

Linear dynamics When the system’s dynamics operator
in p(zt+1 |zt ) is linear, DBF introduces the concept of the inverse observation operator (IOO; see also Frerix et al. 2021)
to construct Gaussian test distributions q(zt |o1:t ). The IOO
and any unknown system parameters are trained to minimize
the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the test distribution q(zt |o1:t ) and the true posterior p(zt |o1:t ). The training
maximizes the likelihood of the observed time series and
therefore does not require teacher signals zt .
Nonlinear dynamics In the more common case of nonlinear dynamics, DBF operates in a latent space, assuming
Gaussianity in the latent variables ht . The original physical variables are recovered through a nonlinear mapping
function ϕ, implemented via neural networks (NNs). This
nonlinear mapping allows for a more flexible representation
of the test distribution q(zt |o1:t ). The IOO and other parameters are trained in a supervised manner (i.e., zt is used
during training).

A key challenge in DA arises from the non-Gaussian nature
of the posterior distributions p(zt |o1:t ), which results from
the inherent nonlinearity in both the system dynamics and
observation models. Despite this, many operational DA
1
Preferred Networks, Inc., Japan. Correspondence to: Yuta
Tarumi <yuta.tarumi@riken.jp>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

For state space models (SSMs) with nonlinear dynamics,
1

