Supervised Contrastive Learning from Weakly-Labeled
Audio Segments for Musical Version Matching

Joan Serrà 1 R. Oguz Araz 2 Dmitry Bogdanov 2 Yuki Mitsufuji 1 3
can be present between versions, which go beyond typical
augmentations used by the machine learning community.
Two musical versions may feature different instrumentation
or timbre, together with tonality and chord modifications,
altered melodies, substantial changes to rhythm and tempo,
an alternate temporal development or structure, and many
more (Yesiler et al., 2021). Yet, musical versions retain their
essence, to the point that we can generally agree whether
two of them correspond to the same piece or not2 . Therefore,
learnt version representations need to encapsulate multiple
characteristics shared between versions that, at the same
time, can discriminate them from other pieces.

Abstract
Detecting musical versions (different renditions
of the same piece) is a challenging task with important applications. Because of the ground truth
nature, existing approaches match musical versions at the track level (e.g., whole song). However, most applications require to match them at
the segment level (e.g., 20 s chunks). In addition,
existing approaches resort to classification and
triplet losses, disregarding more recent losses that
could bring meaningful improvements. In this paper, we propose a method to learn from weakly annotated segments, together with a contrastive loss
variant that outperforms well-studied alternatives.
The former is based on pairwise segment distance
reductions, while the latter modifies an existing
loss following decoupling, hyper-parameter, and
geometric considerations. With these two elements, we do not only achieve state-of-the-art
results in the standard track-level evaluation, but
we also obtain a breakthrough performance in a
segment-level evaluation. We believe that, due to
the generality of the challenges addressed here,
the proposed methods may find utility in domains
beyond audio or musical version matching.

Musical version matching has several relevant applications (Serrà, 2011; Yesiler et al., 2021), including specific
applications to plagiarism and near-duplicate detection3 .
Beyond business impact (Page, 2023) and cultural/artistic
appreciation, some applications have become even more
relevant today, given the sustained rise and improvement
of music generative models (e.g., Copet et al., 2023; Evans
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024). Indeed, the recent efforts on
assessing music data replication, memorization, and attribution in such models exploit some form of music similarity (Barnett et al., 2024; Bralios et al., 2024) or, for improved
results, musical version matching (Batlle-Roca et al., 2024).
A fundamental limitation of version matching approaches is
that they operate at the full-track level, learning and extracting individual representations from relatively long recordings (for instance, a few-minute song). This is due to ground
truth version annotations being only available per track.
However, the segments of interest, for both classical and
modern applications, are much shorter than the track length
(for instance, around 10–20 s). This mismatch between the
learning and inference stages, as we will see, causes a dramatic performance degradation (Sec. 5). Another challenge
is that, in contrast to standard supervised learning tasks,
musical version data sets contain only a few items per class.

1. Introduction
When two audio tracks contain different renditions of the
same musical piece, they are considered musical versions1 .
Musical versions are inherent in human culture and predate
recorded music and notation, as ancient music was transmitted solely through playing and listening (Ball, 2010), which
naturally led to variations in tunes, rhythms, structures, etc.
Learning representations of musical versions is a challenging task due to the degree and amount of variations that

1
A related but more restrictive and biased term in the literature
is “cover songs”. To better understand this restriction and bias, see
the discussion found in, for example, Yesiler et al. (2021).
2
A well-known source collecting this information is https:
//secondhandsongs.com.
3
Note that musical version matching may expand and subsume
traditional music fingerprinting (Cano et al., 2005).

1

Sony AI 2 Music Technology Group, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra 3 Sony Group Corporation. Correspondence to: Joan Serrà
<joan.serra@sony.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

