BackSlash: Rate Constrained Optimized Training of Large Language Models

Jun Wu 1 Jiangtao Wen 2 Yuxing Han 1

Abstract

Table 1. Parameter scale and growth rate of GPTs as an example
over recent years.

The rapid advancement of large-language models
(LLMs) has driven extensive research into parameter compression after training has been completed,
yet compression during the training phase remains
largely unexplored. In this work, we introduce
Rate-Constrained Training (BackSlash), a novel
training-time compression approach based on ratedistortion optimization (RDO). BackSlash enables a flexible trade-off between model accuracy
and complexity, significantly reducing parameter
redundancy while preserving performance. Experiments in various architectures and tasks demonstrate that BackSlash can reduce memory usage
by 60% - 90% without accuracy loss and provides significant compression gain compared to
compression after training. Moreover, BackSlash
proves to be highly versatile: it enhances generalization with small Lagrange multipliers, improves
model robustness to pruning (maintaining accuracy even at 80% pruning rates), and enables network simplification for accelerated inference on
edge devices.

Model name

Time

Parameter size

Growth rate

GPT-1
GPT-2
GPT-3
GPT-4

2018.06
2019.02
2020.06
2024.11

117M
1.5B
175B
1.8T

12.8x
116.7x
1200.0x

The ever-increasing size of LLM parameters leads to increased computational costs, inference latency, and network
distribution overhead during model deployment. To enable
efficient inference of LLMs on edge devices, extensive research has focused on model compression using techniques
such as parameter quantization, model pruning, and lowrank matrix decomposition. However, while there have been
extensive studies on LLM redundancy at the microscopic
level, such as precision and structural inefficiencies, the
overall parameter distribution has received little attention.
In addition, most existing compression techniques are applied after training, as opposed to being integrated into the
LLM parameter training process to proactively achieve optimized trade-offs between parameter precision, model size,
and model performance. Finally, existing studies assume
that model parameters follow the Gaussian distribution and,
therefore employ Huffman coding designed using empirical
statistics for compression. Both the probabilistic model and
the entropy coding technique have room for improvement.

1. Introduction
As the foundation of modern artificial intelligence, generative large language models (LLMs) such as Llama (Touvron
et al., 2023), GPT (Brown et al., 2020), and Qwen (Bai
et al., 2023) exhibit remarkable self-learning and non-linear
modeling capabilities. With continuous advancements in
deep learning, the parameter scales of LLMs have grown at
an unprecedented rate, as shown in Table 1. Looking ahead,
it is expected that the parameter scale of neural networks
will continue to expand rapidly, driving further progress in
AI development.

In this paper, we introduce a rate-constrained optimized approach to LLM training. By incorporating model parameter
size into the training process through a rate (R) and distortion (D) joint optimization, the proposed rate-constrained
training (BackSlash) approach is capable of producing the
optimal performing model for a given parameter set size,
that is, producing the best-fit model given by its end application (hardware constrained parameter set size).

1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Computer Science, New York University. Correspondence
to: Yuxing Han <yuxinghan@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jiangtao Wen
(project lead) <jw9263@nyu.edu>.

The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. Instead of the widely used Gaussian model for LLM
parameter distribution, we found through extensive
experiments that the generalized Gaussian (GG) distribution with the shape parameter less than 2 is a better

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

