Scaling Test-Time Compute Without Verification or RL is Suboptimal

Amrith Setlur 1 Nived Rajaraman 2 Sergey Levine 2 Aviral Kumar 1

Abstract

Verifier-Free: E.g., SFT on search traces
Prompts
(problems)

Base LLM 𝜋𝑏

Expert
𝜋𝑒

Problem 𝒙
Expert trace 𝝉

Reward
Annotator

Problem 𝒙
Base rollout 𝝉
Reward r 𝒙, 𝝉

Reward

Despite substantial advances in scaling test-time
compute, an ongoing debate in the community is
how it should be scaled up to enable continued
and efficient improvements with scaling. There
are largely two approaches: (i) distilling successful search or thinking traces; and (ii), using verification (e.g., 0/1 outcome rewards, or verifiers)
to guide reinforcement learning (RL) and search
algorithms. In this paper, we prove that finetuning
LLMs with verifier-based (VB) methods based
on RL or search is far superior to verifier-free
(VF) approaches based on distilling or cloning
search traces, given a fixed amount of compute/data budget. Further, we show that as we scale
test-time compute (measured as the output token
length) and training data, suboptimality of VF
methods scales poorly compared to VB when the
base pre-trained LLM presents a heterogeneous
distribution over correct solution traces (e.g., different lengths, styles, etc.) and admits a nonsharp distribution over rewards on traces sampled
from it. We formalize this condition using anticoncentration (Erdös, 1945), implying a stronger
result that VB methods scale better asymptotically, with the performance gap between VB and
VF widening as test-time budget grows. We corroborate our theory empirically on didactic and
math reasoning problems with 3/8/32B-sized pretrained LLMs, where we find verification is crucial for scaling test-time compute.

Verifier-Based: E.g., RL with ground-truth
rewards, test-time search
(a)

Verifier
Based

Gap grows
as √𝐻
Verifier
Free

scaling test-time compute 𝐻,
#training data 𝑛 = Ω(𝐻)
(b)

Figure 1: Scaling test-time compute: Given a set of problems,
verifier-free (VF) methods query expert traces, whereas verifierbased (VB) methods collect reward annotations for rollouts from
the base LLM. Crucially, one aims to mimic “good” traces and√the
other seeks to improve via access to verification. We prove a H
gap between a simple VB method and any VF method as we scale
data n and compute H, and verify this in practice.
result, scaling test-time compute is emerging as an alternate
paradigm for improving reasoning performance, where an
LLM is made capable of executing search or refinement
procedures, either implicitly by training for it, or by explicitly executing the search on top of the LLM outputs. The
goal here is to search over responses for a test query, which
naturally leads to traces much longer than a direct answer.
Broadly, we can classify the set of prevalant approaches for
scaling test compute into two categories (see Figure 1).

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence
to: Amrith Setlur <asetlur@cs.cmu.edu>.

The first class uses some form of verification, e.g., a 0/1
outcome reward or a verifier, for test-time search (Cobbe
et al., 2021b) or reinforcement learning (RL), e.g., Deepseek
R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) uses outcome reward. The
second class of approaches circumvents verification altogether and runs supervised fine-tuning on “expert” traces,
obtained either by piecing together tree search (Gandhi et al.,
2024; Moon et al., 2024), or by querying bigger models
trained to generate longer traces, i.e., distillation approaches
(e.g., S1 (Muennighoff et al., 2025), OpenThinker (Team,
2025), etc.). We refer to these as “verifier-free”, as these
methods do not query any verification signal for guiding
learning. Despite the prevalence of both classes, i.e., verifierbased (VB) and verifier-free (VF), it is not clear which
class results in better test-time scaling, especially when the
amount of test-time compute increases. We theoretically
and empirically show that when fine-tuning a pre-trained
LLM, VB methods are expected to perform better.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Theoretically, we show in this paper that VB methods outperform VF methods as we scale data and compute. To
do so, we operate in a setting where we are given a base

1. Introduction
Pre-training and post-training of LLMs rely heavily on access to high-quality “expert” data, but it is projected that by
2028, the availability of such data on the Internet will diminish (Villalobos et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024), and improving
model performance on several domains (e.g., reasoning,
safety, etc.) often requires more data (Li et al., 2024). As a

1

