Probing Visual Language Priors in VLMs

Tiange Luo 1 * Ang Cao 1 * Gunhee Lee 2 Justin Johnson 1 † Honglak Lee 1 2 †

Abstract

with atypical spot patterns (Figure 1), which humans would
easily discern. This raises an important question: do today’s
VLMs still over-rely on learned visual language priors, especially given that they rely on far fewer image-text pairs
than the internet-scale text corpora used for pretraining?

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) may over-rely
on visual language priors from their training data
rather than true visual reasoning. To investigate this, we introduce ViLP, a benchmark featuring deliberately out-of-distribution images synthesized via image generation models and out-ofdistribution Q&A pairs. Each question in ViLP
is coupled with three potential answers and three
corresponding images: one that can be resolved
by text priors alone and two that demand visual
reasoning. Although humans achieve near-perfect
accuracy, modern VLMs falter; for instance, GPT4o achieves only 66.17% on ViLP. To alleviate
this, we propose a self-improving framework in
which models generate new VQA data and then
apply pixel-level and semantic corruptions to form
“good-bad" image pairs for self-training. Our proposed training objective, Image-DPO, compels
VLMs to focus more on the actual visual inputs,
and we demonstrate its effectiveness in LLaVAv1.5 and Cambrian. Project Page: ViLP.

To investigate this, we probe the Visual Language Priors
of VLMs by constructing Question-Image-Answer (QIA)
triplets that deliberately deviate from the training data distribution. Unlike existing benchmarks that typically rely
on internet-sourced images (Goyal et al., 2017; Tong et al.,
2024), which inadvertently favor the visual language priors
embedded in VLM training data, we utilize modern image
generation models, including DALL·E-3 (Ramesh et al.,
2021) and Flux, to synthesize out-of-distribution imageanswer pairs that also feature notable variation in texture,
shape, conceptual combinations, hallucinated elements, and
proverb-based contexts.
Our benchmark, ViLP, contains 300 carefully designed questions, each paired with three distinct answers: a Prior Answer and two Test Answers, resulting in a total of 900 QIA
triplets. To further challenge the priors of VLMs, we amplify language priors in questions by introducing distractor
facts: each question is structured to present a distractor fact
followed by a question. The distractor fact directly leads
to the Prior Answer. In contrast, the two Test Answers are
crafted to challenge the priors by requiring both textual and
visual cues for accurate reasoning. While human participants achieved ∼98% accuracy easily, current VLMs exhibit
considerable difficulty, as evidenced by a significant performance drop on our benchmarks, with GPT-4o (OpenAI,
2024) scoring only 66.17%.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have advanced text-image
interaction, bridging the gap between visual and textual
data (Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023). However,
a persistent challenge for learning-based models, such as
ResNets and CLIPs, lies in their reliance on learned priors
from the training data, sometimes overlooking visual cues
when answering questions (Agrawal et al., 2016; Prabhu
et al., 2023). For example, when shown a torus-shaped soccer ball (Figure 1), a model might incorrectly identify it as a
sphere due to strong language priors. Simultaneously, these
models may adhere to learned visual priors (Thrush et al.,
2022; Sterz et al., 2024), which hampers their ability to
comprehend out-of-distribution visual cues, such as a zebra

Motivated by the results of ViLP, we propose Image-DPO, a
self-improving method for enhancing VLM visual reasoning
by increasing reliance on visual inputs. Our method employs
self-generated VQAs using image generation and editing
models (Podell et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024; Brooks et al.,
2023a) and applies controlled corruptions to create “goodbad" image pairs for DPO-like training (Rafailov et al.,
2024). Experiments with open-source VLMs, including
LLaVA-v1.5 (Liu et al., 2024a) and Cambrian (Tong et al.,
2024), demonstrate its effectiveness. Moreover, we theoretically prove our objective optimizes an upper bound on the
RL fine-tuning objective (Rafailov et al., 2024).

Joint fist authorship, † Equal advising 1 University of Michigan 2 LGAI Research. Correspondence to: Tiange Luo <tiangel@umich.edu>, Ang Cao <ancao@umich.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

