Enforcing Latent Euclidean Geometry in Single-Cell VAEs for Manifold
Interpolation

Alessandro Palma * 1 2 Sergei Rybakov * 1 2 3 Leon Hetzel * 1 2 4 Stephan Günnemann 2 4 Fabian J. Theis 1 2 4 5

Abstract

2023; Lopez et al., 2018; Griffiths & Hernández-Lobato,
2020). One reason is that real-world experimental data
often poses significant modelling challenges as it is
inherently noisy, high-dimensional, and complex (Sarker,
2021). As a solution, learning a compressed and dense
latent representation of the data has gained traction in
applied machine learning. For example, interpolations
in well-behaved, low-dimensional data embeddings are
useful for modelling the dynamics of complex systems,
allowing insights into sample evolution over time (Džeroski
& Todorovski, 2003; Bunne et al., 2022).

Latent space interpolations are a powerful tool
for navigating deep generative models in applied
settings. An example is single-cell RNA sequencing, where existing methods model cellular state
transitions as latent space interpolations with variational autoencoders, often assuming linear shifts
and Euclidean geometry. However, unless explicitly enforced, linear interpolations in the latent
space may not correspond to geodesic paths on
the data manifold, limiting methods that assume
Euclidean geometry in the data representations.
We introduce FlatVI, a novel training framework
that regularises the latent manifold of discretelikelihood variational autoencoders towards
Euclidean geometry, specifically tailored for
modelling single-cell count data. By encouraging
straight lines in the latent space to approximate
geodesic interpolations on the decoded single-cell
manifold, FlatVI enhances compatibility with
downstream approaches that assume Euclidean
latent geometry. Experiments on synthetic data
support the theoretical soundness of our approach,
while applications to time-resolved single-cell
RNA sequencing data demonstrate improved trajectory reconstruction and manifold interpolation.

In particular, VAEs have shown great promise in representing both continuous and discrete data, as the decoder
parameterises a flexible likelihood model. This flexibility has demonstrated unprecedented potential in cellular
data (Lopez et al., 2018), particularly in gene expression,
which is measured in counts that reflect the number of RNA
molecules produced by individual genes and is collected
through single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) (Haque
et al., 2017). Such a technique allows the measurement
of thousands of genes in parallel, and the resulting vector
describes the state of a cell across diverse biological settings
(Regev et al., 2017). Leveraging latent interpolations within
single-cell VAEs can provide insights into cellular state transitions, capturing dynamic changes in gene expression that
reveal underlying biological processes.
The representation learnt by VAEs is tightly connected to
Riemannian geometry, as one can see the latent space as a
parametrisation of a low-dimensional manifold (Arvanitidis
et al., 2021). When modelling latent cellular dynamics on
single-cell data, popular approaches still rely on assuming
Euclidean geometry in the representation space, for example
by modelling cellular transitions through linear-cost Optimal Transport (OT) (Peyré et al., 2019; Klein et al., 2025;
Tong et al., 2020). However, building linear latent trajectories using the Euclidean assumption is sub-optimal when
the data lies on a non-Euclidean manifold, as straight latent lines do not necessarily reflect geodesic paths on the
manifold induced by the decoder.

1. Introduction
Generative models for representation learning, such as
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), have influenced computational sciences across multiple fields (Zhong & Meidani,
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Computational Biology,
Helmholtz Munich, Munich, Germany 2 School of Computation
Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich,
Germany 3 Lamin Labs 4 Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich, Germany 5 TUM School of Life Sciences Weihenstephan, Technical University of Munich, Germany.
Correspondence to: Fabian J. Theis <fabian.theis@helmholtzmunich.de>.

To learn effective interpolations on a single-cell manifold,
we establish the following desiderata: (i) Approximate
trajectories on intractable data manifolds via interpolations

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

