Topological Signatures of Adversaries in Multimodal Alignments

Minh Vu 1 Geigh Zollicoffer 1 Huy Mai 2 Ben Nebgen 1 Boian Alexandrov 1 Manish Bhattarai 1

Abstract

that can maliciously alter the system’s outputs (Goodfellow, 2014; Brendel et al., 2017). While substantial research
has focused on safeguarding AI models against adversarial
attacks in unimodal contexts, the challenges presented by
the multimodal landscape remain understudied. Notably,
although adversarial attacks in multimodal settings have
advanced rapidly (Zhang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023),
defense strategies have yet to fully consider the unique characteristics of multimodal systems, which are crucial for
enhancing their robustness against such threats.

Multimodal Machine Learning systems, particularly those aligning text and image data like
CLIP/BLIP models, have become increasingly
prevalent, yet remain susceptible to adversarial
attacks. While substantial research has addressed
adversarial robustness in unimodal contexts, defense strategies for multimodal systems are underexplored. This work investigates the topological signatures that arise between image and text
embeddings and shows how adversarial attacks
disrupt their alignment, introducing distinctive
signatures. We specifically leverage persistent
homology and introduce two novel TopologicalContrastive losses based on Total Persistence and
Multi-scale kernel methods to analyze the topological signatures introduced by adversarial perturbations. We observe a pattern of monotonic
changes in the proposed topological losses emerging in a wide range of attacks on image-text alignments, as more adversarial samples are introduced
in the data. By designing an algorithm to backpropagate these signatures to input samples, we
are able to integrate these signatures into Maximum Mean Discrepancy tests, creating a novel
class of tests that leverage topological signatures
for better adversarial detection.

In this study, we focus on multimodal alignments, typically
appearing in CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and BLIP (Li
et al., 2022), where the image and text data embeddings
are aligned for downstream predictions. Based on the Manifold Hypothesis (Goodfellow et al., 2016), in many instances—such as natural images—the support of the data
distribution stays on a low-dimensional manifold embedded within Euclidean space. Many interesting features and
patterns of those data can be captured through the topological properties of that manifold as well as the manifold of
their neural network’s embeddings. Particularly, through
extensive experiments based on persistent homology, an
emerging technique in topological data analysis (TDA) to
study those manifolds, we show that adversarial attacks alter
the image-text topological alignment and introduce distinctive topological signatures. We further demonstrate that the
presence of adversarial examples in an image batch can be
more effectively detected with those signatures.

1. Introduction

The key results of this work are highlighted in Fig. 1.
Using the ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) datasets with CLIP-ViT-B/32 and
CLIP-ViT-L/14@336px, respectively, we demonstrate our
proposed Total Persistence (TP) loss Lα
T P and Multi-scale
Kernel (MK) loss LσM K under varying proportions of adversarial samples in the data batch. Intuitively, these losses
capture the mismatch in the corresponding topological signatures between the image and text embeddings. The results
clearly show a proportional change in these losses as the percentage of adversarial data increases, emphasizing the sensitivity of our topological measures to adversarial perturbations. In the third and fourth columns, we demonstrate how
the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Grosse et al.,
2017; Gao et al., 2021) tests, based on topological features
derived from the TP and MK losses (TPSAMMD and MK-

In recent years, the rapid advancement of artificial intelligence (AI) has led to the development of increasingly
complex multimodal systems that integrate diverse streams
of data, including text, images, audio, and graphs. As these
technologies become more pervasive, they also face significant vulnerabilities, particularly from adversarial attacks.
Adversarial attacks exploit inherent weaknesses in machine
learning (ML) models by introducing subtle perturbations
1

Theoretical Division, Los ALamos National Laboratory, Los
Alamos, NM, USA 2 Independent. Correspondence to: Minh Vu
<mvu@lanl.gov>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

