Adversarial Perturbations Are Formed by Iteratively Learning Linear
Combinations of the Right Singular Vectors of the Adversarial Jacobian

Thomas Paniagua 1 Chinmay Savadikar 1 Tianfu Wu 1
Code: https://github.com/ivmcl/ordered-topk-attack

Abstract

wards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Despite of the
remarkable achievement, adversarial vulnerability (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014) remains the Achilles
heel of all DNNs, particularly in computer vision, as revealed by white-box adversarial attacks, especially targeted
white-box attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017) that can fool
trained DNNs towards arbitrarily specified targets. With
the access to network architectures and pretrained weights,
white-box attacks can expose their deep vulnerabilities and
test their robustness. In practice, white-box attacks are also
used as surrogate models in learning transferrable blackbox (Inkawhich et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a; Naseer et al.,
2021; Zhao et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024) and no-box (Li
et al., 2020b) attacks. So, seeking more powerful whitebox attacks will provide a foundation both for learning potentially stronger black-box and no-box attacks. In this
paper, we focus on learning white-box targeted attacks in
ImageNet-1k (Russakovsky et al., 2015) classification tasks.

White-box targeted adversarial attacks reveal core
vulnerabilities in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs),
yet two key challenges persist: (i) How many
target classes can be attacked simultaneously in
a specified order, known as the ordered top-K
attack problem (K ≥ 1)? (ii) How to compute the corresponding adversarial perturbations
for a given benign image directly in the image
space? We address both by showing that ordered
top-K perturbations can be learned via iteratively optimizing linear combinations of the right
singular vectors of the adversarial Jacobian (i.e.,
the logit-to-image Jacobian constrained by target
ranking). These vectors span an orthogonal, informative subspace in the image domain. We introduce RisingAttacK, a novel Sequential Quadratic
Programming (SQP)-based method that exploits
this structure. We propose a holistic figure-ofmerits (FoM) metric combining attack success
rates (ASRs) and ℓp -norms (p = 1, 2, ∞). Extensive experiments on ImageNet-1k across six ordered top-K levels (K = 1, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30)
and four models (ResNet-50, DenseNet-121, ViTB, DEiT-B) show RisingAttacK consistently surpasses the state-of-the-art QuadAttacK.

We consider the generalized setting of targeted attacks, ordered top-K attacks (Zhang & Wu, 2020; Paniagua et al.,
2023), that relax the traditional top-1 targets (e.g., to fool a
DNN to classify a dog image as a cat) to K targets (K ≥ 1)
in any given orders (e.g., to fool a DNN to classify a dog
image with [car, tree, table] as the ordered top-3 prediction, see the middle in Fig. 1). Ordered top-K targeted
attacks expose deeper vulnerabilities of DNNs, since they
show the manipulability of the decision boundary of DNNs
at the logits subspace levels, especially when K is large
(e.g., K > 20). These attacks are particularly impactful
in applications where the order of predictions significantly
influences outcomes, such as recommendation systems or
multi-class decision-making, and adversaries can exploit
decision hierarchies to disrupt critical processes. Particularly, safety-critical systems (e.g., face unlock, medical
triage, content moderation) reason over entire ranked lists.
An attacker dictating all top predictions (similar in spirit to
[cat, car, fish] vs only “cat”) obtains finer control and evades
simple “Top-1 changed” detectors.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have witnessed tremendous
progress across numerous applications, enabling the recent
development of large foundation models (such as DeepMind’s AlphaZero and AlphaFold and OpenAI’s ChatGPT)
that are widely recognized to pave a promising way to1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA. Correspondence to: Thomas Paniagua <tapaniag@ncsu.edu>, Tianfu Wu
<twu19@ncsu.edu>.

In the meanwhile, security evaluations now recommend
K > 1. For example, in the new differential-privacy evaluation guideline, NIST SP 800-226 (March 2025) (Near

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

