Understanding Complexity in VideoQA via Visual Program Generation

Cristóbal Eyzaguirre 1 Igor Vasiljevic 2 Achal Dave 2 Jiajun Wu 1 Rares Andrei Ambrus 2 Thomas Kollar 2
Juan Carlos Niebles 1 Pavel Tokmakov 2
ceyzaguirre4.github.io/codeplexity

Abstract

shown in Figure 1 (top). In our study, human subjects overwhelmingly perceive the question on the right as the more
complex to answer, but evaluating a variety of state-of-theart VideoQA models (Yu et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2022a;
Surı́s et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2021) shows that the question on
the left presents a significantly greater challenge for them.

We propose a data-driven approach to analyzing query complexity in Video Question Answering (VideoQA). Previous efforts in benchmark
design have relied on human expertise to design challenging questions, yet we experimentally show that humans struggle to predict which
questions are difficult for machine learning models. Our automatic approach leverages recent advances in code generation for visual question answering, using the complexity of generated code
as a proxy for question difficulty. We demonstrate that this measure correlates significantly
better with model performance than human estimates. To operationalize this insight, we propose
an algorithm for estimating question complexity
from code. It identifies fine-grained primitives
that correlate with the hardest questions for any
given set of models, making it easy to scale to
new approaches in the future. Finally, to further illustrate the utility of our method, we extend it to automatically generate complex questions, constructing a new benchmark that is 1.9
times harder than the popular NExT-QA.

Experts might assume they would perform better at this
task, but the history of VideoQA benchmarks suggests otherwise. Despite authors’ best efforts, studies show most
datasets are dominated by questions solvable by naive,
single-frame baselines (Buch et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2021). Although many attempts have been
made to address this limitation, they predominantly adopt
a top-down approach. These works start from an expert
hypothesis of what is hard and validate this assumption by
evaluating models on samples that specifically target the
identified skill (Xiao et al., 2021; Mangalam et al., 2023).
While this has led to some progress, such static, heuristicbased definitions of complexity are inherently myopic.
In this work, we propose a bottom-up approach instead that
discovers human-interpretable insights about the sources of
complexity for VideoQA models from the data. To this end,
we capitalize on a recent large language model (LLM)based code generation paradigm (Surı́s et al., 2023; Gupta
& Kembhavi, 2023; Subramanian et al., 2023), which produces modular executable programs to answer natural language queries. While this approach has shown promise for
zero-shot VideoQA (Surı́s et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2024), we
are not interested in its task performance per se. Instead,
we use its rich, structured intermediate representations—
programs, as shown in Figure 1 (bottom)—to capture the
elusive complexity of the original questions.

1. Introduction
Humans can effortlessly reason about activities, whether
that reasoning requires understanding space and time,
cause and effect, or fine-grained details and high-level context (Decety & Grèzes, 1999; Decety et al., 1997; Wurm
& Caramazza, 2022; Aflalo et al., 2020). This versatility
allows us to function effectively in dynamic environments,
yet it simultaneously complicates our ability to assess what
is hard for machines. Consider the two video-question pairs

Specifically, we begin by collecting visual programs generated by recent methods (Surı́s et al., 2023; Ge et al.,
2024) on the validation set of the challenging NExT-QA
benchmark (Xiao et al., 2021), together with predictions
of a large collection of diverse algorithms. We then calculate several standard structural complexity metrics (McCabe, 1976) for these programs and collect human judgments for a subset of the dataset. Intriguingly, our analysis
demonstrates that, despite the programs being imperfect,

1

Stanford Computer Science 2 Toyota Research Institute.
Correspondence to: Cristóbal Eyzaguirre <ceyzaguirre@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

