Adversarial Inception Backdoor Attacks against Reinforcement Learning

Ethan Rathbun 1 Alina Oprea 1 Christopher Amato 1

Abstract

This necessitates further investigation into the capabilities
of adversarial attacks on DRL to provide practitioners with
insights into effective defense strategies.

Recent works have demonstrated the vulnerability of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms against training-time, backdoor poisoning attacks. The objectives of these attacks are
twofold: induce pre-determined, adversarial behavior in the agent upon observing a fixed trigger
during deployment while allowing the agent to
solve its intended task during training. Prior attacks assume arbitrary control over the agent’s
rewards, inducing values far outside the environment’s natural constraints. This results in brittle
attacks that fail once the proper reward constraints
are enforced. Thus, in this work we propose a new
class of backdoor attacks against DRL which are
the first to achieve state of the art performance
under strict reward constraints. These “inception”
attacks manipulate the agent’s training data – inserting the trigger into prior observations and replacing high return actions with those of the targeted adversarial behavior. We formally define
these attacks and prove they achieve both adversarial objectives against arbitrary Markov Decision Processes (MDP). Using this framework we
devise an online inception attack which achieves
an 100% attack success rate on multiple environments under constrained rewards while minimally
impacting the agent’s task performance.

In this work, we focus on gaining a deeper understanding
of backdoor poisoning attacks, which manipulate an agent’s
training to enable direct control over its behavior during
deployment upon encountering a predefined trigger. Stateof-the-art DRL backdoor attacks (Kiourti et al., 2019; Cui
et al., 2023; Rathbun et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2021) assume
an adversary with arbitrary control over the magnitude of the
agent’s reward signal – implanting extremely large positive
rewards and negative penalties into randomly selected states.
This strongly biases the agent’s projected returns, causing
the adversarial behavior to appear optimal whenever the
trigger is observed.
However, RL environments have natural upper and lower
bounds to their reward functions which these attacks ignore, exposing them to detection as outliers. Additionally,
many practical RL implementations enforce reward postprocessing such as clipping or normalization (Mnih et al.,
2013; Huang et al., 2022) which can effectively erase perturbed rewards. These restrictions on the adversary prevents them from sufficiently biasing the agent’s projected
returns, resulting in attack failure. Developing a principled
poisoning strategy under these constraints poses a significant challenge as manipulating randomly selected states
and rewards alone during training is no longer effective.
Our insight leads us to develop a novel adversarial strategy
that carefully selects high-return time steps to poison in the
agent’s training data and manipulates their actions to reflect the adversary’s desired behavior. Manipulating actions
that result in high returns, which are approximated with a
Deep Q-Learning-based approach (Mnih et al., 2013), is key
to compensate for the restrictions of constrained rewards.
Through these strategies we provide multiple contributions
towards our understanding of more realistic, reward constrained backdoor attacks against reinforcement learning.
Specifically we:

1. Introduction
The wide-spread applicability of DRL (Mnih et al., 2013;
Schulman et al., 2017) in security critical domains such as
automated cyber defenses (Vyas et al., 2023), self-driving
vehicles (Kiran et al., 2021), robotic warehouse management (Krnjaic et al., 2023), and space traffic coordination (Dolan et al., 2023) makes it a target for external adversaries wishing to influence the trained agent’s behavior.
1

Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, United States. Correspondence to: Ethan
Rathbun <rathbun.e@northeastern.edu>.

1. Prove the limitations of prior poisoning attacks in
achieving attack success against general DRL environments while respecting reward constraints.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2. Formulate the adversarial inception attack framework
1

