Compelling ReLU Networks to Exhibit Exponentially Many Linear Regions at
Initialization and During Training

Max Milkert 1 2 David Hyde 1 Forrest Laine 1

Abstract

of active and inactive neurons can produce a unique linear
transformation over a particular region of input space. The
number of these activation patterns and their corresponding
linear regions provides a way to measure the expressivity of
a ReLU network1 and can theoretically scale exponentially
with the depth of the network (Montufar et al., 2014; Serra
et al., 2018). Hence deep architectures may outperform
shallow ones.

In a neural network with ReLU activations, the
number of piecewise linear regions in the output
can grow exponentially with depth. However, this
is highly unlikely to happen when the initial parameters are sampled randomly, which therefore
often leads to the use of networks that are unnecessarily large. To address this problem, we
introduce a novel parameterization of the network
that restricts its weights so that a depth d network
produces exactly 2d linear regions at initialization and maintains those regions throughout training under the parameterization. This approach
allows us to learn approximations of convex, onedimensional functions that are several orders of
magnitude more accurate than their randomly initialized counterparts. We further demonstrate a
preliminary extension of our construction to multidimensional and non-convex functions, allowing
the technique to replace traditional dense layers
in various architectures.

Surprisingly, though, a sophisticated theory of how to best
encode functions into ReLU networks is lacking, and in
practice, adding depth is often observed to help less than
one might expect from this exponential intuition. Lacking
more advanced theory, practitioners typically use random
parameter initialization and gradient descent, the drawbacks
of which often lead to extremely inefficient solutions. Indeed, Hanin & Rolnick (2019) show a rather disappointing
bound for randomly initialized networks: the average number of linear regions formed at initialization is invariant with
depth. Whether using a deep or shallow architecture, only
the total number of neurons matters. They further observed
that gradient descent has a difficult time creating new activation regions, and thus their bounds approximately held after
training. As we will discuss later, the total number of linear
regions is not a “local” property in parameter space that gradient descent can directly optimize (see Figure 5). Gradient
descent is also prone to redundancy; for instance, Frankle &
Carbin (2019) show how around 95% of weights may ultimately be eliminated from a network without significantly
degrading accuracy.

1. Introduction
Beyond complementary advances in areas like hardware,
storage, and networking, the success of neural networks
is primarily due to their ability to efficiently capture and
represent nonlinear functions (Gibou et al., 2019). In a
neural network, the goal of an activation function is to introduce nonlinearity between the network’s layers so that the
network does not simplify to a single linear function. The
rectified linear unit (ReLU) has a unique interpretation in
this regard. Since it either deactivates a neuron or acts as
an identity, the resulting transformation on each individual
input remains linear. However, each possible configuration

The present work presents mathematical algorithms that
avoid the limitations of random initialization. Our contributions include:
• A reparameterization of a 4-neuron-wide, depth d
ReLU network that constrains it to initialize with 2d
activation regions over the input domain (Section 3)

1
Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville TN, USA 2 National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden CO, USA. Correspondence to: Max Milkert
<max.milkert@vanderbilt.edu>.

• A novel pretraining strategy, which enforces the existence of 2d activation regions during optimization to
produce its initial solution (Sections 3, 3.1)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
See Appendix A.2 for definitions of terms like linear regions,
activation patterns, and activation regions.

1

