Ad-Hoc Human-AI Coordination Challenge

Tin Dizdarević 1 Ravi Hammond 1 Tobias Gessler 1 Anisoara Calinescu 2 Jonathan Cook 1 Matteo Gallici 3
Andrei Lupu 1 Jakob Nicolaus Foerster 1

Abstract

making in healthcare (Asan et al., 2020) to shared control
in autonomous vehicles (Bansal et al., 2018) and robotics
(Haarnoja et al., 2018; Ahn et al., 2024) as well as advanced
digital assistants (Gemini Team, 2024; Bai et al., 2022). The
ultimate goal is to create AI agents that are not limited to
solving problems independently but can also work effectively with humans to complete tasks in human-compatible
ways (Russell, 2019; Carroll et al., 2019).

Achieving seamless coordination between AI
agents and humans is crucial for real-world applications, yet it remains a significant open challenge. Hanabi is a cooperative card game featuring imperfect information, constrained communication, theory of mind requirements, and
coordinated action – making it an ideal testbed
for human-AI coordination. However, its use for
human-AI interaction has been limited by the
challenges of human evaluation. In this work,
we introduce the Ad-Hoc Human-AI Coordination Challenge (AH2AC2) to overcome the constraints of costly and difficult-to-reproduce human evaluations. We develop human proxy agents
on a large-scale human dataset that serve as robust, cheap, and reproducible human-like evaluation partners in AH2AC2. To encourage the
development of data-efficient methods, we opensource a dataset of 3,079 games, deliberately
limiting the amount of available human gameplay data. We present baseline results for both
two- and three- player Hanabi scenarios. To ensure fair evaluation, we host the proxy agents
through a controlled evaluation system rather than
releasing them publicly. The code is available at
https://github.com/FLAIROx/ah2ac2.

Traditional approaches to training AI agents in simulation
frequently employ self-play (SP) where agents train under a
joint policy that controls the strategies of all players (Samuel,
1959; Tesauro, 1994). While SP has been successful in competitive games like chess and Go (Silver et al., 2016), in
cooperative settings this approach can lead to agents that
overfit to specific strategies, limiting their ability to generalise to novel partners (Carroll et al., 2019). In human-AI
coordination scenarios, forming rigid conventions is particularly problematic, as doing so can pose safety risks where
humans are unable to adapt appropriately (Bard et al., 2019).
Despite the growing importance of human-AI coordination,
the field lacks standardised benchmarks that accurately reflect the complexities of interacting with humans in complex,
partially observable settings. Existing evaluation methods
often rely on closed datasets and proprietary proxy agents
(Bakhtin et al., 2022; Jacob et al., 2022), which hinder reproducibility and broad-based progress. Without accessible
and robust benchmarks, it is challenging to measure advancements consistently. Furthermore, the scarcity of opensource human-AI coordination datasets limits the ability of
researchers to develop and test innovative, data-efficient algorithms that are essential for real-world applications where
large-scale human data may not be readily available.

1. Introduction
Human–AI interaction is rapidly advancing due to significant AI progress and its growing integration into daily life
(Rawas, 2024). Effective coordination between humans and
AI in complex settings becomes crucial as AI agents become
more sophisticated, capable, and prevalent. This interaction
spans a wide range of domains, from collaborative decision-

Hanabi is an established, fully cooperative benchmark environment that involves imperfect information, limited communication, theory of mind, and the necessity for coordination among different players to achieve a shared goal (Bard
et al., 2019). These characteristics make Hanabi a solid
testbed for evaluating human-AI coordination. While previous research in Hanabi has used held-out sets of human data
and human proxy agents to evaluate human-AI coordination
(Hu et al., 2022; 2021; Lupu et al., 2021), these datasets and
proxy agents have thus far remained closed-source and un-

1
FLAIR, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK 3 Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence to:
Tin Dizdarević <tin@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

