Plausible Token Amplification for Improving Accuracy of Differentially Private
In-Context Learning Based on Implicit Bayesian Inference

Yusuke Yamasaki 1 Kenta Niwa 2 Daiki Chijiwa 3 Takumi Fukami 1 Takayuki Miura 1

Abstract

aligns the LLM’s prediction for the query with the inferred
concept accordingly, enabling accurate responses. Despite
ICL’s success across various tasks (Mathur et al., 2023;
Hegselmann et al., 2023), embedding sensitive information
in demonstrations, such as personal health records, risks
leaking sensitive information from responses (Wang et al.,
2023a; Duan et al., 2023). This necessitates privacy-aware
ICL methods that mitigate leakage risks while ensuring
responses are aligned with the concept underlying demonstrations.

We propose Plausible Token Amplification
(PTA)1 to improve the accuracy of Differentially
Private In-Context Learning (DP-ICL) using DP
synthetic demonstrations. While Tang et al. empirically improved the accuracy of DP-ICL by
limiting vocabulary space during DP synthetic
demonstration generation, its theoretical basis remains unexplored. By interpreting ICL as implicit Bayesian inference on a concept underlying demonstrations, we not only provide theoretical evidence supporting Tang et al.’s empirical
method but also introduce PTA, a refined method
for modifying next-token probability distribution.
Through the modification, PTA highlights tokens
that distinctly represent the ground-truth concept
underlying the original demonstrations. As a result, generated DP synthetic demonstrations guide
the Large Language Model to successfully infer
the ground-truth concept, which improves the accuracy of DP-ICL. Experimental evaluations on
both synthetic and real-world text-classification
datasets validated the effectiveness of PTA.

To mitigate leakage risks in ICL, Differential Privacy (DP)
(Dwork et al., 2006a), which offers privacy guarantees
against leakage risks, has been incorporated into ICL, often
referred to as DP-ICL (Tang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024;
Hong et al., 2024). Notably, (Tang et al., 2024) studied generating synthetic demonstrations by adding variance-tuned
noise to the next-token probability obtained from an LLM
prompted with the original demonstrations. The added noise
ensures that the generated synthetic demonstrations satisfy
DP, reducing the leakage risks of the originals by providing
these synthetic ones in the prompt. While increasing noise
variance lowers leakage risks, it also makes the synthetic
demonstrations deviate more from the originals, thereby
degrading task accuracy. To recover the degraded accuracy,
(Tang et al., 2024) empirically limited the vocabulary space
using public information during noise addition. While numerical experiments showed its effectiveness in improving
accuracy, its theoretical basis remains unexplored.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit an impressive capability known as In-Context Learning (ICL) (Brown et al.,
2020), where a few pairs of data and their labels (demonstrations) and new data (query) are provided together as a
prompt. These demonstrations help LLM infer a concept—
namely, a latent rule that connects data to their labels—
which governs the token transitions in demonstrations. ICL

For further credibility in DP-ICL, we begin with its theoretical analysis based on the Bayesian analysis (see Section 3)
inspired by existing work on standard ICL (without employing DP) (Xie et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b), which interprets ICL as implicit Bayesian inference on a ground-truth
concept underlying the original demonstrations. Extending
this framework to DP-ICL, we establish Theorem 2 explaining how the added noise to ensure DP affects the LLM’s
ability to infer the ground-truth concept. Specifically, we
show that the LLM successfully infers the ground-truth concept if the expected divergence, which depends on the nexttoken probability distribution, surpasses a certain threshold.
This divergence measures how much the distribution under
the ground-truth concept differs from that under any other

1
NTT Social Informatics Laboratories 2 NTT Communication Science Laboratories 3 NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories. Correspondence to: Yusuke Yamasaki
<yusuke.yamasaki@ntt.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The code will be available at https://github.com/
Yusuke-Yamasaki/pta

1

