Fast Exact Unlearning for In-Context Learning Data for LLMs

Andrei Muresanu 1 2 Anvith Thudi 3 2 Michael R. Zhang 3 2 Nicolas Papernot 3 2

Abstract

model (distribution) the learning algorithm would produce
if trained without a set of datapoints.

Modern machine learning models are expensive
to train, and there is a growing concern about
the challenge of retroactively removing specific
training data. Achieving exact unlearning in
deep learning pipelines—producing models as
if certain data had never been included in training—remains an open problem. In this paper, we
revisit exact unlearning in deep learning and show
that for large language models (LLMs) we can
efficiently exactly unlearn “fine-tuning data” (the
data used to adapt a pre-trained model). This follows from two observations. First, we can use
in-context learning to adapt the LLM to the finetuning dataset instead of SGD based algorithms.
Second, we show that accurate in-context learning
can be done with quantized k-means, which allows for effectively constant time unlearning operations. Our evaluation shows that this unlearning
recipe has similar performance to fine-tuning alternatives, but vastly reduces the unlearning costs.
Our study also highlights the need for new measures of unlearning cost when adapting the learning algorithm to have faster unlearn operations.

Efficient exact unlearning for deep learning remains an open
problem. Advances in exact unlearning have come from
identifying cheap operations to simulate what changing the
dataset does to learning. This has been possible for classical
machine learning algorithms (Cao & Yang, 2015) (Brophy &
Lowd, 2021), such as clustering (Ginart et al., 2019). However, simulating the change caused by removing a datapoint
from an SGD training run with a neural network (deep learning) has proven difficult, with current approaches still requiring cost on the order of training the original model (Bourtoule et al., 2021).
Approximate unlearning has been proposed as an alternative
to exact learning and aims to lower unlearning costs by approximating the distribution of models trained without the
desired datapoints. However, there is currently no consensus on evaluation metrics, making comparison and utility
difficult to evaluate (Thudi et al., 2022a; Hayes et al., 2025)
In this paper, we show that exact unlearning can be efficient
for “fine-tuning” a pre-trained large language model (LLM),
i.e., learning given access to an LLM. The past literature
on exact unlearning had not considered learning algorithms
that leverage pre-trained models. However, this has become
a recent trend in private machine learning (Yu et al., 2021;
De et al., 2022), where fine-tuning is easier to learn privately.
We show that a similar trend also holds for exact unlearning.

1. Introduction
After a machine learning model is deployed, it may become
necessary to deploy a new model that does not use part of the
original training set. This can occur because of legislation
on the “right to be forgotten” (Mantelero, 2013) or because
of unknown data provenance (e.g., some data may have
come from untrustworthy sources). Machine unlearning
addresses this challenge of modifying a model to behave
as if it were trained without including certain datapoints.
Specifically, exact unlearning aims to produce the same

In-context learning with LLMs offers an alternative to traditional model fine-tuning that proves amenable to exact
unlearning. In-context learning works by selecting representative examples from a training dataset to guide the LLM’s
responses. While in-context learning achieves comparable performance to weight fine-tuning on many downstream
tasks (Brown et al., 2020), it presents a distinct challenge for
unlearning: we must reproduce the example selection process as if certain datapoints never existed in the fine-tuning
dataset.1 This is non-trivial because effective example selection depends on understanding the complex relationships
between datapoints.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Andrei Muresanu <andrei.muresanu@uwaterloo.ca>.

We observe that accurate in-context learning algorithms

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Throughout this paper we consider the pre-training and finetuning datasets to be independent.

1

