Improved Coresets for Vertical Federated Learning: Regularized Linear and
Logistic Regressions

Supratim Shit 1 Gurmehak Kaur Chadha 1 Surendra Kumar 1 Bapi Chatterjee 1

Abstract

plexity and to avoid overfitting during training. If the model
is regularized by a user-defined parameter λ ∈ R>0 , then
the loss function is also penalizedP
by λ and the model. Thus,
it is defined as loss(Z, q, λ) = i∈[n] f (zi , q) + g(λ, q),
where g(·) adds a regularization penalty to the unregularized
loss function. In this paper, we focus on regularized logistic
regression and ridge regression problems. For the above
defined dataset Z, regularization parameter λ > 0 and a set
of models Q, the losses of regularized logistic regression
and ridge regression for any model q ∈ Q are defined as,

Coreset, as a summary of training data, offers an
efficient approach for reducing data processing
and storage complexity during training. In the
emerging vertical federated learning (VFL) setting, where scattered clients store different data
features, it directly reduces communication complexity. In this work, we introduce coresets construction for regularized logistic regression both
in centralized and VFL settings. Additionally, we
improve the coreset size for regularized linear regression in the VFL setting. We also eliminate the
dependency of the coreset size on a property of
the data due to the VFL setting. The improvement
in the coreset sizes is due to our novel coreset
construction algorithms that capture the reduced
model complexity due to the added regularization
and its subsequent analysis. In experiments, we
provide extensive empirical evaluation that backs
our theoretical claims. We also report the performance of our coresets by comparing the models
trained on the complete data and on the coreset.

ClassLoss(Z, q, λ)

:=

n
X

ln 1 + exp(−yi x⊤
i q)



+λ∥q∥1

(1)

i=1

RegLoss(Z, q, λ)

:=

n
X

2
2
(x⊤
i q − yi ) + λ∥q∥2 (2)

i=1

In the vertical federated learning (VFL) setting, there are
multiple scattered clients, so no clients have access to the
complete feature space. In the VFL setting, we study the
setup where the feature space is partitioned between clients.
Formally, let there are T scattered clients, we consider that
a dataset Z is partitioned among all the clients, each having
{Z(1) , Z(2) , . . . , Z(T ) }, such that no two clients share any
features and their union is Z. In this work, we present
coreset construction algorithms for the following two crucial
machine learning problems in the VFL model.

1. Introduction
Let Z be a set of n points and their corresponding labels/responses. Here, Z consists of X ∈ Rn×d represents
the n points in Rd space and labels y ∈ Rn . Let zi represents the ith point (i.e., xi ) and its corresponding label (i.e.,
yi ) (see; Section 2 for notation). Let Q be the set of models
on which a machine learning algorithm optimizes its loss
function. Let, the algorithm uses a nonnegative function
f : Z × Q → R≥0 to compute the loss
Pon the dataset for a
given model q ∈ Q as, loss(Z, q) = i∈[n] f (zi , q).

Definition 1.1 (Vertical Regularized Logistic Regression
(VRLog)). Given a dataset Z consisting of X representing
the points and y be their labels in the VFL model, a regularization parameter λ > 0, the goal of the VRLog problem
is to compute a vector q ∈ Rd on the server that (approximately) minimizes ClassLoss(Z, q, λ) while maintaining
minimum total communication complexity.

Regularization is a common technique to control model com-

Definition 1.2 (Vertical Ridge Linear Regression
(VRLR)). Given a dataset Z consisting of X representing the points and y be their responses in the VFL model,
regularization parameter λ > 0, the goal of the VRLR
problem is to compute a vector q ∈ Rd on the server that
(approximately) minimizes RegLoss(Z, q, λ) while maintaining minimum total communication complexity.

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi, New Delhi,
India. Correspondence to: Supratim Shit <supratim@iiitd.ac.in>,
Bapi Chatterjee <bapi@iiitd.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

