Adversaries Can Misuse Combinations of Safe Models
Erik Jones 1 Anca Dragan 1 Jacob Steinhardt 1

Abstract

mitigate such misuse risks, the most capable frontier systems are trained to refuse requests that would otherwise
lead to malicious outputs. In contrast, less capable opensource systems are often deployed with weaker refusal training that can be further removed by fine-tuning (Lermen
et al., 2023). This strategy in principle only produces safe
models—models that cannot accomplish malicious tasks—
since only frontier models are capable of complex malicious
tasks, and they are trained to refuse them.

Developers try to evaluate whether an AI system
can accomplish malicious tasks before releasing
it; for example, they might test whether a model
enables cyberoffense, user manipulation, or bioterrorism. In this work, we show that individually
testing models for such misuse is inadequate; adversaries can misuse combinations of models even
when each individual model is safe. The adversary accomplishes this by first decomposing tasks
into subtasks, then solving each subtask with the
best-suited model. For example, an adversary
might solve challenging-but-benign subtasks with
an aligned frontier model, and easy-but-malicious
subtasks with a weaker misaligned model. We
study two decomposition methods: manual decomposition where a human identifies a natural
decomposition of a task, and automated decomposition where a weak model generates benign tasks
for a frontier model to solve, then uses the solutions in-context to solve the original task. Using
these decompositions, we empirically show that
adversaries can create vulnerable code, explicit
images, python scripts for hacking, and manipulative tweets at much higher rates with combinations of models than either individual model. Our
work suggests that even perfectly-aligned frontier
systems enable misuse without ever producing
malicious outputs, and that red-teaming efforts
should extend beyond single models in isolation.

In this work, we empirically show that testing whether individual models can be misused is insufficient: adversaries can
misuse combinations of models even when each individual
model is safe. Critically, adversaries do this without circumventing the models’ safety mechanisms; this means that
even a perfectly aligned frontier model can enable harms
without ever producing a malicious output.
The core strategy the adversary employs for misuse is task
decomposition, where it decomposes malicious tasks into
subtasks, then assigns subtasks to models (Figure 1). Many
malicious tasks are combinations of benign-but-hard subtasks and malicious-but-easy subtasks. The adversary executes the benign subtasks (which require capability) with a
frontier model and the malicious subtasks (which require
non-refusal) with a weak model.
We first formalize a threat model that captures model combinations. The adversary aims to produce an output that satisfies some condition (e.g., is a working malicious python
script that can be used to infect a target machine) that it
could not produce itself, using a set of models at its disposal.
At each turn, the adversary takes the task and any previous
turns as input, selects a model and a prompt, then receives
the output of the model on that prompt. The adversary wins
if it eventually produces an output that satisfies the original
condition (e.g., produces the desired python script).

1. Introduction
Developers try to ensure that AI systems cannot accomplish
malicious tasks before releasing them; for example, they
might test whether releasing a model enables automated
cyberoffense, manipulation, or bioterrorism (Phuong et al.,
2024; Google, 2024; OpenAI, 2023; Anthropic, 2023). To
1
UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
jones@berkeley.edu>.

We study two classes of decomposition patterns within this
framework: manual and automated decomposition. For
manual decomposition, a human identifies a natural decomposition of a task (e.g., creating vulnerable code by generating secure code, then editing it). However, some tasks are
hard for humans to manually decompose. We address this
with automated decomposition, where a weak model first
proposes related-but-benign tasks, a frontier model solves
them, and a weak model finally uses the solutions in-context

Erik Jones <er-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

