Diss-l-ECT: Dissecting Graph Data with Local Euler Characteristic Transforms

Julius von Rohrscheidt 1 2 Bastian Rieck 1 2 3
on (weighted) sums, the ECT can be computed efficiently,
making it a powerful tool for representation learning (Röell
& Rieck, 2024). Moreover, the ECT is known to be
invertible for data in Rn , ensuring that the original data
can always be reconstructed (Curry et al., 2022; Ghrist
et al., 2018). In this paper, we extend the ECT to local
neighborhoods, presenting the Local Euler Characteristic
Transform (ℓ-ECT), a novel method designed to preserve
local structure while retaining global interpretability. The
ℓ-ECT captures both topological (i.e., structural) and
geometrical (i.e., spatial) information around each data
point, making it particularly advantageous for graph-based
or higher-order data.1 The ℓ-ECT thus becomes an
expressive fingerprint of local neighborhoods, specifically
addressing the challenge of neighborhood aggregation in
featured graphs while ensuring the lossless representation
of local node neighborhoods. We theoretically investigate
how ℓ-ECTs maintain critical local details, and therefore
provide a nuanced representation that can be used for
downstream graph-learning tasks such as node classification.
Our method is highly effective, particularly for tasks where
node feature aggregation may obscure essential differences,
such as in graphs with high heterophily. Additionally, the
ℓ-ECT framework’s natural vector representation makes it
compatible with a wide range of machine-learning models,
facilitating both performance and interpretability.

Abstract
The Euler Characteristic Transform (ECT) is an
efficiently-computable geometrical-topological
invariant that characterizes the global shape of
data. In this paper, we introduce the Local
Euler Characteristic Transform (ℓ-ECT), a novel
extension of the ECT particularly designed
to enhance expressivity and interpretability
in graph representation learning.
Unlike
traditional graph neural networks (GNNs),
which may lose critical local details through
aggregation, the ℓ-ECT provides a lossless
representation of local neighborhoods. This
approach addresses key limitations in GNNs by
preserving local structures while maintaining
global interpretability. Moreover, we construct
a rotation-invariant metric based on ℓ-ECTs
for spatial alignment of data spaces. Our
method exhibits superior performance compared
to standard GNNs on a variety of benchmark nodeclassification tasks, while also offering theoretical
guarantees that demonstrate its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, graph neural network (GNNs) rely on
message-passing schemes to aggregate node features. While
effective for many tasks, this approach often leads to
the loss of critical local information, as the aggregation
process can diffuse and obscure the original node vector
representations (Topping et al., 2022). This limitation makes
it challenging to preserve local characteristics that may be
essential for some applications. To address this limitation,
we harness the Euler Characteristic Transform (Turner
et al., 2014, ECT), an expressive geometrical-topological
invariant that can be computed efficiently. Relying only

As our main contributions, we (i) construct ℓ-ECTs in
the context of embedded simplicial complexes (and graphs)
and theoretically investigate their expressivity in the special
case of featured graphs, (ii) empirically show that this
expressivity positions ℓ-ECTs as a powerful general tool for
interpretable node classification, often superior to standard
GNNs, and (iii) introduce an efficiently computable rotationinvariant metric based on ℓ-ECTs that facilitates the spatial
alignment of geometric graphs.

2. Background

1

Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Munich, Germany
2
Technical University of Munich, Germany 3 University of Fribourg, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Julius von Rohrscheidt
<julius.rohrscheidt@helmholtz-munich.de>, Bastian Rieck <bastian.grossenbacher@unifr.ch>.

We define our method in the most general setting, i.e.,
that of a simplicial complex, while also providing a brief
introduction to graph neural networks.
1

Our experiments deliberately focus on graphs, but we note
that the method can be extended to novel higher-order datasets
based on simplicial complexes, for instance (Ballester et al., 2025).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

