Grokking at the Edge of Linear Separability

Alon Beck 1 Noam Levi 2 Yohai Bar Sinai 1

Abstract

Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2024; Google,
2023; Zeng et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery
et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023), as well as state of the art
models for computer vision (Srivastava & Sharma, 2023),
defy expectations and are able to generalize with a number
of parameters far exceeding the so called interpolation
threshold (Kaplan et al., 2020; Schaeffer et al., 2023).
Interestingly, these models have been shown to exhibit
unpredictable behaviors when changing the number of
network parameters, not only with respect to generalization,
but also in their learning dynamics.

We investigate the phenomenon of grokking
– delayed generalization accompanied by nonmonotonic test loss behavior – in a simple
binary logistic classification task, for which
"memorizing" and "generalizing" solutions can
be strictly defined. Surprisingly, we find that
grokking arises naturally even in this minimal
model when the parameters of the problem
are close to a critical point, and provide
both empirical and analytical insights into its
mechanism. Concretely, by appealing to the
implicit bias of gradient descent, we show that
logistic regression can exhibit grokking when
the training dataset is nearly linearly separable
from the origin and there is strong noise in the
perpendicular directions. The underlying reason
is that near the critical point, "flat" directions
in the loss landscape with nearly zero gradient
cause training dynamics to linger for arbitrarily
long times near quasi-stable solutions before
eventually reaching the global minimum. Finally,
we highlight similarities between our findings and
the recent literature, strengthening the conjecture
that grokking generally occurs in proximity to
the interpolation threshold, reminiscent of critical
phenomena often observed in physical systems.

One such phenomenon, known as Grokking, was first
observed by Power et al. (2022) during the training of a
transformer model on modular arithmetic tasks. Grokking
occurs when a model initially achieves perfect training
accuracy but no generalization (i.e. no better than a random
predictor), and upon further training, transitions to almost
perfect generalization. This phenomenon has garnered
substantial attention in recent years (Gromov, 2023; Liu
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023) due to its striking contrast
with naive expectations, whereby over-fitting is generally
seen as an undesirable property of models that should not
generalize with further training, originally dealt with using
early stopping (Prechelt, 1996).
In this work, we present a straightforward model where
grokking naturally emerges, allowing us to identify and
analyze its fundamental cause as proximity of the system
to a critical point. In our simple yet illuminating setting,
the asymptotic optimal solution can always be identified,
allowing a sharp definition of notions that are typically
ambiguous, such as "memorization" and "learning".

1. Introduction
Understanding the relationship between the intrinsic
properties of data, the training dynamics of neural networks
(NNs), and their ability to generalize is crucial to explaining
the success of modern machine learning (ML) algorithms.
In particular, highly over-parameterized models based on
the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2023), such as

We study a typical logistic binary classification problem,
with the goal of finding a linear separator between two
Gaussians with distinct labels. We assume that the
Gaussians are well separated along the separation axis and
contains noise in all perpendicular directions. Extensions of
this setup are considered in Sec. 5. We mainly focus on the
limit of large N, d → ∞ while keeping the ratio λ = d/N
fixed, although the results can be generalized.

1

Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics
and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978,
Israel 2 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Alon Beck
<alonbk2@gmail.com>, Noam Levi <noam.levi@epfl.ch>.

Our main contributions are:
1. We prove, and demonstrate numerically, that grokking
may occur in this setting, and is promoted when λ is
close to 1/2 and the separation along the separation

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

