Distributionally Robust Active Learning for Gaussian Process Regression

Shion Takeno 1 Okura Yoshito 1 Yu Inatsu 2 Aoyama Tatsuya 1 Tomonari Tanaka 1 Akahane Satoshi 1
Hiroyuki Hanada 3 Noriaki Hashimoto 3 Taro Murayama 4 Hanju Lee 4 Shinya Kojima 4 Ichiro Takeuchi 1 3

Abstract

Gaussian process regression (GPR) model (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2005) is often used as a base statistical model for
AL algorithms due to its flexible prediction capability (Seo
et al., 2000; Yu et al., 2006; Guestrin et al., 2005; Krause
et al., 2008b; Hoang et al., 2014; Hübotter et al., 2024).
Standard AL methods for the GPR are based on information
gain (Guestrin et al., 2005; Krause et al., 2008b; Kirsch
et al., 2021; Kirsch & Gal, 2022; Bickford Smith et al.,
2023; Hübotter et al., 2024). Most information gain-based
approaches are heuristics without theoretical guarantees.
A notable exception is the work by (Guestrin et al., 2005;
Krause et al., 2008b), which shows that the US for the GPR
model is optimal to maximize the information gain from the
obtained data labels regarding the GP prior. Furthermore,
from the analysis of kernelized bandits (e.g., Srinivas et al.,
2010; Salgia et al., 2024), we can see that the US and RS
guarantee the convergence of the maximum of posterior
variance (See Proposition 2.3 for details). Another commonly used AF is variance reduction (Seo et al., 2000; Yu
et al., 2006; Shoham & Avron, 2023; Hübotter et al., 2024),
which can be computed efficiently in the GPR. However,
these AFs do not incorporate the importance of the unlabelled dataset, that is, the prior information regarding the
target distribution. In addition, to our knowledge, except
for the worst-case analysis in Proposition 2.3, there are no
theoretical guarantees for the target prediction error.

Gaussian process regression (GPR) or kernel
ridge regression is a widely used and powerful
tool for nonlinear prediction. Therefore, active
learning (AL) for GPR, which actively collects
data labels to achieve an accurate prediction with
fewer data labels, is an important problem. However, existing AL methods do not theoretically
guarantee prediction accuracy for target distribution. Furthermore, as discussed in the distributionally robust learning literature, specifying the
target distribution is often difficult. Thus, this
paper proposes two AL methods that effectively
reduce the worst-case expected error for GPR,
which is the worst-case expectation in target distribution candidates. We show an upper bound
of the worst-case expected squared error, which
suggests that the error will be arbitrarily small by
a finite number of data labels under mild conditions. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed methods through synthetic and
real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Active learning (AL) (Settles, 2009) is a framework for
achieving high prediction performance with fewer data when
labeling new data is expensive. For this purpose, AL algorithms actively acquire the label of data that improves the
prediction performance of some statistical model based on
acquisition functions (AFs). Many types of AFs have been
proposed, such as uncertainty sampling (US), random sampling (RS), variance reduction, and information gain, as
summarized in (Settles, 2009).

Several studies have tackled the development of the target
distribution-aware AL (Kirsch et al., 2021; Kirsch & Gal,
2022; Bickford Smith et al., 2023). In particular, as an extension of the distributionally robust learning (Chen et al.,
2020), Frogner et al. (2021) proposed distributionally robust AL (DRAL), which aims to minimize the worst-case
error in the set of target distributions to obtain a robust
model. However, since these studies employed the heuristic
AL methods based on, e.g., information gain and expected
model change (Settles, 2009), the theoretical guarantee has
not been shown.

1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nagoya University,
Aichi, Japan 2 Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 3 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
4
DENSO CORPORATION, Aichi, Japan. Correspondence to:
Shion Takeno <takeno.s.mllab.nit@gmail.com>, Ichiro Takeuchi
<takeuchi.ichiro.n6@f.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp>.

This paper develops a DRAL framework for the GPR model.
We aim to minimize the worst-case expected error, where
the worst-case scenario and the expectation are taken regarding the target distribution candidates and chosen target
distributions, respectively. Note that our formulation generalizes target distribution-aware AL since it includes the case

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

