Learning Bayesian Nash Equilibrium in Auction Games via
Approximate Best Response

Kexin Huang 1 Ziqian Chen 2 Xue Wang 2 Chongming Gao 1 Jinyang Gao 2 Bolin Ding 2 Xiang Wang 1
Optimization Pipeline
Bidders Op&miza&on Gradient
Networks 𝜃 Objec&ve ℒ Computa&on

Abstract
Auction plays a crucial role in many modern trading environments, including online advertising
and public resource allocation. As the number of
competing bidders increases, learning Bayesian
Nash Equilibrium (BNE) in auctions faces significant scalability challenges. Existing methods
often experience slow convergence in large-scale
auctions. For example, in a classic symmetric auction setting, the convergence rate depends on the
number of bidders quadratically. To address this
issue, we propose the Approximate Best Response
Gradient method, a new approach for learning
BNE efficiently in auction games. We leverage an
analytic solution for gradient estimation to enable
efficient gradient computation during optimization. Moreover, we introduce the Best Response
Distance objective, which serves as an upper
bound of approximation quality to BNE. By optimizing the new objective, our method is proven to
achieve a local convergence rate independent of
bidder numbers and circumvent the traditional
quadratic complexity in the classic symmetric
setting. Extensive experiments across various
auction formats demonstrate that our approach
accelerates convergence and enhances learning
efficiency in complex auction settings.

Objective ℒ
(Utility/…)

Gradient update

Challenge 1: Gradient ComputaAon
Non-smooth utility
𝑣 − 𝑏" , win
𝑢" = / "
0,
lose

∇! ℒ

Existing Method
biased utility

Challenge 2: OpAmizaAon Method Design
Utility Gradient (existing)
Objective: Utility
∇!! Ε 𝑢# " (𝑣" , 𝛽!! (𝑣" ))
Slow convergence
Local converge rate under
Assump.3.1: O(n2log1/d)

Estimate Gradient
∇! Ε 𝑢" = ?

AnalyAc Method
original u&lity

Approx BR Gradient (ours)
Objec&ve: BR-distance
∇! ! Ε

𝛽!! 𝑣" − br 𝑣"

#

Local converge rate under
Assump.3.1: O(log1/d)

ust
Rob

ce
gen
ver
con

Figure 1. This work addresses two key challenges in learning BNE
for auction games: (1) gradient computation and (2) optimization
method design. We utilize an analytic gradient solution to avoid
the biased utility function and propose a new optimization method,
approximate BR gradient, for accelerated convergence rate.

mineral rights (Milgrom & Weber, 1982)), to facilitate efficient and transparent market outcomes. At the core of
the auction is a competitive bidding process, where bidders
submit bids to purchase goods or services from auctioneers, with the goal of maximizing their utility. Wherein,
bidders adjust their bidding strategies by estimating values or equilibrium to avoid potential losses (Balseiro et al.,
2015), while auctioneers analyze the equilibrium to assess
the auction mechanism’s effectiveness and predict market
behavior (Krishna, 2010), aiding in the evaluation of overall
market conditions (Milgrom & Weber, 1982). To formalize
this equilibrium behavior, the auction can be modeled as an
incomplete-information game (Harsanyi, 1967), where the
equilibrium concept is captured by the Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (BNE). However, solving BNE in auction games is
computationally hard, classified as PPAD-complete (FilosRatsikas et al., 2021; Filos-Ratsikas et al., 2024), with only
limited closed-form solutions available in simplified settings
(Kaplan & Zamir, 2012).

1. Introduction
Auctions serve as a fundamental mechanism for resource
allocation and price discovery. They are extensively applied
across diverse industries, such as online advertising for ad
impression allocation (Shen et al., 2015) and the distribution
of public resources (e.g., spectrum bands (Milgrom, 2000),

This fundamental challenge has attracted great interest in
integrating machine learning techniques with game theory
(Bichler et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2024) to learn the equilibrium bidding strategies. Early efforts have focused on
discretized approximations of auction games, using methods
such as no-regret learning (Hartline et al., 2015; Kolumbus
& Nisan, 2022; Ahunbay & Bichler, 2025), reinforcement
learning (Feng et al., 2021; Banchio & Skrzypacz, 2022),
and online optimization (Bichler et al., 2023a), to approxi-

1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China 2 Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: Chongming Gao <chongminggao@ustc.edu.cn>, Xiang Wang <xiangwang1223@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

