PILAF: Optimal Human Preference Sampling for Reward Modeling

Yunzhen Feng 1 Ariel Kwiatkowski 2 * Kunhao Zheng 2 * Julia Kempe 2 1

Abstract

⋄

Yaqi Duan 1

⋄

(Dong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b) or leveraging preexisting preference datasets (Ethayarajh et al., 2024; Azar
et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024), comparatively less attention
has been paid to the critical challenge of collecting effective
data for human-labeling in the RLHF pipeline, to maximize
its utility. This is an important problem, as the quality of
preference data directly impacts the effectiveness of reward
modeling and, consequently, the overall success of finetuning. This challenge is further compounded by the high
cost of expert preference labeling (Lightman et al., 2023).

As large language models increasingly drive realworld applications, aligning them with human values becomes paramount. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged
as a key technique, translating preference data
into reward models when oracle human values
remain inaccessible. In practice, RLHF mostly
relies on approximate reward models, which may
not consistently guide the policy toward maximizing the underlying human values. We propose
Policy-Interpolated Learning for Aligned Feedback (PILAF), a novel response sampling strategy
for preference labeling that explicitly aligns preference learning with maximizing the underlying
oracle reward. PILAF is theoretically grounded,
demonstrating optimality from both an optimization and a statistical perspective. The method is
straightforward to implement and demonstrates
strong performance in iterative and online RLHF
settings where feedback curation is critical.

Preference data is usually generated by sampling response
pairs (⃗y ai , ⃗y bi ) to a prompt xi from a policy, and presenting them to human labelers for preference annotation. It is
commonly assumed that the annotation follows the BradleyTerry (BT) model, under an oracle reward. Next, we use
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) on these preference
data to train a reward model, which then serves as a measurable objective to optimize the policy (i.e. LLM) while
staying close to a reference policy. In Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023), this pipeline
is simplified by optimizing the policy with implicit reward
modeling. However, all these pipelines give rise to a misalignment of objectives: RLHF (or DPO) should, in principle, train its policy to maximize the (inherently inaccessible)
oracle objective which combines the oracle reward from the
BT model with reference regularization. In practice, RLHF
relies on preference data through the MLE objective in reward modeling or through methods like DPO, which are not
designed to guide policy optimization towards maximizing
oracle rewards. Thus, reward optimization (either directly
or implicitly via DPO) and (optimal) policy optimization are
not inherently aligned, potentially leading to inefficiencies
(see Section 2).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
(Ouyang et al., 2022) has revolutionized large language models (LLMs) by incorporating human preferences, enabling
significant progress in applications such as conversational
AI (Achiam et al., 2023), personalized tutoring (Limo et al.,
2023), and content curation (Yue et al., 2024). At the core of
RLHF is reward modeling, a critical process that translates
human feedback—such as pairwise comparisons or rankings—into a measurable objective for model training. By
formalizing human preferences, reward models then guide
LLMs towards alignment through policy optimization.

In this work, we study this misalignment by examining
the sampling scheme that generates response pairs (⃗y ai , ⃗y bi )
for preference labeling, which is especially important when
additional preference data is collected mid-RLHF training to
mitigate the off-policy distributional shift, as is empirically
standard (Touvron et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022). We show
that uniform sampling from the current policy, as is common,
leads to misaligned gradients of the two objectives (reward
model loss and true oracle objective).

While numerous studies have focused on improving language models (LMs) by optimizing fixed reward functions
1

New York University 2 Meta FAIR *Joint second authors
Joint senior authors. Correspondence to: Yunzhen Feng
<yf2231@nyu.edu>.
⋄

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To tackle this issue, we present Theoretically Grounded

1

