An Adaptive Orthogonal Convolution Scheme for Efficient and Flexible CNN
Architectures
Thibaut Boissin 1 2 Franck Mamalet 1 Thomas Fel 3 Agustin Martin Picard 1 Thomas Massena 4 2
Mathieu Serrurier 2

Abstract

being a prime candidate: such networks allowing the computation of robustness certificates. Initially, researchers experimented with regularization techniques (Cisse et al., 2017);
however, constrained networks, especially those employing
orthogonal layers, soon became central, as they provided the
advantage of tighter certification bounds: The overall Lipschitz constant of a sequence of layers is typically estimated
as the product of the individual layer constants; however,
this bound is often loose, and computing the exact constant
is NP-hard (Virmaux & Scaman, 2018). (Anil et al., 2019)
shows that combining MaxMin activation with orthogonal
layers makes the aforementioned bound tight. Beyond robustness, orthogonal layers also play a key role in enhancing
performance in normalizing flows. Normalizing flows are
generative models that transform simple distributions into
complex ones via invertible mappings (Dinh et al., 2017;
Rezende & Mohamed, 2015). Orthogonal convolutions
enable these transformations with a computable Jacobian
determinant, thus improving training efficiency (Kingma &
Dhariwal, 2018) and forming the basis for invertible residual
networks (Behrmann et al., 2019). Additionally, orthogonal
layers stabilize training deep and recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) by preserving gradient norms through time, essential in capturing long-term dependencies in time-series, such
as language and speech tasks (Kiani et al., 2022; Qi et al.,
2020; Bansal et al., 2018). Lastly, in Wasserstein GANs
(WGANs) (Arjovsky et al., 2017) orthogonality in both the
discriminator and generator (Müller et al., 2019) supports
stability and expressivity without requiring weight clipping
or gradient penalties (Gulrajani et al., 2017), making it essential for large-scale GAN training (Brock et al., 2018;
Miyato et al., 2018). See Appendix A for a detailed list of
applications.

Orthogonal convolutional layers are valuable components in multiple areas of machine learning,
such as adversarial robustness, normalizing flows,
GANs, and Lipschitz-constrained models. Their
ability to preserve norms and ensure stable gradient propagation makes them valuable for a large
range of problems. Despite their promise, the
deployment of orthogonal convolution in largescale applications is a significant challenge due
to computational overhead and limited support
for modern features like strides, dilations, group
convolutions, and transposed convolutions. In this
paper, we introduce AOC (Adaptive Orthogonal
Convolution), a scalable method that extends the
work of (Li et al., 2019), effectively overcoming
existing limitations in the construction of orthogonal convolutions. This advancement unlocks the
construction of architectures that were previously
considered impractical. We demonstrate through
our experiments that our method produces expressive models that become increasingly efficient as
they scale. To foster further advancement, we
provide an open-source python package implementing this method, called Orthogonium.

1. Introduction and Related Works
Orthogonal layers have become fundamental components in
various deep learning architectures due to their unique mathematical properties, which offer benefits across multiple
applications. For instance, robustness against adversarial
attacks can be achieved by managing a model’s Lipschitz
constant (Szegedy et al., 2014) – with 1-Lipschitz networks

Despite these benefits, extending orthogonality to convolutional layers remains challenging. The orthogonalization of
large Toeplitz matrices-structures central to convolution- is
challenging to do without compromising its convolutional
properties and is sometimes non-feasible (Achour et al.,
2022). Early approaches (Wang et al., 2020; Qi et al., 2020)
explored regularization, yet practical constraints led to the
following solutions:

1

Institut de Recherche Technologique Saint-Exupery, France
IRIT, France 3 Kempner Institute, Harvard University, USA
4
Innovation & Research Division, SNCF, France. Correspondence
to: Thibaut Boissin <thibaut.boissin@irt-saintexupery.com>,
Franck Mamalet <franck.mamalet@irt-saintexupery.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Explicit Construction Methods. Building on (Xiao et al.,
1

