S AFE: Finding Sparse and Flat Minima to Improve Pruning

Dongyeop Lee 1 Kwanhee Lee 1 Jinseok Chung 1 Namhoon Lee 1

Abstract

processing (Blumensath & Davies, 2009), and statistics (Tibshirani, 1996; Beck & Teboulle, 2009). Notably, the recent
success of highly overparameterized deep neural networks
in achieving human-level computer vision and natural language processing tasks has drastically scaled these models
to proportions never seen before, which has spurred considerable research on sparsifying neural networks (Hoefler
et al., 2021). Since the pioneering work of Han et al. (2015),
many works have proposed to remove redundant parameters
by various tactics ranging from those discussed in the survey
work of Hoefler et al. (2021) to their applications to large
foundation models (Kwon et al., 2022; Frantar & Alistarh,
2023; Sun et al., 2024). However, it is witnessed that excessive pruning usually results in performance decline due
to the reduced capacity, potentially impairing deep learning
models from handling tasks of high complexity. Is there a
way to restore this performance loss?

Sparsifying neural networks often suffers from
seemingly inevitable performance degradation,
and it remains challenging to restore the original performance despite much recent progress.
Motivated by recent studies in robust optimization, we aim to tackle this problem by finding
subnetworks that are both sparse and flat at the
same time. Specifically, we formulate pruning
as a sparsity-constrained optimization problem
where flatness is encouraged as an objective. We
solve it explicitly via an augmented Lagrange dual
approach and extend it further by proposing a generalized projection operation, resulting in novel
pruning methods called S AFE and its extension,
S AFE+ . Extensive evaluations on standard image classification and language modeling tasks
reveal that S AFE consistently yields sparse networks with improved generalization performance,
which compares competitively to well-established
baselines. In addition, S AFE demonstrates resilience to noisy data, making it well-suited for
real-world conditions.

We attend to recent studies that have demonstrated that the
generalization performance of a model is closely linked to
the flatness of the solution landscape (Keskar et al., 2017;
Jiang et al., 2020a). This insight has led to the development
of techniques such as sharpness-aware minimization (SAM)
(Foret et al., 2021), which explicitly regularizes the sharpness of the solution during the optimization process. SAM
has been shown to deliver exceptional performance across
various domains (Chen et al., 2022; Bahri et al., 2022) and
has also demonstrated robustness to label noise (Baek et al.,
2024). In light of the SAM’s success, there has been growing interest in applying these techniques to model pruning.
Research by Na et al. (2022) has explored how sharpnessaware training affects model compressibility, while Peste
et al. (2022) and Bair et al. (2023) have examined different
strategies to alter this process for pruning, with the goal
of enhancing performance and robustness. Nevertheless,
the exploration of sharpness-aware techniques within the
context of sparsification is still at an early stage. We believe
there is considerable potential to integrate these approaches
more effectively into the sparsification process, which could
lead to significant advancements in the development of efficient and robust deep learning models.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, the emergence of computers and the
accumulation of digital data have made machine learning
a viable tool for everyday applications. However, modern
machine learning systems have also grown in complexity
with the rapid advances in hardware and databases, demanding significant computational and memory resources. This
has led to a surge of interest in strategies to reduce these
substantial computational costs.
One major approach is sparsification, which aims to find
solutions with mostly zero entries. This has been studied for
many years in various large-scale applications in machine
learning (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi & Stork, 1992), signal
1
POSTECH, South Korea. Correspondence to: Dongyeop Lee
<dylee23@postech.ac.kr>.

In this work, we aim to achieve exactly that, by proposing
to frame it as a sharpness-aware sparsity-constrained optimization problem to simultaneously consider both sharpness
and sparsity during the training process. To tackle this, we

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

