Speculative Prefill: Turbocharging TTFT with
Lightweight and Training-Free Token Importance Estimation

Jingyu Liu 1 Beidi Chen 2 Ce Zhang 1

Abstract

understand and generate human-like languages (Bubeck
et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2024). Many
SOTA models have been developed, such as GPT-4 (OpenAI
et al., 2024), the Llama family (Grattafiori et al., 2024),
DeepSeek R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), Mistral (Jiang
et al., 2023a), Gemini (Team et al., 2024), and Qwen2 (Yang
et al., 2024), to meet the increasing expectations of users. In
order to broaden their real-world applications, one essential
requirement is to build an efficient serving engine that can
satisfy various requirements (Miao et al., 2023; Kwon et al.,
2023; Zheng et al., 2024; Shoeybi et al., 2020).

Improving time-to-first-token (TTFT) is an essentially important objective in modern large language model (LLM) inference engines. Optimizing TTFT directly results in higher maximal QPS and meets the requirements of many
critical applications. However, boosting TTFT
is notoriously challenging since it is computebounded and the performance bottleneck shifts
from the self-attention to the MLP part. We
present S PEC P REFILL1 , a training free framework
that accelerates the inference TTFT for both long
and medium context queries based on the following insight: LLMs are generalized enough
to preserve the quality given only a carefully
chosen subset of prompt tokens. At its core,
S PEC P REFILL leverages a lightweight model to
speculate locally important tokens based on the
context. These tokens, along with the necessary
positional information, are then sent to the main
model for processing. We evaluate S PEC P RE FILL with a diverse set of tasks, followed by a
comprehensive benchmarking of performance improvement both in a real end-to-end setting and
ablation studies. S PEC P REFILL manages to serve
Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct-FP8 with up
to 7× maximal end-to-end QPS on real downstream tasks and 7.66× TTFT improvement.

There are several fundamental reasons why TTFT stands so
pivotal: 1) many applications require a fast response time
that directly influences how users perceive the responsiveness of the system and 2) more importantly, TTFT determines the scaling of maximal QPS an inference engine can
support as shown in Figure 1. However, optimizing TTFT
is an arduous task mostly because the prefill stage is largely
compute-bounded and the computational bottleneck can
change depending on the prompt length and batch size. For
example, many works focus on improving the self-attention
speed (Dao et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2024a), but in reality,
there is still a huge traffic of large-batch short to medium
context queries where it is the MLP part that clogs the whole
system. Despite achieving impressive results, prior works
that target the prefill phase either require a post-training
adaptation (Qiao et al., 2024; Horton et al., 2024) or scale
less efficiently (Shi et al., 2024).
Inspired by those work, we found a key insight that LLMs
can retain most of its performance when given only a carefully chosen subset of tokens from the prompt, and the model
is able to adapt to that in a zero-shot manner. S PEC P REFILL
optimizes the TTFT by leveraging a secondary lightweight
model to speculate locally important tokens. Only these
tokens are sent later to the base model. It reduces the total
FLOPS by a factor proportional to the percentage of token
drop. S PEC P REFILL does not require any fine-tuning and
is ready to be deployed and scaled to larger models. We
summarize our key contributions:

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) represent a transformative
innovation in artificial intelligence, enabling machines to
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Jingyu Liu <jingyu6@uchicago.edu>, Ce Zhang
<cez@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The code with experiment reproduction is available at https:
//github.com/anonymous/speculative_prefill.

• We present a conceptually simple, effective, and noval framework called S PEC P REFILL that significantly
1

