Provably Efficient Algorithm for Best Scoring Rule Identification in Online
Principal-Agent Information Acquisition

Zichen Wang 1 Chuanhao Li 2 Huazheng Wang 3

Abstract

such as consumer preferences or competitive dynamics, that
influence the strategy’s potential. The manager first designs
a scoring rule S and announces it to the expert. The expert
investigates ω by selecting a research method (action k),
which incurs a cost ck . The expert chooses the research
method that maximizes its expected profit, i.e., the method
that maximizes S(σ̂, ω) − ck , where S(σ̂, ω) represents the
payment from the manager based on the accuracy of the
report. After performing the selected method, the expert observes the outcome o and produces a report σ̂. The manager
then uses σ̂ to make an investment decision d (e.g., implementing the proposed strategy). The utility of the manager
u(ω, d) is determined based on the true state ω and d.

We investigate the problem of identifying the optimal scoring rule within the principal-agent framework for online information acquisition problem.
We focus on the principal’s perspective, seeking
to determine the desired scoring rule through interactions with the agent. To address this challenge, we propose two algorithms: OIAFC and
OIAFB, tailored for fixed confidence and fixed
budget settings, respectively. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that OIAFC can extract the desired (ϵ, δ)-scoring rule with a efficient instancedependent sample complexity or an instanceindependent sample complexity. Our analysis
also shows that OIAFB matches the instanceindependent performance bound of OIAFC, while
both algorithms share the same complexity across
fixed confidence and fixed budget settings.

While most existing research (Neyman et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022; Hartline et al., 2023) focuses on designing optimal
scoring rules in offline settings, relatively little attention has
been given to the online scenario, where the principal seeks
to achieve learning objectives through repeated interactions
with the agent. To the best of our knowledge, only two prior
studies have explored the online information acquisition
problem (Chen et al., 2023; Cacciamani et al., 2023). However, these studies primarily focus on regret minimization
from the principal’s perspective, aiming to reduce cumulative regret from sub-optimal decisions. A less-explored
aspect is best scoring rule identification (BSRI), where the
principal’s goal is to identify an estimated optimal scoring rule that maximizes expected profit through repeated
interactions.

1. Introduction
The information acquisition problem, framed within the
framework of the principal-agent model (Laffont & Maskin,
1981), studies how a principal hires an agent to gather critical information for decision-making processes (Oesterheld
& Conitzer, 2020; Neyman et al., 2021). In this setup, the
principal relies on the effort and expertise of the agent to
provide high-quality information. Consider a strategic interaction between a manager (principal) and a domain expert
(agent). The manager is tasked with evaluating the suitability of an advertising strategy for a given market. The
effectiveness of this strategy depends on an uncertain underlying factor, which we refer to as the environment state
ω. This state could represent characteristics of the market,

Chen et al. (2023) presents instance-independent BSRI results for their algorithm in the fixed-confidence setting (see
Corollary 4.4 in Chen et al. (2023)). They show that their
algorithm can identify an (ϵ, δ)-optimal scoring rule using
3
Õ(CO
K 6 ϵ−3 ) samples, where K represents the number of
the agent’s actions, and CO denotes the total number of possible observations. However, this sample complexity is relatively higher than that of standard best arm identification algorithms for multi-armed bandit problems (Even-Dar et al.,
2002; Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012), which typically require
only Õ(Kϵ−2 ) samples. Moreover, no instance-dependent
results are currently available for fixed-confidence BSRI,
where the sample complexity upper bound would depend on
the expected profit gap between the optimal and sub-optimal

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and
Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign, Illinois, USA 2 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, Yale University, Connecticut, USA 3 School of Electronic
Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, USA.
Correspondence to: Zichen Wang <zichenw6@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

