Occult: Optimizing Collaborative Communications across Experts for
Accelerated Parallel MoE Training and Inference

Shuqing Luo 1 Pingzhi Li 1 Jie Peng 1 Yang (Katie) Zhao 2 Yu (Kevin) Cao 2 Yu Cheng 3 Tianlong Chen 1

Abstract
Mixture-of-experts (MoE) architectures could
achieve impressive computational efficiency with
expert parallelism, which relies heavily on all-toall communication across devices. Unfortunately,
such communication overhead typically constitutes a significant portion of the total runtime,
hampering the scalability of distributed training
and inference for modern MoE models (consuming over 40% runtime in large-scale training). In
this paper, we first define collaborative communication to illustrate this intrinsic limitation, and
then propose system- and algorithm-level innovations to reduce communication costs. Specifically,
given a pair of experts co-activated by one token,
we call them as collaborated, which comprises 2
cases as intra- and inter-collaboration, depending
on whether they are kept on the same device. Our
pilot investigations reveal that augmenting the
proportion of intra-collaboration can accelerate
expert parallel at scale. It motivates us to strategically optimize collaborative communication
for accelerated MoE training and inference,
dubbed Occult. Our designs are capable of
either delivering exact results with reduced communication cost, or controllably minimizing the
cost with collaboration pruning, materialized by
modified fine-tuning. Comprehensive experiments on various MoE-LLMs demonstrate that
Occult can be faster than popular state-of-theart inference or training frameworks (more than
1.5× speed up across multiple tasks and models)
with comparable or superior quality compared
to the standard fine-tuning. Code is available at
https://github.com/UNITES-Lab/Occult.

Occult
Occult
Occult
(No Prune) (Prune, 2 GPUs)(Prune, 1 GPU)

Occult
Occult
Occult
(No Prune) (Prune, 2 GPUs)(Prune, 1 GPU)

Occult
(No Prune)

Occult
Occult
(Prune, 2 (Prune, 1 GPU)
GPUs)

Figure 1. Latency Comparison with Multiple Models & Tasks.
Occult can accelerate training & inference for modern MoELLMs on communication-intensive tasks.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based (Vaswani, 2017) large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023) have
demonstrated tremendous success in a broad spectrum of
downstream tasks, and scaling up model parameters is the
de facto approach to train more powerful LLMs (Jiang et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024b). Mixture-of-experts (MoE) empowers LLMs with efficient parameter scaling via sparsity. It
replaces the standard feed-forward network with a group
of experts, and each token only activates a subset, which
significantly improves computation efficiency.
However, the giant scale of MoE parameters and the limited
memory of a single GPU make it necessary to shard an MoE
layer across multiple GPUs for parallelized training and inference. Among the common techniques, expert parallelism
is a scalable and efficient approach (Lepikhin et al., 2021; Fedus et al., 2022), which distributes experts on multiple GPUs
and dispatches tokens to the corresponding devices via allto-all communication. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), we can
outline a typical forward pass as Dispatch → All-to-All →
Computing → All-to-All → Combine.

1

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 2 University
of Minnesota Twin Cities 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Tianlong Chen <tianlong@cs.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

