Unpaired Point Cloud Completion via Unbalanced Optimal Transport

Taekyung Lee 1 Jaemoo Choi 2 Jaewoong Choi * 3 Myungjoo Kang * 1 4

Abstract

2020; Hong et al., 2023). Existing approaches can be categorized into paired (supervised) and unpaired (unsupervised) methods. The paired methods rely on training data
that explicitly aligns incomplete point clouds with their
corresponding complete versions (Yu et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022; Tchapmi et al., 2019; Xia et al., 2021; Zhou
et al., 2021). However, acquiring such paired datasets can
be both expensive and challenging. To address these limitations, the unpaired point cloud completion has emerged.
These approaches aim to train a completion model from
the independently sampled incomplete and complete point
clouds without explicit one-to-one correspondence. This is
achieved by leveraging shared semantic information, such
as object class (Ma et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2020; Wen
et al., 2021), or through domain adaptation using paired
synthetic data (Liu et al., 2024). However, existing unpaired
approaches primarily rely on heuristic techniques without a
rigorous theoretical formulation of the unpaired point cloud
completion problem.

Unpaired point cloud completion is crucial for
real-world applications, where ground-truth data
for complete point clouds are often unavailable.
By learning a completion map from unpaired
incomplete and complete point cloud data, this
task avoids the reliance on paired datasets. In
this paper, we propose the Unbalanced Optimal
Transport Map for Unpaired Point Cloud Completion (UOT-UPC) model, which formulates the
unpaired completion task as the (Unbalanced)
Optimal Transport (OT) problem. Our method
employs a Neural OT model learning the UOT
map using neural networks. Our model is the
first attempt to leverage UOT for unpaired point
cloud completion, achieving competitive or superior performance on both single-category and
multi-category benchmarks. In particular, our approach is especially robust under the class imbalance problem, which is frequently encountered in real-world unpaired point cloud completion scenarios. The code is available at https:
//github.com/LEETK99/UOT-UPC.

In this paper, we formulate this unpaired point cloud completion through the Optimal Transport Map (OT Map)
problem. The OT Map is defined as the cost-minimizing
transport map that bridges two probability distributions. Recently, several works proposed methods for learning the OT
Map using neural networks (Neural OT) (Rout et al., 2022;
Fan et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2024a). These models have been
applied to various machine learning tasks, such as generative
modeling (Choi et al., 2023) and image-to-image translation
(Fan et al., 2022; Gazdieva et al., 2024). A key component of Neural OT is the cost function, which determines
how each input x is transported to T (x). However, existing
approaches mainly focus on variants of the quadratic cost
function l2 (Rout et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022; Choi et al.,
2024a; 2023). To address this limitation, we analyze various candidate cost functions for unpaired completion task
and show that this theoretical analysis closely aligns with
experimental results.

1. Introduction
The three-dimensional (3D) point cloud is a fundamental
representation in 3D geometry processing (Guo et al., 2020).
However, acquiring complete point cloud data of real-world
objects remains a significant challenge due to the limitations of the scanning process (Yuan et al., 2018). Consequently, diverse approaches have been proposed for point
cloud completion, which aims to reconstruct a complete
(full) point cloud from incomplete (partial) data (Yu et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2022; Tchapmi et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 IPAI (Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University) 2 Georgia Institute
of Technology 3 Sungkyunkwan University 4 Department of Mathematical Sciences and RIMS, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Jaewoong Choi <jaewoongchoi@skku.edu>, Myungjoo
Kang <mkang@snu.ac.kr>.

Based on this OT Map formulation, we propose a novel
unpaired point cloud completion model based on the Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT) framework. We refer
to our model as the Unbalanced Optimal Transport Map
for Unpaired Point Cloud Completion (UOT-UPC). Our
experiments demonstrate that UOT-UPC achieves state-ofthe-art performance on unpaired point cloud completion

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

