MENTOR: Mixture-of-Experts Network with Task-Oriented Perturbation for
Visual Reinforcement Learning

Suning Huang * 1 2 Zheyu Zhang * 1 3 Tianhai Liang 1 Yihan Xu 1 Zhehao Kou 1 Chenhao Lu 1 Guowei Xu 1
Zhengrong Xue 1 Huazhe Xu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Visual deep reinforcement learning (RL) focuses on agents
that perceive their environment through high-dimensional
image data, closely aligning with robot control scenarios
where vision is the primary modality. Despite substantial
progress in this field (Kostrikov et al., 2020; Yarats et al.,
2021; Schwarzer et al., 2020; Stooke et al., 2021; Laskin
et al., 2020b), these methods still suffer from low sample
efficiency. As a result, most visual RL pipelines have to
be first trained in the simulator and then deployed to the
real world, inevitably leading to the problem of sim-to-real
gap (Zhao et al., 2020; Salvato et al., 2021).

Visual deep reinforcement learning (RL) enables
robots to acquire skills from visual input for unstructured tasks. However, current algorithms suffer from low sample efficiency, limiting their practical applicability. In this work, we present MENTOR, a method that improves both the architecture and optimization of RL agents. Specifically,
MENTOR replaces the standard multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with a mixture-of-experts (MoE)
backbone and introduces a task-oriented perturbation mechanism. MENTOR outperforms stateof-the-art methods across three simulation benchmarks and achieves an average of 83% success
rate on three challenging real-world robotic manipulation tasks, significantly surpassing the 32%
success rate of the strongest existing model-free
visual RL algorithm. These results underscore
the importance of sample efficiency in advancing
visual RL for real-world robotics. Experimental
videos are available at mentor-vrl.

Peg Insertion

Cable Routing

To bypass this difficulty, one approach is to train visual RL
agents from scratch on physical robots, which is known
as real-world RL (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019; Luo et al.,
2024; Zhu et al., 2020). Given the numerous challenges
of real-world RL, we argue that the fundamental solution
lies not in task-specific tweaks, but in developing substantially more sample-efficient RL algorithms. In this paper,
we introduce MENTOR: Mixture-of-Experts Network with
Task-Oriented perturbation for visual Reinforcement learning, which significantly boosts the sample efficiency of
visual RL through improvements in both agent network
architecture and optimization.
In terms of architecture, visual RL agents typically use
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for feature extraction from high-dimensional images, followed by multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs) for action output (Yarats et al., 2021;
Zheng et al., 2023; Cetin et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023).
However, the learning efficiency of standard MLPs is hindered by intrinsic gradient conflicts in challenging robotic
tasks (Yu et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2021), where the gradient directions for optimizing neural parameters across different stages of the task
trajectory or between tasks may conflict. In this work, we
propose to alleviate gradient conflicts by integrating mixtureof-experts (MoE) architectures (Jacobs et al., 1991; Shazeer
et al., 2017; Masoudnia & Ebrahimpour, 2014) as the backbone to the visual RL framework. Intuitively, MoE architectures can alleviate gradient conflicts due to their ability
to dynamically allocate gradients to specialized experts for

Tabletop Golf

Figure 1. MENTOR validation on real-world tasks. We design
three challenging robotic learning tasks where agents are trained
from scratch in the real world. MENTOR demonstrates the most
efficient and robust policies compared to baseline methods.

*
Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University 2 Stanford University 3 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Suning Huang <suning@stanford.edu>, Zheyu Zhang
<zheyuz5@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

