Relational Conformal Prediction for Correlated Time Series
Andrea Cini 1 2 Alexander Jenkins 1 3 Danilo Mandic 3 Cesare Alippi 1 4 Filippo Maria Bianchi 5 6

Abstract

et al., 2024). In many application domains, such time series
are characterized by a rich spatiotemporal dependency structure that can be exploited by introducing inductive biases in
the forecasting architecture (Cini et al., 2023a), to steer the
learning procedure toward the most plausible models. Accounting for the existing dependencies, usually represented
as a graph, allows the resulting models to obtain accurate
predictions with a reduced sample complexity (Jin et al.,
2023; Cini et al., 2023a). Besides the accuracy of the point
estimates, the reliability of the forecasts is a critical aspect of
the problem and a key element to enable effective decisionmaking in many applications (Makridakis, 1996; Petropoulos et al., 2022). Uncertainty quantification methods (Smith,
2024; Vovk et al., 2005) can improve reliability by providing confidence intervals on the forecasting error magnitude,
allowing for making more informed decisions (Hyndman
and Athanasopoulos, 2018). This is particularly true for
risk-sensitive applications such as healthcare (Makridakis
et al., 2019) and load forecasting (Gasparin et al., 2022).
In this context, inter-series (spatiotemporal) dynamics offer
both a challenge and an opportunity. Indeed, while these
dependencies can lead to wide prediction intervals (PIs) if
overlooked, they may also provide additional knowledge to
reduce uncertainty (Zambon and Alippi, 2022).

We address the problem of uncertainty quantification in time series forecasting by exploiting
observations at correlated sequences. Relational
deep learning methods leveraging graph representations are among the most effective tools for
obtaining point estimates from spatiotemporal
data and correlated time series. However, the
problem of exploiting relational structures to estimate the uncertainty of such predictions has
been largely overlooked in the same context. To
this end, we propose a novel distribution-free approach based on the conformal prediction framework and quantile regression. Despite the recent
applications of conformal prediction to sequential data, existing methods operate independently
on each target time series and do not account
for relationships among them when constructing
the prediction interval. We fill this void by introducing a novel conformal prediction method
based on graph deep learning operators. Our
approach, named Conformal Relational Prediction (C O R EL), does not require the relational
structure (graph) to be known a priori and can be
applied on top of any pre-trained predictor. Additionally, C O R EL includes an adaptive component
to handle non-exchangeable data and changes in
the input time series. Our approach provides accurate coverage and achieves state-of-the-art uncertainty quantification in relevant benchmarks.

Existing probabilistic forecasting frameworks often rely on
strong distributional assumptions and major modifications
of the base point predictor (Benidis et al., 2022; Salinas
et al., 2020). As such, they cannot be used to quantify uncertainty given a pre-trained forecasting model. In such
a setting, conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk et al., 2005;
Angelopoulos et al., 2023) methods are particularly appealing. CP is an uncertainty quantification framework that
estimates confidence intervals with marginal coverage guarantees from observed prediction residuals. One of the main
assumptions of standard CP methods is that of exchangeability between the data used to estimate the confidence
intervals and the test data points, i.e., the assumption that
their joint probability distribution is invariant to the ordering
of the associated sequence of random variables (Angelopoulos et al., 2024). Although this assumption does not usually
hold when operating on time series (Barber et al., 2023),
several methods have successfully adapted CP to estimate
forecast uncertainty (Stankeviciute et al., 2021; Xu and Xie,
2023a;b; Jensen et al., 2022; Auer et al., 2023). Nevertheless, existing CP approaches operate on each (possibly

1. Introduction
Many recent advancements in deep learning methods for
time series forecasting rely on learning from large collections of (related) time series (Benidis et al., 2022; Liang
1

IDSIA USI-SUPSI, Università della Svizzera italiana 2 Swiss
National Science Foundation Postdoc Fellow 3 Imperial College
London 4 Politecnico di Milano 5 UiT The Arctic University of Norway 6 NORCE Norwegian Research Centre AS. Correspondence
to: Andrea Cini <andrea.cini@usi.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

