CMoS: Rethinking Time Series Prediction Through the Lens of Chunk-wise
Spatial Correlations

Haotian Si 1 2 Changhua Pei 1 3 Jianhui Li 4 1 Dan Pei 5 Gaogang Xie 1

Abstract

studies have shown that lightweight models can even outperform their complex counterparts (Zhang et al., 2022;
Zeng et al., 2023; Das et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). This
prompts us to reconsider a fundamental question: whether
temporal structures inherently possess a simple but efficient
representation that we have previously overlooked.

Recent advances in lightweight time series forecasting models suggest the inherent simplicity
of time series forecasting tasks. In this paper,
we present CMoS, a super-lightweight time series forecasting model. Instead of learning the
embedding of the shapes, CMoS directly models the spatial correlations between different time
series chunks. Additionally, we introduce a Correlation Mixing technique that enables the model
to capture diverse spatial correlations with minimal parameters, and an optional Periodicity Injection technique to ensure faster convergence.
Despite utilizing as low as 1% of the lightweight
model DLinear’s parameters count, experimental results demonstrate that CMoS outperforms
existing state-of-the-art models across multiple
datasets. Furthermore, the learned weights of
CMoS exhibit great interpretability, providing
practitioners with valuable insights into temporal
structures within specific application scenarios.

Several previous models (Nie et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024)
emphasized learning the representation of shapes, which is
also called embeddings, to further build abstract dependency
via attention or mixing mechanism. However, we argue that
directly modeling the relative positional relationships between different time series chunks can be more robust and
interpretable than modeling specific patterns. As shown in
Fig. 1, for the subsequences of the sliding window, while
their shapes vary over time, as long as their relative positions are consistent, their dependencies, referred to as
chunk-to-chunk spatial correlations, often maintain stable
and reveal the temporal regularity of the system. This phenomenon carries both analytical and practical implications:
from an analytical perspective, it reveals that there’s an inherent property with translation-equivariance in time series
data, which can be a robust feature used for forecasting;
from a practical perspective, we can employ relatively simple parametric methods for modeling such property, thereby
substantially reducing model complexity.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a vital role in many fields
including finance, energy, and weather. By accurately predicting future time steps, it helps organizations make informed decisions and optimize resource allocation. As datadriven insights become increasingly essential, several forecasting methods based on deep learning are proposed with
the interaction of structures like RNN (Lin et al., 2023),
CNN (Hewage et al., 2020; LIU et al., 2022), and Transformers (Nie et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a). However, recent
1

Computer Network Information Center, CAS, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China 4 School of Frontier Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 5 Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jianhui Li
<lijh@nju.edu.cn>.
2

Figure 1. As time advances, the specific patterns in the time window change greatly, while the spatial correlations of the time series
chunks remain similar.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

