Learning to Steer Learners in Games

Yizhou Zhang 1 Yian Ma 2 Eric Mazumdar 1

Abstract

opponents’ objectives), and on the other, they must reason
strategically about the game-theoretic implications of its
actions to maximize utility. Thus, the problem becomes
trading off between exploration and competition.

We consider the problem of learning to exploit
learning algorithms through repeated interactions
in games. Specifically, we focus on the case of
repeated two player, finite-action games, in which
an optimizer aims to steer a no-regret learner to a
Stackelberg equilibrium without knowledge of its
payoffs. We first show that this is impossible if the
optimizer only knows that the learner is using an
algorithm from the general class of no-regret algorithms. This suggests that the optimizer requires
more information about the learner’s objectives or
algorithm to successfully exploit them. Building
on this intuition, we reduce the problem for the
optimizer to that of recovering the learner’s payoff structure. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
this approach if the learner’s algorithm is drawn
from a smaller class by analyzing two examples:
one where the learner uses an ascent algorithm,
and another where the learner uses stochastic mirror ascent with known regularizer and step sizes.

To address this problem, the dominant approach to learning
in games has been formulating it as an adversarial online
learning problem. In this framing, to handle opponents
with unknown objectives and learning rules, each player
assumes they are faced with an arbitrary (and potentially
adversarial) sequence of payoffs and seeks to find an algorithm that maximizes their own utility. Given this setup,
a natural class of algorithms to choose from is the class
of no-regret algorithms, which guarantees asymptotically
optimal performance compared to the best fixed action in
hindsight (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). If all players use
no-regret algorithms, it is well known that the average action
of the players over the entire time horizon converges to a
(coarse) correlated equilibrium (Foster & Vohra, 1998; Hart
& Mas-Colell, 2000). However, since the opponents are
also learners rather than adversaries, adopting a no-regret
algorithm may not be optimal.
In this paper, we seek to understand how one player
should deviate from choosing a no-regret learning algorithm in games. We focus on a simplified abstraction of this
problem—the repeated two player games with finite actions,
in which each player only knows their own utility function
(i.e., their payoff matrix), but not their opponent’s.

1. Introduction
Learning algorithms and AI agents are increasingly being
deployed into environments where they interact with other
learning agents—be they people or other algorithms. This is
already a reality in wide-ranging application areas such as ad
auctions, self-driving, automated trading, and cybersecurity.
In each of these problem areas, the presence of other agents
with potentially misaligned objectives renders the problem
game-theoretic in nature. Algorithms deployed in such
environments are therefore faced with a generalization of the
classic exploration-exploitation trade-off in online learning:
On one hand, they must take actions to learn the underlying
structure of the game (i.e., its payoff and potentially its

This problem has been well studied in recent years—though
primarily in the case where the payoff matrix, and thus the
objective of the opponent player, is known. Under such
assumptions, it was shown in (Deng et al., 2019) that if
one player (the optimizer) deviates from using a no-regret
algorithm, it can (under mild assumptions about the game
instance) guarantee an asymptotic average payoff that is
arbitrarily close to the Stackelberg value of the game by
steering the no-regret player (the learner) to the Stackelberg equilibrium of the underlying matrix game. This is
the highest attainable value if the optimizer plays one fixed
mixed strategy. Further studies have focused on analyzing
the steerability of smaller classes of algorithms, such as
no-swap-regret (Brown et al., 2023) or mean-based algorithms (Arunachaleswaran et al., 2024), providing more
insights into steering no-regret learners. Crucially, all

1

Department of Computing & Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 2 Halıcıoğlu
Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Correspondence to: Yizhou Zhang
<yzhang8@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

