ABKD: Pursuing a Proper Allocation of the Probability Mass
in Knowledge Distillation via α-β-Divergence

Guanghui Wang 1 Zhiyong Yang 1 Zitai Wang 2 Shi Wang 2 Qianqian Xu 2 Qingming Huang 1 3 2

Abstract

its efficacy. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ghwang-s/abkd.

Knowledge Distillation (KD) transfers knowledge from a large teacher model to a smaller
student model by minimizing the divergence between their output distributions, typically using
forward Kullback-Leibler divergence (FKLD) or
reverse KLD (RKLD). It has become an effective training paradigm due to the broader supervision information provided by the teacher distribution compared to one-hot labels. We identify
that the core challenge in KD lies in balancing
two mode-concentration effects: the HardnessConcentration effect, which refers to focusing
on modes with large errors, and the ConfidenceConcentration effect, which refers to focusing on
modes with high student confidence. Through an
analysis of how probabilities are reassigned during gradient updates, we observe that these two
effects are entangled in FKLD and RKLD, but in
extreme forms. Specifically, both are too weak in
FKLD, causing the student to fail to concentrate
on the target class. In contrast, both are too strong
in RKLD, causing the student to overly emphasize the target class while ignoring the broader
distributional information from the teacher. To
address this imbalance, we propose ABKD, a
generic framework with α-β-divergence. Our theoretical results show that ABKD offers a smooth
interpolation between FKLD and RKLD, achieving an effective trade-off between these effects.
Extensive experiments on 17 language/vision
datasets with 12 teacher-student settings confirm

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, 2015) is a widelyadopted technique for transferring knowledge from large
models (teachers) to smaller models (students). In this setup,
the student model, with a predictive distribution qθ , learns
to mimic the predictive distribution p of the teacher model.
This imitation is typically achieved by minimizing a predefined divergence D between the teacher distribution p and
the student distribution qθ : ℓKD ≜ D(p∥qθ ). This way, KD
allows the student to leverage richer soft label information
from p compared to one-hot labels, often leading to better
performance than traditional supervised fine-tuning. This
has been shown in tasks like image classification (Dosovitskiy, 2020; Radford et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023b; Wang
et al., 2022b) and text generation (Vaswani, 2017; Touvron
et al., 2023a).
A key step in KD is to choose a proper divergence D for distribution matching. One popular choice in previous works
(Cho & Hariharan, 2019; Mirzadeh et al., 2020; Zhou et al.,
2021; Zhao et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024;
Zheng & Yang, 2024) is the forward Kullback-Leibler divergence (FKLD). However, FKLD’s asymmetry often results
in a student distribution qθ that is overly smooth, spreading
across the entire support of p. To address this, recent studies
(Lee et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024a; Kim et al., 2024; Gu et al.,
2024b) have explored the reverse KLD (RKLD), which allows qθ to focus on a few prominent modes of p. Despite
the effectiveness, empirical results (Wen et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2024; Ko et al., 2024) suggest that RKLD often yields
suboptimal performance across a range of tasks. What is
worse, there is no systematic approach to identify the essential issues hidden behind, which hinders the development of
a more generic and effective KD framework. To get out of
this dilemma, we first pose the following question:

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management (BDKM),
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhiyong Yang <yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn>,
Qingming Huang <qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

What underlying factors contribute to the suboptimal
performance of FKLD and RKLD?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To answer this, we analyze how different divergence func1

