ZipAR: Parallel Autoregressive Image Generation through Spatial Locality

Yefei He 1 2 Feng Chen 3 Yuanyu He 1 Shaoxuan He 1 Hong Zhou 1 Kaipeng Zhang 2 Bohan Zhuang 1

Prompt: A bustling downtown street in Tokyo at night, with neon signs, sidewalks, and tall skyscrapers

Prompt: A mountain lake at sunrise, with mist rising off, and snow-capped peaks in the background

Steps: 8190

Steps: 2849 (-65%)

Steps: 1425 (-82%)

Steps: 713 (-91%)

Figure 1: Up to 91% forward step reduction with ZipAR. Samples are generated by Emu3-Gen model with next-token
prediction paradigm (the first column) and ZipAR (the right three columns).

Abstract

corresponding to spatially adjacent regions in the
column dimension can be decoded in parallel.
To ensure alignment with the contextual requirements of each token, we employ an adaptive local
window assignment scheme with rejection sampling analogous to speculative decoding. By decoding multiple tokens in a single forward pass,
the number of forward passes required to generate
an image is significantly reduced, resulting in a
substantial improvement in generation efficiency.
Experiments demonstrate that ZipAR can reduce
the number of model forward passes by up to 91%
on the Emu3-Gen model without requiring any
additional retraining.

In this paper, we propose ZipAR, a training-free,
plug-and-play parallel decoding framework for
accelerating autoregressive (AR) visual generation. The motivation stems from the observation
that images exhibit local structures, and spatially
distant regions tend to have minimal interdependence. Given a partially decoded set of visual
tokens, in addition to the original next-token prediction scheme in the row dimension, the tokens
1
Zhejiang University, China 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
The University of Adelaide, Australia.
Correspondence
to: Hong Zhou <zhouhong zju@zju.edu.cn>, Kaipeng Zhang
<kp zhang@foxmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

