Federated Learning for Feature Generalization with Convex Constraints

Dongwon Kim 1 Donghee Kim 1 Sung Kuk Shyn 2 Kwangsu Kim 1

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) often struggles with generalization due to heterogeneous client data. Local models are prone to overfitting their local
data distributions, and even transferable features
can be distorted during aggregation. To address
these challenges, we propose FedCONST, an approach that adaptively modulates update magnitudes based on the global model’s parameter
strength. This prevents over-emphasizing welllearned parameters while reinforcing underdeveloped ones. Specifically, FedCONST employs linear convex constraints to ensure training stability and preserve locally learned generalization
capabilities during aggregation. A Gradient Signal to Noise Ratio (GSNR) analysis further validates FedCONST’s effectiveness in enhancing
feature transferability and robustness. As a result,
FedCONST effectively aligns local and global
objectives, mitigating overfitting and promoting
stronger generalization across diverse FL environments, achieving state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1. Illustration of the parameter space in FL. (1) Vanilla
FL drives the optimization process away from the generalization
area. (2) Optimization with non-convex constraints stabilizes the
training process within the generalization area but may cause a loss
of generalization during aggregation. (3) Our convex constraints
stabilize the training process and align the aggregation with the
generalization area, ensuring improved global generalization.

et al., 2022). (2) Even when some clients learn features
that could generalize, these can become distorted during
aggregation, misaligning them with global objectives and
undermining performance(Lee & Yoon, 2024).

1. Introduction

Previous approaches, including regularization(An et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2021a; 2020), normalization (Li et al., 2021b;
Andreux et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023) and correction (Acar
et al., 2021; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Varno et al., 2022)
aim to mitigate these issues by aligning local model updates
with the global model. However, by focusing solely on
preserving global model information, these methods have
neglected to ensure generalization, inevitably resulting in
overfitting under limited data conditions.

Federated Learning (FL)(McMahan et al., 2017) has
emerged as a promising paradigm that enables multiple
clients to collaboratively learn a shared model while keeping their data localized. A pivotal challenge in FL arises
from the sparse and heterogeneous data distribution across
clients, which leads to significant problems on the performance of a global model. (1) Local models often overfit
their own distributions, limiting their capacity to generalize
across the entire data distribution(Qu et al., 2022; Mendieta

Recently, some studies have turned their attention to generalization of local learning. FedAlign(Mendieta et al., 2022)
and FedSAM(Qu et al., 2022) focused on the generalization of local learning employing generalization term on loss.
However, by failing to preserve coherent optimization objectives across clients during aggregation, these methods allow
the model’s generalization capabilities to become distorted,
ultimately degrading its overall performance.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Sungkyunkwan, Suwon, Korea 2 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence
to: Dongwon Kim <kdwaha@skku.edu>, Kwangsu Kim
<kim.kwangsu@skku.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In light of these issues, we ask: What kind of constraint
1

