Demeaned Sparse: Efficient Anomaly Detection by Residual Estimate

Yifan Fang * 1 2 Yifei Fang * 3 Ruizhe Chen * 1 4 Haote Xu 1 2 Xinghao Ding 1 2 4 Yue Huang 1 2 4

Abstract

2023; Wu et al., 2024). The scarcity and diversity of anomalous data present significant challenges to collecting sufficient quantities for model training. Consequently, unsupervised anomaly detection methods, which utilize only
nonanomalous samples as the training set, have emerged as
a key research focus in this field (Zhang et al., 2024; Ristea
et al., 2022; Reiss & Hoshen, 2023). Among these methods,
reconstruction-based anomaly detection represents one of
the mainstream approaches (Zavrtanik et al., 2022; 2021a;
Madan et al., 2023). It detects anomalies by measuring
differences between samples before and after reconstruction. The underlying assumption is that the model cannot
accurately reconstruct anomalous structures not encountered
during the training phase (Zavrtanik et al., 2021b).

Frequency-domain image anomaly detection
methods can substantially enhance anomaly detection performance, however, they still lack an
interpretable theoretical framework to guarantee
the effectiveness of the detection process. We
propose a novel test to detect anomalies in structural image via a Demeaned Fourier transform
(DFT) under factor model framework, and we
proof its effectiveness. We also briefly give the
asymptotic theories of our test, the asymptotic
theory explains why the test can detect anomalies at both the image and pixel levels within
the theoretical lower bound. Based on our test,
we derive a module called Demeaned Fourier
Sparse (DFS) that effectively enhances detection
performance in unsupervised anomaly detection
tasks, which can construct masks in the Fourier
domain and utilize a distribution-free sampling
method similar to the bootstrap method. The experimental results indicate that this module can
accurately and efficiently generate effective masks
for reconstruction-based anomaly detection tasks,
thereby enhancing the performance of anomaly
detection methods and validating the effectiveness
of the theoretical framework.

Recently, Kascenas et al. (2023) proposed that anomalies
can be viewed as noise added to the nonanomalous distribution, i.e., anomalous structures are considered an ‘additive’
phenomenon. Anomalies are detected by calculating the
residuals between the reconstructed and original images.
Furthermore, using residuals for structural change tests is
very common in time series analysis, such as the Chow
test (Toyoda, 1974), Ljung-Box test (Hassani & Yeganegi,
2020), and Breusch-Pagan test (Halunga et al., 2017). By
the same way, anomalies in images can be considered a
form of structural change, since the task can be regarded
as a regression problem like the aforementioned tests. Fu
et al. (2023) used a DFT-based method to detect structural
changes in factor model, they gave a framework in factor
level by capturing information from residuals which contain both the time and individual dimension. However, this
test is not suitable for image anomaly detection tasks, as
anomaly detection in images requires the application of a
multi-dimensional DFT across two cross-sectional dimensions, which differs from the approach used in time series
analysis.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection techniques, employed to capture anomalous structural changes within data that lead to deviations
from nonanomalous distributions, are widely applied across
various domains (Khan & Alkhathami, 2024; Jiang et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of
China, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. 2 School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. 3 School of Economics,
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China. 4 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Correspondence to: Haote Xu <hotxu@stu.xmu.edu.cn>, Yue Huang
<yhuang2010@xmu.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we follow the method from Fu et al. (2023)
and incorporate a multi-DFT dual cross-sectional dimension
of positional information as our primary method. we first
demonstrate why anomaly detection can be effectively performed at the factor level using by capturing information
from residuals. We also derive the test for such issue, as
well as asymptotic properties of the statistics under null
hypothesis and alternative hypothesis. The null hypothesis result let us compare with zero spectrum when there

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

