On the Out-of-Distribution Generalization of Self-Supervised Learning

Wenwen Qiang 1 2 * Jingyao Wang 1 2 * Zeen Song 1 2 Jiangmeng Li 1 2 Changwen Zheng 1 2

Abstract

SSL models face significant challenges in generalizing to
out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Understanding and improving the OOD generalization capabilities of SSL is crucial
for deploying these models in real-world scenarios where
the data distribution can shift over time.

In this paper, we focus on the out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization of self-supervised learning
(SSL). By analyzing the mini-batch construction
during the SSL training phase, we first give one
plausible explanation for SSL having OOD generalization. Then, from the perspective of data
generation and causal inference, we analyze and
conclude that SSL learns spurious correlations
during the training process, which leads to a reduction in OOD generalization. To address this
issue, we propose a post-intervention distribution
(PID) grounded in the Structural Causal Model.
PID offers a scenario where the spurious variable and label variable is mutually independent.
Besides, we demonstrate that if each mini-batch
during SSL training satisfies PID, the resulting
SSL model can achieve optimal worst-case OOD
performance. This motivates us to develop a batch
sampling strategy that enforces PID constraints
through the learning of a latent variable model.
Through theoretical analysis, we demonstrate the
identifiability of the latent variable model and validate the effectiveness of the proposed sampling
strategy. Experiments conducted on various downstream OOD tasks demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed sampling strategy.

To investigate the OOD generalization properties of SSL,
we propose examining the batch construction process during
SSL training. SSL methods are generally categorized into
two main types: discrimination-based SSL (D-SSL) (Chen
et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020a) and generation-based SSL
(G-SSL) (He et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2022). The core
principle of D-SSL is augmentation invariance, ensuring that
the feature representations of two different augmentations
of the same sample are similar. In contrast, G-SSL focuses
on the mask and reconstruction principle, where a portion of
a sample is masked and then reconstructed using an encoderdecoder structure. Leveraging these principles, augmented
samples derived from the same original sample, as well
as samples before and after masking, can be considered
anchor-related pairs. During SSL training, each pair is
treated as a distinct class, effectively framing each minibatch as a multi-class learning task. Consequently, the SSL
training process can be perceived as learning a distribution
over tasks based on discrete training tasks, enabling the
trained SSL model to generalize to new, unseen tasks, thus
demonstrating its OOD generalization capability. However,
machine learning is prone to learning spurious correlations
that vary between classes or environments (Wang et al.,
2023a; 2022). Therefore, although SSL is highly effective
in OOD generalization, it may still face the challenge of
mitigating spurious correlations.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a powerful
paradigm for training models without relying on labeled
data. Meanwhile, SSL models have achieved competitive
or superior performance on various downstream tasks compared to supervised learning approaches (Chen et al., 2020;
Grill et al., 2020a; Zbontar et al., 2021; He et al., 2022; Tong
et al., 2022). However, despite their superior performance,

Building upon the analysis in Section 3, we examine the
aforementioned challenge from the perspectives of data generation and causal inference. First, we conclude that the
similarity or reconstruction between samples within a pair
is affected by several unobservable factors, such as background or texture information independent of the foreground.
We also find that the spurious correlation between the anchor
and the unobservable variable can vary with the tasks, making it difficult to eliminate it using the unified causal criterion proposed by (Pearl et al.; Pearl, 2009). Furthermore, we
demonstrate that, under these circumstances, the SSL model
learns to measure similarity or reconstruct using spurious
causal factors. This reliance leads to a lack of discriminabil-

*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Software Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jiangmeng Li
<jiangmeng2019@iscas.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

