Bench: Graduate-level Multi-disciplinary Benchmarks for
LLM & MLLM Complex Reasoning Evaluation

Meng-Hao Guo 1 Jiajun Xu 1 Yi Zhang 1 Jiaxi Song 1 Haoyang Peng 1 Yi-Xuan Deng 1 Xinzhi Dong 1
Kiyohiro Nakayama 2 Zhengyang Geng 3 Chen Wang 4 Bolin Ni 5 Guo-Wei Yang 6
Yongming Rao † 5 Houwen Peng † 5 Han Hu 5 Gordon Wetzstein 2 Shi-Min Hu † B 1

Abstract
92.3

Reasoning stands as a cornerstone of intelligence,
enabling the synthesis of existing knowledge to
solve complex problems. Despite remarkable
progress, existing reasoning benchmarks often fail
to rigorously evaluate the nuanced reasoning capabilities required for complex, real-world problemsolving, particularly in multi-disciplinary and
multimodal contexts. In this paper, we introduce a graduate-level, multi-disciplinary, EnglishChinese benchmark, dubbed as Reasoning Bench
(RBench), for assessing the reasoning capability of both language and multimodal models.
RBench spans 1,094 questions across 108 subjects for language model evaluation and 665 questions across 83 subjects for multimodal model
testing. These questions are meticulously curated
to ensure rigorous difficulty calibration, subject
balance, and cross-linguistic alignment, enabling
the assessment to be an Olympiad-level multidisciplinary benchmark. We evaluate many models such as o1, GPT-4o, DeepSeek-R1, etc. Experimental results indicate that advanced models
perform poorly on complex reasoning, especially
multimodal reasoning. Even the top-performing
model OpenAI o1 achieves only 53.2% accuracy
on our multimodal evaluation. Data and code are
made publicly available at here.

-Bench-T
-Bench-M

MMLU
MMMU

90.0

88.0

78.2
69.1

69.0

Accuracy (%)

61.2
53.6

53.2

33.4

41217

o1-202

o
GPT-4

eek-R1

DeepS

41217

o1-202

o
GPT-4

Figure 1. Top-1 accuracy comparison of different models on
MMLU, MMMU, and RBench. RBench poses a greater challenge to current models.

Reasoning, the systematic process of synthesizing knowledge to solve novel problems, lies at the heart of intelligence.
Yet, as foundation models grow increasingly sophisticated,
existing benchmarks fail to comprehensively assess their
complex reasoning capabilities. As shown in the above
quote, before equipping foundation models with reasoning
skills, we should first define goals for them by establishing
a reliable evaluation to assess their reasoning capabilities.
As noted in (Kahneman, 2011) and (Wei et al., 2022), realizing system-I, a.k.a., quick and intuitive thinking and
system-II, a.k.a., slow and deliberate reasoning raises distinct requirements on foundation models. Similarly, assessing quick thinking and complex reasoning requires substantially different assessment methods. On the one hand,
evaluating system-I needs to evaluate the knowledge and
memory, which requires collecting various daily conversations and knowledge-based questions e.g., concept and
common sense questions. On the other hand, evaluating
system-II requires evaluating complex reasoning skills. It
requires gathering a diverse range of reasoning questions,
such as analytical and deductive ones, which is more chal-

1. Introduction
“Setting goals is the first step in turning the invisible into the visible.”
— Tony Robbins
†

Joint project lead, 1 Tsinghua University, 2 Stanford University,
CMU, 4 University of Pennsylvania, 5 Tencent Hunyuan X, 6 Fitten.
Correspondence to: Shi-Min Hu <shimin@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

