Conservative Offline Goal-Conditioned Implicit V-Learning

Kaiqiang Ke 1 Qian Lin 1 Zongkai Liu 1 2 Shenghong He 1 Chao Yu 1 3

Abstract

2020). Consequently, offline GCRL has attracted significant
attention in recent years, enabling the learning of skillful
agents from pre-collected datasets while circumventing the
challenges of online data collection (Ma et al., 2022b; Park
et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024).

Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning
(GCRL) learns a goal-conditioned value function to train policies for diverse goals with precollected datasets. Hindsight experience replay
addresses the issue of sparse rewards by treating
intermediate states as goals but fails to complete
goal-stitching tasks where achieving goals requires stitching different trajectories. While crosstrajectory sampling is a potential solution that associates states and goals belonging to different trajectories, we demonstrate that this direct method
degrades performance in goal-conditioned tasks
due to the overestimation of values on unconnected pairs. To this end, we propose Conservative Goal-Conditioned Implicit Value Learning
(CGCIVL), a novel algorithm that introduces a
penalty term to penalize value estimation for unconnected state-goal pairs and leverages the quasimetric framework to accurately estimate values
for connected pairs. Evaluations on OGBench, a
benchmark for offline GCRL, demonstrate that
CGCIVL consistently surpasses state-of-the-art
methods across diverse tasks.

A common approach in offline GCRL is to train a goalconditioned value function V (s, g) from a static dataset via
temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018;
Schaul et al., 2015; Ghosh et al., 2023). One of the primary
challenges in value learning is the low learning efficiency
issue caused by sparse rewards. Existing methods utilize
Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017), which samples states and goals within a single trajectory, to tackle this problem. However, such approaches
ignore the issue of the cross-trajectory state-goal pairs,
i.e., pairs that can only be connected by stitching multiple
trajectories. Such cross-trajectory pairs are essential in goalstitching tasks, where the initial state and the goal could
belong to different trajectories.
However, directly incorporating cross-trajectory state-goal
pairs into data sampling can lead to value estimation errors, particularly when some of these pairs are unconnected—that is, when no valid sequence of transitions exists
within the dataset linking the state to the goal. Therefore,
their values cannot be estimated accurately using TD learning and tend to be consistently overestimated during training.
Moreover, these overestimated values propagate to neighboring states through the bootstrapping process of TD learning,
thus misleading the policy to select suboptimal actions.

1. Introduction
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) aims
to train RL agents that are capable of mastering a diverse
range of skills, each defined by a distinct goal (Schaul et al.,
2015; Liu et al., 2022). In offline settings, these goals are
typically identified as states already contained in the dataset,
eliminating the need for manual goal design and facilitating
the acquisition of general-purpose policies without active environment interactions. Such a setup is especially beneficial
for real-world applications, where direct interactions can be
costly, time-consuming, or even hazardous (Kumar et al.,

In this paper, we investigate the above issue in depth. First,
by theoretically analyzing the discrepancy between the estimated and optimal values, we show that the overestimation of values on unconnected state-goal pairs leads to
propagation errors in adjacent states. Then, we propose
Conservative Goal-Conditioned Implicit Value Learning
(CGCIVL), a novel algorithm designed to learn a conservative estimate of the goal-conditioned value function. Specifically, a regularization term is incorporated to prevent overestimated values of unconnected pairs and a quasimetric
model is employed to prevent potential under-estimation on
cross-trajectory but connected state-goal pairs. Theoretical
guarantees further show that the proposed method alleviates overestimation of values on unconnected pairs while

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute,
Shanghai, China 3 Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Chao Yu <yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

