Action-Minimization Meets Generative Modeling:
Efficient Transition Path Sampling with the Onsager-Machlup Functional

Sanjeev Raja * 1 Martin Šı́pka * 2 3 Michael Psenka * 1 Tobias Kreiman 1 Michal Pavelka 2 Aditi S. Krishnapriyan 1 4 5

Abstract

statistical mechanics and computational science (Tuckerman,
2023; Frenkel & Smit, 2023). A key area of interest is the
sampling of rare, transition events between two stable configurations, such as in chemical reactions or protein folding
(Bolhuis et al., 2002; Dellago et al., 2002). This task, broadly
known as transition path sampling (TPS), is challenging due
to the presence of energy barriers, which create a substantial
difference in timescales between rare events and the fastest
dynamical motions of the system (e.g., bond vibrations). This
has inspired a rich line of literature on enhanced sampling
techniques (Torrie & Valleau, 1977; Swendsen & Wang,
1986; Laio & Parrinello, 2002b; Laio & Gervasio, 2008;
Tiwary & Parrinello, 2013; Valsson & Parrinello, 2014).
More recently, machine learning (ML) based methods have
gained popularity for accelerating TPS by learning a control
drift term to bias a system towards a desired target state
(Sipka et al., 2023; Holdijk et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024; Seong
et al., 2024). However, these approaches rely on highly specialized training procedures and fail to exploit the growing
quantity of atomistic simulation and structural data (Bank,
1971; Vander Meersche et al., 2024; Lewis et al., 2024),
and the increasing availability of high-quality atomistic
conformational generative models (Abramson et al., 2024;
Lewis et al., 2024; Jing et al., 2024a; Zheng et al., 2024).

Transition path sampling (TPS), which involves
finding probable paths connecting two points
on an energy landscape, remains a challenge
due to the complexity of real-world atomistic
systems. Current machine learning approaches
use expensive, task-specific, and data-free training
procedures, limiting their ability to benefit from recent advances in atomistic machine learning, such
as high-quality datasets and large-scale pre-trained
models. In this work, we address TPS by interpreting candidate paths as trajectories sampled
from stochastic dynamics induced by the learned
score function of pre-trained generative models,
specifically denoising diffusion and flow matching.
Under these dynamics, finding high-likelihood
transition paths becomes equivalent to minimizing
the Onsager-Machlup (OM) action functional.
This enables us to repurpose pre-trained generative
models for TPS in a zero-shot manner, in contrast
with bespoke, task-specific TPS models trained
in previous work. We demonstrate our approach
on varied molecular systems, obtaining diverse,
physically realistic transition pathways and
generalizing beyond the pre-trained model’s
original training dataset. Our method can be easily
incorporated into new generative models, making
it practically relevant as models continue to scale
and improve with increased data availability.

Generative models can produce unbiased, independent
samples from atomistic conformational ensembles (Noé
et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2024; Jing et al., 2024a) and
have shown the potential to generalize across chemical
space (Klein & Noé, 2024; Lewis et al., 2024). However,
they have not been directly used for TPS due to the use of
uncorrelated states during training. In this work, we propose
a conceptually simple post-training method to repurpose
generative models to perform TPS in a zero-shot manner.
Our core idea exploits the fact that generative models
based on denoising diffusion (Ho et al., 2020) and flow
matching (Lipman et al., 2022) induce a set of stochastic
Langevin dynamics on the data manifold, governed by their
learned score function. Drawing inspiration from statistical
mechanics, the probability of paths sampled from these
dynamics can be characterized by a quantity known as
the Onsager-Machlup (OM) action functional (Onsager &
Machlup, 1953). As a result, we can identify high-probability
paths between arbitrary points on the data manifold directly

1. Introduction
Efficiently sampling the configurational distribution of
high-dimensional molecular systems is a grand challenge in
*
Equal contribution, random order. 1 Dept. of EECS, UC
Berkeley 2 Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University
3
Done prior to joining Amazon 4 Dept. of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, UC Berkeley 5 Applied Mathematics and
Computational Research, LBNL. Correspondence to: Sanjeev Raja,
Aditi S. Krishnapriyan <{sanjeevr, aditik1}@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

