Fully Dynamic Embedding into ℓp Spaces

Kiarash Banihashem 1 Xiang Chen 2 MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi 1 Sungchul Kim 2 Kanak Mahadik 2
Ryan A. Rossi 2 Tong Yu 2

Abstract

done in many ways, the usual goal in embedding design is to
ensure small distortion, i.e., we make sure that the distances
are approximately preserved.

Metric embeddings are fundamental in machine
learning, enabling similarity search, dimensionality reduction, and representation learning. They
underpin modern architectures like transformers and large language models, facilitating scalable training and improved generalization. Theoretically, the classic problem in embedding design is mapping arbitrary metrics into ℓp spaces
while approximately preserving pairwise distances. We study this problem in a fully dynamic setting, where the underlying metric is
a graph metric subject to edge insertions and
deletions. Our goal is to maintain an efficient embedding after each update. We present
the first fully dynamic algorithm for this problem, achieving O(log(n))2q O(log(nW ))q−1 expected distortion with O(m1/q+o(1) ) update time
and O(q log(n) log(nW )) query time, where q ≥
2 is an integer parameter.

Low-distortion embeddings with “simple” target metric
spaces V ′ effectively simplify the original metric while approximately preserving distances. This can be useful from
an algorithm design perspective as quite often, the problem
is much more approachable in the simpler metric, especially
from a computational perspective. Because of this, many
works have previously studied such embeddings for a variety of target metrics such as ℓp spaces (Bourgain, 1985)
and hierarchical trees (Bartal, 1996a; 1998; Fakcharoenphol
et al., 2004). A closely related line of work also examines
the problem of maintaining a low-stretch spanning tree of
a graph (Alon et al., 1995; Elkin et al., 2008). These embeddings have been used to obtain algorithms for a variety
of problems such as sparsest cut (Linial et al., 1995), network design (Awerbuch & Azar, 1997; Garg et al., 2000),
minimum bandwidth (Blum et al., 1998), and metric labeling (Kleinberg & Tardos, 2002)
Embeddings are a cornerstone of modern machine learning,
powering models from word2vec to large language models (LLMs). These methods represent discrete data—such
as words, entities, or tokens—in continuous metric spaces,
enabling geometric reasoning about semantic relationships.
This makes embeddings useful for tasks such as node classification, link prediction, and community detection (Zhang
& Chen, 2018; Abu-El-Haija et al., 2018; Yun et al., 2021;
Davison et al., 2024) Among embedding targets, ℓp spaces
(especially ℓ2 ) have emerged as the standard representation
space in much of modern machine learning. This is due to
(a) their interpretability—distances and angles have clear
geometric meaning—and (b) the fact that many key computational primitives are substantially more efficient in ℓp
spaces. For example, nearest neighbor search in high dimensions is routinely performed using locality-sensitive hashing
(LSH), a technique specifically designed for ℓ2 and other
vector norms.

1. Introduction
Metric embeddings are fundamental to computer science,
with applications in machine learning, databases, and network design. In ML, they are critical for tasks like similarity
search, dimensionality reduction, and representation learning, underpinning modern architectures such as transformers and large language models (Vaswani, 2017; Kenton &
Toutanova, 2019). By enabling efficient and context-aware
representations of high-dimensional data, embeddings drive
scalable training and task generalization, making them essential for advancing state-of-the-art models.
From a theoretical perspective, the classic formulation of
metric embedding problem is as follows. We are given a set
of points in an input metric space M = (V, d), and we want
to map (i.e., embed) each point v ∈ V to a point v ′ ∈ V ′
in a target metric space M ′ = (V ′ , d′ ). While this can be
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Adobe research. Correspondence to: Kiarash Banihashem <kiarash@umd.edu>.

In the past decade, motivated by the surge of interest in modern Big Data applications, there has been a renewed interest
in studying classical problems in a dynamic setting, where
the underlying input is constantly changing and the goal is to

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

