Harnessing Heterogeneous Statistical Strength for Personalized Federated
Learning via Hierarchical Bayesian Inference

Mahendra Singh Thapa 1 Rui Li 1

Abstract
Personalized federated learning (PFL) based on
Bayesian approach tackle the challenges from statistical heterogeneity of client data by computing a personalized posterior distribution over the
parameters of each client’s local model and constructing a global distribution by aggregating the
parameters of these personalized posteriors. However, the heuristic aggregation methods introduce
strong biases and result in global models with
poor generalization. We thus propose a novel hierarchical Bayesian inference framework for PFL
by specifying a conjugate hyper-prior over the
parameters of the personalized posteriors. This
allows us to jointly compute a global posterior
distribution for aggregation and the personalized
ones at local level. This hierarchical Bayesian
inference framework achieves elegant balance between local personalization and global model robustness. Extensive empirical study shows that by
effectively sharing the heterogeneous statistical
strength across the local models while retaining
their distinctive characteristics, our framework
yields state-of-the-art performance. We also show
that existing Bayesian PFLs are special cases of
our framework.

Samples
Sample Mean

2
1
0
0.0

0.5

1.0

Variance

1.5

2.0

Figure 1. In Bayesian PFL, variance parameters of personalized
distributions often follow skewed distributions. In such cases, the
MLE/MAP estimate (e.g., arithmetic mean) is obviously a poor
estimate.

et al., 2024), and mobile applications (Hard et al., 2018; Wu
et al., 2020; Geng et al., 2024). However, FL still faces substantial challenges, mainly due to statistical heterogeneity
and limited data availability on individual clients (Ye et al.,
2023).
The Bayesian-based personalized FL (PFL) approaches focusing on learning personalized local models for individual
clients perform Bayesian inference to derive personalized
posterior distributions of local model parameters (Zhang
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Bhatt et al., 2024; Makhija et al.,
2024). The server then aggregates the parameters of these
personalized posteriors to construct a global distribution.
Specifically, the construction of the global distributions in
these approaches typically involves arithmetic aggregation
of personalized posterior parameters as the global distribution parameters (Zhang et al., 2022) or approximation of
the global distributions as the product of the personalized
ones (Liu et al., 2023), as shown in Figure 2. The global distributions are then transmitted back to all clients as a local
regularization for the next training iteration. These simple
yet rigid aggregation schemes at the global level introduce
strong constraints that obscure unique characteristics distinguishing the heterogeneous local data and lead to biased
estimates of the global models with poor generalization, as
illustrated in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) emerges as a promising framework
that enables collaborative model training across decentralized client devices while preserving data privacy (McMahan
et al., 2017). This approach demonstrates significant potential in various real-world applications, such as healthcare
(Yang et al., 2021; Dayan et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024),
recommendation systems (Muhammad et al., 2020; Yuan
1

College of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester
Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Rui Li <rxlics@rit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

There are Bayesian-based FL approaches focusing on constructing robust global models, such as computing global dis1

