Learning from Loss Landscape: Generalizable Mixed-Precision Quantization via
Adaptive Sharpness-Aware Gradient Aligning

Lianbo Ma 1 Jianlun Ma 1 Yuee Zhou 1 Guoyang Xie 2 3 Qiang He 4 Zhichao Lu 2

Abstract

one effective way is to utilize a set of small bitwidths to
quantize the entire network for reducing model redundancy
(Deng et al., 2020), termed as mixed-precision quantization
(MPQ). Different from fixed-precision quantization (FPQ)
(Esser et al., 2019), MPQ works in a fine-grained way, allowing different bitwidths for different layers (Elthakeb et al.,
2020; Guo et al., 2020). That is, the quantization-insensitive
layers can be quantized using much smaller bitwidths than
the quantization-sensitive layers, which can naturally obtain
more optimal accuracy-complexity trade-off than FPQ.

Mixed Precision Quantization (MPQ) has become
an essential technique for optimizing neural network by determining the optimal bitwidth per
layer. Existing MPQ methods, however, face a
major hurdle: they require a computationally expensive search for quantization policies on largescale datasets. To resolve this issue, we introduce
a novel approach that first searches for quantization policies on small datasets and then generalizes them to large-scale datasets. This approach simplifies the process, eliminating the
need for large-scale quantization fine-tuning and
only necessitating model weight adjustment. Our
method is characterized by three key techniques:
sharpness-aware minimization for enhanced quantization generalization, implicit gradient direction alignment to handle gradient conflicts among
different optimization objectives, and an adaptive perturbation radius to accelerate optimization. Both theoretical analysis and experimental
results validate our approach. Using the CIFAR10
dataset (just 0.5% the size of ImageNet training
data) for MPQ policy search, we achieved equivalent accuracy on ImageNet with a significantly
lower computational cost, while improving efficiency by up to 150% over the baselines.

Limitations. Most existing MPQ methods require the consistency of datasets for bitwidth search and network deployment to guarantee policy optimality, which results in heavy
search burden on large-scale datasets (Zhao et al., 2024).
For example, HAQ (Wang et al., 2019) requires approximately 72 GPU hours to search for the optimal quantization
policy for ResNet50 on ImageNet. A natural solution to
solve the above issue is to decouple the dataset used in
MPQ search stage and model inference stage. In this way,
the search efficiency can be largely improved since the MPQ
search can be performed with a small size of proxy dataset.
Unfortunately, it inevitably suffers from intractable challenges incurred by shifted data distributions and small data
volume of the disparate datasets. For example, when CIFAR10 is used to search for MPQ policy for MobileNet-V2
trained on ImageNet, PACT (Choi et al., 2018) suffers from
a substantial loss of nearly 10% in Top-1 accuracy.
To bridge such gap, we aim to search transferable policy
using small proxy datasets via enhancing generalization of
quantization search (as shown in Figure 7 in Supplementary
Material A.1). Several studies demonstrate that utilizing the
discriminative nature of feature representations (e.g., the
attribution rank of image’s features (Wang et al., 2021), the
class-level information of feature maps (Tang et al., 2023))
can find a transferable policy. However, such disentangled
representation learning methods just enhance the discrimination ability of target quanitzed models, which is empirically
helpful to improve generalization, but still suffers from lack
of theoretical support. Moreover, they entail intricate calculation of feature maps (e.g., attribution rank calculation
and alignment, classification margin computation), which is
computationally complex.

1. Introduction
With the fast development of edge intelligence applications,
it is desirable to compress DNNs with minimal/no performance deterioration according to specific hardware configurations (Shuvo et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2024). To realize this,
1
College of Software , Northeastern University, Shenyang,
China 2 The Department of Computer Science, City University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 3 The Department of Intelligent
Manufacturing, CATL, Ningde, China 4 College of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China.
Correspondence to: Guoyang Xie <guoyang.xie@ieee.org>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

