Sorbet: A Neuromorphic Hardware-Compatible Transformer-Based Spiking
Language Model

Kaiwen Tang 1 Zhanglu Yan 1 Weng-Fai Wong 1

Abstract

et al., 2022) has prompted research into distilling small language models (SLMs) (Sun et al., 2020; Eldan & Li, 2023;
Zhang et al., 2024) from LLMs that can run on the resourceconstrained edge devices. Local inference on the device is
critical in situations where data privacy is essential or when
connectivity to powerful remote computing resources is unfeasible (Sun et al., 2020; Sanh, 2019). The high demand
for energy efficiency drives research to simplify SLM inference, making it better suited for devices with low energy
consumption while maintaining adequate performance.

For reasons such as privacy, there are use cases for
language models at the edge. This has given rise
to small language models targeted for deployment
in resource-constrained devices where energy efficiency is critical. Spiking neural networks (SNNs)
offer a promising solution due to their energy efficiency, and there are already works on realizing
transformer-based models on SNNs. However,
key operations like softmax and layer normalization (LN) are difficult to implement on neuromorphic hardware, and many of these early
works sidestepped them. To address these challenges, we introduce Sorbet, a transformer-based
spiking language model that is more neuromorphic hardware-compatible. Sorbet incorporates
a novel shifting-based softmax called PTsoftmax
and a Bit Shifting PowerNorm (BSPN), both designed to replace the respective energy-intensive
operations. By leveraging knowledge distillation and model quantization, Sorbet achieved a
highly compressed binary weight model that maintains competitive performance while achieving
27.16× energy savings compared to BERT. We
validate Sorbet through extensive testing on the
GLUE benchmark and a series of ablation studies,
demonstrating its potential as an energy-efficient
solution for language model inference. Our code
is publicly available at https://github.com/KaiwenTang/Sorbet

In parallel, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have gained significant attention due to their remarkable energy efficiency.
SNNs closely mimic biological neural networks and are
multiplication-free, resulting in much lower energy consumption compared to artificial neural networks (ANNs).
Developing SNNs on neuromorphic hardware significantly
improves energy efficiency while preserving impressive performance compared to advanced ANNs (Guo et al., 2023;
Shi et al., 2024). For example, the SNN based on the ViTbase architecture (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) achieves competitive accuracy levels (e.g., up to 81.10% on ImageNet)
to its ANN counterpart, but with only one-tenth of energy
consumption (Zhou et al., 2024).
However, developing transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)based spiking language models is challenging, particularly
in encoding spikes and handling the incompatible operations
of neuromorphic hardware. Previous works have focused
on replacing matrix multiplications with encoding methods,
like SpikFormer (Zhou et al., 2024), SpikeBERT (Lv et al.,
2023), SpikeLM (Xing et al.), and SpikingBERT (Bal &
Sengupta, 2024). However, the transformer architecture also
includes softmax and layer normalization (LN) operations,
which are energy-intensive and incompatible with neuromorphic hardware. Models like SpikeLM and SpikingBERT,
which target natural language processing (NLP) tasks, still
rely on softmax and LN operations, limiting their compatibility with neuromorphic hardware. SpikFormer addresses
this issue by adopting features from convolutional networks
and batch normalization, avoiding the use of these operations. While effective for vision tasks, their applicability to
language tasks, which rely more heavily on operations like
LN, remains unproven. Thus, there is no transformer-based

1. Introduction
The phenomenal success of large language models
(LLMs) (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Raffel
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Lewis et al., 2020; Taylor
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Zhanglu Yan
<zlyan@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

