LongRoPE2: Near-Lossless LLM Context Window Scaling

Ning Shang * 1 Li Lyna Zhang * 1 † Siyuan Wang 2 1 Gaokai Zhang 3 1 Gilsinia Lopez 1
Fan Yang 1 Weizhu Chen 1 Mao Yang 1

Abstract

(RoPE) (Su et al., 2021) are rescaled to fit the expanded
context. The model weights are then fine-tuned using longsequence data to adapt to the rescaled RoPE.

LongRoPE2 is a novel approach that extends the
effective context window of pre-trained large language models (LLMs) to the target length, while
preserving the performance on the original shorter
context window. This is achieved by three contributions: (1) a hypothesis that insufficient training in higher RoPE dimensions contributes to
the persistent out-of-distribution (OOD) issues
observed in existing methods; (2) an effective
RoPE rescaling algorithm that adopts evolutionary search guided by ”needle-driven” perplexity
to address the insufficient training problem; (3)
a mixed context window training approach that
fine-tunes model weights to adopt rescaled RoPE
for long-context sequences while preserving the
short-context performance with the original RoPE.
Extensive experiments on LLaMA3-8B and Phi3mini-3.8B across various benchmarks validate the
hypothesis and demonstrate the effectiveness of
LongRoPE2. Remarkably, LongRoPE2 extends
LLaMA3-8B to achieve a 128K effective context
length while retaining over 98.5% of short-context
performance, using only 10B tokens – 80x fewer
than Meta’s approach, which fails to reach the
target effective context length.

1

Extending the context window of a pre-trained LLM requires addressing the out-of-distribution (OOD) issue in
rotary positional embeddings (RoPE). In RoPE, higherdimensional RoPE embeddings produce OOD values at
extended token positions due to incomplete rotation periods
within the original context window (Liu et al., 2023; Han
et al., 2023; Men et al., 2024a). To mitigate this, RoPE
rescaling remaps these OOD values into the in-distribution
range learned during pre-training. Various methods, such
as YaRN (Peng et al., 2023), NTK (LocalLLaMA, 2023),
and LongRoPE (Ding et al., 2024), have been proposed to
determine appropriate rescaling factors.
Despite attempts to mitigate the OOD issue with RoPE
rescaling, context window extension still encounters two
major challenges. First, rescaling factors derived from previous methods often fall short of achieving the effective target
context length. For example, LLaMA3.1 adopts YaRN to extend its context window to 128k; however, its performance
on RULER (Hsieh et al., 2024), a benchmark designed to
evaluate LLMs’ long-context processing capability, deteriorates significantly when going beyond 64k (Fig. 1). Second,
existing approaches to extending an LLM’s context window
usually lead to a noticeable performance degradation on
tasks for the original short context window. As shown in
Fig. 2(c), extending Phi3-mini (Abdin et al., 2024) to 128k
results in MMLU score drops of 7.56, 4.34, and 3.52 points
for YaRN, NTK, and LongRoPE, respectively. Restoring
short-context performance typically requires costly midtraining strategies, such as multi-stage progressive extension (Dubey et al., 2024) and pre-training data replay (Hu
et al., 2024b), which increase both training costs (e.g., 800B
tokens for LLaMA3.1) and system complexity.

Introduction

A long context window has become an essential feature
of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023;
Dubey et al., 2024; Abdin et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024;
Team, 2024). For instance, a 128k context window is now
standard in recent LLMs like GPT-4o and LLaMA3.1. Context window extension is achieved through mid-training
after pre-training, where the rotary positional embeddings

This paper introduces LongRoPE2, a novel approach for
context extension that enables LLMs to achieve an effective long context window while preserving short-context
performance. Our analysis reveals that lower RoPE dimensions are sufficiently trained, whereas higher dimensions
– critical for long-context processing – receive inadequate
training. This results in shorter effective RoPE rotation

*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Zhejiang University; Siyuan Wang and Gaokai Zhang did this
work during the internship at MSRA. Correspondence to: Li Lyna
Zhang <lzhani@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

