Fixing the Loose Brake: Exponential-Tailed Stopping Time in Best Arm
Identification
Kapilan Balagopalan * 1 Tuan Ngo Nguyen * 1 Yao Zhao * 1 Kwang-Sung Jun 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit model serves a foundational framework for studying sequential decision-making under uncertainty. In this framework, a learner interacts with an
environment by sequentially selecting among multiple alternatives (arms) and observing stochastic rewards, allowing
for the rigorous analysis of fundamental trade-offs inherent in sequential decision-making. A core problem within
this theoretical landscape is best arm identification, which
focuses on identifying the arm associated with the highest
mean reward, either with a pre-specified confidence level or
within a pre-specified sampling budget, known as the fixed
confidence setting and fixed budget setting, respectively.

The best arm identification problem requires identifying the best alternative (i.e., arm) in active experimentation using the smallest number of experiments (i.e., arm pulls), which is crucial for costefficient and timely decision-making processes.
We consider the fixed confidence setting where an
algorithm repeatedly selects arms until it decides
to stop and then returns the estimated best arm
with a correctness guarantee. Since this stopping
time is random, we desire its distribution to have
light tails. Unfortunately, many existing studies
focus on guarantees that hide the issue of allowing heavy tails or even not stopping at all. Indeed,
we show that the never-stopping event can indeed
happen for standard algorithms. Motivated by
this, we make two theoretical contributions. First,
we show that there exists an algorithm that attains
a desirable exponential-tailed stopping time guarantee that is strictly better than the polynomial
tail bound of Kalyanakrishnan et al. (2012) and
the exponential guarantee obtained by uniform
sampling. Our guarantee is more fundamental
than existing ones in the sense that our guarantee
implies that it achieves existing optimal guarantees up to logarithmic factors. Second, we show
that there exists a meta algorithm that takes in any
fixed confidence algorithm with a high probability stopping guarantee and turns it into one that
enjoys an exponential-tailed stopping time with
a matching instance-dependent complexity up to
logarithmic factors. Our results imply that there
might be much more to be desired for contemporary fixed confidence algorithms.

While the fixed confidence setting has conceptual connections to applications such as A/B/../K testing, the focus of
this work lies in the more general and theoretical side, adaptive fixed confidence best arm identification setting, where
arm pulls are assigned adaptively based on the outcomes
of previous pulls. The advantage of adaptive assignment is
that it often results in significantly lower sample complexity
compared to non-adaptive assignment.
Therefore, many works have proposed algorithms and
proved bounds on how many samples they use until stopping (i.e., sample complexity) either with high probability
or in expectation (Even-Dar et al., 2006; Karnin et al., 2013;
Jamieson et al., 2014). However, most existing sample complexity guarantees do not sufficiently describe the behavior
of the stopping time. For instance, an algorithm might
be guaranteed to stop before T ∗ samples with probability
at least 1 − δ, but with probability up to δ, the algorithm
may never stop or stop only after a very long time, much
larger than T ∗ . Algorithms with expected sample complexity guarantees will stop, but the tail of the distribution of the
stopping time can be very thick. Thus, the realized stopping
time can be significantly larger than the expected one, which
is undesirable. These issues have been under-explored in
the literature.
To address this gap, we push the limits of attainable guarantees for the tail decaying rate of stopping time distribution
of fixed confidence best arm identification algorithms. To
the best of our knowledge, aside from LUCB by (Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012) with a polynomial-tailed stopping time
bound, there has been no significant study on the tail of the

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Arizona. Correspondence
to: Kwang-Sung Jun <kjun@cs.arizona.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

