Learning Latent Graph Structures and their Uncertainty

Alessandro Manenti 1 Daniele Zambon 1 Cesare Alippi 1 2

Abstract

and its parameters in ψ – is conditioned on the relational
information encoded in variable A. Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2008) are one example of models
of this kind that rely on a graph structure represented as an
adjacency matrix A and have been demonstrated successful
in a plethora of applications (Fout et al., 2017; Shlomi et al.,
2020).

Graph neural networks use relational information as an inductive bias to enhance prediction
performance. Not rarely, task-relevant relations
are unknown and graph structure learning approaches have been proposed to learn them from
data. Given their latent nature, no graph observations are available to provide a direct training
signal to the learnable relations. Therefore, graph
topologies are typically learned on the prediction
task alongside the other graph neural network parameters. In this paper, we demonstrate that minimizing point-prediction losses does not guarantee
proper learning of the latent relational information and its associated uncertainty. Conversely, we
prove that suitable loss functions on the stochastic
model outputs simultaneously grant solving two
tasks: (i) learning the unknown distribution of
the latent graph and (ii) achieving optimal predictions of the target variable. Finally, we propose
a sampling-based method that solves this joint
learning task 1 . Empirical results validate our theoretical claims and demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

Indeed, relational information is needed to implement such
a relational inductive bias and, in some cases, it is provided
at the application design phase. However, more frequently,
such topological information is not rich enough to address
the problem at hand, and – not seldom – it is completely
unavailable. Therefore, Graph Structure Learning (GSL)
emerges as an approach to learn the graph topology (Kipf
et al., 2018; Franceschi et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2021; Fatemi
et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Cini et al., 2023) alongside
the predictive model fψ . This entails formulating a joint
learning process that learns the adjacency matrix A – or a parameterization of it – along with the predictor’s parameters
ψ. This is usually achieved by optimizing a loss function on
the model output y, e.g., a point prediction measure based
on the square or the absolute prediction error.
Different sources of uncertainty affect the graph structure
learning process, including epistemic uncertainty in the
data and variability inherent in the data-generating process.
Learning appropriate models of the data-generating process
can provide valuable insights into the modeled environment
with uncertainty quantification enhancing explainability and
interpretability, ultimately enabling more informed decisionmaking. Examples of applications are found in the study
of infection and information spreading, as well as biological systems (Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2013; Lokhov, 2016;
Deleu et al., 2022). It follows that a probabilistic framework
is appropriate to accurately capture the uncertainty in the
learned relations whenever randomness affects the graph
topology. Probabilistic approaches have been devised in recent years. For instance, research carried out by Franceschi
et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2019); Elinas et al. (2020); Cini
et al. (2023) propose methods that learn a parametric distribution PAθ over the latent graph structure A. However,
none of them have studied whether these approaches were
able to learn a calibrated latent distribution PAθ for A, properly reflecting the uncertainty associated with the learned
topology.

1. Introduction
Relational information processing has provided breakthroughs in the analysis of rich and complex data coming
from, e.g., social networks, natural language, and biology.
This side information takes various forms, from structuring
the data into clusters to defining causal relations and hierarchies, and enables machine learning models to condition
their predictions on dependency-related observations. In
this context, predictive models take the form y = fψ (x, A),
where the input-output relation x 7→ y – modeled by fψ
1

Università della Svizzera italiana, IDSIA, Lugano, Switzerland 2 Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to:
Alessandro Manenti <alessandro.manenti@usi.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/allemanenti/LearningCalibrated-Structures

1

