Permutation-Based Rank Test in the Presence of Discretization
and Application in Causal Discovery with Mixed Data

Xinshuai Dong 1 Ignavier Ng 1 Boyang Sun 2 Haoyue Dai 1 Guang-Yuan Hao 2
Shunxing Fan 2 Peter Spirtes 1 Yumou Qiu 3 Kun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

(Sullivant et al., 2010; Spirtes, 2013). From one perspective, Independence and Conditional Independence (CI) are
crucial concepts in causal discovery and Bayesian network
learning (Pearl et al., 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000; Koller &
Friedman, 2009) due to its relation to d-separations (Pearl,
1988), and it has been shown that rank tests take those linear
CI tests as special cases (Sullivant et al., 2010; Di, 2009;
Dong et al., 2024a). From another point of view, rank of
a cross-covariance matrix corresponds to t-separations in a
graph (Sullivant et al., 2010), which contain graphical information that can be used to identify latent variables (Huang
et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2024a). A more detailed discussion
about related work can be found in Appendix D.

Recent advances have shown that statistical tests
for the rank of cross-covariance matrices play an
important role in causal discovery. These rank
tests include partial correlation tests as special
cases and provide further graphical information
about latent variables. Existing rank tests typically assume that all the continuous variables
can be perfectly measured, and yet, in practice
many variables can only be measured after discretization. For example, in psychometric studies,
the continuous level of certain personality dimensions of a person can only be measured after being
discretized into order-preserving options such as
disagree, neutral, and agree. Motivated by this,
we propose Mixed data Permutation-based Rank
Test (MPRT), which properly controls the statistical errors even when some or all variables are
discretized. Theoretically, we establish the exchangeability and estimate the asymptotic null
distribution by permutations; as a consequence,
MPRT can effectively control the Type I error
in the presence of discretization while previous
methods cannot. Empirically, our method is validated by extensive experiments on synthetic data
and real-world data to demonstrate its effectiveness as well as applicability in causal discovery
(code will be available at https://github.
com/dongxinshuai/scm-identify).

Existing statistical rank tests (Anderson, 1984) are often
built upon Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Jordan,
1875; Hotelling, 1992), with a likelihood ratio based test
statistics. Despite their effectiveness, existing methods rely
on the strong assumption that all the variables concerned
can be perfectly measured. However, in many fields, it is
often the case that the best available data are just discretized
approximations of some underlying continuous variable
(formally defined in Eq. 1). For example, in mental health,
anxiety levels are often categorized into levels such as mild,
moderate, or severe, according to some latent thresholds
(Johnson et al., 2019). Examples can be found in multiple
fields such as finance (Changsheng & Yongfeng, 2012),
psychology (Lord & Novick, 2008), biometrics (Finney,
1952) and econometrics (Nerlove & Press, 1973), where
continuous variables are often assumed to be observed as
discretized values.
When discretization is present, existing rank tests can hardly
work. The main reason lies is that the discretized values only
reflect the order of the data, leading to cross-covariance estimates that may differ significantly from the underlying crosscovariance matrix (also illustrated in Figure 1). Furthermore,
even though the true underlying cross-covariance matrix can
be estimated by maximum likelihood-based methods such as
polychoric and polyserial correlations (Olsson et al., 1982;
Olsson, 1979), they cannot be directly plugged into existing
rank tests. This is because the involved discretization and
maximum likelihood processes change the distribution of

1. Introduction and Related Work
Recent advances have shown that the rank of a crosscovariance matrix and its statistical test play essential roles
in multiple fields of statistics especially in causal discovery
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University
of Artificial Intelligence 3 Peking University. Correspondence to:
Kun Zhang <kunz1@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

