TeLoGraF: Temporal Logic Planning via Graph-encoded Flow Matching

Yue Meng 1 Chuchu Fan 1

Abstract

stop before the stop sign and may proceed only if no other
cars have the right of way, etc. These cases require precise
reasoning and planning to ensure safety, efficiency, and correctness. Hence, it is of utmost importance to endow agents
with the ability to tackle temporal logic constraints.

Learning to solve complex tasks with signal temporal logic (STL) specifications is crucial to many
real-world applications. However, most previous
works only consider fixed or parametrized STL
specifications due to the lack of a diverse STL
dataset and encoders to effectively extract temporal logic information for downstream tasks. In this
paper, we propose TeLoGraF, Temporal Logic
Graph-encoded Flow, which utilizes Graph Neural Networks (GNN) encoder and flow-matching
to learn solutions for general STL specifications.
We identify four commonly used STL templates
and collect a total of 200K specifications with
paired demonstrations. We conduct extensive experiments in five simulation environments ranging from simple dynamical models in the 2D
space to high-dimensional 7DoF Franka Panda
robot arm and Ant quadruped navigation. Results show that our method outperforms other
baselines in the STL satisfaction rate. Compared
to classical STL planning algorithms, our approach is 10-100X faster in inference and can
work on any system dynamics. Besides, we show
our graph-encoding method’s capability to solve
complex STLs and robustness to out-distribution
STL specifications. Code is available at https:
//github.com/mengyuest/TeLoGraF.

Existing temporal logic specifications can be mainly categorized into linear temporal logic (LTL) (Pnueli, 1977),
computation tree logic (CTL) (Clarke & Emerson, 1981),
metric temporal logic (MTL) (Koymans, 1990), and signal
temporal logic (STL) (Donzé & Maler, 2010; Raman et al.,
2015; He et al., 2022). LTL checks a single system trace
via logical operators and temporal operators, whereas CTL
reasons for a tree of possible futures. Extending from LTL,
MTL introduces timed intervals for the temporal operators
and STL further generalizes this by handling continuousvalued signals. In this work, we focus on STL since it offers
the most expressive framework to handle a wide range of
requirements in robotics and cyber-physical systems.
However, it is challenging to plan paths under STL specifications, due to its non-Markovian nature and lack of efficient decomposition. Synthesis for STL satisfaction is NPhard (Kurtz & Lin, 2022). Classical methods for solving
STL include sampling-based methods (Vasile et al., 2017;
Kapoor et al., 2020), optimization-based methods (Sadraddini & Belta, 2015; Kurtz & Lin, 2022; Sun et al., 2022)
and gradient-based methods (Dawson & Fan, 2022) but they
cannot balance solution quality and computation efficiency
for high-dimensional systems or complex STLs.
There is a growing trend to use learning-based methods to
satisfy a given STL (Li et al., 2017; Puranic et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2024) or a family of parametrized
STL (Leung & Pavone, 2022; Meng & Fan, 2024), but few
of them can train one model to handle general STLs. If a new
STL comes, they must retrain the neural network to learn the
corresponding policy, resulting in inefficiency. Hashimoto
et al. (2022) propose a model-based approach to handle
flexible STL forms but requires differentiable environments.
While other works (Zhong et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2024)
explored regularizing the pre-trained models with temporal
logic guidance at test time, the generated trajectories are
heavily constrained by the original data distribution. To the
best of our knowledge, there is no existing model that can
take a general STL as input to produce satisfiable solutions.

1. Introduction
Learning to plan for complex tasks with temporal dependency and logical constraints is critical to many real-world
applications, such as navigation, autonomous vehicles, and
industrial assembly lines. For example, a robot might need
to reach one of the destination regions in 10 seconds while
avoiding obstacles, a robot arm will need to pick the objects
in a specific sequence, a vehicle should come to a complete
1
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, MIT, Cambridge,
USA. Correspondence to: Yue Meng <mengyue@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

