Multilayer Matrix Factorization via Dimension-Reducing
Diffusion Variational Inference
Junbin Liu 1 Farzan Farnia 2 Wing-Kin Ma 1

Abstract

researchers in this subject has led to both diverse and substantial developments. In particular, we have seen different
ways to exploit the hidden structures of the underlying matrix factors, such as statistical independence, sparsity, and
non-negativity. Some of such methods are equipped with
desirable results such as identifiability guarantees—that is,
the guarantees of identifying the underlying ground-truth
factors—which are essential in applications such as blind
source separation; see, e.g., (Gillis, 2020; Khemakhem et al.,
2020; Wu et al., 2021) and the references therein. MF is intimately linked with the notion of learning low-dimensional
structures from higher-dimensional data. It is closely related
to latent-variable component analysis such as independent
component analysis (ICA).

Multilayer matrix factorization (MMF) has recently emerged as a generalized model of, and
potentially a more expressive approach than, the
classic matrix factorization. This paper considers
MMF under a probabilistic formulation, and our
focus is on inference methods under variational
inference. The challenge in this context lies in
determining a variational process that leads to a
computationally efficient and accurate approximation of the maximum likelihood inference. One
well-known example is the variational autoencoder (VAE), which uses neural networks for the
variational process. In this work, we take insight
from variational diffusion models in the context
of generative models to develop variational inference for MMF. We propose a dimension-reducing
diffusion process that results in a new way to
interact with the layered structures of the MMF
model. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed diffusion variational inference method
leads to improved performance scores compared
to several existing methods, including the VAE.

More recently, there has been interest in multilayer, and
possibly nonlinear, MF (Trigeorgis et al., 2016; Zhao et al.,
2017; Xue et al., 2017; Fan, 2021; De Handschutter & Gillis,
2023). Multilayer MF (MMF) is a more general model
than the (two-factor) MF model, and it is anticipated that
MMF should provide more powerful results. It was empirically shown that MMF can extract meaningful hierarchical
features from data, which offers new insights in applications such as clustering; see, e.g., (Trigeorgis et al., 2016;
De Handschutter et al., 2021) and the references therein.
MMF is also related to nonlinear latent-variable component
analysis (Khemakhem et al., 2020). In particular, if the
nonlinear system is modeled by a neural network, we can
see it as a multilayer system.

1. Introduction
Over decades, matrix factorization (MF) methods have
played a crucial role in a wide variety of problems such
as dimensionality reduction, low-dimension representation
learning, blind source separation (Hyvärinen et al., 2023),
hyperspectral unmixing (Ma et al., 2013), topic modeling (Arora et al., 2012), community detection (Yang &
Leskovec, 2013), to name a few. The broad interest of

One powerful approach to MF or MMF is to formulate the
factorization model as a latent-variable model and treat the
factorization problem as a probabilistic inference problem.
In this direction, variational inference (VI) has been found
to be promising in providing a practical way to handle complex models (Rezende et al., 2014; Ranganath et al., 2015).
In particular, for MMF, variational autoencoders (VAEs)
appear to be the only available solution in the literature so
far; see (Khemakhem et al., 2020) and also (Li et al., 2024).

1

Department of Electronic Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR of China 2 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR of China.
Correspondence to: Junbin Liu <liujunbin@link.cuhk.edu.hk>,
Farzan Farnia <farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Wing-Kin Ma
<wkma@ee.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Lately, diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Luo, 2022) have caught
tremendous attention in the context of generative models.
They have been found to provide competitive performance
in various generation tasks. There are several ways to derive

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

