DIS-CO: Discovering Copyrighted Content in VLMs Training Data

André V. Duarte 1 2 Xuandong Zhao 3 Arlindo L. Oliveira 2 Lei Li 1

Abstract

VLMs accurately
Q: “What movie is
this frame from?”

How can we verify whether copyrighted content was used to train a large vision-language
model (VLM) without direct access to its training
data? Motivated by the hypothesis that a VLM
is able to recognize images from its training corpus, we propose DIS-CO, a novel approach to
infer the inclusion of copyrighted content during
the model’s development. By repeatedly querying a VLM with specific frames from targeted
copyrighted material, DIS-CO extracts the content’s identity through free-form text completions.
To assess its effectiveness, we introduce MovieTection, a benchmark comprising 14,000 frames
paired with detailed captions, drawn from films
released both before and after a model’s training
cutoff. Our results show that DIS-CO significantly
improves detection performance, nearly doubling
the average AUC of the best prior method on models with logits available. Our findings also highlight a broader concern: all tested models appear
to have been exposed to some extent to copyrighted content. Our code and data are available
at https://github.com/avduarte333/
DIS-CO

Visual-LLM
1.0

Frozen

0.8

match Suspect
movie titles
to their frames!
Suspect
Movies

Clean
Movies

0.6
0.4
Aquaman - 2

0.2
0.0
…

Figure 1. Our DIS-CO reveals that VLMs successfully map frames
of suspect movies to their titles, even when the frames are highly
challenging. For example, the GPT-4o model accurately identifies
the movie “Frozen” (blue circle), despite the varying complexity
of its frames. In contrast, for newly released films, the models are
unable to perform similar frame-to-title predictions.

verse datasets introduces challenges in ensuring compliance
with ethical and legal standards. Without strict safeguards
during the data collection step, proprietary content could be
incorporated into the models’ knowledge, opening the door
to intellectual property infringements and potential legal
conflicts (Carlini et al., 2022a; Nasr et al., 2023; Duan et al.,
2024). In fact, in the United States alone, more than 24
copyright lawsuits were filed against the AI industry since
2023 (Knibbs, 2024), reflecting growing concerns about the
use of protected material in training (Kadrey, 2023; Daily
News, 2024).

1. Introduction
The rapid evolution of large-scale models has driven a
paradigm shift toward multimodality, with recent large
vision-language models (VLMs) gaining prominence for
their ability to process both visual and textual information
(Alayrac et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Wang
et al., 2024). While these models showcase remarkable performance across a variety of tasks, their reliance on vast, di-

Discovering training data is, therefore, essential for effectively addressing the ethical and legal challenges of model
training. However, the lack of transparency in data collection (often justified by competitive concerns) makes it
especially difficult to trace the inclusion of specific content.

1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 INESC-ID / Instituto Superior Técnico, ULisboa 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to:
André V. Duarte <andre.v.duarte@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>, Xuandong
Zhao <xuandongzhao@berkeley.edu>, Arlindo L. Oliveira <arlindo.oliveira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>, Lei Li <leili@cs.cmu.edu>.

To tackle these challenges, Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) serve as a tool to identify whether specific
data samples were part of a model’s training set. While
MIA techniques are well-studied for text-based models,
their adaptation to multimodal settings, particularly VLMs,
remains less explored - a gap that our work aims to address.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

