EraseAnything: Enabling Concept Erasure in Rectified Flow Transformers

Daiheng Gao 1 Shilin Lu 2 Wenbo Zhou 1 Jiaming Chu 3 Jie Zhang 4 Mengxi Jia 5 Bang Zhang 6
Zhaoxin Fan 7 Weiming Zhang 1

Abstract
Removing unwanted concepts from large-scale
text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models while maintaining their overall generative quality remains
an open challenge. This difficulty is especially
pronounced in emerging paradigms, such as Stable Diffusion (SD) v3 and Flux, which incorporate flow matching and transformer-based architectures. These advancements limit the transferability of existing concept-erasure techniques
that were originally designed for the previous
T2I paradigm (e.g., SD v1.4). In this work, we
introduce
EraseAnything, the first method
specifically developed to address concept erasure
within the latest flow-based T2I framework. We
formulate concept erasure as a bi-level optimization problem, employing LoRA-based parameter
tuning and an attention map regularizer to selectively suppress undesirable activations. Furthermore, we propose a self-contrastive learning strategy to ensure that removing unwanted concepts
does not inadvertently harm performance on unrelated ones. Experimental results demonstrate that
EraseAnything successfully fills the research gap
left by earlier methods in this new T2I paradigm,
achieving SOTA performance across a wide range
of concept erasure tasks.

Figure 1. Top: Comparison between our proposed EraseAnything
and classical concept-erasing methods, such as ESD (Gandikota
et al., 2023), UCE (Gandikota et al., 2024), and EAP (Bui et al.,
2024). Taking ‘nudity erasure’ on Flux models as an example.
Bottom: Examples of differen concept erasure via EraseAnything.
(blue bars indicate author-added sensory harmony, while yellow
bbox showcases the corresponding original output.)

major facelift, with leaps in prompt following, image quality, and output diversity. However, as these models are
trained on increasingly large and diverse datasets sourced
from online content, they also face growing safety risks.
One major concern is their potential to generate NSFW
(Not Suitable For Work) material when provided with inappropriate prompts. This issue has been widely reported
in the media and falls under the broader challenge of concept erasing (CE), which involves preventing models from
generating harmful or undesirable content.

1. Introduction
From the advent of DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and
Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) to the beefedup Flux, Recraft and Photon, diffusion models (DMs) have
consistently showcased their mastery in the domain of textto-image (T2I). Over the past few years, T2I has seen a

While CE has been extensively studied in the context of
Stable Diffusion (SD), which relies on a DDPM/DDIM (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) + U-Net (Ronneberger et al.,
2015) framework, the Flux series introduces a new set of
challenges due to its modern architecture. Flux incorporates advanced techniques such as flow matching (Lipman
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) and transformer-based components (Vaswani, 2017), which differ significantly from SD’s
design. As discussed in Sec. 3, these architectural differences, such as the use of the T5 Encoder (Raffel et al., 2020)
and rotary positional encoding (RoPE) (Su et al., 2024),

1

USTC 2 NTU 3 BUPT 4 IHPC and CFAR, A*STAR 5 TeleAI
Tongyi Lab, Alibaba 7 Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing, Beihang University.
Correspondence to: Zhaoxin Fan & Weiming Zhang <zhaoxinf@buaa.edu.cn & zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn>.
6

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

