Learning from Sample Stability for Deep Clustering

Zhixin Li 1 Yuheng Jia 1 2 Hui Liu 3 Junhui Hou 4

Abstract

Prior studies have utilized various supervision signals such
as autoencoder reconstruction (Xie et al., 2016; Li et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2017), sample similarity and neighbor
relationship (Chang et al., 2017; Ji et al., 2019; Tao et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2019; 2023), and pseudo
labels (Van Gansbeke et al., 2020; Niu et al., 2022; Tian
et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2023). Recent advancements in selfsupervised learning (Grill et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020) have prompted many deep clustering methods
to explore contrastive learning for generating clusteringcompatible representations (Huang et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2022; 2021b; Yu et al., 2023). Despite the effectiveness
of these supervision signals in enhancing clustering performance, current research often overlooks the learning
progress of individual samples during network training.

Deep clustering, an unsupervised technique independent of labels, necessitates tailored supervision for model training. Prior methods explore
supervision like similarity and pseudo labels, yet
overlook individual sample training analysis. Our
study correlates sample stability during unsupervised training with clustering accuracy and network memorization on a per-sample basis. Unstable representations across epochs often lead
to mispredictions, indicating difficulty in memorization and atypicality. Leveraging these findings, we introduce supervision signals for the
first time based on sample stability at the representation level. Our proposed strategy serves
as a versatile tool to enhance various deep clustering techniques. Experiments across benchmark datasets showcase that incorporating sample stability into training can improve the performance of deep clustering. The code is available at
https://github.com/LZX-001/LFSS.

Throughout training, the representations of the same input
sample may vary across epochs due to ongoing weight updates. We propose a new metric called sample stability,
which is defined the cosine similarity of representations
for the same input across two consecutive epochs in the
model, to represent the learning progress of individual samples. Through extensive experiments, we consistently observe that samples with the most unstable representations
are prone to incorrect clustering (see Observation 1). In
addition, we find that unstable samples exhibit non-random
long-term instability during training (see Observation 2).
Further examination reveals that consistently unstable samples are typically atypical and rare compared to stable counterparts, indicating their difficulty in model memorization
(see Observation 3). These observations hold true across
multiple self-supervised learning and deep clustering methods, as well as across various datasets and epochs, detailed
in Section 2. The above insights underscore the utility of
sample stability in evaluating individual sample training
progress. Thus, we pioneer the use of sample stability to
construct supervision signals and introduce a novel deep
clustering method LFSS (Learning From Sample Stability).
Our approach incorporates a predecessor network to track
previous epoch weights and assess sample stability. Moreover, based on the contrastive learning paradigm (Chen et al.,
2020), we employ sample stability from both the instance
level and the cluster level.

1. Introduction
Deep clustering trains a deep neural network in an unsupervised manner to assign appropriate labels to samples.
Unlike supervised learning, where the ground truth labels
are used to guide model optimization, deep clustering lacks
such labels to aid network training. Consequently, suitable supervision signals must be derived from the data itself to enable deep clustering models to extract meaningful
features, yield discriminative high-dimensional representations, and achieve accurate clustering (Lu et al., 2024).
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Computing Information Sciences, Saint Francis University, Hong Kong, China 4 Department of Computer Science, City
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to:
Yuheng Jia <yhjia@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In summary, this work makes the following key contributions:
1

