Guarantees of a Preconditioned Subgradient Algorithm for
Overparameterized Asymmetric Low-rank Matrix Recovery

Paris Giampouras 1 HanQin Cai 2 René Vidal 3

Abstract

Kümmerle & Verdun, 2021; Cai et al., 2023), and robust
principal component analysis (Candès et al., 2011; Netrapalli et al., 2014; Giampouras et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2019;
2021b), can all be cast as low-rank matrix recovery problems and then solved using minimization algorithms that
seek a matrix X ∈ Rm×n that is as close as possible to the
unknown low-rank matrix X⋆ ∈ Rm×n .

In this paper, we focus on a matrix factorizationbased approach to recover low-rank asymmetric matrices from corrupted measurements. We
propose an Overparameterized Preconditioned
Subgradient Algorithm (OPSA) and provide, for
the first time in the literature, linear convergence
rates independent of the rank of the sought asymmetric matrix in the presence of gross corruptions. Our work goes beyond existing results in
preconditioned-type approaches addressing their
current limitation, i.e., the lack of convergence
guarantees in the case of asymmetric matrices
of unknown rank. By applying our approach to
(robust) matrix sensing, we highlight its merits
when the measurement operator satisfies a mixednorm restricted isometry property. Lastly, we
present extensive numerical experiments that validate our theoretical results and demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach for different levels
of overparameterization and outlier corruptions.

A major challenge in low-rank matrix recovery concerns the
computational complexity and memory requirements of the
proposed algorithms when the size of the unknown matrix
significantly increases. To address this, matrix factorizationbased approaches have been proposed, (Chi et al., 2019;
Park et al., 2016), which, given r ≥ rank(X⋆ ), use matrices L ∈ Rm×r and R ∈ Rn×r such that X = LR⊤ . These
approaches enable the development of iterative algorithms
with significantly reduced computational complexity and
memory storage requirements. However, they lead to nonconvex formulations of the optimization problems, which
pose their own challenges in the derivation of theoretical
guarantees and fast rates of convergence.
Alternating gradient-based algorithms have been a standard
approach for solving matrix factorization-based problems.
A well-known issue with these approaches lies in the dependence of their rate of convergence on the condition number
of the unknown matrix X⋆ ,(Tong et al., 2021a). This makes
convergence too slow in problems where the sought matrix
is ill-conditioned. Several works, (Park et al., 2016; Zhang
et al., 2023), address this issue by moving beyond vanilla
gradient updates and resorting to preconditioned approaches.
In (Tong et al., 2021a), preconditioned gradient algorithms
have been proposed that consist of updates in the following
form:

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix recovery has been a ubiquitous problem
showing up in numerous applications in the fields of signal/image processing, machine learning, and data science
(Recht et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2013; Davenport & Romberg,
2016; Cai et al., 2021a; Smith et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024).
For instance, problems such as matrix sensing (Jain et al.,
2013; Wei et al., 2016; Park et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020),
matrix completion (Candes & Recht, 2008; Nie et al., 2012;

Lt+1 = Lt − η∇L L(Lt Rt⊤ ) (Rt⊤ Rt )−1 ,
| {z }

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick,
Coventry, England, UK 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science and Department of Computer Science, University of Central
Florida, Orlando, FL, USA 3 Center for Innovation in Data Engineering and Science (IDEAS), Departments of ESE and Radiology,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: René Vidal <vidalr@seas.upenn.edu>.

preconditioner

Rt+1 = Rt − η∇R L(Lt Rt⊤ )

L⊤
t Lt
| {z

−1

.

(1)

}

preconditioner

Preconditioned-based approaches, e.g. (Chi et al., 2019; Cai
et al., 2021c; Zhang et al., 2023; 2024; Cai et al., 2024),
lead to linear rates of convergence that do not depend on
the condition number of X⋆ . Recently, these approaches
have been extended to the robust low-rank matrix recovery

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

