In-Context Learning as Conditioned Associative Memory Retrieval

Weimin Wu * 1 2 Teng-Yun Hsiao * 3 Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 2 Wenxin Zhang 2 Han Liu 1 2 4

Abstract

associative memory models (Krotov, 2023). With the success of large language models (Guo et al., 2025; Grattafiori
et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024a), ICL enables large language
models to adapt to diverse tasks by leveraging task-specific
examples embedded in the input prompts, without updating model parameters (Min et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2022;
Brown et al., 2020). This “learning in the forward pass”
raises fundamental questions about how models represent
and reuse knowledge, and challenges our understanding of
how a fixed model can implement new task behaviors on
the fly (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Akyürek et al., 2022; Xie
et al., 2022). Understanding that mechanism is theoretically
compelling and practically valuable: better mental models of ICL can guide prompt construction and improve the
reliability of LLM-based systems or Transformer models
in general (Zhang et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025; Han et al.,
2024; Bai et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2022).

We provide an exactly solvable example for interpreting In-Context Learning (ICL) with one-layer
attention models as conditional retrieval of dense
associative memory models. Our main contribution is to interpret ICL as memory reshaping in
the modern Hopfield model from a conditional
memory set (in-context examples). Specifically,
we show that the in-context sequential examples
induce an effective reshaping of the energy landscape of a Hopfield model. We integrate this incontext memory reshaping phenomenon into the
existing Bayesian model averaging view of ICL
[Zhang et al., AISTATS 2025] via the established
equivalence between the modern Hopfield model
and transformer attention. Under this unique perspective, we not only characterize how in-context
examples shape predictions in the Gaussian linear regression case, but also recover the known
ϵ-stability generalization bound of the ICL for the
one-layer attention model. We also give explanations for three key behaviors of ICL and validate
them through experiments.

1

In this work, we approach ICL through the lens of associative memory (Krotov, 2023; Krotov & Hopfield, 2020;
2016; Hopfield, 1982; Amari, 1972). In particular, we draw
inspiration from transformer-compatible modern Hopfield
networks (Ramsauer et al., 2020). These networks are
continuous-state dense associative memories with an energy landscape that stores memory patterns as local minima.
Recent studies establish a formal equivalence between the
transformer’s attention mechanism and the update dynamics
of a modern Hopfield network (Santos et al., 2024a;b; Hu
et al., 2024b; Wu et al., 2024b; Krotov & Hopfield, 2020;
Ramsauer et al., 2020). In a Hopfield network, a query
pattern is iteratively matched to the closest stored memory
pattern (a local minimum of the energy function). Analogously, a transformer’s attention module can be viewed as
retrieving a stored vector (from the key–value pairs) that
best matches a query embedding. Consequently, training
attention weights can be viewed as shaping the Hopfield
energy landscape so that training examples become stable
memories (Wu et al., 2024a; Hu et al., 2024a). This perspective suggests that a transformer may be remembering
and retrieving relevant information from its weights when
performing ICL, akin to an associative memory recalling
patterns in response to cues. This unique perspective recasts prompt-based inference as a memory retrieval process,
potentially offering a more concrete mechanism to explain
how in-context examples influence model predictions.

Introduction

We show that In-Context Learning (ICL) reshapes a model’s
internal associative memory using prompt examples, analogous to how a modern Hopfield network adjusts its stored
memories in response to new cues. To be precise, we provide an exactly solvable example for interpreting ICL in
one-layer attention models as conditional retrieval of dense
*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Foundation Models and Generative AI, Northwestern University, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, USA 3 Department of
Physics, National Taiwan University, Taiwan 4 Department of
Statistics and Data Science, Northwestern Universit, USA. Correspondence to: Weimin Wu <wwm@u.northwestern.edu>,
Teng-Yun Hsiao <b10502058@ntu.edu.tw>, Jerry YaoCheih Hu <jhu@u.northwestern.edu>, Wenxin Zhang
<wenxinzhang2025@u.northwestern.edu>, Han Liu
<hanliu@northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

