Optimal Transport Barycenter via Nonconvex-Concave Minimax Optimization

Kaheon Kim 1 Rentian Yao 2 Changbo Zhu 1 Xiaohui Chen 3

Abstract

measures. Direct applications of the Wasserstein barycenter include smooth interpolation between shapes (Solomon
et al., 2015), texture mixing (Rabin et al., 2012), and averaging of neuroimaging data (Gramfort et al., 2015), among others. More importantly, the computation of the Wasserstein
barycenter often serves as a key stepping stone to derive
more advanced machine learning and statistical algorithms.
For instance, centroid-based methods for clustering distributions rely on the computation of Wasserstein barycenters
(Cuturi & Doucet, 2014; Zhuang et al., 2022). Additionally, regression models and statistical inference methods for
distributional data that utilize Wasserstein geometry often
employ the barycenter as an “anchor” measure to map distributions to a linear tangent space (Dubey & Müller, 2020;
Zhang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Zhu & Müller, 2023;
Zhu & Müller, 2023; Jiang et al., 2024).

The optimal transport barycenter (a.k.a. Wasserstein barycenter) is a fundamental notion of averaging that extends from the Euclidean space
to the Wasserstein space of probability distributions. Computation of the unregularized barycenter for discretized probability distributions on
point clouds is a challenging task when the domain dimension d > 1. Most practical algorithms
for the barycenter problem are based on entropic
regularization. In this paper, we introduce a nearly
linear time O(m log m) and linear space complexity O(m) primal-dual algorithm, the WassersteinDescent Ḣ1 -Ascent (WDHA) algorithm, for computing the exact barycenter when the input probability density functions are discretized on an mpoint grid. The key success of the WDHA algorithm hinges on alternating between two different
yet closely related Wasserstein and Sobolev optimization geometries for the primal barycenter and
dual Kantorovich potential subproblems. Under
reasonable assumptions, we establish the convergence rate and iteration complexity of WDHA
to its stationary point when the step size is appropriately chosen. Superior computational efficacy, scalability, and accuracy over the existing
Sinkhorn-type algorithms are demonstrated on
high-resolution (e.g., 1024 × 1024 images) 2D
synthetic and real data.

Despite the widespread applications, computationally efficient or even scalable algorithms of the Wasserstein barycenter with theoretical guarantees remain to be developed. Existing approaches to compute the Wasserstein barycenter
of a collection of probability density functions µ1 , . . . , µn
in Rd rely on a Wasserstein analog of the gradient descent
algorithm, which requires to compute n OT maps per iteration (Zemel & Panaretos, 2019; Chewi et al., 2020). ÁlvarezEsteban et al. (2016) propose a fixed point approach that
is effective for any location-scatter family. Method that
resorts to using first-order methods on the dual for exact
barycenter calculation (Carlier et al., 2015), and classical OT
solvers, such as Hungarian method (Kuhn, 1955), auction
algorithm (Bertsekas & Castanon, 1989) and transportation
simplex (Luenberger & Ye, 2008), scale poorly for even
moderately mesh-sized problems. This presents a substantial computational barrier for computing the barycenter of
multivariate distributions. On the other hand, various regularized barycenters have been proposed to mitigate the
computational difficulty (Li et al., 2020a; Janati et al., 2020;
Bigot et al., 2019; Carlier et al., 2021; Chizat, 2023), and
Sinkhorn’s algorithm is perhaps one of the most widely
used algorithms to compute the entropy-regularized barycenter (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019; Lin et al., 2022; Carlier, 2022).
Also, Li et al. (2020b) propose a new dual formulation
for the regularized Wasserstein barycenter problem such
that discretizing the support is not needed. However, the
computation thrifty of these methods is subject to the ap-

1. Introduction
The Wasserstein barycenter, introduced by Agueh & Carlier
(2011) based on the theory of optimal transport (OT), extends the notion of a Euclidean average to measure-valued
data, thus representing the “average” of a set of probability
1

Department of ACMS, University of Notre Dame, IN, USA.
Department of Mathematics, University of British Columbia,
BC, Canada. 3 Department of Mathematics, University of Southern California, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Changbo Zhu
<czhu4@nd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

