Learning with Expected Signatures: Theory and Applications

Lorenzo Lucchese 1 Mikko S. Pakkanen 1 Almut E. D. Veraart 1

Abstract

of iterated integrals of X, i.e. for t ∈ [0, T ], k ≥ 0
Z
Z
S k (X)[0,t] =
···
dXs1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ dXsk .

The expected signature maps a collection of data
streams to a lower dimensional representation,
with a remarkable property: the resulting feature tensor can fully characterize the data generating distribution. This “model-free” embedding
has been successfully leveraged to build multiple domain-agnostic machine learning (ML) algorithms for time series and sequential data. The
convergence results proved in this paper bridge
the gap between the expected signature’s empirical discrete-time estimator and its theoretical continuous-time value, allowing for a more
complete probabilistic interpretation of expected
signature-based ML methods. Moreover, when
the data generating process is a martingale, we
suggest a simple modification of the expected signature estimator with significantly lower mean
squared error and empirically demonstrate how it
can be effectively applied to improve predictive
performance.

(1)

0≤s1 ≤...≤sk ≤t

In many practical applications the path X is taken to be
the piecewise linear interpolation of a discrete-time stream
of data, which is of bounded variation by construction.
Signature-based machine learning (ML) approaches (Lyons
& McLeod, 2024) thus often restrict the theoretical framework to paths in BV([0, T ], Rd ). In this setting, two fundamental properties of the signature that make it a desirable
non-parametric feature extraction method for sequential
data are the characterization result of Hambly & Lyons
(2005) and the universality approximation theorem of Levin
et al. (2016). Moreover, when the path X is understood
as a (realization of a) random process with distribution P
over BV([0, T ], Rd ), the shuffle property of the signature
implies that all moments of the random variable S(X)[0,T ]
are determined by its expectation
ϕ(T ) := E[S(X)[0,T ] ] ∈ T ((Rd )).
A natural question, known as the Hamburger moment problem (Fawcett, 2003), is thus whether the expectation of
the signature characterizes its law (and thus the law of the
path). When imposing a probability distribution P on X
the assumption of bounded variation paths becomes quite
restrictive: Brownian motion, the basic building block of
many stochastic models, has paths of infinite variation almost surely. Even if we observe a discrete-time stream of
data, we often still would like to define the process X as
a latent stochastic process of which we observe the linear
interpolation over some partition π of [0, T ], hereafter denoted by Xπ . We hence wish to make sense of the signature
of a stochastic process X with paths of unbounded variation.
For a given path X ∈ C([0, T ], Rd ) of finite p-variation,
once we “lift” the process to a p-rough path (Lyons et al.,
2007, Definition 3.11) then the signature S of X is uniquely
defined1 . Without delving into the details of rough path
theory, for our purposes it suffices to interpret the choice of
lift as fixing a notion of integration with respect to X: the
higher order signatures terms are then understood as iterated
integrals of the path X defined in this sense.

1. Introduction
The signature transform of a stream of data is an infinite but
countable sequence of its “iterated integrals” summarizing
the input in a top-down fashion, meaning the informational
content of its terms decays factorially. Originally introduced
by Chen (1954) and serving as a fundamental object of
rough path analysis (Lyons et al., 2007), the signature
S = {S(X)[0,t] ∈ T ((Rd )), t ∈ [0, T ]},
of a path X = {Xt , t ∈ [0, T ]} ∈ C([0, T ], Rd ) is a lift
(in the sense that it embeds X) to the space of continuous
functions over the tensor algebra T ((Rd )) possessing some
nice algebraic and geometric properties. When the path is of
bounded variation, the signature is defined as the sequence
1

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Lorenzo Lucchese
<lorenzo.lucchese17@imperial.ac.uk, llucchese6@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
This is the first fundamental theorem in the theory of rough
paths (Lyons et al., 2007, Theorem 3.7).

1

