Statistical and Computational Guarantees of
Kernel Max-Sliced Wasserstein Distances
Jie Wang1,2 March Boedihardjo3 Yao Xie4

Abstract

tion [2, 12–14, 77], etc. See [62] for comprehensive reviews
on these topics. The sample complexity of the Wasserstein distance has been an essential building block for OT
in statistical inference. It studies the relationship between
a population
distribution µ and its empirical distribution
Pn
1
i=1 δxi with xi ∼ µ in terms of the ”Wasserstein disn
tance”. Unfortunately, the sample size n needs to be exponentially large in data dimension to achieve an accurate
enough estimation [22], called the curse of dimensionality
issue.

Optimal transport has been very successful for
various machine learning tasks; however, it is
known to suffer from the curse of dimensionality. Hence, dimensionality reduction is desirable when applied to high-dimensional data
with low-dimensional structures. The kernel maxsliced (KMS) Wasserstein distance is developed
for this purpose by finding an optimal nonlinear
mapping that reduces data into 1 dimension before computing the Wasserstein distance. However, its theoretical properties have not yet been
fully developed. In this paper, we provide sharp
finite-sample guarantees under milder technical
assumptions compared with state-of-the-art for
the KMS p-Wasserstein distance between two
empirical distributions with n samples for general p ∈ [1, ∞). Algorithm-wise, we show that
computing the KMS 2-Wasserstein distance is
NP-hard, and then we further propose a semidefinite relaxation (SDR) formulation (which can be
solved efficiently in polynomial time) and provide
a relaxation gap for the obtained solution. We provide numerical examples to demonstrate the good
performance of our scheme for high-dimensional
two-sample testing.

To tackle the challenge of high dimensionality, it is meaningful to combine OT with projection operators in lowdimensional spaces. Researchers first attempted to study
the sliced Wasserstein distance [10, 11, 17, 38, 39, 54, 56],
which computes the average of the Wasserstein distance
between two projected distributions using random onedimensional projections. Since a single random projection contains little information to distinguish two highdimensional distributions, computing the sliced Wasserstein
distance requires a large number of linear projections. To address this issue, more recent literature considered the MaxSliced (MS) Wasserstein distance that seeks the optimal projection direction such that the Wasserstein distance between
projected distributions is maximized [16, 45, 47, 60, 74].
Later, Wang et al. [75] modified the MS Wasserstein distance by seeking an optimal nonlinear projection belonging to a ball of reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
which we call the Kernel Max-Sliced (KMS) Wasserstein
distance. The motivation is that a nonlinear projector can
be more flexible in capturing the differences between two
high-dimensional distributions; it is worth noting that KMS
Wasserstein reduces to MS Wasserstein when specifying a
dot product kernel.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) has achieved much success in various areas, such as generative modeling [27, 49, 59, 61],
distributionally robust optimization [24, 25, 73], nonparametric testing [63, 71, 76, 78, 80], domain adapta-

Despite promising applications of the KMS Wasserstein
distance, its statistical and computational results have not
yet been fully developed. From a statistical perspective,
Wang et al. [75] built concentration properties of the empirical KMS Wasserstein distance for distributions that satisfy
the projection Poincaré inequality and the Poincaré inequality [42], which could be difficult to verify in practice. From
a computational perspective, the authors therein developed
a gradient-based algorithm to approximately compute the
empirical KMS Wasserstein distance. However, there is no

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China 2 School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen,
China 3 Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, USA 4 School of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence
to: Yao Xie <yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

