Bayesian Active Learning for Bivariate Causal Discovery

Yuxuan Wang 1 Mingzhou Liu 1 Xinwei Sun 2 Wei Wang 3 Yizhou Wang 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Determining the direction of causal relationships between
pairs of variables is a fundamental challenge in understanding complex systems. In fields like genetic research (Pinna
et al., 2010; Jia & Zhang, 2022), while we may observe
strong associations between genetic variants and phenotypes, determining which variable causally influences the
other remains difficult. This directional uncertainty complicates our understanding of underlying mechanisms and
limits our ability to make reliable predictions about system
behavior.

Determining the direction of relationships between variables is fundamental for understanding complex systems across scientific domains.
While observational data can uncover relationships between variables, it cannot distinguish between cause and effect without experimental interventions. To effectively uncover causality, previous works have proposed intervention strategies
that sequentially optimize the intervention values. However, most of these approaches primarily
maximized information-theoretic gains that may
not effectively measure the reliability of direction determination. In this paper, we formulate
the causal direction identification as a hypothesistesting problem, and propose a Bayes factor-based
intervention strategy, which can quantify the evidence strength of one hypothesis (e.g., causal)
over the other (e.g., non-causal). To balance the
immediate and future gains of testing strength,
we propose a sequential intervention objective
over intervention values in multiple steps. By
analyzing the objective function, we develop a
dynamic programming algorithm that reduces the
complexity from non-polynomial to polynomial.
Experimental results on bivariate systems, treestructured graphs, and an embodied AI environment demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework in direction determination and its extensibility to both multivariate settings and real-world
applications.

1

Traditional methods for inferring causal direction rely primarily on observational data, representing relationships
through directed edges between variable pairs. However,
observational data alone often proves insufficient for determining causal direction due to the fundamental limitation
of Markov equivalence (Pearl, 2009) - different causal directions can generate identical observational distributions,
making them indistinguishable without intervention data.
The limitations of observational studies necessitate experimental interventions as the gold standard for determining
causal direction (Fisher, 1936). While interventional experiments like gene knockouts have become increasingly
feasible (Pinna et al., 2010), they remain costly and resourceintensive. This limitation has motivated the development
of active learning methods for causal direction determination. Traditional approaches typically employ informationtheoretic objectives (Tong & Koller, 2001; Murphy, 2001;
Agrawal et al., 2019), greedily maximizing the mutual information between interventions and outcomes. However,
recent studies (Gong et al., 2023) have shown that successful
causal direction inference depends not only on the informativeness of generated data but also on its evidential complexity. This highlights a potential misalignment: maximizing
information gain alone may not be optimal for bivariate
causal discovery, as it does not directly optimize for the
probability of drawing correct directional conclusions. This
is a crucial distinction from a Bayesian decision-theoretic
perspective (Trimmer et al., 2011), where the objective is
typically to select actions that maximize the expected utility of the outcome, in our case, the correct identification
of causal direction. Simply acquiring information is often
a surrogate for, but not identical to, achieving a specific

School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 3 State
Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI, Beijing, China 4 School of Computer Science, Inst. for Artificial
Intelligence, State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Xinwei Sun <sunxinwei@fudan.edu.cn>, Wei Wang <wangwei@bigai.ai>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

