L3A: Label-Augmented Analytic Adaptation for
Multi-Label Class Incremental Learning

Xiang Zhang 1 Run He 1 Jiao Chen 1 Di Fang 2
Ming Li 3 Ziqian Zeng 1 Cen Chen 2 Huiping Zhuang 1

Abstract

Training set 𝒟1train

Class-incremental learning (CIL) enables models
to learn new classes continually without forgetting previously acquired knowledge. Multi-label
CIL (MLCIL) extends CIL to a real-world scenario where each sample may belong to multiple classes, introducing several challenges: label
absence, which leads to incomplete historical information due to missing labels, and class imbalance, which results in the model bias toward
majority classes. To address these challenges, we
propose Label-Augmented Analytic Adaptation
(L3A), an exemplar-free approach without storing past samples. L3A integrates two key modules. The pseudo-label (PL) module implements
label augmentation by generating pseudo-labels
for current phase samples, addressing the label
absence problem. The weighted analytic classifier (WAC) derives a closed-form solution for
neural networks. It introduces sample-specific
weights to adaptively balance the class contribution and mitigate class imbalance. Experiments on
MS-COCO and PASCAL VOC datasets demonstrate that L3A outperforms existing methods in
MLCIL tasks. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/scut-zx/L3A.

person

Model
𝚯𝟏
Test set 𝒟1test

person, bike

Training set 𝒟𝑡train

Training set 𝒟2train

person, bike, car

Phase 1

person, bike

Model
𝚯𝟐

Phase 2

Test set 𝒟1test ∪ 𝒟2test

person, bike, car

person

person, bike, car

……

Model
网络
𝚯𝒕
模型

car

Phase 𝑡

Test set 𝒟1test ∪ ⋯ ∪ 𝒟𝑡test

person, bike, car

bike, car

Figure 1. The process of MLCIL. The model learns different
classes such as ‘person’, ‘bicycle’, and ‘car’ during phases 1, 2,
and t. ‘person’ represents samples that belong to this class but lack
the label. Different colors of Model Θ1 , Θ2 , and Θt represent the
changes in model parameters caused by continual learning.

on CIL faces the severe catastrophic forgetting problem
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990), manifested
as performance degradation of previously learned classes.
Existing CIL methods (Zhou et al., 2024b) have achieved
considerable success in single-label CIL tasks, significantly
reducing the computational resources for model retraining.

1. Introduction

However, in complex real-world environments, a CIL agent
needs to learn complex training data with more than one object in one image, termed multi-label CIL (MLCIL). Figure 1
illustrates the detail paradigm, where each training sample is
labeled only with the classes relevant to the current learning
phase, while the labels of other classes are masked. The goal
of MLCIL is to enable the model to eventually recognize all
classes encountered throughout the learning process, even if
some labels are masked during training phases.

Class-incremental learning (CIL) enables models to acquire knowledge of new classes in a phase-by-phase manner, while maintaining knowledge of previously learned
classes without retraining the model from scratch. Research
1
Shien-Ming Wu School of Intelligent Engineering, South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 2 School
of Future Technology, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, China 3 Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ). Correspondence to: Huiping
Zhuang <hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn>.

MLCIL faces three major challenges: (1) label absence:
each sample is label-incomplete, containing only the labels
from the current phase, with the labels from previous and
future phases absent. For example, the left sample in the
training set Dttrain in Figure 1 includes a person riding a bicy-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

