Super Deep Contrastive Information Bottleneck for Multi-modal Clustering

Zhengzheng Lou 1 Ke Zhang 1 Yucong Wu 1 Shizhe Hu 1

Abstract

multi-modal data, while the scale and complexity of the
data have significantly increased (Srivastava & Salakhutdinov, 2012; Baltrusaitis et al., 2019; Ramesh et al., 2021).
“Modality” refers to different types of data obtained from
various perspectives of information acquisition and processing (Hacquard, 2010). For example, a video can capture data
information from both the sound and image perspectives.
However, traditional single-modal data analysis methods
often struggle to comprehensively handle multi-modal data.
Multi-modal clustering (MMC), as a key technology, can
fully mine and integrate information from different modalities, revealing the potential complementarity between them.
It has been widely applied in areas such as cross-modal retrieval (Hu et al., 2019; Chun et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2022),
intelligent recommendation (Liu et al., 2021), and biomedical science (Acosta et al., 2022; Si et al., 2023). Therefore,
research on MMC methods provides vast prospects for practical applications.

In an era of increasingly diverse information
sources, multi-modal clustering (MMC) has become a key technology for processing multimodal data. It can apply and integrate the feature
information and potential relationships of different modalities. Although there is a wealth of research on MMC, due to the complexity of datasets,
a major challenge remains in how to deeply explore the complex latent information and interdependencies between modalities. To address this
issue, this paper proposes a method called super
deep contrastive information bottleneck (SDCIB)
for MMC, which aims to explore and utilize all
types of latent information to the fullest extent.
Specifically, the proposed SDCIB explicitly introduces the rich information contained in the encoder’s hidden layers into the loss function for the
first time, thoroughly mining both modal features
and the hidden relationships between modalities.
Moreover, the proposed SDCIB performs dual
optimization by simultaneously considering consistency information from both the feature distribution and clustering assignment perspectives, the
proposed SDCIB significantly improves clustering accuracy and robustness. We conducted experiments on 4 multi-modal datasets and the accuracy
of the method on the ESP dataset improved by
9.3%. The results demonstrate the superiority and
clever design of the proposed SDCIB. The source
code is available on https://github.com/ShizheHu.

Existing traditional MMC methods mainly focus on three
categories: subspace learning, graphical models and matrix
decomposition (Cai et al., 2011; Xia et al., 2023). However, as multi-modal datasets become increasingly complex,
traditional MMC methods are prone to the “curse of dimensionality” in high-dimensional spaces and struggle to handle
high-dimensional data effectively.
At the same time, with the continuous development of deep
learning, deep MMC methods fully integrate the advantages
of deep neural networks, providing more solutions for MMC
(Ngiam et al., 2011; Andrew et al., 2013; Xie et al., 2016;
Liu et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2020). For example, Wang et
al. (Wang et al., 2021) combined the self-supervised t-SNE
module with the self-expression layer to learn a shared lowdimensional representation. Mao et al. (Mao et al., 2021)
adopted the idea of contrastive learning to maximize the
shared information between modalities and minimize the
redundancy within each modality, achieving efficient clustering by integrating a multi-modal shared encoder with
variational optimization. In recent years, Rong et al. (Rong
et al., 2022) utilized a variational autoencoder architecture
based on the autoencoder and incorporated an attention
mechanism to extract cluster-friendly representations from
multi-omics data. However, the aforementioned methods
fail to deeply understand the complex relationships within
data samples across modalities, neglecting the close connec-

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid advancement of information
acquisition technology, data storage capacity has also developed quickly. The sources of information have gradually
diversified, evolving from traditional single-modal data to
1

School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China. Correspondence to: Shizhe Hu <
ieshizhehu@gmail.com, https://shizhehu.github.io/>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

