RestoreGrad: Signal Restoration Using Conditional Denoising
Diffusion Models with Jointly Learned Prior

Ching-Hua Lee 1 Chouchang Yang 1 Jaejin Cho 1 Yashas Malur Saidutta 1 Rakshith Sharma Srinivasa 1
Yilin Shen 1 Hongxia Jin 1

Abstract

able generative models consisting of i) the forward process,
where the original data samples are gradually corrupted
by adding Gaussian noise to eventually become a standard
normal prior; ii) the reverse process, in which a neural network is responsible for recovering the original data from the
corrupted samples by learning to sequentially reverse the
diffusion process. With their exceptional capabilities of generating high-quality data, DDPMs can be applied to various
signal restoration tasks – recovering the missing components in a signal due to contamination (e.g., audio recorded
with environmental noises (Lu et al., 2021; 2022; Tai et al.,
2023b), images obstructed by various measurement noises
(Özdenizci & Legenstein, 2023; Croitoru et al., 2023)), by
conditioning the DDPM on the degraded observations.

Denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDPMs) can be utilized to recover a clean signal
from its degraded observation(s) by conditioning
the model on the degraded signal. The degraded
signals are themselves contaminated versions
of the clean signals; due to this correlation,
they may encompass certain useful information
about the target clean data distribution. However,
existing adoption of the standard Gaussian
as the prior distribution in turn discards such
information when shaping the prior, resulting
in sub-optimal performance. In this paper, we
propose to improve conditional DDPMs for signal
restoration by leveraging a more informative prior
that is jointly learned with the diffusion model.
The proposed framework, called RestoreGrad,
seamlessly integrates DDPMs into the variational
autoencoder (VAE) framework, taking advantage
of the correlation between the degraded and clean
signals to encode a better diffusion prior. On
speech and image restoration tasks, we show that
RestoreGrad demonstrates faster convergence
(5-10 times fewer training steps) to achieve better
quality of restored signals over existing DDPM
baselines and improved robustness to using fewer
sampling steps in inference time (2-2.5 times
fewer), advocating the advantages of leveraging
jointly learned prior for efficiency improvements
in the diffusion process.

However, for the diffusion model to adequately learn the
reverse process, a large number of training iterations may
be required, leading to potentially slow convergence. Such
inefficiency was related to the discrepancy between the real
data distribution and the accustomed choice of the standard
Gaussian prior by Lee et al. (2022). They therefor proposed
a simple yet effective approach called PriorGrad, aiming to
construct a better prior by using rule-based approaches to
extract useful information from the conditioner data. However, despite improving performance on some generative
speech tasks, handcrafting a “better” prior requires certain
knowledge about the data characteristics, and such guidance
may not always exist for a given task or application.
In this paper, our main focus is to investigate the question:
Can we systematically obtain a better prior distribution that
improves the efficiency of the diffusion generative process?
In other words, we aim to develop a framework of learningbased diffusion priors for improved DDPM efficiency. A
high-level view of our approach is depicted in Figure 1,
where the conditional DDPM (parameterized by θ) samples
the latent noise ϵ from a learned prior distribution estimated
by a prior encoder ψ, which takes the conditioner y as
input. The prior encoder is jointly trained with the DDPM
θ to synthesize the data x0 , and a posterior encoder ϕ that
exploits information from both x0 and y, to align the prior
and posterior distributions. The main idea here is that, if
there is a certain correlation between the conditioner y and

1. Introduction
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Ho
et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) are latent vari1

Artificial Intelligence Center−Mountain View, Samsung Electronics, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Ching-Hua
Lee <chinghua.l@samsung.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

