CLIMB: Data Foundations for Large Scale Multimodal Clinical Foundation
Models
Wei Dai 1 Peilin Chen 1 Malinda Lu 1 Daniel Li 1 Haowen Wei 2 3 Hejie Cui 4 Paul Pu Liang 1

Abstract

These domains include analyzing clinical images (Johnson
et al., 2019; Irvin et al., 2019a), processing clinical notes
(Liu et al., 2025; Johnson et al., 2016), and predicting patient
outcomes (Yan et al., 2024). Despite these achievements,
most current approaches remain limited to a few modalities
primarily in the image and text domain (Thakoor et al., 2019;
Jing et al., 2023b; Sharma et al., 2022), failing to capture the
interactions between many medical indicators that clinicians
routinely combine to make holistic assessments on patient
health and well-being (Liang et al., 2024b; Rajendran et al.,
2023; Shaik et al., 2024).

Recent advances in clinical AI have enabled remarkable progress across many clinical domains.
However, existing benchmarks and models are
primarily limited to a small set of modalities
and tasks, which hinders the development of
large-scale multimodal methods that can make
holistic assessments of patient health and wellbeing. To bridge this gap, we introduce Clinical
Large-scale Integrative Multimodal Benchmark
(CLIMB), a comprehensive clinical benchmark
unifying diverse clinical data across imaging, language, temporal, and graph modalities. CLIMB
comprises 4.51 million patient samples totaling
19.01 terabytes distributed across 2D imaging,
3D video, time series, graphs, and multimodal
data. Through extensive empirical evaluation,
we demonstrate that multitask pretraining significantly improves performance on understudied
domains, achieving up to 29% improvement in
ultrasound and 23% in ECG analysis over singletask learning. Pretraining on CLIMB also effectively improves models’ generalization capability
to new tasks, and strong unimodal encoder performance translates well to multimodal performance
when paired with task-appropriate fusion strategies. Our findings provide a foundation for new
architecture designs and pretraining strategies to
advance clinical AI research. Code is released at
this link.

1. Introduction

To develop the next generation of holistic multimodal clinical foundation models, we introduce Clinical Large-scale
Integrative Multi-modal Benchmark (CLIMB), a comprehensive multimodal clinical benchmark that unifies data
across imaging, language, temporal, and genomic modalities. Our dataset comprises 4.51 million patient samples,
totaling 19.01 terabytes of data, with a diverse spectrum
of modalities: 707K 2D imaging data (including X-rays,
dermoscopy images, fundus images, and pathology slides),
1.83M 3D or video samples (ultrasounds, CT scans, endoscopic images and MRI images), 871K 1D data (electronic
health records, EEG, ECG, gait and genomic data), 69.3K
graph data (brain networks, molecules) and 1.03M multimodal data combining multiple of the above modalities. We
accomplish this through a novel data collection and preprocessing pipeline that standardizes diverse data formats
from 33 different medical institutions while preserving the
natural patterns of missing data. The dataset encompasses
96 different clinical conditions across 13 clinical domains,
making it one of the largest and most diverse public clinical
benchmarks to date.

Advances in AI for clinical data have significantly helped
doctors process and analyze complex clinical information
for diagnosis, treatment planning, and decision support (Esteva et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2025; Rajpurkar et al., 2022).

Through extensive empirical evaluation on CLIMB, we establish comprehensive benchmarks and best practices for
clinical multimodal learning. As illustrated in Fig. 3, our
analysis yields three key insights:

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging 3 Harvard Medical School
4
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Wei Dai <dvdai@mit.edu>.

1. Multitask pretraining: We evaluate single encoders
trained jointly on all tasks within each modality in
CLIMB. Our experiments show that multitask pretraining significantly improves performance across clinical
tasks, achieving up to 32.54% AUC improvement in
COVID ultrasound and other understudied areas. Fur-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

