Training Deep Learning Models with Norm-Constrained LMOs

Thomas Pethick 1 Wanyun Xie 1 Kimon Antonakopoulos 1
Zhenyu Zhu 1 Antonio Silveti-Falls 2 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

Adaptation on-the-fly has been the defacto standard in this
setting, with adaptive algorithms, such as Adam (Kingma,
2014), dominating the deep learning model training.

In this work, we study optimization methods that
leverage the linear minimization oracle (lmo)
over a norm-ball. We propose a new stochastic
family of algorithms that uses the lmo to adapt
to the geometry of the problem and, perhaps surprisingly, show that they can be applied to unconstrained problems. The resulting update rule
unifies several existing optimization methods under a single framework. Furthermore, we propose an explicit choice of norm for deep architectures, which, as a side benefit, leads to the
transferability of hyperparameters across model
sizes. Experimentally, we demonstrate significant speedups on nanoGPT training using our algorithm, Scion, without any reliance on Adam.
The proposed method is memory-efficient, requiring only one set of model weights and one
set of gradients, which can be stored in halfprecision. The code is available at https:
//github.com/LIONS-EPFL/scion.

One possible way for adaptation a priori, which we focus on in this work, is to modify the underlying norm
used to measure distances in the parameter space. There
is precedence to our proposal, as the early work by Carlson et al. (2015a;b;c) introduced the stochastic spectral descent method (SSD), which performs steepest descent in
the spectral norm, and demonstrated that the method can
substantially accelerate deep learning training.
The significance of the SSD approach has been very recently brought back to attention by Bernstein & Newhouse
(2024b), who showed that the Shampoo optimizer (Gupta
et al., 2017)—winner of the external tuning track at the
2024 AlgoPerf: Training Algorithms competition (Dahl
et al., 2023)—can be viewed as SSD when a certain accumulation is disabled. Moreover, Bernstein & Newhouse
(2024b) introduced an efficient Newton-Schultz iteration
to replace the approximate SVD calculations previously
required. Jordan et al. (2024b) incorporated the NewtonSchultz iteration with additional momentum into SSD under the name Muon to achieve impressive results on the
nanoGPT architecture by applying it to the hidden layers.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has greatly benefited from adaptive optimization methods such as RMSProp (Hinton et al., 2012),
AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011; McMahan & Streeter, 2010),
and Adam (Kingma, 2014), which dynamically change
the geometry of the problem based on gradients encountered on-the-fly during training. While these methods have
demonstrated remarkable success, they fundamentally treat
neural networks (NNs) as optimization problems where we
lack any prior knowledge about their particular setting.

Contributions This work focuses on developing an algorithmic framework that can exploit an appropriate choice of
norm for the entire neural network with particular emphasis on hyperparameter transfer across model sizes (Yang &
Hu, 2021), convergence and practical performance.
To adapt to the geometry a priori, we will build on a classical (but unexpected) family of algorithms in contrast to
the steepest descent methods, namely the ones involving
the linear minimization oracle (lmo) over a norm-ball constraint known as the Conditional Gradient (CG) methods.

However, NNs are far from being black boxes—their structure is not only known but they are deliberately designed.
This simple observation raises directly the question:
Is it more beneficial to adapt the optimizer a priori,
instead of exploring their respective geometries on-the-fly?

While classically being used for constrained problems,
we take the slightly unusual approach by showing that the
lmos can be used even for unconstrained problems. The
algorithm, dubbed as the unconstrained Stochastic Conditional Gradient method (uSCG), shows improvements both
theoretically and practically when the norm-ball constraint
matches the natural geometry of the problem.

1
LIONS, EPFL 2 CVN, Université Paris-Saclay. Correspondence to: Thomas Pethick <thomas.pethick@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

