Hypo3D: Exploring Hypothetical Reasoning in 3D

Ye Mao 1 Weixun Luo 1 Junpeng Jing 1 Anlan Qiu 1 Krystian Mikolajczyk 1

Abstract

full spectrum of human cognitive abilities (Goertzel, 2014;
Rayhan et al., 2023). Reasoning, a core cognitive ability, is
a major research focus. The emergence of vision-language
foundation models (Hong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024; Mao et al., 2024) has
marked a significant step toward narrowing the gap between
human and machine reasoning, enabling progress from text
summarization (Lewis, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020) to complex
scene understanding (Huang et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023).

The rise of vision-language foundation models
marks an advancement in bridging the gap between human and machine capabilities in 3D
scene reasoning. Existing 3D reasoning benchmarks assume real-time scene accessibility, which
is impractical due to the high cost of frequent
scene updates. To this end, we introduce Hypothetical 3D Reasoning, namely Hypo3D, a
benchmark designed to evaluate models’ ability to reason without access to real-time scene
data. Models need to imagine the scene state
based on a provided change description before
reasoning. Hypo3D is formulated as a 3D Visual
Question Answering (VQA) benchmark, comprising 7,727 context changes across 700 indoor scenes, resulting in 14,885 question-answer
pairs. An anchor-based world frame is established
for all scenes, ensuring consistent reference to
a global frame for directional terms in context
changes and QAs. Extensive experiments show
that state-of-the-art foundation models struggle
to reason effectively in hypothetically changed
scenes. This reveals a substantial performance
gap compared to humans, particularly in scenarios involving movement changes and directional
reasoning. Even when the change is irrelevant to
the question, models often incorrectly adjust their
answers. The code and dataset are publicly available at: https://matchlab-imperial.
github.io/Hypo3D.

These models are typically evaluated under the assumption
that all knowledge about perception is immediately accessible during reasoning. For instance, in the evaluation of
model performance in 3D scene reasoning, existing benchmarks (Ye et al., 2021; Azuma et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022;
Linghu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) presuppose realtime availability of scene data (e.g., point clouds). Yet,
this assumption does not always hold, as real-world scenes
are dynamic, and maintaining up-to-date 3D scenes is challenging. Unlike 2D image capture, 3D scene collection
demands specialized equipment, extended scanning times,
and a complex reconstruction process for accurate geometric representation (Nießner et al., 2013; Daneshmand et al.,
2018). Thus, immediate perceptual knowledge for reasoning is unavailable in many real-world cases. Imagination,
rooted in prior knowledge, allows humans to overcome such
limitations by deducing missing details and approximating reality. Even without direct visual input, humans can
mentally simulate changes in a scene and reason about the
changed scene in their minds. This ability, known as mental
imagery (Pylyshyn, 2002; Moulton & Kosslyn, 2009), is
crucial to human intelligence and raises a critical question:
Can current foundation models employ imagination to fill
perceptual knowledge gaps and enhance reasoning?

1. Introduction

In response to this question, we propose a new reasoning
concept: hypothetical reasoning. It evaluates models’ ability
to reason without immediate perceptual knowledge, requiring models to formulate reasonable hypotheses to bridge
knowledge gaps. As an initial attempt, this study focuses
specifically on hypothetical reasoning in 3D scenes, referred
to as Hypo3D. As shown in Figures 1 and 2, the Hypo3D
task follows a 3D visual question-answering format but cannot be solved using the given scene alone. Instead, models
need to rely on an accessible context change description to
imagine the current scene state after the change and adjust

“Imagination is more important than knowledge.”
– ALBERT EINSTEIN
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) aims to replicate the
1

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial
College London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Junpeng
Jing <j.jing23@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

