Sparse Training from Random Initialization:
Aligning Lottery Ticket Masks using Weight Symmetry

Mohammed Adnan * 1 2 Rohan Jain * 1 Ekansh Sharma 3 2 Rahul G. Krishnan 3 2 Yani Ioannou 1

Abstract

and practitioners alike. To overcome this issue, different
model compression methods, such as pruning, quantization
and knowledge distillation, have been proposed to reduce
the model size at different phases of training or inference.
Post-training model pruning (Han et al., 2016) has been
shown to be effective in compressing the model size, and
seminal works have demonstrated that large models can be
pruned after training with minimal loss in accuracy (Gale
et al., 2019; Han et al., 2015). While model pruning makes
inference more efficient, it does not reduce the computational
cost of training the model.

The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) suggests
there exists a sparse LTH mask and weights that
achieve the same generalization performance as
the dense model while using significantly fewer
parameters. However, finding a LTH solution is
computationally expensive, and a LTH’s sparsity
mask does not generalize to other random weight
initializations. Recent work has suggested that
neural networks trained from random initialization
find solutions within the same basin modulo permutation, and proposes a method to align trained
models within the same loss basin. We hypothesize that misalignment of basins is the reason why
LTH masks do not generalize to new random initializations and propose permuting the LTH mask
to align with the new optimization basin when performing sparse training from a different random
init. We empirically show a significant increase in
generalization when sparse training from random
initialization with the permuted mask as compared
to using the non-permuted LTH mask, on multiple
datasets (CIFAR-10/100 & ImageNet) and models
(VGG11 & ResNet20/50). Our codebase for reproducing the results is publicly available at here.

Motivated by the goal of training a sparse model from a
random initialization, Frankle & Carbin (2019) demonstrated
that training with a highly sparse mask is possible and
proposed the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) to identify
sparse subnetworks that, when trained, can match the
performance of a dense model. The key caveat is that a dense
model must first be trained to find the sparse mask, which
can only be used with the same random initialization that was
used to train the dense model. Despite LTH seeing significant
interest in the research community, LTH masks cannot be
used to train from a new random initialization. Furthermore,
it has been observed empirically that the LTH is impractical
for finding a diverse set of solutions (Evci et al., 2022).
This posits our main research questions: How can we train a
LTH mask from a different random initialization while maintaining good generalization? Would doing so find a more
diverse set of solutions than observed with the LTH itself?

1. Introduction

In this work, we try to understand why the LTH does not
work for different random initializations from a weight-space
symmetry perspective. Our hypothesis is that to reuse
the LTH winning ticket mask with a different random
initialization, the winning ticket mask obtained needs to
be permuted such that it aligns with the optimization basin
associated with the new random initialization. We illustrate
our hypothesis in Figure 1.

In recent years, foundation models have achieved state-ofthe-art results for different tasks. However, the exponential
increase in the size of state-of-the-art models requires a
similarly exponential increase in the memory and computational costs required to train, store and use these models —
decreasing the accessibility of these models for researchers
*

Equal contribution 1 Schulich School of Engineering,
University of Calgary 2 Vector Institute for AI 3 Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto. Correspondence to:
Mohammed Adnan <adnan.ahmad@ucalgary.ca>, Yani Ioannou
<yani.ioannou@ucalgary.ca>.

To empirically validate our hypothesis, we obtain a sparse
mask using Iterative Magnitude Pruning (IMP) (Renda et al.,
2020; Han et al., 2015) on model A (from Figure 1) and show
that given a permutation that aligns the optimization basin
of model A and a new random initialization, the mask can

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

