Catoni Contextual Bandits are Robust to Heavy-tailed Rewards

Chenlu Ye 1 Yujia Jin 2 Alekh Agarwal 3 Tong Zhang 4

Abstract

some function class F
√ available to the learner, this optimal
regret scales as O(R T dF log NF ), where R is the range
of the rewards, T is the number of rounds, dF is a complexity notion for F, such as the eluder dimension (Russo &
Van Roy, 2013), and NF is the covering number of F.

Typical contextual bandit algorithms assume that
the rewards at each round lie in some fixed range
[0, R], and their regret scales polynomially with
this reward range R. However, many practical
scenarios naturally involve heavy-tailed rewards
or rewards where the worst-case range can be
substantially larger than the variance. In this paper, we develop an algorithmic approach building
on Catoni’s estimator from robust statistics, and
apply it to contextual bandits with general function approximation. When the variance of the
reward at each round is known, we use a varianceweighted regression approach and establish a regret bound that depends only on the cumulative
reward variance and logarithmically on the reward range R as well as the number of rounds
T . For the unknown-variance case, we further
propose a careful peeling-based algorithm and
remove the need for cumbersome variance estimation. With additional dependence on the fourth
moment, our algorithm also enjoys a variancebased bound with logarithmic reward-range dependence. Moreover, we demonstrate the optimality of the leading-order term in our regret bound
through a matching lower bound.

However, this worst-case behavior arises only when the
rewards span their entire range [0, R] with a significant
probability, a phenomenon not typical in practice. Even for
a common case of binary rewards in {0, R} for instance,
the expected reward is often relatively close to 0 in common click/no-click style recommendation settings with low
clickthrough rates. Consequently, the expectation, variance
and even higher moments of the reward are much smaller
than the worst-case range. More generally, rewards with
heavier tails naturally arise when considering waiting times
in wireless communication networks (Nair et al., 2013),
stock prices in financial markets (Cont, 2001; Hull, 2012),
or value returns for online advertising (Choi et al., 2020;
Jebarajakirthy et al., 2021). In this paper, we study the design of contextual bandit algorithms that can leverage such
structures to have regret guarantees dependent polynomially
on the reward variance, with only a mild logarithmic scaling
with the range parameter R.
Such variance-based regret bounds have received significant
attention recently, under the topic of robustness to heavytailed rewards. Huang et al. (2024); Li & Sun (2024) study
Huber regression and design variance-weighted regressionbased approaches for linear contextual bandits with known
variance, and
show that their algorithms achieve a varianceqP

2
e
based O d
t∈[T ] σt regret bound, where d is the dimension for the linear function, thus avoiding a dependence
on range R. They also study Markov Decision Processes

1. Introduction
Minimax optimal regret bounds in the worst-case over problem instances for contextual bandit learning are relatively
well-understood in the literature, both using policy-based
approaches in the agnostic case, and regression-based approaches in the realizable case. A variety of algorithms
attain these bounds in both settings, and the minimax optimality implies that the bounds are unimprovable in general.
When the expected reward of each action is realizable using

1
Huang et al. (2024) consider a more general setting, where
the 1 + ϵ-th moment of the reward is upper bounded for some
ϵ ∈ (0, 1], and incur a dependence in terms of this moment along
with additional poly(T ) terms. Since our work only considers
bounded variance, we present their result with (Li & Sun, 2024)
together, as the two results are identical for the case of ϵ = 1.
2
DistUCB relies on a stonger assumption: estimating the full
reward distribution rather than just the mean, and hence relies
on a stronger realizability on the function class to capture this
distribution. In contrast, we only assume realizability of the reward
mean R. Moreover, d˜F measures the complexity of a class of
distributions, while dF measures the complexity of a class of mean
functions, thus the two notions are generally incomparable.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
OpenAI (Work done during an internship at Google) 3 Google Research 4 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence
to: Chenlu Ye <chenluy3@illinois.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

