Neural Genetic Search in Discrete Spaces

Hyeonah Kim * 1 2 Sanghyeok Choi * 3 Jiwoo Son 4 Jinkyoo Park 3 4 Changhyun Kwon 3 4
Parent

Abstract
Routing

A

Effective search methods are crucial for improving the performance of deep generative models
at test time. In this paper, we introduce a novel
test-time search method, Neural Genetic Search
(NGS), which incorporates the evolutionary mechanism of genetic algorithms into the generation
procedure of deep models. The core idea behind
NGS is its crossover, which is defined as parentconditioned generation using trained generative
models. This approach offers a versatile and easyto-implement search algorithm for deep generative models. We demonstrate the effectiveness
and flexibility of NGS through experiments across
three distinct domains: routing problems, adversarial prompt generation for language models, and
molecular design.

B−G −A −F −E −D −C −B

E−D −B −C −G −A −F −E

Language

She dances gracefully on stage

Molecule

D

NC ( O ) C ( = O ) O

The river flows downstream

O C C [C@H] ( O ) C C

The river dances
gracefully and slowly

NC ( O ) C [C@H] ( O ) C ( Br ) C

process to refine the outputs of generative models using
existing problem-specific GAs (Ahn et al., 2020; Kim et al.,
2024). In contrast, our goal is to integrate the evolutionary
principles of GAs directly into the generation process of
deep models rather than simply chaining the deep models
and GAs.

Genetic algorithms (GAs) have demonstrated remarkable
performance across a diverse range of tasks with discrete
search space, from classic combinatorial optimization problems (Holland, 1992; Omara & Arafa, 2010; Vidal et al.,
2012; Nagata & Kobayashi, 2013; Mahmoudinazlou &
Kwon, 2024) to more recent applications in molecular design (Morris et al., 1998; Jensen, 2019; Nigam et al., 2021;
Kerstjens & De Winter, 2022). By maintaining a population
of candidate solutions and iteratively applying evolutionary operators, such as crossover and mutation, GAs can
systematically explore vast search spaces.

We present Neural Genetic Search (NGS), a GA-inspired
new search algorithm for deep generative models. NGS
enhances the sequential generation process by incorporating genetic operators, crossover, and mutation. Specifically,
we define the crossover as a parent-conditioned generation,
where the model’s vocabulary is restricted to the tokens used
in the selected parents, while mutation simply removes this
restriction (Figure 1), allowing for more diverse outputs.
The generation with the genetic operators proceeds iteratively with an evolving population, steering the generation
toward better results over time, similar to traditional GAs.

In this work, we investigate how to incorporate the powerful
search capabilities of GAs into deep generative models.
Previous efforts that combined GAs with deep learning for
better search typically applied GAs after the generation
1

G−A −B −D−C−E −F −G

E

Figure 1. Illustrative examples of parents and offspring in various
tasks. Offspring are generated through crossover and mutation.
Crossover combines two parent chromosomes (Yellow and Blue)
by restricting the vocabulary to tokens present in one of the parents.
Mutation (Pink) occasionally removes this limitation, promoting
the solution diversity.

1. Introduction

*

G

C
B

Offspring

F

Since the generation process is still governed by the trained
generative models, NGS effectively combine the search capability of GAs with the generative power of deep models.
Furthermore, as the proposed genetic operators are problemagnostic, NGS can be applied to any sequential generative
model across various tasks, in contrast to traditional GAs,
which require significant effort to design problem-specific
operators. NGS also can be easily implemented by adding
the population and the parent-conditioned masking rule to

2

Equal contribution Mila - Quebec AI Institute Université de
Montréal 3 KAIST 4 Omelet. Correspondence to: Hyeonah
Kim <hyeonah.kim@mila.quebec>,
Sanghyeok Choi
<sanghyeok.choi@kaist.ac.kr>, Changhyun Kwon <chkwon@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

