Foundation Molecular Grammar: Multi-Modal Foundation Models Induce
Interpretable Molecular Graph Languages

Michael Sun 1 Weize Yuan 2 Gang Liu 3 Wojciech Matusik 1 Jie Chen 4

Abstract

ended direction is to leverage MMFMs for this task, but
their potential for advanced chemistry reasoning has been
limited to simple (predominantly text-based) tasks (Guo
et al., 2023; Bran et al., 2023) and remains to be validated
by experts.

Recent data-efficient molecular generation approaches exploit graph grammars to introduce
interpretability into the generative models. However, grammar learning therein relies on expert
annotation or unreliable heuristics for algorithmic inference. We propose Foundation Molecular
Grammar (FMG), which leverages multi-modal
foundation models (MMFMs) to induce an interpretable molecular language. By exploiting the
chemical knowledge of an MMFM, FMG renders molecules as images, describes them as text,
and aligns information across modalities using
prompt learning. FMG can be used as a drop-in
replacement for the prior grammar learning approaches in molecular generation and property
prediction. We show that FMG not only excels
in synthesizability, diversity, and data efficiency
but also offers built-in chemical interpretability
for automated molecular discovery workflows.
Code is available at https://github.com/
shiningsunnyday/induction.

Recent success of Large Language Models (LLMs) on natural language has begun to permeate the molecular domain.
Using the formal languages SMILES (Weininger, 1988) and
SELFIES (Krenn et al., 2020), transformer-based decoder
architectures have been used to directly generate molecular strings (Bagal et al., 2021). Encoder-decoder architectures have been adopted for translating between natural
language and formal language (Edwards et al., 2022). The
text-molecule translation task has been reformulated for
in-context learning tasks for chatbots like ChatGPT (Guo
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). These efforts have also enabled
the creation of instruction datasets (Fang et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2024a) that enable further finetuning for custom tasks.
When combined with abundant textual data, using natural
language as the surrounding context also enables masked
language modeling pretraining (Christofidellis et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023c; Born & Manica, 2023).
Instead of modeling molecular graphs as strings, specialized graph encoders have been adopted for enhanced crossmodality pretraining (Su et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023b; 2024a;b), leading to downstream tasks
such as text-based structure retrieval (Liu et al., 2023a) and
structure-based design through an interactive conversation
(Zeng et al., 2024). However, graph encoders do not come
with the same advanced features of foundation models like
understanding and reasoning. Aware of these challenges,
our work explores an unconventional solution: rendering
molecules as images alongside self-generated textual descriptions, implicitly aligning the two modalities in-context.
This comes at a ripe opportunity when cheminformatics
APIs like RDKit (Landrum) are becoming prevalent enough
that MMFMs are likely to have seen sufficient artifacts of
the standardized rendering procedure during pretraining.

1. Introduction
Substructure-based graph grammar is a data-efficient approach for molecular generation, offering significant advantages in terms of interpretability and performance (Guo
et al., 2022b;a; Sun et al., 2024) compared to directly training on base molecular formal languages like SMILES and
SELFIES. However, learning a graph grammar is challenging, as the resulting production rules are rarely guaranteed
to be interpretable, e.g. containing functional groups. Interpretable approaches typically require expert annotation to
construct the vocabulary of substructures (Sun et al., 2024),
which is time-intensive and resource-demanding. One open1

MIT CSAIL 2 MIT Chemistry 3 University of Notre Dame
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research. Correspondence to:
Michael Sun <msun415@csail.mit.edu>.

4

MMFMs such as GPT-4o possess strong image understanding and reasoning capabilities when interacting with natural
language. In this work, we demonstrate that these models
can identify molecular substructures directly from rendered

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

