BinauralFlow: A Causal and Streamable Approach for High-Quality Binaural
Speech Synthesis with Flow Matching Models

Susan Liang * 1 2 Dejan Markovic 2 Israel D. Gebru 2 Steven Krenn 2 Todd Keebler 2 Jacob Sandakly 2
Frank Yu 2 Samuel Hassel 2 Chenliang Xu 1 Alexander Richard 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Unlike monaural audio, which conveys content in a single channel with no spatial context, spatial audio presents
the audience with a multi-dimensional listening experience
by rendering sounds from various directions and distances.
When rendered using two audio channels and played back
to the user’s ears through headphones, spatial audio is also
referred to as binaural audio. Its ability to enhance realism
and user engagement makes spatial audio a key component
of a wide range of immersive applications, from cinematic
experiences and gaming (Raghuvanshi & Snyder, 2018;
Chaitanya et al., 2020; Broderick et al., 2018; Yadegari
et al., 2024) to rapidly evolving fields such as virtual (VR),
augmented (AR) and mixed realities (MR) (Zotkin et al.,
2004; Kim et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2022; Schütze & IrwinSchütze, 2018; Cohen et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2020; Kailas
& Tiwari, 2021; Liang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024).

Binaural rendering aims to synthesize binaural audio that mimics natural hearing based on a mono
audio and the locations of the speaker and listener.
Although many methods have been proposed to
solve this problem, they struggle with rendering
quality and streamable inference. Synthesizing
high-quality binaural audio that is indistinguishable from real-world recordings requires precise
modeling of binaural cues, room reverb, and ambient sounds. Additionally, real-world applications demand streaming inference. To address
these challenges, we propose a flow matching
based streaming binaural speech synthesis framework called BinauralFlow. We consider binaural rendering to be a generation problem rather
than a regression problem and design a conditional flow matching model to render high-quality
audio. Moreover, we design a causal U-Net architecture that estimates the current audio frame
solely based on past information to tailor generative models for streaming inference. Finally, we
introduce a continuous inference pipeline incorporating streaming STFT/ISTFT operations, a buffer
bank, a midpoint solver, and an early skip schedule to improve rendering continuity and speed.
Quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the superiority of our method over SOTA approaches. A perceptual study further reveals that
our model is nearly indistinguishable from realworld recordings, with a 42% confusion rate. We
recommend that readers visit our project page for
demo videos: https://liangsusan-git.
github.io/project/binauralflow/.

Although a lot of work has been done in both signal processing and machine learning communities (Savioja et al.,
1999; Zotkin et al., 2004; Jianjun et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2017; Gao & Grauman, 2019; Richard et al., 2021; Leng
et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2023b), the current state-of-the-art
methods still struggle with achieving both (1) high-quality
rendering and (2) causal and streamable inference. In particular, generating high-fidelity binaural audio that is truly
indistinguishable from real-world recordings, has remained
an open problem. Given a (virtual) acoustic source and its
audio signal, rendering binaural audio that is of such quality
to deceive the listener into believing it is truly present in
the space requires careful consideration and modeling of
binaural cues, room reverb, and ambient noise. The poses of
the sound source and receiver are key to perception. The distance between them primarily affects the overall audio level,
while their relative orientation influences the perceived direction of the sound source (e.g., interaural level and time
differences). Meanwhile, the inclusion of reverberation
effects and background noise that match the environment
is crucial for improving the realism and immersion of the
acoustic scene. Existing approaches might not fully consider all of these factors, leading to suboptimal rendering
performance, with noticeable differences between recorded

* Work done during an internship at Meta. 1 University of
Rochester, NY, USA 2 Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, PA, USA.
Correspondence to: Susan Liang <sliang22@ur.rochester.edu>,
Alexander Richard <richardalex@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

