Overestimation in LLM Evaluation: A Controlled Large-Scale Study on Data
Contamination’s Impact on Machine Translation

Muhammed Yusuf Kocyigit 1 Eleftheria Briakou 2 Daniel Deutsch 2 Jiaming Luo 2 Colin Cherry 2
Markus Freitag 2

Abstract

tion issue and shown that it can contribute to performance
overestimations (Zhou et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2023), we still lack a large-scale controlled analysis to better characterize the phenomenon. Concretely,
prior efforts are commonly limited to smaller scales, both
in terms of model and data (Jiang et al., 2024), treating
contamination as a fine-tuning (Yang et al., 2023) or extended pre-training problem (Zhou et al., 2023), rather than
addressing it directly in the larger-scale pre-training setting.
Meanwhile, computational and logistical constraints have
deterred large-scale, systematic experiments that would clarify how contamination interacts not only with model size,
but also with training dynamics, and data composition.

Data contamination—the accidental consumption
of evaluation examples within the pre-training
data—can undermine the validity of evaluation
benchmarks. In this paper, we present a rigorous
analysis of the effects of contamination on language models at 1B and 8B scales on the machine
translation task. Starting from a carefully decontaminated train-test split, we systematically introduce contamination at various stages, scales, and
data formats to isolate its effect and measure its
impact on performance metrics. Our experiments
reveal that contamination with both source and
target substantially inflates BLEU scores, and this
inflation is 2.5× larger (up to 30 BLEU points) for
8B compared to 1B models. In contrast, sourceonly and target-only contamination generally produce smaller, less consistent over-estimations. Finally, we study how the temporal distribution and
frequency of contaminated samples influence performance over-estimation across languages with
varying degrees of data resources.

In this paper, we present a controlled study to isolate and
measure the impact of contamination during pre-training under diverse contamination conditions and two model scales
(1 and 8 billion parameters). For this purpose, we take machine translation (MT) test suites as our case study, covering
eight languages, thereby gaining insight into the interaction
between contamination and linguistic resource availability.
Starting with a multilingual mixture of public pre-training
corpora, we first decontaminate our train-test set splits and
train a base LM on the training data (Figure 1). Then, we
systematically introduce MT test examples into pre-training
by varying their mode (presenting source and target in isolation or as full, prompted parallel texts), temporal distribution (controlling for when contamination happens), and frequency (controlling for the number of contamination copies).
To efficiently explore various contamination conditions without the prohibitive cost of training from scratch, we adopted
a branching strategy—resulting in more than 50% reduction in our training computational budget. Concretely, each
experiment branched from a base model checkpoint and continued training on a modified data mixture, which replaces
original samples with test contamination instances. Following our branching strategy, we studied a total of 42 contamination conditions for each model scale, by comparatively
studying the performance of contaminated and uncontaminated models across contaminated and non-contaminated
datasets. Our findings are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Scaling laws have reshaped our understanding of the data
requirements for training language models (LM), leading to
a rapid expansion in data collection efforts. This expansion
has inadvertently increased the probability of evaluation data
contamination (Sainz et al., 2024): fragments or even entire
test sets are accidentally consumed within the pre-training
data, thereby invalidating the assumption that models are
evaluated on unseen data.
Although several studies have acknowledged the contamina1

Boston University, USA, Work done while at Google.
Google. Correspondence to: Muhammed Yusuf Kocyigit <kocyigit@bu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

