Wait-Less Offline Tuning and Re-solving for Online Decision Making

Jingruo Sun 1 Wenzhi Gao 2 Ellen Vitercik 1 3 Yinyu Ye 1 4 5

Abstract

tem continuously accumulates and evolves. Online Linear
Programming (OLP) (Agrawal et al., 2014) offers a powerful framework that encapsulates the core principles of sequential decision-making and has been extensively applied
to different domains, including resource allocation (Balseiro et al., 2022a), online advertising (Mehta et al., 2007),
and inventory management (Talluri et al., 2004).

Online linear programming (OLP) has found
broad applications in revenue management and
resource allocation. State-of-the-art OLP algorithms achieve low regret by repeatedly solving
linear programming (LP) subproblems that incorporate updated resource information. However, LP-based methods are computationally expensive and often inefficient for large-scale applications. By contrast, recent first-order OLP algorithms are more computationally efficient but
typically suffer from weaker regret guarantees.
To address these shortcomings, we propose a
new algorithm that combines the strengths of LPbased and first-order OLP algorithms. Our algorithm re-solves the LP subproblems periodically
at a predefined frequency f and uses the latest
dual prices to guide online decision-making. In
parallel, a first-order method runs during each
interval between LP re-solves and smooths resource consumption.
Our algorithm achieves
√
O(log(T /f ) + f ) regret and delivers a “waitless” online decision-making process that balances computational efficiency and regret guarantees. Extensive experiments demonstrate at
least 10-fold improvements in regret over firstorder methods and 100-fold improvements in
runtime over LP-based methods.

We study an OLP problem where customers arrive sequentially, each requesting a combination of resources and offering a bidding price. The objective is to determine which
resource requests to fulfill to maximize revenue while respecting resource constraints. The challenge is that decisions must be made immediately and irrevocably, relying
solely on historical data without knowledge of future arrivals. The goal is to minimize regret with respect to the
optimal hindsight linear programming (LP) solution.
To guide real-time decision-making, state-of-the-art OLP
algorithms estimate optimal dual prices and use them to
make decisions. These algorithms fall into two main categories: LP-based and first-order methods. Specifically,
LP-based methods update dual prices by repeatedly solving linear programs at each time step with all available information so far. However, the substantial computational
demands limit their application in time-sensitive settings.
First-order methods offer quick, incremental updates to
dual prices using gradient information, but generally fall
short of achieving the strong regret guarantee of LP-based
methods. These trade-offs motivate an open question at the
intersection of online learning and decision-making:

1. Introduction

Can we simultaneously achieve
low regret and computational efficiency?

Sequential decision-making has garnered significant attention for its utility in guiding optimal strategies in dynamic
environments. The goal is to identify effective decisions
and policies in environments where knowledge of the sys-

Our contributions. We answer this question in the affirmative. We summarize our contributions as follows:

1
Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford
University 2 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University 3 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University 4 Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shen
Zhen) 5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Jingruo Sun <jingruo@stanford.edu>.

• Parallel Multi-Stage Framework: We separate online
learning and decision-making into distinct processes that
interact via a feedback loop. We re-solve the LP subproblems periodically at a fixed frequency and feed the
updated dual price to guide decision-making until the
next time that the LP is re-solved. To further enhance efficiency, we apply a first-order method during the initial
and final stages, restarting with the most recent learn-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

