False Coverage Proportion Control for Conformal Prediction

Alexandre Blain 1 2 3 Bertrand Thirion 1 4 2 Pierre Neuvial 3

Abstract

about the underlying data distribution. These methods are
used across various fields such as medicine, finance, and
engineering, where decision-making requires quantifiable
estimates of uncertainty.

Split Conformal Prediction (SCP) provides a
computationally efficient way to construct confidence intervals in prediction problems. Notably,
most of the theory built around SCP is focused
on the single test point setting. In real-life, inference sets consist of multiple points, which raises
the question of coverage guarantees for many
points simultaneously. While on average, the
False Coverage Proportion (FCP) remains controlled, it can fluctuate strongly around its mean,
the False Coverage Rate (FCR). We observe that
when a dataset is split multiple times, classical SCP may not control the FCP in a majority of the splits. We propose CoJER, a novel
method that achieves sharp FCP control in probability for conformal prediction, based on a recent characterization of the distribution of conformal p-values in a transductive setting. This
procedure incorporates an aggregation scheme
which provides robustness with respect to modeling choices. We show through extensive real
data experiments that CoJER provides FCP control while standard SCP does not. Furthermore,
CoJER yields shorter intervals than the state-ofthe-art method for FCP control and only slightly
larger intervals than standard SCP.

Split conformal prediction (SCP) is the standard practical
approach within the conformal prediction framework, offering improved computational efficiency and scalability.
In this method, the dataset is divided into two parts: a training set and a calibration set. The model is first trained
on the training set, and then the calibration set is used to
compute non-conformity scores and ultimately confidence
intervals. This approach simplifies the computation compared to full conformal prediction, as the calibration set remains fixed while the model parameters are tuned. Split
conformal prediction ensures marginal coverage, meaning
that on average, the prediction intervals will contain the
true value a specified proportion of the time – e.g., 90%
or 95% – providing a reliable measure of uncertainty.
Many real-world applications, such as healthcare (predicting outcomes for multiple patients), finance (forecasting
ranges for multiple assets), and manufacturing (quality
control across batches), inherently require predictions for
multiple data points simultaneously. However, SCP encounters limitations when applied to multiple test points simultaneously, as discussed by Vovk, 2013. A key concern
in this transductive setting is to control the false coverage
proportion (FCP), that is, the proportion of prediction intervals that fail to contain the true value. In applications
involving a large number of simultaneous predictions, it is
important to ensure that the FCP remains within acceptable
bounds. While SCP controls the expected proportion of
non-covered points (FCR; False Coverage Rate), it does not
guarantee control over the actual proportion of non-covered
intervals across multiple test points with high probability.

1. Introduction
In the realm of uncertain predictions, conformal prediction
methods provide a robust approach to obtaining confidence
intervals that maintain a predetermined coverage with statistical guarantees. Introduced by Vovk et al., 2005, conformal prediction methods are nonparametric techniques
that can be applied to any predictive model to generate prediction intervals that are valid under minimal assumptions

To address this, we introduce a method to control the FCP
using conformal p-values within a Joint Error Rate (JER,
Blanchard et al., 2020) control framework and cumulative distribution function (CDF) formulations (Gazin et al.,
2024). This approach allows controlling the FCP with high
probability across multiple predictions, ensuring that the
proportion of incorrect intervals does not exceed a prespecified level. While the approach of Gazin et al., 2024
yields valid FCP bounds, the latter can be conservative, as

1
INRIA 2 Université Paris-Saclay 3 Institut de Mathématiques
de Toulouse, Université de Toulouse; CNRS; UPS, F-31062
Toulouse Cedex 9, France 4 CEA. Correspondence to: Alexandre
Blain <alexandre.blain@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

