Compressed Image Generation with Denoising Diffusion Codebook Models

Guy Ohayon * 1 Hila Manor * 2 Tomer Michaeli 2 Michael Elad 1

Abstract

for generating samples from complex signal distributions
(e.g., natural images). Hence, DDMs are commonly leveraged to facilitate a variety of downstream tasks, such as
text-to-image synthesis (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022), editing (Meng et al., 2022;
Huberman-Spiegelglas et al., 2024), compression (Theis
et al., 2022; Elata et al., 2024; Körber et al., 2024), and
restoration (Kawar et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2023). Common to many of these applications is the reliance on iterative
sampling from a continuous Gaussian distribution, yielding
an unbounded representation space.

We present a novel generative approach based on
Denoising Diffusion Models (DDMs), which produces high-quality image samples along with their
losslessly compressed bit-stream representations.
This is obtained by replacing the standard Gaussian noise sampling in the reverse diffusion with a
selection of noise samples from pre-defined codebooks of fixed iid Gaussian vectors. Surprisingly,
we find that our method, termed Denoising Diffusion Codebook Model (DDCM), retains sample
quality and diversity of standard DDMs, even for
extremely small codebooks. We leverage DDCM
and pick the noises from the codebooks that best
match a given image, converting our generative
model into a highly effective lossy image codec
achieving state-of-the-art perceptual image compression results. More generally, by setting other
noise selections rules, we extend our compression method to any conditional image generation
task (e.g., image restoration), where the generated images are produced jointly with their condensed bit-stream representations. Our work is
accompanied by a mathematical interpretation of
the proposed compressed conditional generation
schemes, establishing a connection with scorebased approximations of posterior samplers for
the tasks considered. Code and demo are available
on our project’s website.

This work embarks on the hypothesis that such an infinite representation space is highly redundant. For example,
consider any stochastic diffusion generative process with
T = 1000 sampling steps (e.g., DDPM (Ho et al., 2020)).
Suppose that at each timestep, the generative process is
restricted to choosing between only two fixed noise realizations. Sampling could then lead to 21000 different outputs,
an incredibly large number exceeding the estimated amount
of atoms in the universe. Thus, in principle, such a process
could cover the distribution of natural images densely.
We harness this intuition and propose Denoising Diffusion Codebook Models (DDCM), a novel DDM generation scheme for continuous signals, leveraging a discrete
and finite representation space. In particular, we first construct a chain of codebooks, where each is a sequence of
pre-sampled Gaussian noise vectors. These codebooks are
constructed once and remain fixed for the entire lifetime of
the model. Then, during the generative process, we simply
randomly pick the noises from the codebooks instead of
drawing them from a Gaussian distribution, as shown in
Fig. 2. Since we alter only the sampling process, DDCM
can be applied using any pre-trained DDM. Interestingly,
we find that our proposed discrete and finite representation
space is indeed expressive enough to retain the generative
capabilities of standard DDMs, even when using incredibly
small codebooks. Since our generative process is entirely
governed by the noise indices picked during the generation,
an important consequence is that every generated image can
be perfectly reconstructed by repeating the process with its
corresponding indices.

1. Introduction
Denoising Diffusion Models (DDMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020) have emerged as an effective tool
*
Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Faculty
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to: Guy Ohayon <guyoep@gmail.com>, Hila Manor
<hila.manor@campus.technion.ac.il>.

We leverage this property to solve a variety of tasks, using
gradient-free noise selection rules to guide the DDCM gener-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

