The Generalized Skew Spectrum of Graphs

Armando Bellante 1 2 3 Martin Plávala 4 5 Alessandro Luongo 6 7
3

Abstract

1
3

4
0
This paper proposes a family of permutation5
invariant graph embeddings, generalizing the
4
2
5
Skew Spectrum of graphs of Kondor & Borg1
wardt (2008). Grounded in group theory and
0
2
harmonic analysis, our method introduces a new
maps a graph to a vector.
(a) G1.
(b) G2.
class of graphEmbedding:
invariantsa function
that aref that
isomorphism10
8
invariant and capable of embedding richer graph
12 14
structures - including attributed graphs, multilayer
5 4
6 0
1
graphs, and hypergraphs - which the Skew SpecG3
11
trum could not handle. Our generalization further
3
13
G1, G2
2
defines a family of functions that enables a trade7
9
off between computational complexity and exc) G3.
d) Embedding.
a) G1.
b) G2.
(c) G3.
(d) Embedding in R2 .
pressivity. By applying generalization-preserving
Permutation
invariance:
G1 and G2
permutational equivalent ⟹ f(G1) = f(G2)
heuristics to this
family, we
improve
the Skew
⟹ f(G
f(G2)
Completeness: at
notthe
(G1 and
G2 computapermutational equivalent)
Figure
1. 1) ≠
Three
graphs and a permutation-invariant embedding.
Spectrum’s expressivity
same
tional cost. We formally prove the invariance
Can we its
design a
permutation-invariant embedding that handles complex graph structures?
of our generalization, demonstrate
improved
adjacency
matrices, are highly sensitive to the conconsiders nodesuch
labels,asnode
features, multi-graphs
expressiveness through experiments, and e.g.,
discuss
ventional node numbering used when acquiring the graph
its efficient computation.
5
The Multi-Orbits Skew Spectrum: Boosting Permutation-Invariant Data Representations
Learning
Graphs Conference
2022
data. For instance, graphs G1 and G2
in on
Figure
1 are isomorphic, but their different node numbering would yield distinct
adjacency matrices. Graph representations that are sensitive
to initial node numbering make learning on graphs a harder
1. Introduction
task, similarly to how rotation- and translation-sensitive repGraph-structured data is ubiquitous across domains, from
resentations make learning on images challenging. This
molecular structures in chemistry (Kosmala et al., 2023)
motivates the need for permutation-invariant graph embedto social networks in computational social science (Netdings, also known as graph invariants.
tleton, 2013), or fraud detection in banking (Pourhabibi
A permutation-invariant embedding is a mapping that repet al., 2020). However, developing adequate graphs repreresents graphs as vectors while ensuring that isomorphic
sentations remains a fundamental challenge in graph analgraphs are assigned the same vector. The expressivity, or
ysis (Hamilton, 2020). Traditional graph representations,
completeness, of such an embedding is determined by its
1
Max-Planck-Institut für Quantenoptik, Hans-Kopfermann-Str.
ability to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs. An embedding
1, 85748 Garching, Germany 2 Munich Center for Quantum Sciis complete if it maps all non-isomorphic graphs to different
ence and Technology (MCQST), Schellingstr. 4, 80799 München,
vectors.
However, as of today, achieving both computational
3
Germany Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegefficiency and completeness requires a trade-off, as deterneria, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 4 Institute of Theoretical
Physics, Leibiniz Universität Hannover, Appelstraße 2, 30167
mining wether two graphs are isomorphic is a paramount
Hannover, Germany 5 Naturwissenschaftlich-Technische Fakultät,
example of an NP-intermediate problem (Babai, 2016).
6

An unsupervised permutation-invariant embedding

Universität Siegen, Siegen, Germany Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore 7 Inveriant
Pte. Ltd., Singapore. Correspondence to: Armando Bellante <armando.bellante@polimi.it>.

Various approaches have been proposed to construct graph
invariants, and the challenge has gained renewed importance
with the rise of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli
et al., 2008) and their applications across scientific disciplines (Corso et al., 2024). Modern methods primarily rely
on message-passing neural networks (Gilmer et al., 2017)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

