Kinetic Langevin Diffusion for Crystalline Materials Generation

Arghya Bhowmik

1

François Cornet * 1 Federico Bergamin * 1 2
Juan Maria Garcia Lastra 1 Jes Frellsen 1 2 Mikkel N. Schmidt 1 2
search the space for feasible materials and to accurately
estimate their properties. Conventional approaches usually
combine random structure search methods with ab-initio
Quantum Mechanics (QM) methods (Oganov et al., 2019),
such as Density Functional Theory (DFT) (Kohn & Sham,
1965); however, structural optimization and property evaluation with DFT can be computationally expensive. Recently,
the field has witnessed a paradigm shift where deep generative models have been introduced to supplement traditional
search methods (Anstine & Isayev, 2023), such as random
search (Pickard & Needs, 2011) or evolutionary algorithms
(Glass et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2010). Deep generative models learn to approximate underlying probability distributions
from existing material data, and in turn, can be sampled
from to generate novel materials based on the learned patterns.

Abstract
Generative modeling of crystalline materials using diffusion models presents a series of challenges: the data distribution is characterized by inherent symmetries and involves multiple modalities, with some defined on specific manifolds. Notably, the treatment of fractional coordinates representing atomic positions in the unit cell requires
careful consideration, as they lie on a hypertorus.
In this work, we introduce Kinetic Langevin Diffusion for Materials (KLDM), a novel diffusion
model for crystalline materials generation, where
the key innovation resides in the modeling of the
coordinates. Instead of resorting to Riemannian
diffusion on the hypertorus directly, we generalize
Trivialized Diffusion Model (TDM) to account for
the symmetries inherent to crystals. By coupling
coordinates with auxiliary Euclidean variables
representing velocities, the diffusion process is
now offset to a flat space. This allows us to effectively perform diffusion on the hypertorus while
providing a training objective that accounts for
the periodic translation symmetry of the true data
distribution. We evaluate KLDM on both Crystal
Structure Prediction (CSP) and De-novo Generation (DNG) tasks, demonstrating its competitive
performance with current state-of-the-art models.

Among deep generative models, diffusion models have been
successful on a variety of data modalities relevant to the
sciences, ranging from Partial Differential Equations (PDE)
simulations (Lippe et al., 2023; Rozet & Louppe, 2023;
Shysheya et al., 2024) to molecule generation (Hoogeboom
et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023; Cornet et al., 2024). Unlike
molecules, crystalline materials consist of a periodic arrangement of atoms, typically described by a unit cell, a
parallelepiped that serves as the fundamental building block
repeated to tile the entire space. A unit cell is typically represented by three vectors that define its edges and the angles
between them, along with the coordinates and species of
the atoms inside it. It can be considered as a multi-modal
data type, specifically a geometric graph combining discrete
and continuous features (Joshi et al., 2023). Notably, the
atomic positions are described by coordinates that lie on
a hypertorus. Dealing with non-Euclidean data in the diffusion setting requires careful consideration: for example,
restricting Brownian motion to a manifold requires incorporating its geometric structure to ensure trajectories remain
on the manifold, typically using projection or specialized
approximations (Lou et al., 2023). Current diffusion models for crystals either handle this by working in real space,
through multi-graph representations (Xie et al., 2022), or on
fractional coordinates (Jiao et al., 2023). In addition to this,
the data distribution is governed by inherent symmetries,
including permutation invariance (swapping atom indices

1. Introduction
The discovery of novel compounds with desired properties is
critical to several scientific fields, such as molecular discovery (Bilodeau et al., 2022) and materials design (Merchant
et al., 2023; Zeni et al., 2025). In the case of crystalline
materials, the search space is vast, but only a fraction of it is
physically plausible. The main challenges are to efficiently
*
Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 2 Pioneer Center for Artificial Intelligence,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: François Cornet
<frjc@dtu.dk>, Federico Bergamin <fedbe@dtu.dk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

