QuEst: Enhancing Estimates of Quantile-Based Distributional Measures
Using Model Predictions

Zhun Deng * 1 Thomas Zollo * 2 Benjamin Eyre * 2 Amogh Inamdar 2 David Madras 3 Richard Zemel 2

Abstract
As machine learning models grow increasingly
competent, their predictions can supplement
scarce or expensive data in various important domains. In support of this paradigm, algorithms
have emerged to combine a small amount of highfidelity observed data with a much larger set of
imputed model outputs to estimate some quantity of interest. Yet current hybrid-inference tools
target only means or single quantiles, limiting
their applicability for many critical domains and
use cases. We present QuEst, a principled framework to merge observed and imputed data to deliver point estimates and rigorous confidence intervals for a wide family of quantile-based distributional measures. QuEst covers a range of
measures, from tail risk (CVaR) to population
segments such as quartiles, that are central to
fields such as economics, sociology, education,
medicine, and more. We extend QuEst to multidimensional metrics, and introduce an additional
optimization technique to further reduce variance
in this and other hybrid estimators. We demonstrate the utility of our framework through experiments in economic modeling, opinion polling,
and language model auto-evaluation.

Figure 1. Small gold-standard (observed) datasets may be noisy,
while model-predicted (imputed) data are often biased. QuEst
combines both to rigorously characterize various distributional
measures, such as the wealth of the top and bottom 25% of households in a developing nation.

since they often exhibit biases or misalignment with user objectives. Instead, a promising approach leverages both small,
expensive observed datasets (i.e., true measurements) and
large imputed datasets (i.e., model-predicted values), in order to improve the estimation of important quantities across
various critical domains (Angelopoulos et al., 2023). This
paradigm can be applied, for example, to improve the measurements generated by experiments in biology (Angelopoulos et al., 2023) or environmental science (Angelopoulos
et al., 2024), or to enhance evaluation reliability in the large
language model (LLM) development cycle (Boyeau et al.,
2024; Eyre & Madras, 2024). A range of existing methods (Angelopoulos et al., 2023; 2024; Fisch et al., 2024;
Hofer et al., 2024) can produce valid confidence intervals
for quantities such as a mean, quantile, or linear regression
coefficient in this hybrid manner, without any knowledge of
the model that produced the predictions.

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) models grow increasingly competent, their predictions are being used to simulate or otherwise represent diverse phenomena across economics (Horton, 2023), politics (Argyle et al., 2023a), genetics (Jumper
et al., 2021), and other fields, especially when such data is
scarce or expensive to gather. Despite their convenience,
these predictions cannot be trusted as perfect surrogates,

Despite their utility, existing frameworks ultimately focus
on a narrow set of quantities, leaving other important aspects of a distribution unaddressed. In applications with
societal or high-stakes implications—ranging from wealth
disparity assessments to identifying the most harmful outputs of LLMs—understanding the tails or other segments
of a distribution can be crucial (Snell et al., 2022; Deng
et al., 2024; Zollo et al., 2023). For instance, policy-makers

1
UNC at Chapel Hill 2 Columbia University 3 Google Deepmind.
Correspondence to: Zhun Deng <first1.last1@xxx.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

