The Importance of Being Lazy: Scaling Limits of Continual Learning

Jacopo Graldi * 1 Alessandro Breccia * 2 Giulia Lanzillotta 3 4 Thomas Hofmann 3 Lorenzo Noci 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modern neural networks (NNs) have achieved impressive results on many hard benchmarks, recently beating all expectations with the introduction of large autoregressive language
models (OpenAI, 2023). However, the learning algorithms
in use are only applicable to stationary data distributions. In
particular, these algorithms fail to retain knowledge when
learning new skills, a phenomenon termed Catastrophic
Forgetting (CF) (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989) in the literature. Arguably, the design of algorithms which can adapt
to changes in the environment is a crucial step towards the
development of more widely applicable, trustworthy, and
scalable AI systems (Wang et al., 2024). Continual learning
(CL) (e.g. Ring, 1994; Thrun & Mitchell, 1995; Silver et al.,
2013; Parisi et al., 2019; Hadsell et al., 2020; Lesort et al.,
2020) directly aims at devising algorithms which allow the
model to learn under distribution shifts. This entails two
requirements: knowledge adaptation – also called plasticity
– and knowledge retention – stability. For NNs these objectives are inherently conflicting, creating an unavoidable
tradeoff, often called the stability-plasticity dilemma. Various studies have investigated the causes of CF in artificial
neural networks. However, theoretical models of CF have
only been established in simplified settings, e.g., by assuming fixed features during training (Bennani et al., 2020; Doan
et al., 2021; Evron et al., 2022; Goldfarb & Hand, 2023;
Lin et al., 2023; Goldfarb et al., 2024). At the same time,
empirical studies have significantly contributed to the understanding of CF in modern deep networks used in practice
(Mirzadeh et al., 2020; 2021; 2022a; Ramasesh et al., 2020;
2022). Among these, multiple recent works have focused
on the role of scale and overparameterization in continual
learning, producing different if not contradictory answers
(Ramasesh et al., 2022; Mirzadeh et al., 2022a;b; Goldfarb
& Hand, 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Wenger et al., 2023) – as
elaborated below in Section 2. In particular, the question
of whether scaling alone can ameliorate forgetting is still
open.

Despite recent efforts, neural networks still struggle to learn in non-stationary environments, and
our understanding of catastrophic forgetting (CF)
is far from complete. In this work, we perform a
systematic study on the impact of model scale and
the degree of feature learning in continual learning. We reconcile existing contradictory observations on scale in the literature, by differentiating
between lazy and rich training regimes through a
variable parameterization of the architecture. We
show that increasing model width is only beneficial when it reduces the amount of feature learning, yielding more laziness. Using the framework
of dynamical mean field theory, we then study the
infinite width dynamics of the model in the feature
learning regime and characterize CF, extending
prior theoretical results limited to the lazy regime.
We study the intricate relationship between feature learning, task non-stationarity, and forgetting,
finding that high feature learning is only beneficial with highly similar tasks. We identify a
transition modulated by task similarity where the
model exits an effectively lazy regime with low
forgetting to enter a rich regime with significant
forgetting. Finally, our findings reveal that neural
networks achieve optimal performance at a critical level of feature learning, which depends on
task non-stationarity and transfers across model
scales. This work provides a unified perspective
on the role of scale and feature learning in continual learning.

*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 Dept. of Physics
and Astronomy, University of Padua, Italy 3 Dept. of Computer
Science, ETH Zurich 4 ETH AI Center. Correspondence to: <jacopograldi@gmail.com>.

A separate thread of literature has studied the so-called
scaling limits of neural networks, where the network dimensions (i.e., width and depth) are taken to infinity (Neal,
1996). Depending on the parameterization used – see formal
definition in Sec. 3 – the network exhibits fundamentally
different training dynamics. More specifically, in one ex-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

