Robust ML Auditing using Prior Knowledge

Jade Garcia Bourrée * 1 2 3 Augustin Godinot * 1 2 3 4 Sayan Biswas 5 Anne-Marie Kermarrec 5
Erwan Le Merrer 2 Gilles Tredan 6 Martijn de Vos 5 Milos Vujasinovic 5

Abstract

(West, 2000). Given the far-reaching consequences of these
applications, ensuring the fairness (Mehrabi et al., 2021)
and regulatory compliance (Petersen et al., 2022) of such
models is paramount.

Among the many technical challenges to enforcing AI regulations, one crucial yet underexplored
problem is the risk of audit manipulation. This
manipulation occurs when a platform deliberately
alters its answers to a regulator to pass an audit without modifying its answers to other users.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to
manipulation-proof auditing by taking into account the auditor’s prior knowledge of the task
solved by the platform. We first demonstrate that
regulators must not rely on public priors (e.g., a
public dataset), as platforms could easily fool the
auditor in such cases. We then formally establish
the conditions under which an auditor can prevent audit manipulations using prior knowledge
about the ground truth. Finally, our experiments
with two standard datasets illustrate the maximum
level of unfairness a platform can hide before
being detected as malicious. Our formalization
and generalization of manipulation-proof auditing
with a prior opens up new research directions for
more robust fairness audits.

Independent fairness audits serve as a critical tool for assessing the fairness of ML models and ensure that model
providers remain accountable to the public (Birhane et al.,
2024; Raji, 2024; Raji et al., 2022). As models are placed in
production, auditors rely on black-box interactions, where
queries are sent to the model, and the responses are analyzed
to identify potential fairness violations (e.g., see (Kim et al.,
2019)). However, this reliance on black-box audits leaves
the process vulnerable to manipulations by the platform,
also known as fairwashing. Regulatory practices currently
require auditors to notify platforms in advance of an audit. Platforms can thus strategically alter the model or its
responses during the audit to create the appearance of fairness, effectively concealing underlying biases and unfair
practices from the auditor while maintaining operational efficiency for its users. Consider, for example, a social media
platform that employs an ML model to moderate content,
automatically removing posts deemed harmful or misleading. During a fairness audit, the platform could deploy a
more lenient moderation model that appears unbiased, only
to revert to a stricter, potentially biased version once the
audit concludes, effectively concealing unfair treatment of
certain user groups.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are becoming central to numerous businesses, industrial processes, and administrations.
Such models are being employed in high-stakes domains
where ML-driven decisions can have profound impacts on
individuals and communities (Rudin, 2019).

In fact, such discrepancies between a platform’s behavior
during audits and its real-world operations have been observed. Initially created as part of the Social Science One
project, a data sharing program by Meta encountered a major setback when consistency issues were discovered in
the data provided to scientists (Timberg, 2021). Similarly,
a collaboration between Meta and independent scientists,
studying the polarization effects of Facebook’s recommendation algorithm, recently faced criticism over discrepancies
found between the algorithm’s behavior before and during
the audit (Ribeiro, 2024). Academic studies show that fairness audits are easily manipulatable, whether the platform
is required to prove its fairness through the release of a
public dataset (Fukuchi et al., 2020), through the explanation of decisions (Aı̈vodji et al., 2021; Shamsabadi et al.,
2022; Le Merrer & Trédan, 2020; Aı̈vodji et al., 2019), or

For instance, financial institutions have been leveraging
ML-driven systems to evaluate loan applications based on
attributes like income, credit score, and employment history
*
Equal contribution 1 Université de Rennes, Rennes, France
Inria, Rennes, France 3 IRISA/CNRS, Rennes, France 4 PEReN,
Paris, France 5 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 6 LAAS, CNRS,
Toulouse, France. Correspondence to: Augustin Godinot <augustin.godinot@inria.fr>, Jade Garcia Bourrée <jade.garciabourree@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

