LGDM: Latent Guidance in Diffusion Models for Perceptual Evaluations

Shreshth Saini 1 Ru-Ling Liao 2 Yan Ye 2 Alan C. Bovik 1

Abstract
Despite recent advancements in latent diffusion
models that generate high-dimensional image data
and perform various downstream tasks, there has
been little exploration into perceptual consistency
within these models on the task of No-Reference
Image Quality Assessment (NR-IQA). In this paper, we hypothesize that latent diffusion models
implicitly exhibit perceptually consistent local regions within the data manifold. We leverage this
insight to guide on-manifold sampling using perceptual features and input measurements. Specifically, we propose Perceptual Manifold Guidance
(PMG), an algorithm that utilizes pretrained latent
diffusion models and perceptual quality features
to obtain perceptually consistent multi-scale and
multi-timestep feature maps from the denoising UNet. We empirically demonstrate that these hyperfeatures exhibit high correlation with human perception in IQA tasks. Our method can be applied
to any existing pretrained latent diffusion model
and is straightforward to integrate. To the best of
our knowledge, this paper is the first work on guiding diffusion model with perceptual features for
NR-IQA. Extensive experiments on IQA datasets
show that our method, LGDM, achieves state-ofthe-art performance, underscoring the superior
generalization capabilities of diffusion models for
NR-IQA tasks.

1

Figure 1: An overview of our proposed approach: (a) shows
the transition of latent samples across latent manifolds, highlighting the steps of DDIM and our PMG. (b) depicts the
content bias (green) on the manifold M0 ≈ D(Z0 ), showing that the guidance term in red (PMG) pushes a data
′
sample (x′0|t ∼ D(z0|t
)) towards the perceptually consistent
region (yellow) on the manifold. Here D is decoder of VAE.

2019; Song et al., 2021b; Zhang et al., 2023a). Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs), which embed data into a compressed
latent space, enhance computational efficiency (Rombach
et al., 2022). Diffusion models provide strong data priors
that effectively capture the intricacies of high-dimensional
data distributions, making them powerful for generative
tasks. Conditional generation using posterior sampling has
become crucial for solving various real-world low-level vision problems (Kawar et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2024; Rout
et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024). Additionally, several methods leverage the rich internal representations of diffusion
models by extracting either hand-selected single or subsets
of features from a denoising U-Net for downstream tasks
(Tumanyan et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023;
Baranchuk et al., 2022). Despite these advancements in
addressing tasks like inverse problems, segmentation, and
semantic keypoint correspondence, there has been little exploration into perceptual consistency of diffusion models
for No-Reference Image Quality Assessment (NR-IQA).
NR-IQA aims to evaluate image quality in line with human
perception without a high-quality reference image (Wang &
Bovik, 2006). It plays a crucial role in optimizing parameters for image processing tasks, such as resizing, compression (Feng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023), and enhancement
(Hou et al., 2024; Fei et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024). Fig.
2 illustrate a diverse spectrum of distortions frequently en-

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models have advanced significantly
in recent years and have achieved remarkable success at synthesizing high-quality images across diverse scenes, views,
and lighting conditions (Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon,
*Work done during internship at Alibaba Group. 1 Laboratory
for Image and Video Engineering (LIVE), The University of Texas
at Austin, Texas, USA. 2 Alibaba Group, Sunnyvale, USA. Correspondence to: Shreshth Saini <saini.2@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

