Data-driven Design of Randomized Control Trials with Guaranteed Treatment
Effects
Santiago Cortes-Gomez 1 Naveen Raman 1 Aarti Singh 1 Bryan Wilder 1

Abstract

stage RCTs are often deployed alongside policy programs
in order to quantify the policy’s direct impact. Since underperforming arms are likely to be discontinued, precisely
quantifying their effect sizes at the cost of reducing the
statistical power for higher-quality treatments is not worthwhile. However, single-stage trials cannot allocate more
samples to high-performing arms to improve the estimate
precision.

Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) generate
guarantees for treatment effects. However, RCTs
often spend unnecessary resources exploring suboptimal treatments, which can reduce the power of
treatment guarantees. To address this, we propose
a two-stage RCT design. In the first stage, a datadriven screening procedure prunes low-impact
treatments, while the second stage focuses on developing high-probability lower bounds for the
best-performing treatment effect. Unlike existing
adaptive RCT frameworks, our method is simple enough to be implemented in scenarios with
limited adaptivity. We derive optimal designs
for two-stage RCTs and demonstrate how such
designs can be implemented through sample splitting. Empirically, we demonstrate that two-stage
designs improve upon single-stage approaches,
especially for scenarios where domain knowledge
is available through a prior. Our work is thus, a
simple yet effective design for RCTs, optimizing
for the ability to certify with high probability the
largest possible treatment effect for at least one of
the arms studied.

Motivated by these limitations, a growing body of work
has focused on adaptive trials, which periodically update
the probability of assigning units to each arm in order to
focus on more promising arms. While adaptive designs
can enhance statistical performance, their implementation
in practice can be challenging. First, treatment assignment
probabilities must be updated dynamically, potentially after each sample, which imposes significant logistical demands on practitioners conducting the trial. Furthermore,
high degrees of adaptivity may even be infeasible when
outcomes are delayed. For instance, in clinical trials for
chronic disease treatments, effect observations may occur
only after months or even years, making it impossible to repeatedly change assignment probabilities based on realized
outcomes.
In this work we question whether complex, adaptive designs
are needed for improved statistical performance. Instead, we
propose two-stage designs, which are deliberately simplified
yet still allow for enhanced statistical guarantees. In the first
stage, the experimenter uniformly explores arms and selects
a subset of arms to retain for the second stage. In the second
stage, the experimenter uniformly randomizes once more
over the arms that are retained and computes the highest
possible lower bound for one of the remaining treatments.
The goal is to return as large a lower bound as possible,
which requires both identifying arms with high rewards and
concentrating enough samples on these arms to quantify
(certify) its outcome accurately.

1. Introduction
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are the gold standard for measuring treatment effects (Hariton and Locascio,
2018). In a traditional single-stage RCT, the experimenter
fixes a set of treatments up front and randomizes the samples
across them using predetermined assignment probabilities.
While this design simplifies implementation and analysis, it
often spends significant samples exploring suboptimal arms.
Policy decisions on scaling or adopting programs often depend on proving sufficient effectiveness. To that end, single

We make three main contributions. First, we design a novel
two-stage algorithm with the goal of computing a high probability lower bound for a high performant treatment effect.
We theoretically analyze this algorithm’s performance and
prove that it approximates the optimal two-stage design.
Second, we extend our formulation to the scenario where

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Machine Learning,
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Santiago CortesGomez <scortesg@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

