Secant Line Search for Frank-Wolfe Algorithms

Deborah Hendrych * 1 2 Sebastian Pokutta * 1 2 Mathieu Besançon * 3 David Martínez-Rubio * 4

Abstract

subproblem’s function evaluations are available to us, which
corresponds to computing partial derivatives of f , making
the secant method (instead of the Newton-Raphson method)
the natural choice.

We present a new step-size strategy based on the
secant method for Frank-Wolfe algorithms. This
strategy, which requires mild assumptions about
the function under consideration, can be applied
to any Frank-Wolfe algorithm. It is as effective as
full line search and, in particular, allows for adapting to the local smoothness of the function, such
as in Pedregosa et al. (2020), but comes with a
significantly reduced computational cost, leading
to higher effective rates of convergence. We provide theoretical guarantees and demonstrate the
effectiveness of the strategy through numerical
experiments.

Related Work
There is an abundance of work on line search strategies for
optimization, as step-size rules can significantly impact the
performance of optimization algorithms, both computationally and in terms of convergence rates. Standard examples
of step-size strategies in unconstrained optimization include
backtracking and golden ratio search (see e.g., (Nocedal
& Wright, 1999)). A notable recent example is the Silver
Step-size Schedule (Altschuler & Parrilo, 2023; 2024a;b),
which achieves partial acceleration for smooth convex optimization via standard gradient descent. Here, we will only
provide a brief overview of the prior works most closely
related to ours.

1. Introduction
We are interested in solving constrained optimization problems of the form
(1.1)
min f (x)

The requirements for a step-size strategy are typically that it
should be (1) effective (making progress), (2) efficient (low
computational cost), and (3) adaptive (adapting to the local
smoothness of the function). As a bonus, the strategy should
be simple and robust so that it is easy to implement. While
achieving two out of the three requirements is relatively
easy, achieving all three is challenging. Recently, Malitsky & Mishchenko (2020; 2023) made significant progress
in this direction by providing an adaptive step-size strategy that does not perform line search, satisfying all three
requirements. This sparked a lot of interest, with alternative approaches (see e.g., Zhou et al. (2024) based on
the Barzilai-Borwein two-point step-size (Barzilai & Borwein, 1988)) being analyzed. These approaches estimate
the inverse of the local Lipschitz smoothness constant via
∥x−y∥
two points x, y as ∥∇f (x)−∇f
(y)∥ and then use this (with
modifications) as the step-size γt for an update of the form
xt+1 ← xt − γt ∇f (xt ). A close inspection reveals that
this is effectively a modified (higher-dimensional) secant
step. The resulting step-size strategy performs well computationally with great adaptivity to the function geometry.
Unfortunately, the approach comes with two caveats for the
setting we are interested in. First, it cannot be carried over
to the Frank-Wolfe setting as the analysis relies on the convergence of the iterates to the optimal point. This, however,
is not necessarily given for Frank-Wolfe algorithms (Bolte

x∈X

with a first-order method, relying only on gradient and function evaluations, where f is a smooth function and X is
a compact convex set onto which projection is potentially
expensive. In this case, variants of the Frank-Wolfe (FW)
algorithm (Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Levitin & Polyak, 1966)
are a popular choice. One operation required for most FW
variants is a choice of a step size to update the iterate xt
along a descent direction. We present a new line search
strategy based on the secant method for these algorithms.
To this end, we will solve for roots of the optimality system
of the line search problem. Together with the first-order
requirement of the main algorithm, this means that only
*
Equal contribution 1 Zuse Institute Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Berlin Institute of Technology, Berlin, Germany 3 Université
Grenoble Alpes, Inria, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Grenoble,
Grenoble, France 4 Signal Theory and Communications Department, Carlos III University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Correspondence to: Sebastian Pokutta <pokutta@zib.de>, Mathieu Besançon <mathieu.besancon@inria.fr>, David Martínez-Rubio <dmrubio@ing.uc3m.es>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

