The Courage to Stop: Overcoming Sunk Cost Fallacy
in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Jiashun Liu 1 Johan Obando-Ceron 2 3 Pablo Samuel Castro 2 3 Aaron Courville 2 3 Ling Pan 1

Abstract
Replay buffer

Off-policy deep reinforcement learning (RL) typically leverages replay buffers for reusing past experiences during learning. This can help improve
sample efficiency when the collected data is informative and aligned with the learning objectives;
when that is not the case, it can have the effect of
“polluting” the replay buffer with data which can
exacerbate optimization challenges in addition to
wasting environment interactions due to wasteful
sampling. We argue that sampling these uninformative and wasteful transitions can be avoided by
addressing the sunk cost fallacy which, in the context of deep RL, is the tendency towards continuing an episode until termination. To address this,
we propose learn to stop (LEAST), a lightweight
mechanism that enables strategic early episode termination based on Q-value and gradient statistics,
which helps agents recognize when to terminate
unproductive episodes early. We demonstrate that
our method improves learning efficiency on a variety of RL algorithms, evaluated on both the MuJoCo and DeepMind Control Suite benchmarks.

𝑠!

𝑠"

Avoid
p

𝑠#

olluti

Bad state
detected, stop!

on

…

Dead

𝑠$

Current episode

Roll out
Environment
new episode

𝑠!!

𝑠"!

𝑠#!

…
Save
Interaction

Reset

Goal

…

𝑠$ !

…

Figure 1. LEAST enables the agent to prematurely end the current
episode by monitoring the quality of present situations, such as
getting stuck in a suboptimal trajectory. This mechanism improves
sample efficiency, reduces replay buffer contamination, and conserves the overall interaction budget.

processes. A simple example of this is watching a bad movie
until the end because we have already paid for a movie ticket,
thereby wasting our time and energy that could have been
devoted elsewhere. In this work, we argue that this fallacy
is inherent in traditional deep reinforcement learning (deep
RL) frameworks, where enforced episode completion hinders agents from making strategic stopping decisions (Pardo
et al., 2018). It gives the impression that the RL agent is fixated on the interaction costs already incurred, which limits
its subsequent learning capability and sample efficiency.

“People are reluctant to waste prior investments, even when
continuing guarantees further loss.”
– Halr Arkes

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Mila Québec AI Institute 3 Université de Montréal. Correspondence to:
Ling Pan <lingpan@ust.hk>.

Specifically, the design limitations of traditional RL, i.e.,
lacking key mechanisms for autonomous stopping decisions,
can limit agents to repeatedly traverse low-quality (suboptimal) trajectories similar (uninformative) to those they
have encountered several times before. Although utilizing
experience replay buffers can improve sample efficiency
for off-policy deep RL (Fedus et al., 2020), the accumulation of such experiences, particularly during early training stages, can require parameter-sensitive sampling methods (Schaul, 2015) to prevent overfitting to uninformative
experiences (Nikishin et al., 2022).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Furthermore, this constrained decision space and restricted
decision flexibility fail to optimize the environmental interaction budget (Yin et al., 2023). To address the aforemen-

1. Introduction
The sunk cost fallacy refers to a behavioral pattern where
agents continue along a current course of action despite
recognizing its suboptimality, rather than stop acting if they
have already devoted a certain amount of effort towards
it (Arkes & Blumer, 1985; Sweis et al., 2018). This cognitive bias often leads to inefficiencies in decision-making
1

1

