Position: AI Agents Need Authenticated Delegation

Tobin South 1 Samuele Marro 2 Thomas Hardjono 1 Robert Mahari 1 3 Cedric Deslandes Whitney 4
Alan Chan 5 Alex Pentland 1 6

Abstract

the precise scope of that delegation.
Agentic AI systems (or ‘agents’) are useful for their ability
to interact with other actors on a user’s behalf and accomplish complex tasks autonomously, including by interacting
with a variety of external digital tools and services (Nakano
et al., 2021; Lieberman, 1997; Fourney et al., 2024). For example, AI agents prompted to book travel arrangements for
a holiday may browse the web for recommendations, search
for flights via APIs, or message an airline agent in natural language via chat services to arrange a booking. Such
communications could even extend to AI agent negotiations
(Abdelnabi et al., 2023) and other multi-agent contexts.

The rapid deployment of autonomous AI agents
creates urgent challenges in the areas of authorization, accountability, and access control in task
delegation. This position paper argues that authenticated and auditable delegation of authority
to AI agents is a critical component of mitigating
practical risks and unlocking the value of agents.
To support this argument, we examine how existing web authentication and authorization protocols, as well as natural language interfaces to
common access control mechanisms, can be extended to enable secure authenticated delegation
of authority to AI agents. By extending OAuth 2.0
and OpenID Connect with agent-specific credentials and using transparent translation of natural
language permissions into robust scoping rules
across diverse interaction modalities, we outline
how authenticated delegation can be achieved to
enable clear chains of accountability while maintaining compatibility with established authentication and web infrastructure for immediate compatibility. This work contributes to ensuring that
agentic AI systems perform only appropriate actions. It argues for prioritizing delegation infrastructure as a key component of AI agent governance and provides a roadmap for achieving this.

Many risks exist for AI agents, including challenges from
prompt injection attacks (Perez & Ribeiro, 2022; Liu et al.,
2023), risks to contextual confidence (Jain et al., 2023), risks
from not communicating properties of AI agents to third
parties (Chan et al., 2024a), unreliability of distinguishing
humans online (Adler et al., 2024), challenges with human
in the loop (European Commission, 2021; Gabriel et al.,
2024), and other challenges arising from incomplete governance and transparency (Shavit et al., 2023; Reuel et al.,
2024; South et al., 2023). To address these, the world needs
ways to explicitly delegate authority to agents, transparently
identify those agents as AI, and enforce human-centered
choices around security and permission for these agents.
This work has three key contributions. First, section 2 builds
upon the existing literature to argue why authenticated
delegation is important for AI agents and what risks it
could mitigate. Second, section 3 directly addresses this
need, outlining how to extend existing authentication and
authorization protocols to enable authenticated delegation for AI agents, examining the role OpenID Connect
and OAuth 2.0 could play in enabling a pragmatic, robust,
and extensible implementation. Third, section 4 explores
the role of agentic access control and outlines a method
for expressing flexible, natural language permissions for
agents and transforming them into auditable, fine-grained
access control rules, that can operate across agent modalities
(e.g., web requests, computer use, or language interfaces).
Further, this work provides example use cases of the framework in Appendix E and a legal analysis of the implications
of this work in Subsection 5.3.

1. Introduction
This position paper argues that when AI agents interact
with third parties—such as digital services, other AI
agents, or humans—those parties must be able to verify
both the principal delegating authority to the agent and
1
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK 3 Harvard Law School, Cambridge,
MA, USA 4 University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, California,
USA 5 Centre for the Governance of AI, Oxford, UK 6 Stanford
University, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Tobin South
<tsouth@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

