Audio Flamingo 2: An Audio-Language Model with Long-Audio
Understanding and Expert Reasoning Abilities

Sreyan Ghosh * 1 2 Zhifeng Kong 1 Sonal Kumar 2 S Sakshi 2 Jaehyeon Kim 1 Wei Ping 1 Rafael Valle 1
Dinesh Manocha 2 Bryan Catanzaro 1
Project: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/adlr/AF2/

Abstract

AudioFlamingo 2
Previous SOTA

Audio Entailment
AudioCaps

Medley-Solos DB

Understanding and reasoning over non-speech
sounds and music are crucial for both humans
and AI agents to interact effectively with their
environments. In this paper, we introduce Audio
Flamingo 2 (AF2), an Audio-Language Model
(ALM) with advanced audio understanding and
reasoning capabilities. AF2 leverages (i) a custom CLAP model, (ii) synthetic Audio QA data
for fine-grained audio reasoning, and (iii) a multistage curriculum learning strategy. AF2 achieves
state-of-the-art performance with only a 3B parameter small language model, surpassing large
open-source and proprietary models across over
20 benchmarks. Next, for the first time, we extend audio understanding to long audio segments
(30 secs to 5 mins) and propose LongAudio, a
large and novel dataset for training ALMs on
long audio captioning and question-answering
tasks. Fine-tuning AF2 on LongAudio leads to
exceptional performance on our proposed LongAudioBench, an expert-annotated benchmark
for evaluating ALMs on long audio understanding capabilities. We conduct extensive ablation
studies to confirm the efficacy of our approach.

Audio Entailment
Clotho

MMAU
Music

MMAU
Sound

ClothoAQA

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

MuchoMusic

AudioCaps

CREMA-D

CompA-R-test

OpenAQA
LongAudioBench
(ours)

Figure 1: Audio Flamingo 2 versus previous SOTA ALMs on audio understanding and reasoning benchmarks (values normalized).
AF2 outperforms all baselines and has smaller model footprints.

impaired. While Large Language Models (LLMs) have
demonstrated remarkable reasoning capabilities through language, extending these systems to comprehend audio is
key to building intelligent systems capable of reasoning
with contextual auditory cues (Kong et al., 2024). Verbal
speech, inherently tied to language, benefits significantly
from (L)LM advancements (Watanabe et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2024a); however, the potential to enhance perception
and reasoning over non-verbal audio remains largely underexplored (Ghosh et al., 2024c). Audio-Language Models
(ALMs) extend language models with audio understanding capabilities. Contrastive Language-Audio Pre-training
(CLAP) (Elizalde et al., 2023a) was among the first encoderonly ALMs to bridge audio and language with contrastive
learning. Building on this, subsequent efforts introduced
Large ALMs (LALMs), which integrate audio encoders
with pre-trained decoder-based LLMs, enabling open-ended
Audio Question Answering (AQA) and free-form response
generation (Gong et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2024; Ghosh et al.,
2024c). However, despite these developments, even the
most advanced LALMs continue to underperform on expertlevel reasoning tasks compared to foundational tasks like

1. Introduction
Understanding non-speech sounds, non-verbal speech, and
music (collectively referred to as “audio” in this paper)
is essential for real-world applications such as detecting
anomalies in industrial environments, recognizing emotional cues, and improving assistive technologies for the
*
Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. 1 NVIDIA, Santa
Clara, CA, USA 2 University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
Correspondence to: Sreyan Ghosh <sreyang@umd.edu>, Zhifeng
Kong <zkong@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

