CUPS: Improving Human Pose-Shape Estimators
with Conformalized Deep Uncertainty

Harry Zhang 1 Luca Carlone 1

Abstract
We introduce CUPS, a novel method for learning sequence-to-sequence 3D human shapes and
poses from RGB videos with uncertainty quantification. To improve on top of prior work, we
develop a method to generate and score multiple hypotheses during training, effectively integrating uncertainty quantification into the learning process. This process results in a deep uncertainty function that is trained end-to-end with
the 3D pose estimator. Post-training, the learned
deep uncertainty model is used as the conformity
score, which can be used to calibrate a conformal predictor in order to assess the quality of
the output prediction. Since the data in human
pose-shape learning is not fully exchangeable,
we also present two practical bounds for the coverage gap in conformal prediction, developing
theoretical backing for the uncertainty bound of
our model. Our results indicate that by taking
advantage of deep uncertainty with conformal
prediction, our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance across various metrics and datasets
while inheriting the guarantees of conformal prediction. 3D visualization, code, and data will be
available at this website.

Input

Single Prediction

Set Prediction

Figure 1: CUPS sample results obtained on in-the-wild videos.
Given RGB frames, CUPS reconstructs a sequence of 3D meshes,
and then a conformal predictor calibrated using a deep uncertainty function —trained end-to-end with the human pose-shape
estimator— quantifies the uncertainty of the output SMPL.

parametrized human models, such as SMPL (Kanazawa
et al., 2018), which represent human body shape and pose
with well-defined joint and structure parameters, made it
possible for modern deep learning models to efficiently
learn to predict human poses and shapes in a systematic
way by directly regressing SMPL parameters from video
inputs. At the same time, safety-critical applications, including robotics and autonomous vehicles, demand computer vision algorithms that are able to quantify the uncertainty in their estimates and possibly provide performance
guarantees (Yang & Pavone, 2023).

1. Introduction
Recovering a sequence of human meshes (i.e., shapes and
poses) from a monocular video is a fundamental challenge with wide-ranging applications in computer vision,
robotics, AR/VR, and computer graphics. Such technology has the potential to minimize reliance on traditional
motion capture systems or labor-intensive 3D annotations,
facilitating the generation of human motion templates for
tasks such as animating 3D avatars. The emergence of
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Harry Zhang <harryz@mit.edu>.

Few existing works in human reconstruction have explored
the direction of uncertainty-aware human pose and shape
prediction due to two challenges. First, it is difficult
to ensure the predicted pose and shape are close to the
groundtruth under out-of-distribution data or heavy occlu-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

