Pareto-Optimality, Smoothness, and Stochasticity in Learning-Augmented
One-Max-Search
Ziyad Benomar * 1 2 Lorenzo Croissant * 1 2 Vianney Perchet 1 2 3 Spyros Angelopoulos 4
growth in recent years, starting with the seminal works (Lykouris & Vassilvtiskii, 2018) and (Purohit et al., 2018), particularly in online decision making. In this class of problems,
the input is a sequence of items, which are revealed one
by one, with the algorithm making an irrevocable decision
on each. Here, the prediction oracle provides some inherently imperfect information on the input items, which the
algorithm must be able to leverage in a judicious manner.

Abstract
One-max search is a classic problem in online
decision-making, in which a trader acts on a sequence of revealed prices and accepts one of them
irrevocably to maximize its profit. The problem
has been studied both in probabilistic and in worstcase settings, notably through competitive analysis, and more recently in learning-augmented settings in which the trader has access to a prediction
on the sequence. However, existing approaches
either lack smoothness, or do not achieve optimal
worst-case guarantees: they do not attain the best
possible trade-off between the consistency and the
robustness of the algorithm. We close this gap by
presenting the first algorithm that simultaneously
achieves both of these important objectives. Furthermore, we show how to leverage the obtained
smoothness to provide an analysis of one-max
search in stochastic learning-augmented settings
which capture randomness in both the observed
prices and the prediction.

One of the most challenging aspects of learning-augmented
(online) algorithms is their theoretical evaluation. Unlike the
prediction-free setting, in which worst-case measures such
as the competitive ratio (Borodin & El-Yaniv, 2005) evaluate algorithms on a single metric, the analysis of learningaugmented settings is multifaceted and must incorporate
the effect of the prediction error to be meaningful. Typical
desiderata (Lykouris & Vassilvtiskii, 2018) include: an efficient performance if the prediction is accurate (consistency);
a performance that is not much worse than the competitive
ratio if the predictions are arbitrarily inaccurate (robustness);
and between these, a smooth decay of performance as the
prediction error grows (smoothness). This marks a significant departure from the worst-case, and overly pessimistic
competitive analysis, and allows for a much more nuanced
and beyond worst-case performance evaluation.

1. Introduction

Achieving all these objectives simultaneously is a challenging task, and is even impossible for certain problems (Elenter et al., 2024). To illustrate such challenges with an example, consider the one-max-search problem, which models a
simple, yet fundamental setting in financial trading. Here,
the input is a sequence of prices (pi )ni=1 ∈ [1, θ], where θ
is a known upper bound, and the online algorithm (i.e., the
trader) must decide, irrevocably, which price to accept.

Recent and rapid advances in machine learning have provided the ability to learn complex patterns in data and time
series. These advancements have given rise to a new computational paradigm, in which the algorithm designer has the
capacity to incorporate a prediction oracle in the design, the
theoretical analysis, and the empirical evaluation of an algorithm. The field of learning-augmented algorithms was born
out of this emerging requirement to leverage ML techniques
towards the development of more efficient algorithms.

Under standard competitive analysis, which compares the
algorithm’s accepted price to the maximum price p∗ :=
maxi pi on a worst-case instance, the problem admits a simple, yet optimal, algorithm (El-Yaniv, 1998). In contrast,
the learning-augmented setting, in which the algorithm has
access to a prediction of p∗ , is far more complex. Specifically, Sun et al. (2021) gave a Pareto-optimal algorithm,
i.e. one that achieves the best possible trade-off between
consistency and robustness. However, this algorithm lacks
smoothness, which results in brittleness. Namely, Benomar

Learning-augmented algorithms have witnessed remarkable
*

Equal contribution 1 CREST, ENSAE, Palaiseau, France
INRIA Fairplay joint team, Palaiseau, France 3 Criteo AI Lab,
Paris, France 4 CNRS and International Laboratory on Learning
Systems, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: Ziyad Benomar
<ziyad.benomar@ensae.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

