Towards Theoretical Understanding of
Sequential Decision Making with Preference Feedback

Simone Drago 1 Marco Mussi 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
The success of sequential decision-making approaches, such as reinforcement learning (RL), is
closely tied to the availability of a reward feedback. However, designing a reward function that
encodes the desired objective is a challenging
task. In this work, we address a more realistic
scenario: sequential decision making with preference feedback provided, for instance, by a human
expert. We aim to build a theoretical basis linking preferences, (non-Markovian) utilities, and
(Markovian) rewards, and we study the connections between them. First, we model preference
feedback using a partial (pre)order over trajectories, enabling the presence of incomparabilities
that are common when preferences are provided
by humans but are surprisingly overlooked in existing works. Second, to provide a theoretical
justification for a common practice, we investigate how a preference relation can be approximated by a multi-objective utility. We introduce a
notion of preference-utility compatibility and analyze the computational complexity of this transformation, showing that constructing the minimumdimensional utility is NP-hard. Third, we propose
a novel concept of preference-based policy dominance that does not rely on utilities or rewards and
discuss the computational complexity of assessing
it. Fourth, we develop a computationally efficient
algorithm to approximate a utility using (Markovian) rewards and quantify the error in terms of
the suboptimality of the optimal policy induced
by the approximating reward. This work aims to
lay the foundation for a principled approach to
sequential decision making from preference feedback, with promising potential applications in RL
from human feedback.

In the last decade, reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton
& Barto, 2018) has demonstrated great success tackling
sequential decision-making under uncertainty with notable results in industrial plant control (Nian et al., 2020),
robotics (Kober et al., 2013), clinical trials (Coronato
et al., 2020), autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021),
videogames (Mnih et al., 2015), and, more recently, language models (Du et al., 2023). In RL, the learning process
is guided by a numerical feedback (i.e., a reward function).
The reward is often defined informally as “the most succinct
description of a task” (Ng & Russell, 2000). More formally,
the power of a reward function is apparent since it allows,
under the Markovian property of the environment (Puterman, 2014), to approach the learning problem with desirable
computational (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Littman,
1995) and statistical (Azar et al., 2012) properties.
Nevertheless, the limits of learning with a reward are well
known. In the common practice, the reward function is
typically designed by a system expert who leverages their
domain knowledge to capture the intuitive notion of “solving
the task”. However, in many real-world scenarios, crafting
a reward function that appropriately encodes the desired
objective can be challenging. Indeed, rewards should go
beyond merely capturing the desired behavior to enhance
their generalizability, interpretability, and transferability to
new environments (Ng & Russell, 2000). Defining a reward,
often referred to as reward engineering (Dewey, 2014), is
typically a trial-and-error process involving successive refinements since the behavior learned by the agent can be
highly sensitive to misspecifications of the reward (Pan et al.,
2022). As such, the choice of the reward function has a critical impact on the success of the agent in learning how to
solve the task. Even accepting the availability of a reward
function, the community has recently questioned whether a
reward function is truly an appropriate mathematical tool to
encode the notion of a goal. The debate dates back twenty
years, when Sutton postulated that “all of what we mean by
goals and purposes can be well thought of as maximization
of the expected value of the cumulative sum of a received
scalar signal (reward)” (Sutton, 2004). More recently, this
hypothesis has been under investigation, although a defini-

1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Simone Drago <simone.drago@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

