Algorithmic Recourse for Long-Term Improvement

Kentaro Kanamori 1 Ken Kobayashi 2 Satoshi Hara 3 Takuya Takagi 1

Abstract

to x can regard the perturbation a as a recourse action for
obtaining the desired decision result y ∗ from the classifier
h (Karimi et al., 2022). For example, let us consider a
situation where a bank deploys a model h for predicting
whether a loan applicant will repay the loan or default, and
a user x gets the loan application rejected by h. To help
the user x get the loan approved, AR suggests an action
a that changes the prediction result of h from “default” to
“repayment.” We call such an action a as valid with respect
to h, or h-valid for short, across the paper.

Algorithmic recourse aims to provide a recourse
action for altering an unfavorable prediction given
by a model into a favorable one (e.g., loan approval). In practice, it is also desirable to ensure
that an action makes the real-world outcome better
(e.g., loan repayment). We call this requirement
improvement. Unfortunately, existing methods
cannot ensure improvement unless we know the
true oracle. To address this issue, we propose a
framework for suggesting improvement-oriented
actions from a long-term perspective. Specifically, we introduce a new online learning task of
assigning actions to a given sequence of instances.
We assume that we can observe delayed feedback
on whether the past suggested action achieved
improvement. Using the feedback, we estimate
an action that can achieve improvement for each
instance. To solve this task, we propose two approaches based on contextual linear bandit and
contextual Bayesian optimization. Experimental
results demonstrated that our approaches could
assign improvement-oriented actions to more instances than the existing methods.

While conventional AR methods focus on providing actions that change the prediction result by a model h (i.e., hvalidity), they often overlook whether the user’s real-world
outcome actually improves. This gap is critical in real-world
applications. For example, in the loan approval scenario,
even if the prediction of h changes from “default” to “repayment” by executing the suggested action a, the user x
may fail to repay the loan if the suggested action a does not
actually improve the user’s underlying payment capability.
Such a gap between the prediction result and real-world outcome can result in degrading the quality and reliability of
decision-making (Hardt et al., 2016; Rosenfeld et al., 2020;
Estornell et al., 2023; Friedbaum et al., 2024).
To fill this gap, (König et al., 2023) introduced improvement
as an additional requirement for AR, which focuses on providing actions that improve the user’s real-world outcome.
Let h∗ : X → Y be the unknown oracle that returns the
real-world outcome corresponding to a given input. (König
et al., 2023) claims that actions should be valid with respect
to the oracle h∗ , which we refer to as h∗ -validity to distinguish it from the validity for the classifier h. While the
classifier h is commonly trained to be a proxy for the oracle
h∗ , it is not completely equivalent to h∗ in practice due to
various factors such as data limitations, model complexity,
and evolving real-world conditions. Thus, since completely
filling the gap between h and h∗ is unrealistic, h-validity
does not always imply h∗ -validity. It indicates that ensuring
h∗ -validity is fundamentally difficult for the conventional
formulation of AR that relies solely on h.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models have been applied to real-world
critical decision-making tasks like loan approvals, where
predictions significantly impact human users (Rudin, 2019).
Thus, decision-makers are expected to explain how users
can alter undesired predictions (Miller, 2019; Wachter et al.,
2018). Algorithmic Recourse (AR) aims to provide such
information (Ustun et al., 2019). For a classifier h : X → Y,
a desired class y ∗ ∈ Y, and an instance x ∈ X , AR provides
a perturbation vector a that leads the instance x to the
desired class y ∗ , i.e., h(x+a) = y ∗ , with a minimum effort
measured by some cost function c. The user corresponding
1

Fujitsu Limited, Japan 2 Institute of Science Tokyo, Japan 3 The
University of Electro-Communications, Japan. Correspondence to:
Kentaro Kanamori <k.kanamori@fujitsu.com>.

To address this issue, this paper aims to introduce a new
framework of AR for ensuring improvement from a longterm perspective. While the oracle h∗ is unknown, it is
natural to assume that we can observe the outcome h∗ (x+a)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

