O-MAPL: Offline Multi-agent Preference Learning

The Viet Bui 1 Tien Mai 1 Hong Thanh Nguyen 2

Abstract

by RL algorithms, which might find ways to achieve high
expected returns by inducing unexpected or undesirable behaviors (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017; Turner et al., 2020).

Inferring reward functions from demonstrations
is a key challenge in reinforcement learning (RL),
particularly in multi-agent RL (MARL), where
large joint state-action spaces and complex interagent interactions complicate the task. While
prior single-agent studies have explored recovering reward functions and policies from human
preferences, similar work in MARL is limited. Existing methods often involve separate stages of supervised reward learning and MARL algorithms,
leading to unstable training. In this work, we introduce a novel end-to-end preference-based learning framework for cooperative MARL, leveraging
the underlying connection between reward functions and soft Q-functions. Our approach uses a
carefully-designed multi-agent value decomposition strategy to improve training efficiency. Extensive experiments on SMAC and MAMuJoCo
benchmarks show that our algorithm outperforms
existing methods across various tasks.

To address these challenges, many RL studies have relaxed
the reward structure by using sparse rewards, where agents
receive feedback periodically (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019;
Ren et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024b). While this reduces
the need for dense reward signals, it is often insufficient to
train effective agents in complex domains. Alternatively, imitation learning (IL) has been explored, where agents learn
to mimic an expert’s policy from demonstrations, without
explicit reward signals (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Fu et al., 2017;
Garg et al., 2021; Mai et al., 2024). However, achieving
expert-level performance with IL requires a large amount of
expert data, which can be costly and difficult to obtain.
A recent promising approach is to train agents using human
preference data, a more resource-efficient form of feedback called Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF). This allows agents to learn behaviors aligned with
human intentions. RLHF has proven effective in both singleagent control (Christiano et al., 2017; Mukherjee et al., 2024;
Lee et al., 2021; Shin et al., 2023; Hejna & Sadigh, 2024)
and natural language tasks (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2024). However, RLHF in
multi-agent environments is still underexplored, as simply
extending single-agent methods is insufficient due to the
complex interdependencies between agents’ policies.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been instrumental in a
wide range of decision making tasks, where agents gradually learn to operate effectively through interactions with
their environment (Levine et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2017;
Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Haydari & Yılmaz, 2020). Typically, when an agent takes an action, it receives feedback
in the form of reward signals, enabling it to adjust or revise
its action plan (i.e., policy). However, designing an appropriate reward function is a significant challenge in many
real-world domains. While essential for training successful
RL agents, reward design often requires extensive instrumentation or engineering (Yahya et al., 2017; Schenck &
Fox, 2017; Peng et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020; Zhu et al.,
2020). Moreover, such reward functions can be exploited

Only a few recent studies have developed preference-based
RL algorithms for multi-agent settings (Kang et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024a), typically using a two-phase learning
framework: first, preference data trains a reward model, and
then the policy is optimized. However, this approach has
two main drawbacks: (i) it requires large preference datasets
to cover the state and action spaces, and (ii) misalignment
between the two phases can degrade policy quality.
In this work, we investigate multi-agent preference-based
RL (PbRL), focusing on the offline learning setting where
agents do not interact with the environment but instead have
access to an offline dataset of pairwise trajectory preferences.
Unlike previous studies in multi-agent PbRL, we propose
an end-to-end learning approach that directly trains agents’
policies from preference data, without relying on an explicit
reward model. Our main contributions are as follows:

*

Equal contribution 1 Singapore Management University, Singapore 2 University of Oregon Eugene, Oregon, United States.
Correspondence to: Tien Mai <atmai@smu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

