High-Fidelity Simultaneous Speech-To-Speech Translation

Tom Labiausse 1 Laurent Mazaré 1 Edouard Grave 1 Alexandre Défossez 1 Neil Zeghidour 1

Abstract

while fitting many use cases such as offline video dubbing.
A more challenging setting is that of simultaneous translation, where translated speech is produced on-the-fly. This
task requires a real-time decision-making process to evaluate whether enough context has been accumulated to reliably
translate another chunk of speech. When cast as a machine
learning problem, this endeavor presents additional challenges such as the lack of speech aligned at a chunk-level.

We introduce Hibiki, a decoder-only model for
simultaneous speech translation. Hibiki leverages
a multistream language model to synchronously
process source and target speech, and jointly
produces text and audio tokens to perform speechto-text and speech-to-speech translation. We
furthermore address the fundamental challenge
of simultaneous interpretation, which unlike its
consecutive counterpart—where one waits for the
end of the source utterance to start translating—
adapts its flow to accumulate just enough context
to produce a correct translation in real-time,
chunk by chunk. To do so, we introduce a weaklysupervised method that leverages the perplexity
of an off-the-shelf text translation system to
identify optimal delays on a per-word basis and
create aligned synthetic data. After supervised
training, Hibiki performs adaptive, simultaneous
speech translation with vanilla temperature
sampling. On a French-English simultaneous
speech translation task, Hibiki demonstrates
state-of-the-art performance in translation quality,
speaker fidelity and naturalness. Moreover,
the simplicity of its inference process makes it
compatible with batched translation and even
real-time on-device deployment. We provide
examples1 as well as models and inference code.2

Hibiki is a decoder-only model which synchronously
receives source speech and generates translated speech
by leveraging a multistream architecture. In this context,
nested global and local Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
jointly model two audio streams by predicting a hierarchy
of text and audio tokens for each of them. At inference
time, temperature sampling combined with a causal audio
codec allows for streaming inputs and outputs. While
this architecture was originally introduced by Défossez
et al. (2024) for full-duplex spoken dialogue, we show
how it provides a simple and convenient architecture
for simultaneous speech translation. To train Hibiki,
we generate synthetic parallel data by translating and
resynthesizing the transcript of single-language audio.
While this provides pairs of inputs and outputs aligned at
the sequence level, this does not allow learning fine-grained
alignments. We thus introduce “contextual alignment”, a
simple method based on the perplexity of an off-the-shelf
machine translation system (Kudugunta et al., 2023) to
derive word-level alignments. By then introducing proper
silences into target speech, we can train Hibiki to adapt its
flow in real-time, without the need for complex inference
policies. Moreover, observing that training data varies
widely in speaker similarity, we propose to label training
examples with categories of speaker similarity, which
avoids filtering the training data while allowing to favor high
speaker similarity at inference with classifier-free guidance.

1. Introduction
We introduce Hibiki (“echo” in Japanese), a system for
streaming and expressive speech-to-speech (S2ST) and
speech-to-text (S2TT) translation. Most work in speech
translation has focused on the offline (or consecutive)
setting where the model has access to the full source
utterance before it translates, as it provides useful context

In a French-to-English translation task, Hibiki outperforms
previous work in translation quality, speaker similarity and
naturalness. We demonstrate how the simplicity of our inference process allows for translating hundreds of sequences in
real-time on GPU, and how a distilled model can run in realtime on a smartphone. Human evaluations also show that Hibiki is the first model to provide an experience of interpretation close to human professionals. We will release our code,
models, and a high quality 900 hours synthetic dataset.

1

Kyutai, Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Hibiki <hibiki@kyutai.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://hf.co/spaces/kyutai/hibiki-samples
2
https://github.com/kyutai-labs/hibiki

1

