Exact risk curves of signSGD in High-Dimensions: quantifying
preconditioning and noise-compression effects

Ke Liang Xiao 1 Noah Marshall 1 Atish Agarwala 2 Elliot Paquette 1

Abstract

ing of Adam and its variants is hindered by their complexity.
While the multiple exponential moving averages are easy to
implement, they complicate analysis.

In recent years, SIGN SGD has garnered interest
as both a practical optimizer as well as a simple model to understand adaptive optimizers like
A DAM. Though there is a general consensus that
SIGN SGD acts to precondition optimization and
reshapes noise, quantitatively understanding these
effects in theoretically solvable settings remains
difficult. We present an analysis of SIGN SGD in
a high-dimensional limit, and derive a limiting
SDE and ODE to describe the risk. Using this
framework we quantify four effects of SIGN SGD:
effective learning rate, noise compression, diagonal preconditioning, and gradient noise reshaping.
Our analysis is consistent with experimental observations but moves beyond that by quantifying
the dependence of these effects on the data and
noise distributions. We conclude with a conjecture on how these results might be extended to
A DAM.

The practical desire for simpler, more efficient learning algorithms as well as the theoretical desire for simpler models to
analyze have led to a resurgence in the study of SIGN SGD.
SIGN SGD is a variant of SGD where the stochastic gradient
is passed through the sign function σ, leading to an update
vector of ±1s. On average, SIGN SGD’s updates at every
step have positive dot product with the average SGD step,
but it can have dramatically different convergence properties
(Bernstein et al., 2018a; Karimireddy et al., 2019). Multiple
studies point towards sign-based methods as an effective
proxy given that the sign component of the gradient has
been shown to play an important role in A DAM (Kunstner
et al., 2023; Balles & Hennig, 2018; Bernstein et al., 2018b).
SIGN SGD is also the basis for new practical methods; the
L ION algorithm (Chen et al., 2023) combines SIGN SGD
with multiple exponential moving averages, and SIGN SGD
+ momentum was used to train LLMs with performance
comparable to A DAM (Zhao et al., 2024).
Despite the promise of SIGN SGD, a detailed quantitative
understanding of its dynamics in realistic settings remain
elusive—in particular the nature of the preconditioning and
the effect of the σ function on the noise are not well understood. A crucial first step is to understand these effects on
quadratic optimization problems.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning has been driven by the effectiveness of relatively simple stochastic optimization algorithms. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum
can be used to train models like ResNet50 with minimal
hyperparameter tuning. The workhorse of modern machine
learning is A DAM, which was designed to give an approximation of preconditioning with a diagonal, online approximation of the Fisher information matrix (Kingma, 2014).
Additional hypotheses for the success of A DAM include its
ability to maintain balanced updates to parameters across
layers and its potential noise-mitigating effects (Zhang et al.,
2020b; 2024). Getting a quantitative, theoretical understand-

Motivated by these questions, we provide the first analysis of
the learning dynamics of SIGN SGD in a high-dimensional
stochastic setting (Section 2). We make the following contributions:
• We derive a limiting stochastic differential equation
(SDE) for SIGN SGD and combine it with a concentration result to derive a deterministic ordinary differential
equation (ODE) that describes the dynamics of the risk
in our setting (Section 3).

1
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University,
Montreal, Canada 2 Google Deepmind, Mountain View, United
States of America. Correspondence to: Ke Liang Xiao <keliang.xiao@mail.mcgill.ca>.

• We compare the dynamics of SIGN SGD and vanilla
SGD, isolating 4 effects: effective learning rate, noisecompression, diagonal preconditioning, and gradient
noise reshaping (Section 4).

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

