UniMoMo: Unified Generative Modeling of 3D Molecules
for De Novo Binder Design

Xiangzhe Kong 1 2 Zishen Zhang 1 Ziting Zhang 3 Rui Jiao 1 2
Jianzhu Ma 4 2 Wenbing Huang 5 6 Kai Liu 7 Yang Liu 1 2

Abstract

Peptide

The design of target-specific molecules such as
small molecules, peptides, and antibodies is vital
for biological research and drug discovery. Existing generative methods are restricted to singledomain molecules, failing to address versatile
therapeutic needs or utilize cross-domain transferability to enhance model performance. In this
paper, we introduce Unified generative Modeling
of 3D Molecules (UniMoMo), the first framework
capable of designing binders of multiple molecular domains using a single model. In particular,
UniMoMo unifies the representations of different
molecules as graphs of blocks, where each block
corresponds to either a standard amino acid or
a molecular fragment. Subsequently, UniMoMo
utilizes a geometric latent diffusion model for
3D molecular generation, featuring an iterative
full-atom autoencoder to compress blocks into latent space points, followed by an E(3)-equivariant
diffusion process. Extensive benchmarks across
peptides, antibodies, and small molecules demonstrate the superiority of our unified framework
over existing domain-specific models, highlighting the benefits of multi-domain training.

Antibody

?
Target Protein
Small Molecule

Figure 1. Given the binding site on the target protein, our UniMoMo is capable of generating diverse molecular binders, including peptides, antibodies, and small molecules.

the resulting bindings can induce or block specific biological pathways of interest (Glögl et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2021). Various types of molecules have been exploited
for different purposes because of their unique biochemical properties. For instance, small molecules are ideal
for oral administration due to their high absorption efficiency (Beck et al., 2022), peptides excel in intracellular
targeting thanks to their cell-penetrating capability (Derakhshankhah & Jafari, 2018), and antibodies are favored
for treating severe diseases like cancer because of their
high specificity (Basu et al., 2019). The distinct roles of
these molecular types have led to domain-specific generative models. In particular, for small molecules, research
has focused on autoregressive models (Peng et al., 2022),
diffusion-based approaches (Guan et al., 2023a; Schneuing et al., 2024), Bayesian flow networks (Qu et al., 2024),
and voxel-based representations (Pinheiro et al., 2024). For
peptides and antibodies, diffusion models (Luo et al., 2022;
Kong et al., 2024b), iterative refinement (Jin et al., 2021;
Kong et al., 2023a;b) and multi-modal flow matching (Li
et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2024c) are prevalent.

1. Introduction
Designing molecules that bind to target proteins is a fundamental task in biological research and drug discovery, as
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University 2 Institute
for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 3 Dept. of
Automation, Tsinghua University 4 Dept. of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University 5 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Renmin University of China 6 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research
on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 7 Bytedance Project
Voyager Team. Correspondence to: Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>, Kai Liu <liukai0824@bytedance.com>, Yang
Liu <liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

We argue that a unified generative framework for all types
of molecules offers distinct advantages over the current
domain-specific paradigm. From an application standpoint,
such a framework enables the exploration of multiple drugs
spanning diverse molecular types for a single target, addressing varied therapeutic needs. From a machine learning

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

