Federated Generalised Variational Inference:
A Robust Probabilistic Federated Learning Framework

Terje Mildner 1 Oliver Hamelijnck 1 Paris Giampouras 1 Theodoros Damoulas 1 2
cally and averaging updates on the server. This has sparked
a large body of research on issues such as communication efficiency, data privacy, and data heterogeneity across clients
(Hamer et al., 2020; Malinovsky et al., 2020; Reddi et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022; Tenison et al., 2023; Tziotis et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2024; Demidovich et al., 2025). There has
been some work addressing robustness to adversarial clients
(Allouah et al., 2024; Bao et al., 2024) and data and system
heterogeneity (Chen et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023; Heikkilä
et al., 2023). However, these only provide point estimates,
and do not allow principled uncertainty quantification, as
required in many FL applications (Jonker et al., 2024).

Abstract
We introduce F ED GVI, a probabilistic Federated
Learning (FL) framework that is robust to both
prior and likelihood misspecification. F ED GVI
addresses limitations in both frequentist and
Bayesian FL by providing unbiased predictions
under model misspecification, with calibrated uncertainty quantification. Our approach generalises
previous FL approaches, specifically Partitioned
Variational Inference (Ashman et al., 2022), by
allowing robust and conjugate updates, decreasing computational complexity at the clients. We
offer theoretical analysis in terms of fixed-point
convergence, optimality of the cavity distribution,
and provable robustness to likelihood misspecification. Further, we empirically demonstrate the
effectiveness of F ED GVI in terms of improved robustness and predictive performance on multiple
synthetic and real world classification data sets.

In contrast, Bayesian FL approaches aim to update beliefs of a global model with data partitioned across clients.
This largely builds on distributed inference methods such
as the Bayesian Committee Machine (Tresp, 2000), parallel MCMC (Ahn et al., 2014; Mesquita et al., 2020), or
Divide&Conquer SMC (Chan et al., 2023). Expectation
Propagation (Minka, 2001; Vehtari et al., 2020) is naturally applicable to the distributed setting where local sites
are iteratively refined. This requires computing the cavity
distribution that removes local sites from the current approximation. Partitioned Variational Inference (PVI, Bui et al.,
2018; Ashman et al., 2022) takes this idea and proposes a
distributed variational inference algorithm, which has been
extended through MCMC (Guo et al., 2023) and Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) (Mekkaoui et al.,
2021). Whilst these approaches quantify uncertainty, they
are susceptible to model misspecification which can lead to
inaccurate, overconfident predictions (Bernardo & Smith,
2000; Bissiri et al., 2016; Knoblauch et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a framework for the collaborative
training of a global model by a collection of clients, without
requiring proprietary data to be shared with a central server
or other participating clients (McMahan et al., 2017). This
decentralised approach allows FL to be used on applications
with strict data privacy constraints, such as in finance or
healthcare (Kairouz et al., 2021). However, due to the sensitive nature and complexity of these domains, both privacy
and robustness to model misspecification are paramount.

Current approaches to FL are inherently non-robust to model
misspecification which leads to compromised performance
and uncalibrated uncertainty quantification. We address
these challenges by departing from the traditional Bayesian
paradigm and propose a distributed Generalised Variational
Inference framework that allows us to deal with model misspecification. In summary, our contributions are:

The frequentist formulation of FL aims to minimise a global
loss function by aggregating local gradients from clients.
Early works include Federated Averaging (F EDAVG, McMahan et al., 2017) which iterates between training clients lo1
University of Warwick, Department of Computer Science,
Coventry, United Kingdom 2 University of Warwick, Department
of Statistics, Coventry, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Terje
Mildner <Terje.Mildner@warwick.ac.uk>.

• We introduce Federated Generalised Variational Inference (F ED GVI), a family of robust probabilistic
algorithms for federated learning.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

