Position: AI Should Not Be An Imitation Game: Centaur Evaluations
Andreas Haupt 1 Erik Brynjolfsson 1

Abstract

(Xie et al., 2024; Majumder et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024; Drouin et al., 2024). Very few exceptions
are centaur evaluations (Lee et al., 2024; Wijk et al., 2024;
Shao et al., 2025) which include humans in the evaluation
process.

Benchmarks and evaluations are central to machine learning methodology and direct research
in the field. Current evaluations commonly test
systems in the absence of humans. This position
paper argues that the machine learning community should increasingly use centaur evaluations,
in which humans and AI jointly solve tasks. Centaur Evaluations refocus machine learning development toward human augmentation instead of
human replacement, they allow for direct evaluation of human-centered desiderata, such as interpretability and helpfulness, and they can be more
challenging and realistic than existing evaluations.
By shifting the focus from automation toward
collaboration between humans and AI, centaur
evaluations can drive progress toward more effective and human-augmenting machine learning
systems.

There are several explanations for why centaur evaluations
are relatively rare. One is the history of the field, from the
Turing Test to Imagenet, which we discuss in Section 3. Another one lies in the cost and challenges in making centaur
evaluations reproducible, which we discuss in Sections 5
and 6.
In Section 4, we argue that increasing the amount of centaur evaluation in machine learning will benefit society with
three arguments. First, centaur evaluations expand which
capabilities of machines we can evaluate, in particular those
involving human perception and dexterity (Section 4.1): “It
is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult level
performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, and
difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-yearold when it comes to perception and mobility.” (Moravec
(1990), p.15) Centaur evaluations might lead us away from
evaluating AI with exams (Metz, 2025) and toward evaluations that more closely resemble human use of machine
learning systems.

1. Introduction
Benchmarks and evaluations are central to machine learning
methodology and direct machine learning research (Sculley
et al., 2018). As machine learning systems expand into many
parts of society, broader impacts of evaluations become
important. This position paper is concerned with how (or
how not) AI system evaluation incorporates humans. We
argue that there should be more and more systematic
centaur evaluations, in which humans and AI solve a
task cooperatively.

Our second argument for centaur evaluations is that they
allow to directly evaluate human-centered features of machine learning models, such as interpretability (Casper et al.,
2023), complementarity (Donahue et al., 2022), helpfulness
(Bai et al., 2022), and the ability to ask follow-up questions
(Li et al., 2023; Shaikh et al., 2024) (Section 4.2). This is in
contrast to current evaluation methodologies, which require
imperfect proxies for these desiderata.

The progress of language models and their evaluation has
been particularly rapid, leading to many new evaluation
datasets in question-answer format (Hendrycks et al., 2021a;
Wang et al., 2019; 2018; Chollet et al., 2024; Srivastava et al.,
2023; Suzgun et al., 2023; Rein et al., 2024; Hendrycks
et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2021; Dua et al., 2019; Glazer
et al., 2024; Chan et al., 2024) and interactive environments

Finally, and for us most importantly, centaur evaluations can
re-center machine learning practice toward human augmentation and away from a destructive path of human replacement, leaving some without economic power and wealth
and others with high amounts of both (Section 4.3).
There are clear incentives for imitation. Imitation-based
evaluations are straightforward to formalize as supervised
learning problems, humans provide ample training data in
the behavior being imitated, and results are easy to communicate to the public, as most people have engaged in the
behavior that systems are trained and evaluated to imitate.

1

Digital Economy Lab, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Andreas Haupt <h4upt@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

