Curvature-aware Graph Attention for PDEs on Manifolds

Yunfeng Liao 1 Jiawen Guan 1 Xiucheng Li 1

Abstract

solve PDEs by learning the mapping between input-output
pairs in an end-to-end manner. Thus they outperform numerical solvers in time-sensitive scenarios (e.g., real-time
rendering in gaming engines) while slight inaccuracy is
tolerable. However, most of them are dedicated to PDEs
in Euclidean space. To generalize the methods to discrete
manifolds, the work Geo-FNO (Li et al., 2023a) and Transolver (Wu et al., 2024) are proposed.

Deep models have recently achieved remarkable
performances in solving partial differential equations (PDEs). The previous methods are mostly
focused on PDEs arising in Euclidean spaces
with less emphasis on the general manifolds with
rich geometry. Several proposals attempt to account for the geometry by exploiting the spatial coordinates but overlook the underlying intrinsic geometry of manifolds. In this paper,
we propose a Curvature-aware Graph Attention
for PDEs on manifolds by exploring the important intrinsic geometric quantities such as curvature and discrete gradient operator. It is realized
via parallel transport and tensor field on manifolds. To accelerate computation, we present three
curvature-oriented graph embedding approaches
and derive closed-form parallel transport equations, and a subtree partition method is also developed to promote parameter-sharing. Our proposed curvature-aware attention can be used as
a replacement for vanilla attention, and experiments show that it significantly improves the
performance of the existing methods for solving PDEs on manifolds. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Supradax/CurvGT.

Geo-FNO (Li et al., 2023a) attempts to learn a universal
mapping that transforms a curved surface into regularly
spaced grids and then solves the PDEs in Euclidean space
with Fourier neural operators. However, the reduction to
Euclidean space might fail since the existence of such a
universal parametrization is not always guaranteed. By
contrast, Transolver (Wu et al., 2024) directly handles the
ambient space in which the surface resides. By establishing
a global coordinate system, it encodes relative positions
into node features so as to distinguish different parts of the
surface. Nevertheless, relying solely on spatial coordinates
leaves the intrinsic geometry of the manifold unexplored. In
particular, it is a well-established theory that the curvature
of underlying manifolds dominates the physical laws of
observable phenomena (Naber, 2011). Hence, the curvature
is essential for developing an accurate solver for PDEs on
the manifolds. However, neither Geo-FNO nor Transolver
explicitly considers it in their model design.
On the other hand, the discrete manifolds are often represented by graphs (with node coordinates) and Graph Transformers (Ying et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023) have achieved
promising results on a wide spectrum of graph-related tasks,
whose successes can largely be attributed to the inductive
bias injected into the self-attention to capture the underlying topology and geometry. However, as one of the most
important geometry quantities of manifolds, the curvature
is still under-explored. To further explore the intrinsic geometry of the underlying manifold, we propose a Curvatureaware Graph Attention for time-dependent PDEs on discrete
manifolds, which naturally encodes the curvature into the
self-attention mechanism. However, simply treating curvatures as additional node features has limited impact because
it only reveals the local curvature at points, and it is the
curvature of the path connecting points that dominates the
physics laws. In addition, in contrast to message-passing
in Euclidean space, the tangent vectors of different points

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) serve as fundamental
tools for describing a wide range of scientific phenomena.
However, deriving closed-form solutions for general PDEs
is often infeasible. The numerical methods such as finite
difference methods and finite element methods, discretizing
PDE domains into grids, offer a viable alternative but are
often costly. Recently, data-driven deep models (Lu et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2023d; 2020a; Kovachki et al., 2023) have
emerged as powerful tools for PDE-governed tasks. They
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
of Technology (Shenzhen), China. Correspondence to: Xiucheng
Li <lixiucheng@hit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

