Distributed Nonparametric Estimation: from Sparse to Dense Samples per
Terminal
Deheng Yuan 1 Tao Guo 2 Zhongyi Huang 1

Abstract

the classic centralized settings where all the samples are
accessed directly.

Consider the communication-constrained problem of nonparametric function estimation, in
which each distributed terminal holds multiple
i.i.d. samples. Under certain regularity assumptions, we characterize the minimax optimal rates
for all regimes, and identify phase transitions of
the optimal rates as the samples per terminal vary
from sparse to dense. This fully solves the problem left open by previous works, whose scopes
are limited to regimes with either dense samples or a single sample per terminal. To achieve
the optimal rates, we design a layered estimation protocol by exploiting protocols for the parametric density estimation problem. We show
the optimality of the protocol using informationtheoretic methods and strong data processing inequalities, and incorporating the classic balls and
bins model. The optimal rates are immediate for
various special cases such as density estimation,
Gaussian, binary, Poisson and heteroskedastic regression models.

In this work, we investigate the nonparametric function estimation problem, where each of the m terminals observes
n i.i.d. samples and has a communication budget of l bits.
We consider all parameter regimes from sparse to dense
samples per terminal, i.e., there is no restriction on the relative value of n compared to m. Inspired by (Zaman & Szabó, 2022), a unified nonparametric estimation model describing many ways of sample generation is adopted in this
work, so that many specific settings are subsumed.
1.1. Our Contributions
The main contribution of this work is that we obtain the
minimax optimal rates (up to logarithmic factors) for the
aforementioned estimation problem, under a few regularity assumptions. The assumptions are satisfied in several key estimation settings, including density estimation,
Gaussian, binary, Poisson and heteroskedastic regression
models. Hence, the optimal rates for these models follow
directly as corollaries of the main results.
Previous works focused on either the case m < nγ , γ < 2r
(r is the Sobolev regularity parameter) with dense samples (Szabó & van Zanten, 2020; Zaman & Szabó, 2022)
or the specific density estimation problem with extremely
sparse n = 1 sample (Barnes et al., 2020; Acharya et al.,
2024). We fully solve the problem by characterizing the
optimal rates for all regimes from sparse to dense samples
per terminal classified by the relative size of n and m. As
a result, We see that the dependence of the optimal rates on
the communication budget l can be qualitatively different
for sparse and dense settings, where phase transitions are
clearly characterized.

1. Introduction
Distributed nonparametric estimation problems have attracted wide attention, and related theoretical studies can
shed light on the understanding of modern applications
such as federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2020; P. Kairouz, et al., 2021). In this setting, multiple
distributed terminals cooperate to estimate a nonparametric function, while each of them can only observe part of
samples and use limited number of bits to describe the observation. The limitation of communication resources often leads to an increase in estimation error compared with

To establish our results, we need to prove both the upper and lower bounds for the minimax rate. For the upper bound, we design a two-layer estimation protocol. The
outer layer transforms the original problem into a parametric density estimation problem, and the inner layer solves it
by exploiting the protocol developed in (Yuan et al., 2024).
The design of the outer layer employs wavelet-based estimator with sparsity properties, incorporating appropriate

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. 2 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.. Correspondence to: Tao Guo <taoguo@seu.edu.cn>, Zhongyi Huang
<zhongyih@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

