Multinoulli Extension: A Lossless Yet Effective Probabilistic Framework for
Subset Selection over Partition Constraints
Qixin Zhang 1 Wei Huang 2 Can Jin 3 Puning Zhao 4 Yao Shu 5 Li Shen 4 Dacheng Tao 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Subset selection aims to identify a small group of representative items from a vast ground set, which finds numerous real-world applications in the fields of machine learning, operations research and statistics, including feature
selection (Das & Kempe, 2008; 2011; Qian et al., 2015;
2017), data summarizarion (Lin & Bilmes, 2010; 2011; Wei
et al., 2015; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016), product marketing (Kempe et al., 2003; Tang et al., 2018; Han et al., 2021),
sensor placement (Krause et al., 2008; Hashemi et al., 2019;
DeValve et al., 2023) and in-context learning (Kumari et al.,
2024a;b; Fan et al., 2025). Beyond the aforementioned representational capacity, ensuring the diversity and fairness of
the chosen subset is of significant importance. For instance,
in various marketing scenarios, it is essential to equitably
allocate free products across different communities (Tsang
et al., 2019). To this end, partition constraints are often
imposed in the process of subset selection, which involves
dividing the entire set into non-overlapping sub-classes and
then fairly distributing the total budget among them. Motivated by these findings, this paper explores the subset
selection problem under partition constraints.

Identifying the most representative subset for a
close-to-submodular objective while satisfying
the predefined partition constraint is a fundamental task with numerous applications in machine
learning. However, the existing distorted localsearch methods are often hindered by their prohibitive query complexities and the rigid requirement for prior knowledge of difficult-to-obtain
structural parameters. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a novel algorithm titled
Multinoulli-SCG, which not only is parameterfree, but also can achieve the same approximation
guarantees as the distorted local-search methods
with significantly fewer function evaluations. The
core of our Multinoulli-SCG algorithm is an innovative continuous-relaxation framework named
Multinoulli Extension(ME), which can effectively
convert the discrete subset selection problem subject to partition constraints into a solvable continuous maximization focused on learning the optimal
multinoulli priors across the considered partition.
In sharp contrast with the well-established multilinear extension for submodular subset selection,
a notable advantage of our proposed ME is its
intrinsic capacity to provide a lossless rounding
scheme for any set function. Finally, we validate the practical efficacy of our proposed algorithms by applying them to video summarization,
A-optimal design and coverage maximization.

Broadly speaking, the subset selection problem is NPhard (Natarajan, 1995; Feige, 1998), implying that no
polynomial-time algorithms can solve it optimally. In light
of this hurdle, many studies have focused on designing
efficient approximation algorithms to address the subset
selection problem. Especially when the utility function associated with the subset selection problem is submodular,
a plethora of effective and practical algorithms have been
proposed for maximizing this type of functions subject to
partition constraints (Fisher et al., 1978; Calinescu et al.,
2011; Filmus & Ward, 2012b; 2014). Additionally, it has
been frequently observed that there are also many scenarios
inducing utility functions that are “close-to-submodular”,
but not strictly submodular. Examples include variable selection for regression (Das & Kempe, 2018; Elenberg et al.,
2018), video summarization (Chen et al., 2018a), neural
network pruning (El Halabi et al., 2022) and sparse optimal
transport (Manupriya et al., 2024).

1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project(AIP) 3 Rutgers University 4
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou). Email to: Qixin
Zhang <qixin.zhang@ntu.edu.sg> Correspondence to: Li Shen
<mathshenli@gmail.com>

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Compared to the extensive literature on submodular functions, there is a limited amount of research exploring the
1

