Separating Knowledge and Perception with Procedural Data

Adrián Rodrı́guez-Muñoz 1 Manel Baradad 1 Phillip Isola 1 Antonio Torralba 1
Train procedural vision model...

...and solve tasks with real visual memory...

...for unlearning and privacy guarantees

Classification

Data unlearning

Procedural data
Query

Similar examples in memory Majority vote
“Dog”

Memory
“Garbage truck”

“Organ”

Data privacy

Segmentation
Query

SSL

Ground Truth

Zero-shot prediction

Memory

Embedding model

Figure 1: Our approach is as follows: first, an embedding model is trained on procedural data generated with OpenGL code using
self-supervised learning (SSL). In this stage, unlearning and attribution is difficult, but procedural data is much less exposed to privacy/bias
risk and real-world semantics. Next, we use the embedding model on real world tasks using only a visual memory of reference image
embeddings, without extra training. When working with real instead of procedural data, there is high privacy/bias risk and real world
semantics. However, isolating all real data to only the memory makes efficient data unlearning and privacy analysis possible. The overall
system has perfect control over all real world data, while approximating the performance of standard training.

Abstract

fine-grained classification, and is within 10% on
ImageNet-1K classification. It also demonstrates
strong zero-shot segmentation, achieving an R2
on COCO within 10% of the models trained on
real data. Finally, we analyze procedural versus
real data models, showing that parts of the same
object have dissimilar representations in procedural models, resulting in incorrect searches in memory and explaining the remaining performance
gap.

We train representation models with procedural
data only, and apply them on visual similarity,
classification, and semantic segmentation tasks
without further training by using visual memory—
an explicit database of reference image embeddings. Unlike prior work on visual memory, our
approach achieves full compartmentalization with
respect to all real-world images while retaining
strong performance. Compared to a model trained
on Places, our procedural model performs within
1% on NIGHTS visual similarity, outperforms
by 8% and 15% on CUB200 and Flowers102

1. Introduction

1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Adrian Rodrı́guez-Muñoz <adrianrm@mit.edu>.

Modern vision systems learn by digesting images into
weights via gradient descent. While offering strong performance, this approach carries concerns about interpretability,
privacy, and bias. Moreover, it makes adding and removing
data difficult, since weights store knowledge in a black-box
manner. To alleviate this issue, prior work proposed the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

