Learning the Electronic Hamiltonian of Large Atomic Structures

Chen Hao Xia * 1 Manasa Kaniselvan * 1 Alexandros Nikolaos Ziogas 1 Marko Mladenović 1 Rayen Mahjoub 1
Alexander Maeder 1 Mathieu Luisier 1

Abstract

atomic structures, and thus easily represented by graphstructured data (Veličković et al., 2018). They have already
enabled new directions of research previously thought computationally unaffordable. More recently, GNNs have been
applied to predict electronic-level properties. The most
general of such properties is the ground-state Hamiltonian
matrix H, which, if expressed in a localized basis, can be
decomposed into sub-matrices Hi,j that encode the coupling between the sets of basis elements located on atoms i
and j. These coupling terms depend on the nature (atomic
type) and relative coordinates of the local environment.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown
promise in learning the ground-state electronic
properties of materials, subverting ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations when
the underlying lattices can be represented as small
and/or repeatable unit cells (i.e., molecules and
periodic crystals). Realistic systems are, however, non-ideal and generally characterized by
higher structural complexity. As such, they require large (10+ Å) unit cells and thousands of
atoms to be accurately described. At these scales,
DFT becomes computationally prohibitive, making GNNs especially attractive. In this work, we
present a strictly local equivariant GNN capable
of learning the electronic Hamiltonian (H) of
realistically extended materials. It incorporates
an augmented partitioning approach that enables
training on arbitrarily large structures while preserving local atomic environments beyond boundaries. We demonstrate its capabilities by predicting the electronic Hamiltonian of various systems
with up to 3,000 nodes (atoms), 500,000+ edges,
∼28 million orbital interactions (nonzero entries
of H), and ≤0.53% error in the eigenvalue spectra. Our work expands the applicability of current
electronic property prediction methods to some of
the most challenging cases encountered in computational materials science, namely systems with
disorder, interfaces, and defects.

Previous works on electronic property prediction focused
on the cases of molecules (Zhong et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2023b; Bai et al., 2021) and ordered materials (Li et al.,
2022; Gong et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a) whose graph
representations are fairly small; typical molecules contain
only a few atoms and all relevant structural information in
crystalline materials can be captured by translating a small
unit cell. The electronic properties of such systems can be
computed “exactly” with density functional theory (DFT)
within a few minutes on a single CPU.
Real materials, however, are not made with the repetition
of small unit cells. The unavoidable presence of defects,
for example, doping atoms, vacancies, strain, compositional
variations, or lattice mismatch (Ducry et al., 2020; Kaniselvan et al., 2023; Strand et al., 2018), requires large unit
cells composed of up to a few thousand atoms to capture
the associated structural disorder (Repa & Fredin, 2023).
Accurate DFT simulations of such non-ideal materials are
prohibitively expensive, even on today’s largest supercomputers. The prospect of applying machine learning solutions
to handle such systems is thus particularly attractive and of
high relevance in computational materials science.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have proven capable of
learning properties that are functions of molecular and

Here, we adapt equivariant GNN approaches to learn the
ground-state Hamiltonian H of this more realistic class of
atomic structures. As main contributions:

*

Equal contribution 1 Integrated Systems Laboratory, Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Chen Hao
Xia <chexia@iis.ee.ethz.ch>, Manasa Kaniselvan <mkaniselvan@iis.ee.ethz.ch>.

• We develop a strictly local GNN-based architecture
tailored for electronic property prediction from small
to large scales. Our network leverages efficient SO(2)convolutions and multi-headed attention, with learnable embeddings for node and edges that are mapped
to diagonal (Hi,i ) and off-diagonal (Hi,j ) blocks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

