A Stronger Mixture of Low-Rank Experts for Fine-Tuning Foundation Models

Mengyang Sun † 1 Yihao Wang 2 Tao Feng 1 Dan Zhang † 1 Yifan Zhu 3 Jie Tang 1

to its versatility and simplicity. In detail, LoRA introduces
trainable low-rank matrices A and B to update the internal
modules of FMs, which is given by X = W + BA, where
X represents the overall weight matrix after integrating
pretrained weights W and LoRA modules A and B. In a
sense, the product of A and B serves as an approximation of
the full-rank update (in other words, Fully Fine-Tuning, or
FFT) for the pre-trained weights. While LoRA significantly
reduces the number of trainable parameters, it also imposes
two limitations: One is limited representation, and the other
one is gradient sub-optimality.

Abstract
In order to streamline the fine-tuning of foundation models, Low-Rank Adapters (LoRAs) have
been substantially adopted across various fields,
including instruction tuning and domain adaptation. The underlying concept of LoRA involves
decomposing a full-rank matrix into the product of two lower-rank matrices, which reduces
storage consumption and accelerates the training
process. Furthermore, to address the limited expressive capacity of LoRA, the Mixture-of-Expert
(MoE) has been introduced for incorporating multiple LoRA adapters. The integration of LoRA
experts leads to a visible improvement across several downstream scenes. However, the mixture of
LoRAs (MoE-LoRA) still exhibits its low robustness during tuning and inferring. Inspired by the
Riemannian Preconditioners which train LoRA as
a sub-space projector, we propose a new training
strategy for MoE-LoRA, to stabilize and boost
its feature learning by gate-rescaled multi-space
projections. We provide both a theoretical solution as well as an alternative engineering strategy.
Examinations on SGD and AdamW optimizers
demonstrate the effectiveness of our methodology.
Source code is available at https://github.
com/THUDM/MoELoRA_Riemannian.

Limitation 1: Limited representation. A natural problem of
low-rank matrices lies in less powerful representation, especially in complex tasks. To tackle this, one straightforward
solution is the integration of multiple LoRA modules into
the mixture-of-expert framework, known as MoE-LoRA.
Figure 1 (left) illustrates a plain MoE-LoRA framework.
These efforts tangibly improved the performance of LoRA
in many scenarios, like vision-language tasks, multi-task
learning, continual learning, etc. In a nutshell, the route
of MoE-LoRA can be roughly categorized into two lines:
(i) Designing dedicated MoE-LoRA frameworks for specific domains, such as MOELoRA (Liu et al., 2023) and
MoCLE (Gou et al., 2023). (ii) Technically improving MoELoRA via architectural, updating, and loss constraints, such
as MoLA (Gao et al., 2024) and HydraLoRA (Tian et al.,
2024). Nevertheless, most of these efforts fail to consider
the instability and inefficiency of training MoE-LoRA.
Limitation 2: Gradient Sub-optimality. Another concern
that plagues LoRA is gradient sub-optimality. This occurs
since the low-rank matrices A and B together form a quotient manifold space with a certain curvature, leading to
an inconsistency between the inner-manifold optimal and
the full-rank optimal gradient. This further leads to a suboptimal training process for LoRA. To alleviate, Zhang et
al. (Zhang & Pilanci, 2024) enhances LoRA gradients by
a Riemannian gradient preconditioner, given by ∇A L =
(B T B)−1 ∇A L and ∇B L = ∇B L(AAT )−1 . These preconditioners contribute to constructing two gradient projectors after a mathematical derivation, ensuring the update is
done in accord with the full-rank gradient projection onto
the row space of A and the column space of B, that is
Xnew = X −η[P rojcol(B) (∇X L)T +P rojrow(A) (∇X L)].
Here the notation P rojV (M ) represents a projection func-

1. Introduction
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) techniques offer
a cost-effective solution for fine-tuning foundation models
(FMs) (Zhang et al., 2025a; Fu et al., 2024). Among these,
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is a prevalent technology due
†

Work was done while these authors interned at Zhipu AI.
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China; 2 Computer School, Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing, China; 3 School
of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jie Tang <jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Tao Feng <fengtao.hi@gmail.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

