Cape: Context-Aware Prompt Perturbation Mechanism with Differential
Privacy

Haoqi Wu 1 Wei Dai 1 Li Wang 1 Qiang Yan 1

Abstract

posing significant risks to user privacy, as the prompts can
contain sensitive user information or confidential business
guidelines (Yu et al., 2024). For example, a user might
request ChatGPT to summarize or analyze a confidential
business report (Forbes, 2023), potentially resulting in severe privacy breaches. This issue is further exacerbated by
the growing stringency of modern data privacy regulations.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained significant popularity due to their remarkable capabilities in text understanding and generation.
However, despite their widespread deployment
in inference services such as ChatGPT, concerns
about the potential leakage of sensitive user data
have arisen. Existing solutions primarily rely on
privacy-enhancing technologies to mitigate such
risks, facing the trade-off among efficiency, privacy, and utility. To narrow this gap, we propose Cape, a context-aware prompt perturbation
mechanism based on differential privacy, to enable efficient inference with an improved privacyutility trade-off. Concretely, we introduce a hybrid utility function that better captures the token similarity. Additionally, we propose a bucketized sampling mechanism to handle large sampling space, which might lead to long-tail phenomenons. Extensive experiments across multiple
datasets, along with ablation studies, demonstrate
that Cape achieves a better privacy-utility tradeoff compared to prior state-of-the-art works.

Data Leakage

Client
Prompt | Sensitive Information

Haoqi

Cloud Server
Deployed Language Model

Existing solutions (Ma et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024) utilize
cryptographic techniques like secure multi-party computation (MPC) (Yao, 1986) and homomorphic encryption
(HE) (Gentry, 2009) to offer provable security. However,
the huge computation and communication overhead hinders
their application in real world scenarios 1 . Another line of
works utilize the client-server hybrid execution paradigm,
where client performs some lightweight computations and
sends shallow layer embeddings to the server. However,
prior work (Song & Raghunathan, 2020) has shown that
such information can be leveraged to reconstruct the original text effectively. Subsequent works (Zhou et al., 2023; Du
et al., 2023) bridge this gap by adding noise to intermediate
embeddings to break the linkage between the noisy embeddings and original tokens. However, a major limitation is
their reliance on a white-box inference setup, requiring shallow layers to be deployed on the client side, which demands
extensive model modifications, making it seldom practical.

Recent advancements in large language models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) have revolutionized fields such as natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019),
driving their widespread adoption in machine learning (ML)
inference services. However, despite their growing popularity, data privacy remains a critical concern. In ML services
like ChatGPT (Brown et al., 2020), the server provides
an API that processes client queries and returns generated
responses. This paradigm (Figure 1) requires clients to
transmit their queries—commonly referred to as prompts in
the context of language models—to the server in plaintext,
to:

Response

Adversary

Figure 1: Illustration of existing LLM inference services.

1. Introduction

1
TikTok.
Correspondence
<haoqi.1997@tiktok.com>.

Original Prompt

A promising approach is to utilize differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork, 2006), widely adopted as the de facto standard for protecting user privacy, to verbatim perturb tokens
in the prompts. It is highly efficient and requires no modifications to the back-end model. SANTEXT (Yue et al.,
2021) and CUSTEXT (Chen et al., 2022) focus on text classification tasks. InferDPT (Tong et al., 2023) takes the first

Wu

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Take the SOTA 3-party computing work Ditto (Wu et al., 2024)
as an example, the average runtime for generating one token with
a sequence length of 128 on Bert-base model requires about 30s.

1

