TSP: A Two-Sided Smoothed Primal-Dual Method for Nonconvex Bilevel
Optimization

Songtao Lu 1

Abstract

the two learning objectives. Typical applications include hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2017; Shaban
et al., 2019), meta-learning (Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Raghu
et al., 2020), coreset selection (Zhou et al., 2022; Hao et al.,
2024), actor-critic schemes in reinforcement learning (Hong
et al., 2023), and many more (Liu et al., 2021a; Lu, 2023).
Specifically, it takes the form of:

Extensive research has shown that a wide range
of machine learning problems can be formulated
as bilevel optimization, where two levels of learning processes intertwine through distinct sets
of optimization variables. However, prevailing
approaches often impose stringent assumptions,
such as strong convexity of the lower-level loss
function or uniqueness of the optimal solution,
to enable algorithmic development and convergence analysis. However, these assumptions tend
to be overly restrictive in real-world scenarios.
In this work, we explore a recently popularized
Moreau envelope based reformulation of bilevel
optimization problems, accommodating nonconvex objective functions at both levels. We propose a stochastic primal-dual method that incorporates smoothing on both sides, capable of finding
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker solutions for this general
class of nonconvex bilevel optimization problems.
A key feature of our algorithm is its ability to
dynamically weigh the lower-level problems, enhancing its performance, particularly in stochastic
learning scenarios. Numerical experiments underscore the superiority of our proposed algorithm
over existing penalty-based methods in terms of
both the convergence rate and the test accuracy.

min f (x, y),
x,y∈S(x)

s.t.

S(x) ≜ arg min g(x, y),
y

(1)

where f (x, y) and g(x, y) denote the upper-level (UL) and
lower-level (LL) objective functions, S(x) represents the
feasible sets that are the optimal solution set that contains
all the global optimal solutions of the LL problem with respect to (w.r.t.). the block-y. However, solving this class of
problems is challenging. Even when both functions f (x, y)
and g(x, y) are differentiable and smooth, computing the
gradient of the UL loss function with respect to x may involve the computation of high-order derivatives of the LL
loss function. For example, when the LL loss function is
strongly convex, the closed-form expression of this gradient requires the computation of both the Jacobian and the
inverse Hessian matrix w.r.t. the LL loss function (Ghadimi
& Wang, 2018). Many works have focused on directly optimizing the UL and LL loss functions by applying iterative
numerical methods to perform the Hessian inverse operation,
such as reverse-mode iterative differentiation, approximate
implicit differentiation techniques (Grazzi et al., 2020; Ji
et al., 2021), and the Lanczos method (Gao et al., 2025),
achieving good performance. However, a major assumption
they cannot avoid is the uniqueness of the LL optimal solution, i.e., the optimal solution set S(x) must be a singleton.
This restrictively constrains the applicability of these algorithms for many machine learning problems where the LL
loss function contains multiple optimal solutions. For example, a convex LL objective function is one of the simplest
cases where this issue arises.

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization problems have been established as a
general formulation for a wide range of machine learning
tasks. The two-level structure enables the integration of
different learning or optimization processes. This approach
ensures that the solution obtained strikes a balance between

Targeting this challenge, one of the most straightforward
approaches is to penalize the LL optimization problem in the
UL, forming a single-level optimization problem that can
be tackled with existing constrained optimization methods.
Specifically, the original bilevel optimization problem can
be written as
min f (x, y), s.t. g(x, y) − g ⋆ (x) ≤ δ
(2)

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering and Shun
Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Songtao Lu
<stlu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

x,y

1

