Mixture of Lookup Experts

Shibo Jie 1 Yehui Tang 2 Kai Han 2 Yitong Li 3 Duyu Tang 3 Zhi-Hong Deng 1 Yunhe Wang 2

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) activates only a subset
of experts during inference, allowing the model
to maintain low inference FLOPs and latency
even as the parameter count scales up. However, since MoE dynamically selects the experts,
all the experts need to be loaded into VRAM.
Their large parameter size still limits deployment,
and offloading, which load experts into VRAM
only when needed, significantly increase inference latency. To address this, we propose Mixture
of Lookup Experts (MoLE), a new MoE architecture that is efficient in both communication
and VRAM usage. In MoLE, the experts are
Feed-Forward Networks (FFNs) during training,
taking the output of the embedding layer as input. Before inference, these experts can be reparameterized as lookup tables (LUTs) that retrieves expert outputs based on input ids, and
offloaded to storage devices. Therefore, we do
not need to perform expert computations during inference. Instead, we directly retrieve the
expert’s computation results based on input ids
and load them into VRAM, and thus the resulting communication overhead is negligible. Experiments show that, with the same FLOPs and
VRAM usage, MoLE achieves inference speeds
comparable to dense models and significantly
faster than MoE with experts offloading, while
maintaining performance on par with MoE. Code:
https://github.com/JieShibo/MoLE.

42
44
0.0 0.5 1.0
0
100
200
Average Accuracy # Parameter in VRAM (B) Latency (ms/step)
Dense

MoE

MoE (Expert Offloading)

MoLE (Ours)

Figure 1. With the same 410M activated parameters, MoE outperforms the dense model in terms of performance, but it comes with
significant VRAM usage. If experts are offloaded, inference latency will increase. Our MoLE maintains competitive performance
without increasing the model’s VRAM usage or decoding latency.

1. Introduction
Scaling laws indicate that, with sufficient data for training,
the performance of large language models (LLMs) improves
as the model size increases (Kaplan et al., 2020). However,
larger LLMs also result in slower inference speeds, which
can degrade the user experience. For this reason, the architecture of LLMs has increasingly focused on Mixture of
Experts (MoE) (Jiang et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024). MoE
models use several Feed-Forward Networks (FFNs) as experts and employ a router to determine which subset of experts needs to be activated, rather than activating the entire
model. This allows the model to maintain a large number of
parameters while keeping the computational cost low.
Although MoE reduces the computational cost, the number of parameters does not decrease. This means that the
VRAM requirements during inference remain unaffordable.
For example, although the Mixtral-8×7B (Jiang et al., 2024)
model only has 13B parameters activated at a time, its total parameter count reaches 46B, making it impossible to
load into a single 80GB GPU with FP16. Existing methods (Eliseev & Mazur, 2023; Xue et al., 2024; Shen et al.,
2022) reduce VRAM usage by offloading experts to larger
storage devices (e.g., CPU RAM, disk, or cloud storage),
and loading the selected experts into VRAM at each inference step. However, there are two drawbacks to this
approach: i) Since the selection of experts is dynamically

1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Peking University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Consumer
Business Group, Huawei.
Correspondence to: Yunhe
Wang <yunhe.wang@huawei.com>, Zhi-Hong Deng <zhdeng@pku.edu.cn>, Yehui Tang <yehui.tang@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

