Task-Aware Virtual Training: Enhancing Generalization in Meta-Reinforcement
Learning for Out-of-Distribution Tasks

Jeongmo Kim 1 Yisak Park 1 Minung Kim 1 Seungyul Han 1∗

Abstract

from off-policy samples and uses these samples for reinforcement learning, resulting in sample-efficient learning
and faster convergence compared to traditional methods. In
contrast, another prominent context-based meta-RL method,
VariBad (Zintgraf et al., 2019), employs a Bayesian approach to learn a belief distribution over environments, effectively managing the exploration-exploitation trade-off
in previously unseen environments. Recently, to address
this issue and better distinguish tasks based on their characteristics, advanced representation learning methods such
as contrastive learning have been increasingly adopted in
meta-RL (Fu et al., 2021; Choshen & Tamar, 2023). CCM
(Fu et al., 2021) is a meta-RL method that integrates contrastive learning with PEARL. In CCM, task latents from
the same task are treated as having a positive relationship
and are trained to be close to each other, while latents from
different tasks are treated as having a negative relationship
and are trained to be distant.

Meta reinforcement learning aims to develop policies that generalize to unseen tasks sampled from
a task distribution. While context-based meta-RL
methods improve task representation using task latents, they often struggle with out-of-distribution
(OOD) tasks. To address this, we propose TaskAware Virtual Training (TAVT), a novel algorithm
that accurately captures task characteristics for
both training and OOD scenarios using metricbased representation learning. Our method successfully preserves task characteristics in virtual
tasks and employs a state regularization technique
to mitigate overestimation errors in state-varying
environments. Numerical results demonstrate that
TAVT significantly enhances generalization to
OOD tasks across various MuJoCo and MetaWorld environments. Our code is available at
https://github.com/JM-Kim-94/tavt.git.

Advanced representation learning in meta-RL improves the
ability to distinguish training tasks through learned task
latents. However, most existing methods assume that the
test task distribution matches the training distribution, limiting their effectiveness on out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks.
Latent Dynamics Mixture (LDM) (Lee & Chung, 2021)
addresses this by training policies with virtual tasks (VTs)
created via linear interpolation of task latents learned by
VariBad, improving OOD generalization. Despite its benefits, we identify two key issues with the existing methods for
VT construction. First, generated VTs often fail to capture
task characteristics accurately. Second, LDM focuses solely
on reward sample generation, which struggles in environments with task-dependent state transitions. To overcome
these limitations, we propose Task-Aware Virtual Training
(TAVT), a novel algorithm that generates VTs accurately
reflecting task characteristics for both training and OOD
scenarios. Using a Bisimulation metric (Ferns et al., 2011;
Ferns & Precup, 2014), our method captures task variations,
such as changing goal positions, and incorporates an on-off
task latent loss to stabilize the task latents. In addition, we
introduce task-preserving sample generation to ensure VTs
generate realistic sample contexts while maintaining taskspecific features. Finally, to address state-varying environments, our task decoder generates full dynamics including

1. Introduction
Research in meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL) aims to
train policies on training tasks sampled from a training task
distribution, with the goal of enabling the learned policy
to adapt and perform well on unseen test tasks. Modelagnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017) seeks to
find initial parameters that can generalize well to new tasks
by using policy gradients to measure how well the current
policy parameter can adapt to new tasks. On the other hand,
to effectively distinguish tasks while capturing the task characteristics, context-based meta-RL methods that learn task
latents through representation learning has been researched
recently (Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2019; Fu et al.,
2021). One of the most well-known context-based methods,
PEARL (Rakelly et al., 2019), learns task representations
1

Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea. * Correspondence to: Seungyul Han <syhan@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

