AdvI2I: Adversarial Image Attack on Image-to-Image Diffusion Models

Yaopei Zeng 1 Yuanpu Cao 1 Bochuan Cao 1 Yurui Chang 1 Jinghui Chen 1 Lu Lin 1
CAUTION: This paper contains explicit content that may be disturbing to some readers.

Abstract

Zhang et al., 2023). However, these advancements have also
raised significant ethical and safety concerns. Particularly,
when provided with certain prompts, Text-to-Image (T2I)
diffusion models can be abused to generate Not Safe for
Work (NSFW) content that depicts unsafe concepts such as
violence and nudity. This issue stems from the presence of
NSFW samples in the large-scale training datasets sourced
from the Internet (Schuhmann et al., 2022), making it a pervasive problem in emerging diffusion models (Truong et al.,
2024; Schramowski et al., 2023). Despite some early efforts have been made in defending against the generation of
NSFW content (Gandikota et al., 2023; 2024; Schramowski
et al., 2023; CompVis, 2022), recent studies have shown
that these safeguards can still be circumvented by carefully
crafted adversarial prompts (Yang et al., 2024c; Ma et al.,
2024; Yang et al., 2024a; Tsai et al., 2023). As a result,
malicious users can exploit these models to generate NSFW
images for unethical purposes.

Recent advances in diffusion models have significantly enhanced the quality of image synthesis, yet they have also introduced serious safety
concerns, particularly the generation of Not Safe
for Work (NSFW) content. Previous research
has demonstrated that adversarial prompts can
be used to generate NSFW content. However,
such adversarial text prompts are often easily detectable by text-based filters, limiting their efficacy. In this paper, we expose a previously overlooked vulnerability: adversarial image attacks
targeting Image-to-Image (I2I) diffusion models.
We propose AdvI2I, a novel framework that manipulates input images to induce diffusion models to generate NSFW content. By optimizing a
generator to craft adversarial images, AdvI2I circumvents existing defense mechanisms, such as
Safe Latent Diffusion (SLD), without altering the
text prompts. Furthermore, we introduce AdvI2IAdaptive, an enhanced version that adapts to potential countermeasures and minimizes the resemblance between adversarial images and NSFW
concept embeddings, making the attack even more
resilient against defenses. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that both AdvI2I
and AdvI2I-Adaptive can effectively bypass current safeguards, highlighting the urgent need for
stronger security measures to address the misuse
of I2I diffusion models. The code is available at
https://github.com/Spinozaaa/AdvI2I.

While adversarial prompts present a notable risk to the generation safety of diffusion models, their Achilles’ heel lies
in that such attacks work by changing the input text prompt,
which can exhibit easily detectable patterns that distinguish
them from natural prompts. Specifically, we applied four
types of simple filters (perplexity filter, keyword filter, embedding filter and large language model (LLM) filter) to a
range of adversarial prompt attacks (Zhuang et al., 2023;
Kou et al., 2023; Tsai et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2024c), and found that even the simplest filters can
effectively identify adversarial prompts from normal ones
in most cases (see more detailed in Section 3.1). Notably,
a naive perplexity filter can (on average) reduce the attack
success rate (ASR) of adversarial prompts by 58%, while
LLM as the safety filter reduces the ASR to under 20%.

1. Introduction

This suggests that adversarial text prompts can be identified,
which means that diffusion models can reject generating
images with such queries. However, the new question is:

Recently, diffusion models have made significant strides
in the domain of image synthesis, demonstrating their ability to produce high-quality images (Rombach et al., 2022;

Does the rejection of adversarial text prompts truly ensure
the safety of diffusion models?

1

College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, State College PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Yaopei Zeng <ypz5549@psu.edu>, Lu Lin <lulin@psu.edu>.

In this work, we provide a negative answer to this question.
We reveal the risk of adversarial images that can also induce diffusion models to generate NSFW images, which has
not been well explored in previous research. We propose

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

