Inverse problems with experiment-guided AlphaFold

Advaith Maddipatla * 1 2 3 Nadav Bojan Sellam * 1 3 Meital Bojan * 1 3
Sanketh Vedula 1 3 † Paul Schanda 3 † Ailie Marx 4 5 † Alex M. Bronstein 1 3 †

1. Introduction

Abstract

Proteins are inherently dynamic entities, sampling a continuum of conformational states to fulfill their biological
roles. Experimental techniques such as X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, and
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) inherently report on
ensemble-averaged data rather than singular static snapshots.
In X-ray crystallography, the resolved electron density map
represents a spatial and temporal average over all molecules
in the crystal lattice, with regions of flexibility manifesting
as diffuse or poorly resolved density. NMR spectroscopy
measures the interaction between nuclear spins (e.g., magnetization transfer due to nuclear Overhauser effect, NOE)
and spins and electrons (e.g., chemical shifts) arising from
dynamic conformational ensembles in solution, with these
experimental restraints used computationally to resolve compatible structural states. Cryo-EM similarly resolves multiple conformational states, as individual particles frozen
in vitreous ice adopt distinct orientations and conformations, which are computationally classified into discrete or
continuous flexibility ranges.

Proteins exist as a dynamic ensemble of multiple conformations, and these motions are often
crucial for their functions. However, current structure prediction methods predominantly yield a
single conformation, overlooking the conformational heterogeneity revealed by diverse experimental modalities. Here, we present a framework for building experiment-grounded protein
structure generative models that infer conformational ensembles consistent with measured experimental data. The key idea is to treat stateof-the-art protein structure predictors (e.g., AlphaFold3) as sequence-conditioned structural priors, and cast ensemble modeling as posterior inference of protein structures given experimental
measurements. Through extensive real-data experiments, we demonstrate the generality of our
method to incorporate a variety of experimental
measurements. In particular, our framework uncovers previously unmodeled conformational heterogeneity from crystallographic densities, and
generates high-accuracy NMR ensembles orders
of magnitude faster than the status quo. Notably,
we demonstrate that our ensembles outperform
AlphaFold3 (Abramson et al., 2024) and sometimes better fit experimental data than publicly deposited structures to the Protein Data Bank (PDB,
Burley et al. (2017)). We believe that this approach will unlock building predictive models
that fully embrace experimentally observed conformational diversity.

On the computational front, ab initio protein structure determination based on modeling the molecule’s free energy
and its subsequent minimization (e.g., Rosetta and many
of its variants (Baek et al., 2021; 2024)) have been only
partially successful and computationally expensive. A giant
leap in protein structure prediction resulted from the fundamental discovery of the coevolution of contacting residues
(Göbel et al., 1994; Hopf et al., 2014), underlying deep
learning-based models such as AlphaFold (Jumper et al.,
2021; Abramson et al., 2024), which had a groundbreaking
impact on structural biology and was awarded the recent
2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Protein structure predictors are trained exclusively on Xray crystallographic models, which are themselves fitted to
electron density maps averaged over trillions of molecule
instances. While it has been recognised several decades
ago that the conformations of proteins in crystals are heterogeneous (Smith et al., 1986; Furnham et al., 2006), early
crystallographic refinements prioritized single-conformer
models. Advances in resolution, the more widespread application of room-temperature crystallographic experiments

*

Equally
contributing
first
author. † Equally
contributing
senior
author. Correspondence
contact:
sai.maddipatla@cs.ox.ac.uk, n.sellam@campus.technion.ac.il,
meital.bojan@campus.technion.ac.il 1 Technion–Israel Institute
of Technology, Israel. 2 University of Oxford, UK. 3 Institute of
Science and Technology, Austria. 4 Tel Hai Academic College,
Israel. 5 MIGAL - Galilee Research Institute, Israel.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

