Towards Understanding Fine-Tuning Mechanisms of LLMs via Circuit Analysis

Xu Wang 1 2 Yan Hu 2 Wenyu Du 1 Reynold Cheng 1 Benyou Wang 2 Difan Zou 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Fine-tuning significantly improves the performance of Large Language Models (LLMs), yet
its underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. This paper aims to provide an in-depth interpretation of the fine-tuning process through circuit analysis, a popular tool in Mechanistic Interpretability (MI). Unlike previous studies (Prakash
et al., 2024; Chhabra et al., 2024) that focus on
tasks where pre-trained models already perform
well, we develop a set of mathematical tasks
where fine-tuning yields substantial performance
gains, which are closer to the practical setting.
In our experiments, we identify circuits at various checkpoints during fine-tuning and examine
the interplay between circuit analysis, fine-tuning
methods, and task complexities. First, we find
that while circuits maintain high node similarity
before and after fine-tuning, their edges undergo
significant changes, which is in contrast to the previous work (Prakash et al., 2024; Chhabra et al.,
2024) that show circuits only add some additional
components after fine-tuning. Based on these observations, we develop a circuit-aware Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) method, which assigns ranks
to layers based on edge changes in the circuits.
Experimental results demonstrate that our circuitbased LoRA algorithm achieves an average performance improvement of 2.46% over standard
LoRA with similar parameter sizes. Furthermore,
we explore how combining circuits from subtasks
can enhance fine-tuning in compositional tasks,
providing new insights into the design of such
tasks and deepening the understanding of circuit
dynamics and fine-tuning mechanisms.

Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) has become a powerful
approach for exploring the inner workings of machine learning models, particularly Large Language Models (LLMs)
(Rai et al., 2024). It provides valuable insights into how
information flows and transforms across different layers
(Ferrando et al., 2024). One of the most critical aspects
of deploying LLMs in real-world scenarios is fine-tuning
(Chung et al., 2024). However, the interpretability of how
pre-trained models improve during fine-tuning remains limited, and the underlying mechanisms enabling their success
across tasks require further investigation.
Many studies in MI regard models as computational graphs
(Geiger et al., 2021), where circuits are specific subgraphs
that perform identifiable functions (Wang et al., 2022). Notably, this framework has been successfully applied to various LLMs, revealing emergent behaviors within attention
heads and Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) (Heimersheim
& Janiak, 2023; Burns et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2023;
Gould et al., 2023). Moreover, circuits have recently been
leveraged to investigate the fine-tuning process of language
models, seeking to understand the mechanisms behind finetuning (Prakash et al., 2024; Chhabra et al., 2024; Jain et al.,
2024). However, these studies often focus on tasks where
pre-trained models already perform well (e.g., GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) achieves around 98% accuracy on the IOI
task), or they use general data for fine-tuning rather than
domain-specific datasets (Prakash et al., 2024). Under such
conditions, fine-tuning mainly enhances existing mechanisms (e.g., by adding some attention heads). Consequently,
their arguments may not be applicable in more practical
fine-tuning scenarios where models initially perform poorly
and require fine-tuning on domain data.
To better understand fine-tuning mechanisms in practical
settings, it is crucial to focus on tasks where fine-tuning
leads to performance improvements. In this work, we design a class of mathematical tasks on which pre-trained large
language models initially perform poorly with low accuracy,
yet demonstrates a performance boost after fine-tuned. We
employ the Edge Attribution Patching with Integrated Gradients (EAP-IG) (Hanna et al., 2024) method to identify
circuits within both pre-trained and fine-tuned models. Surprisingly, we observe that this approach consistently finds

1
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of
Hong Kong 2 School of Data Science, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. This work is done when Xu Wang
is working at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
supervised by Dr. Yan Hu. Correspondence to: Difan Zou
<dzou@cs.hku.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

