Enhancing Target-unspecific Tasks through a Features Matrix

Fangming Cui 1 Yonggang Zhang 2 Xuan Wang 3 Xinmei Tian 4 Jun Yu† 5

Abstract

CLIP utilizes a large collection of 400 million text-image
pairs. One of CLIP’s most appealing features is its ability
to perform zero-shot inference. During inference, CLIP
utilizes hand-crafted text inputs, known as prompts, to generate classification weights to predict image features, all
without requiring any target-specific parameters training.

Recent developments in prompt learning of large
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have significantly improved performance in target-specific
tasks. However, these prompting methods often
struggle to tackle the target-unspecific or generalizable tasks effectively. It may be attributed to the
fact that overfitting training causes the model to
forget its general knowledge. The general knowledge has a strong promotion on target-unspecific
tasks. To alleviate this issue, we propose a novel
Features Matrix (FM) approach designed to enhance these models on target-unspecific tasks.
Our method extracts and leverages general knowledge, shaping a Features Matrix (FM). Specifically, the FM captures the semantics of diverse
inputs from a deep and fine perspective, preserving essential general knowledge, which mitigates
the risk of overfitting. Representative evaluations
demonstrate that: 1) the FM is compatible with
existing frameworks as a generic and flexible module, and 2) the FM significantly showcases its effectiveness in enhancing target-unspecific tasks
(base-to-novel generalization, domain generalization, and cross-dataset generalization), achieving
state-of-the-art performance.

In contrast to hand-crafted prompts, a model-parameter tuning method has been proposed as prompt learning to automatically learn prompt embeddings (Zhou et al., 2022a).
For instance, CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b) represents the first
method that specifically focuses on learning the text embeddings of prompts with few-shot samples training while keeping the CLIP model frozen. Although CoOp (Zhou et al.,
2022b) has shown significant performance improvements
over hand-crafted prompts in target-specific base classes,
it may yield inferior performance compared to the handcrafted prompt CLIP in generalization tasks, e.g., the novel
class of generalization from base-to-novel (see Table 1). To
overcome this challenge, some effective methods (Lu et al.,
2022; Zhu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022a;b; Yao et al.,
2023a; Chen et al.; Li et al., 2024a) with tuning textual
embeddings have been proposed. These methods aim to enhance the performance of novel classes, surpassing the novel
performance of the previous CoOp. Although the novel ability of these methods surpasses that of CoOp (67.96%), it
is unfortunate that the novel ability of these methods still
falls short compared to the hand-crafted prompt method
(CLIP: 74.22%), as shown in Table 1 (Novel). A possible
reason (Zhou et al., 2022a) may be that these methods with
tuning text embeddings tend to overfit the downstream data
distributions. This overfitting can result in the model losing
its inherent generalization capabilities (Yao et al., 2023a)
obtained from hand-crafted prompts (Radford et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Large vision-language models such as CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) have attracted increasing attention for remarkable generalization performance. Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
are trained to align textual and visual modalities by leveraging extensive datasets. For instance, a prominent example
of such models is CLIP, which has achieved remarkable
success across a wide range of downstream tasks (Greer
et al., 2024; Sanghi et al., 2022; Etchegaray et al., 2024).

To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel Features Matrix (FM) with CLIP for target-unspecific tasks. Our method
incorporates multiple hand-crafted prompts to extract general information as a pre-trained matrix from frozen CLIP
to enhance generalization. The matrix of pre-trained features can delve into the semantics of different hand-crafted
prompts finely and deeply, which reduces the risk of forgetting the essential general knowledge of pre-trained CLIP.
Importantly, our method is compatible with current prompt
learning frameworks for textual or multi-modal prompt
learning and serves as a flexible and generic module. As

1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Hong Kong Baptist University
Meituan Inc. 4 University of Science and Technology of China
5
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen). Correspondence to:
Jun Yu† <yujun@hit.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

