A Bregman Proximal Viewpoint on Neural Operators

Abdel-Rahim Mezidi 1 * Jordan Patracone 1 * Saverio Salzo 2 * Amaury Habrard 1 3 Massimiliano Pontil 4 5
Remi Emonet 1 3 Marc Sebban 1

Abstract

tries to design equivariant Fourier layers, thereby enhancing
the representation power and robustness of the architecture. To better scale the depth of neural operators, the FFNO (Tran et al., 2023) proposed separable spectral layers
and improved residual connections, along with a bag of
training tricks. The FNO are extended to Wavelet Neural
Operators (WNO) (Tripura & Chakraborty, 2023) by replacing Fourier layers with wavelet layers to further exploit
multiscale information. The U-shaped Neural Operator (UNO) (Rahman et al., 2023) adapts the U-net architecture for
neural operators, enabling mapping between function spaces
through integral operators, thus broadening the applicability of neural architectures to diverse domains. Differently,
the DeepONet architecture (Lu et al., 2021) comprises two
intertwined components: a branch network responsible for
encoding discrete input function spaces, and a trunk network dedicated to encoding the domain of output functions.
Operating as a conditional model, DeepONet leverages the
embedding of inputs and outputs via a dot product operation,
facilitating the approximation of complex functions through
a structured network topology. Finally, Neural Inverse Operators (NIO) (Molinaro et al., 2023) tackle inverse problems
by combining DeepONet and FNO architectures to map
operators to functions, thereby extending the applicability
of neural operators to coefficient estimation tasks.
Some approaches inspired by attention mechanisms, pivotal
in image and natural language processing, have also been
considered in operator learning. LOCA (Learning Operators with Coupled Attention) (Kissas et al., 2022) facilitates
robust gradient estimation, particularly in scenarios with
limited training data, by combining attention with kernel
mechanisms. The General Neural Operator Transformer
(GNOT) (Hao et al., 2023) is a scalable framework based
self-attention mechanisms allowing to deal with heterogeneous inputs useful for modeling diverse physical systems.
Some physics-informed variants integrating information
from PDEs during the learning process have been proposed
enhancing model interpretability and generalization: PIDeepONet (Wang et al., 2021) and its Long-Time Integration variant (LTI-PI-DeepONet) (Wang & Perdikaris,
2023), PINO (Physics-Informed Neural Operator) (Li et al.,
2021b) a hybrid extension of FNO, or other variations such
as V-DeepONet (Goswami et al., 2022) and Modified DeepONet (Wang et al., 2022).

We present several advances on neural operators
by viewing the action of operator layers as the
minimizers of Bregman regularized optimization
problems over Banach function spaces. The proposed framework allows interpreting the activation operators as Bregman proximity operators
from dual to primal space. This novel viewpoint
is general enough to recover classical neural operators as well as a new variant, coined Bregman
neural operators, which includes the inverse activation operator and features the same expressivity
of standard neural operators. Numerical experiments support the added benefits of the Bregman
variant of Fourier neural operators for training
deeper and more accurate models.

1. Introduction
Neural operators (Kovachki et al., 2021; 2023), a recent
extension of neural networks, have emerged as a versatile
framework for learning mappings between function spaces.
These operators have shown great potential in solving partial differential equations (PDEs) and simulating complex
dynamical systems. The exploration of neural architectures
for the approximation and learning of operators has led to
the development of a variety of models.
One influential contribution is the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2021a), sketched in Figure 1, which
transforms encoded input data into frequency components
in order to learn intricate relationships in the frequency
domain. More recently, the Group-Equivariant FNO (GFNO) (Helwig et al., 2023) additionally leverages symme*
Equal contribution 1 Université Jean Monnet Saint-Etienne,
CNRS, Institut d’Optique Graduate School, Inria, Laboratoire
Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINT-ETIENNE, France
2
DIAG, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy 3 Institut
Universitaire de France (IUF) 4 Computational Statistics and Machine Learning, IIT, Genova, Italy 5 Departement of Computer
Science, UCL, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Abdel-Rahim Mezidi <abdel.rahim.mezidi@univ-st-etienne.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

