Generalization Analysis for Supervised Contrastive Representation Learning
under Non-IID Settings

Nong Minh Hieu 1 Antoine Ledent 1

Abstract

points of other classes, thereby ensuring inter-class separability under an appropriate distance metric. Motivated by
this intuition, CRL has been utilized in numerous ML tasks
as a pre-processing step to improve data representations.
Essentially, the goal of CRL is to learn a representation
function f : X Ñ Rd that maps data from an input space X
to a representation space (potentially of lower dimension).
The underlying strategy for representation learning is by
pulling together similar pairs of data points px, x` q while
pushing apart dissimilar pairs px, x´
i q via minimizing a certain contrastive loss function ℓ. For instance, given an input
k
tuple px, x` , tx´
i ui“1 q where k is the number of negative
samples, the logistic loss (otherwise known as N-pair loss
(Sohn, 2016)) ℓ : Rk Ñ R` is defined as follows:
˜
¸
k
ÿ
ℓpvq “ log 1 `
expp´vi q ,
(1)
i“1

Contrastive Representation Learning (CRL) has
achieved impressive success in various domains
in recent years. Nevertheless, the theoretical understanding of the generalization behavior of CRL
has remained limited. Moreover, to the best of our
knowledge, the current literature only analyzes
generalization bounds under the assumption that
the data tuples used for contrastive learning are
independently and identically distributed. However, in practice, we are often limited to a fixed
pool of reusable labeled data points, making it
inevitable to recycle data across tuples to create
sufficiently large datasets. Therefore, the tuplewise independence condition imposed by previous
works is invalidated. In this paper, we provide a
generalization analysis for the CRL framework
under non-i.i.d. settings that adheres to practice
more realistically. Drawing inspiration from the
literature on U-statistics, we derive generalization
bounds which indicate that the required number
of samples in each class scales as the logarithm
of the covering number of the class of learnable
feature representations associated to that class.
Next, we apply our main results to derive excess
risk bounds for common function classes such as
linear maps and neural networks.

where vi “ f pxqJ f px` q ´ f pxqJ f px´
i q.
The application of CRL spans a wide variety of ML disciplines, including computer vision (Chen et al., 2020; He
et al., 2019; Gidaris et al., 2018), graph representation learning (Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; Zhu et al., 2020; Velickovic et al., 2019), natural language processing (Gao et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Reimers & Gurevych, 2021) and
time series forecasting (Lee et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2022;
Nie1 et al., 2023; Eldele et al., 2021). The increasing empirical success naturally inspires multiple theoretical works
(Arora et al., 2019; Lei et al., 2023; Hieu et al., 2024) dedicated to studying the generalization behavior of the CRL
framework. However, the analyses performed by previous
works have only explored the i.i.d. settings where input
tuples are independently and identically distributed (cf. Section 3.2). In reality, training datasets are often limited to
fixed pools of labeled samples (Sohn, 2016; van den Oord
et al., 2019; Khosla et al., 2020). Therefore, in order to
create sufficiently large datasets for contrastive learning, it
is a standard practice to “recycle” data points across input
tuples (cf. Section 3.3). Effectively, it is possible for the
same data points to appear multiple times in different input
tuples, invalidating the independence criterion. As a result,
previous results on generalization bounds for CRL might not
comply with most practical use cases where data is limited.

1. Introduction
The performance of many machine learning (ML) algorithms is often significantly influenced by the quality of data
representations. For example, in multi-class classification
problems, it is typically desirable for data points within the
same class to exhibit proximity, reflecting intra-class compactness, while maintaining sufficient separation from data
1

School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore
Management University. Correspondence to: Nong Minh Hieu
<mh.nong.2024@phdcs.smu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

