Graph World Model

Tao Feng 1 Yexin Wu 1 Guanyu Lin 1 Jiaxuan You 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
A world model (WM) (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018) constructs
the world observations as states and predicts future states
based on given actions. Modern world models are trained
with massive data (Liu et al., 2024b; Cui & Gao), demonstrating successful prediction, generation, and planning capabilities. However, existing world models do not directly
generalize to structured data, primarily graphs, that are ubiquitous in science (Jin et al., 2018; You et al., 2018) and
industry (Ying et al., 2018; You et al., 2022) and can be further enriched with multi-modal information (Ektefaie et al.,
2023). Therefore, our paper aims to raise attention to this
pressing research question: Can we extend a WM to handle
graph-structured data across a broad range of tasks?

World models (WMs) demonstrate strong capabilities in prediction, generation, and planning
tasks. Existing WMs primarily focus on unstructured data while cannot leverage the ubiquitous
structured data, often represented as graphs, in
the digital world. While multiple graph foundation models have been proposed, they focus
on graph learning tasks and cannot extend to
diverse multi-modal data and interdisciplinary
tasks. To address these challenges, we propose the
Graph World Model (GWM), a world model that
supports both unstructured and graph-structured
states with multi-modal information and represents diverse tasks as actions. The core of a
GWM is a generic message-passing algorithm
to aggregate structured information, either over
a unified multi-modal token space by converting
multi-modal data into text (GWM-T) or a unified multi-modal embedding space by modalityspecific encoders (GWM-E). Notably, GWM introduces action nodes to support diverse tasks,
where action nodes are linked to other nodes via
direct reference or similarity computation. Extensive experiments on 6 tasks from diverse domains,
including multi-modal generation and matching,
recommendation, graph prediction, multi-agent,
retrieval-augmented generation, and planning and
optimization, show that the same GWM outperforms or matches domain-specific baselines’
performance, benefits from multi-hop structures,
and demonstrate strong zero-shot/few-shot capabilities on unseen new tasks. Our codes for
GWM is released at https://github.com/
ulab-uiuc/GWM.

Existing WMs mainly focus on unstructured data. For example, iVideoGPT (Wu et al., 2024a) and Genie (Bruce
et al., 2024) are successful world models over video data.
However, the relations and structures in the data are rarely
explored in these works. Although some works (Zhang et al.,
2021; Zhu et al., 2022) attempt to model structured data in
WM using graphs, they have focused solely on planning
problems in a specific domain. In recent years, researchers
have also explored the concept of the Graph Foundation
Model (GFM) (Liu et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2024a). However, these methods are confined to predefined graph learning tasks, which cannot easily extend to: (1) multi-modal
input data including images and text, (2) diverse tasks beyond standard graph prediction tasks, and (3) data without
explicit structure, i.e., standard unstructured data.
To address these challenges, we propose the Graph World
Model (GWM) that embeds the capabilities of the graph
into the WM, which models the current state as a graph
and the action as a node (see Table 1 for comparison with
existing methods). Various tasks can be expressed as action
nodes; for example, in a graph prediction task, predicting
the label of a given node/edge/subgraph leads to intended
action nodes that link relevant nodes in the state graph, i.e.,
target nodes, to the action node; in a retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) task, we can also represent a user query
as an unintended action node that links to target nodes in
the state graph via embedding similarities.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Urbana, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Tao Feng
<taofeng2@illinois.edu>, Jiaxuan You <jiaxuan@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To build GWMs, we first introduce a simplified token-based
GWM (GWM-T), which integrates multi-modal data like
1

