Private Model Personalization Revisited
Conor Snedeker * 1 Xinyu Zhou * 1 Raef Bassily 2

Abstract

1

Introduction

The rapid advances in machine learning have revolutionized domains such as healthcare, finance, and personalized
services. However, this progress relies heavily on the availability of user data, which presents two critical challenges.
First, user data is often statistically heterogeneous, that is,
individual users have distinct data distributions. This heterogeneity hinders the training of a single global model that
performs well for all users. Second, the reliance on sensitive
user data raises significant privacy concerns, necessitating
robust mechanisms that offer strong privacy protections.

We study model personalization under user-level
differential privacy (DP) in the shared representation framework. In this problem, there are n users
whose data is statistically heterogeneous, and their
optimal parameters share an unknown embedding
U ∗ ∈ Rd×k that maps the user parameters in Rd
to low-dimensional representations in Rk , where
k ≪ d. Our goal is to privately recover the shared
embedding and the local low-dimensional representations with small excess risk in the federated
setting. We propose a private, efficient federated
learning algorithm to learn the shared embedding
based on the FedRep algorithm in (Collins et al.,
2021). Unlike (Collins et al., 2021), our algorithm satisfies differential privacy, and our results
hold for the case of noisy labels. In contrast to
prior work on private model personalization (Jain
et al., 2021), our utility guarantees hold under a
larger class of users’ distributions (sub-Gaussian
instead of Gaussian distributions). Additionally,
in natural parameter regimes, we improve the privacy error term in (Jain et al., 2021) by a factor
e
of O(dk).
Next, we consider the binary classification setting. We present an information-theoretic
construction to privately learn the shared embedding and derive a margin-based accuracy guarantee that is independent of d. Our method utilizes
the Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform to reduce
the effective dimensions of the shared embedding and the users’ data. This result shows that
dimension-independent risk bounds are possible
in this setting under a margin loss.

Model personalization has emerged as a key strategy to address the challenge of statistical heterogeneity by adapting
models to individual users, rather than relying on a single
global model that may perform suboptimally across diverse
data distributions. A widely used framework for personalization is shared representation learning, where users collaborate to learn a low-dimensional embedding that captures
commonalities in their tasks. This shared embedding allows
users to train their local models more efficiently, leveraging
the embedding to complement their unique data.
However, despite its effectiveness in handling heterogeneity,
model personalization introduces additional privacy concerns, as learning shared representations involves user collaboration, which can inadvertently expose sensitive information. Ensuring rigorous privacy protections in this setting
requires formal guarantees, such as user-level differential
privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006), which prevents adversaries from inferring an individual’s presence in the training
dataset based on the trained model. Existing approaches to
private model personalization suffer from limitations such
as restrictive assumptions about data distributions, centralized processing requirements, and suboptimal privacy-utility
trade-offs.
In this work, we study model personalization under userlevel differential privacy via shared representation learning. In this problem, there are n users, where user i ∈ [n]
is associated with a data distribution Di and a dataset
Si = (z1 , . . . zm ) ∼ Dim . The optimal parameter of user
i is denoted as wi∗ ∈ Rd . We aim at learning a shared
low-dimensional embedding U ∗ ∈ Rd×k , where k ≪ d,
and user-specific parameters v1∗ , . . . , vn∗ ∈ Rk such that
wi∗ = U ∗ vi∗ for each user i ∈ [n], under user-level DP. We

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Ohio State University 2 Department of Computer
Science & Engineering and the Translational Data Analytics
Institute (TDAI), The Ohio State University. Correspondence
to: Conor Snedeker <snedeker.31@buckeyemail.osu.edu>, Xinyu
Zhou <zhou.3542@buckeyemail.osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

