Subgroups Matter for Robust Bias Mitigation

Anissa Alloula 1 Charles Jones 2 Ben Glocker 2 Bartłomiej W. Papież 1

Abstract

by bias in training data such as spurious correlations (SC),
under-representation of certain subgroups, or shifts in the
presentation of the target Y (Jones et al., 2024). Bias mitigation methods aim to address these issues by training more
robust models which are less susceptible to these biases,
thereby improving generalisation. These methods generally
adapt model training to improve the performance of some
disadvantaged subgroups within the training data.

Despite the constant development of new bias mitigation methods for machine learning, no method
consistently succeeds, and a fundamental question
remains unanswered: when and why do bias mitigation techniques fail? In this paper, we hypothesise that a key factor may be the often-overlooked
but crucial step shared by many bias mitigation
methods: the definition of subgroups. To investigate this, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation
of state-of-the-art bias mitigation methods across
multiple vision and language classification tasks,
systematically varying subgroup definitions, including coarse, fine-grained, intersectional, and
noisy subgroups. Our results reveal that subgroup
choice significantly impacts performance, with
certain groupings paradoxically leading to worse
outcomes than no mitigation at all. Our findings suggest that observing a disparity between a
set of subgroups is not a sufficient reason to use
those subgroups for mitigation. Through theoretical analysis, we explain these phenomena and
uncover a counter-intuitive insight that, in some
cases, improving fairness with respect to a particular set of subgroups is best achieved by using
a different set of subgroups for mitigation. Our
work highlights the importance of careful subgroup definition in bias mitigation and presents it
as an alternative lever for improving the robustness and fairness of machine learning models.

Despite the number of bias mitigation methods which have
been proposed, benchmarks are increasingly reporting that
the performance of these methods is inconsistent when
tested in new settings, and that they often fail to surpass
the empirical risk minimisation (ERM) baseline (Zong et al.,
2023; Zietlow et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Shrestha et al.,
2022; Alloula et al., 2024). Some efforts have been made to
begin to elucidate the conditions under which certain bias
mitigation methods might be valid, such as the work of Jones
et al. (2025) in fair representation learning and Schrouff et al.
(2024) in data balancing. However, the choice of an appropriate mitigation method is only one aspect of the problem.
To successfully mitigate bias, we must also select which
subgroups we wish to apply the methods on – a question
which very little work has explicitly addressed.
Indeed, most bias mitigation methods rely on some form of
grouping to first identify disadvantaged subgroups within
the training data and then to implement group-based strategies aimed at improving generalisation or fairness. This can
be as simple as observing a disparity in model performance
between men and women, and trying to fix this by rebalancing the training data such that both subgroups are more
uniformly distributed (Weng et al., 2023), or noticing that a
model performs poorly on data coming from a specific type
of scanner, and applying a robust learning strategy such as
adversarial training to prevent learning of scanner-specific
but task-irrelevant information (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015).
To date, the literature has predominantly focused on simple
and coarse subgroups, for example blonde hair and nonblonde hair in the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015b) or
waterbirds and landbirds in the waterbird dataset (Sagawa*
et al., 2020). In medical applications, the subgroups are
often “white” or “non-white”, “men” or “women”, or some
coarse binning of age (Ricci Lara et al., 2022). Subgroup
choice is often motivated by two factors: a) practical constraints, for instance only having annotations for common

1. Introduction
A significant barrier to the wider deployment of machine
learning (ML) models is their tendency to fail when tested
on distributions that differ from their training data. One
particularly concerning manifestation of this issue is performance degradation for population subgroups, often caused
1
University of Oxford, UK 2 Imperial College London, UK. Correspondence to: Anissa Alloula <anissa.alloula@dtc.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

