MASS: MAthematical Data Selection via Skill Graphs
for Pretraining Large Language Models

Jiazheng Li * 1 Lu Yu * 2 Qing Cui 2 Zhiqiang Zhang 2 Jun Zhou † 2 Yanfang Ye 3 Chuxu Zhang † 1

Abstract
High-quality data plays a critical role in the pretraining and fine-tuning of large language models
(LLMs), even determining their performance ceiling to some degree. Consequently, numerous data
selection methods have been proposed to identify
subsets of data that can effectively and efficiently
enhance model performance. However, most of
these methods focus on general data selection and
tend to overlook the specific nuances of domainrelated data. In this paper, we introduce MASS,
a MAthematical data Selection framework using
the Skill graph for pretraining LLMs in the mathematical reasoning domain. By taking into account
the unique characteristics of mathematics and reasoning, we construct a skill graph that captures
the mathematical skills and their interrelations
from a reference dataset. This skill graph guides
us in assigning quality scores to the target dataset,
enabling us to select the top-ranked subset which
is further used to pretrain LLMs. Experimental results demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness
of MASS across different model sizes (1B and
7B) and pretraining datasets (web data and synthetic data). Specifically, in terms of efficiency,
models trained on subsets selected by MASS can
achieve similar performance to models trained
on the original datasets, with a significant reduction in the number of trained tokens - ranging
from 50% to 70% fewer tokens. In terms of efficacy, when trained on the same amount of tokens,
models trained on the data selected by MASS outperform those trained on the original datasets by
3.3% to 5.9%. These results underscore the potential of MASS to improve both the efficiency and
effectiveness of pretraining LLMs.

Figure 1. The pipeline of MASS. (1) We first employ prompt engineering to extract mathematical skills from a reference dataset,
thereby constructing a skill graph. (2) We then score and rank the
target dataset using the constructed skill graph. The top-ranked
subset can further be selected and used to train LLMs.

1. Introduction
The success of large language models (LLMs) is closely
tied to the scaling up of model size, training data, and computational resources (Brown, 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022;
Qwen Team, 2024). Among these three factors, training
data serves as the foundation of LLMs’ rich knowledge
and capabilities, enabling them to excel in creative writing,
complex reasoning, and even agentic planning. Recently,
there is mounting evidence that pretraining on high-quality
and diverse corpora can significantly enhance LLM performance (Penedo et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a). For example,
Microsoft’s Phi series of models has been renowned for
their pretraining corpus’s quality and efficiency. The latest
Phi-4 model (Abdin et al., 2024), trained on 10T tokens, has
surpassed other models of the same size, including Qwen
2.5 (Qwen Team, 2024), which was trained on 18 trillion
tokens. This has led many researchers to focus on LLM
data curation methodologies, which include the selection of
high-quality sub-datasets (Wettig et al., 2024), deduplication of extensive datasets (Tirumala et al., 2023), and the
balancing of data from various domains (Xie et al., 2024),
among other techniques.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Connecticut, USA 2 Ant
Group, China 3 University of Notre Dame, USA. Correspondence to: Chuxu Zhang <chuxu.zhang@uconn.edu>, Jun Zhou
<jun.zhoujun@antgroup.com>.

In terms of data selection methods, the objective is to extract high-quality subsets from the original datasets such
that training LLMs on these subsets can achieve similar or
even superior performance on downstream tasks compared

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

