Federated Node-Level Clustering Network with
Cross-Subgraph Link Mending

Jingxin Liu 1 Renda Han 2 Wenxuan Tu 2 Haotian Wang 2 Junlong Wu 2 Jieren Cheng 2

Abstract
Subgraphs of a complete graph are usually distributed across multiple devices and can only be
accessed locally because the raw data cannot be
directly shared. However, existing node-level federated graph learning suffers from at least one of
the following issues: 1) heavily relying on labeled
graph samples that are difficult to obtain in realworld applications, and 2) partitioning a complete
graph into several subgraphs inevitably causes
missing links, leading to sub-optimal sample representations. To solve these issues, we propose a
novel Federated Node-level Clustering Network
(FedNCN), which mends the destroyed crosssubgraph links using clustering prior knowledge.
Specifically, within each client, we first design an
MLP-based projector to implicitly preserve key
clustering properties of a subgraph in a denoising
learning-like manner, and then upload the resultant clustering signals that are hard to reconstruct
for subsequent cross-subgraph links restoration.
In the server, we maximize the potential affinity
between subgraphs stemming from clustering signals by graph similarity estimation and minimize
redundant links via the N-Cut criterion. Moreover, we employ a GNN-based generator to learn
consensus prototypes from this mended graph,
enabling the MLP-GNN joint-optimized learner
to enhance data privacy during data transmission
and further promote the local model for better
clustering. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of FedNCN.

Figure 1. Research motivation for cross-subgraph link mending.
We visualize the encoded raw graph structure using heat maps.
The similarities of the destroyed and mended topologies relative to
the original topology are 44.74% and 78.45%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Graph machine learning (GML) is a well-established technique that harnesses the structure of graph data to facilitate
various learning tasks. A large amount of GML methods
have recently been developed and achieved satisfactory performance (Liang et al., 2023). Commonly, almost all of
them assume that the graph data is centralized and available unconditionally. However, in numerous real-world scenarios, such as medical data analysis (Huang et al., 2024),
smart transportation (Chen et al., 2024), and social networks
(Chen et al., 2022), a complete graph is usually partitioned
into multiple subgraphs, with each one distributed to an
isolated client without directly exposing the raw data. In
this background, node-level federated graph learning (FGL)
has emerged as a promising solution and has attracted a lot
of research attention in recent years.
To be brief, node-level FGL is a machine learning paradigm
composed of multiple isolated clients and an independent
server (Baek et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024)
to group the distributed subgraphs into categories while ensuring private data is not directly shared. Typically, each
client trains local model parameters with its own label signals and sends them to the server, while the server integrates
the uploaded signals to compute a consensus one that is
subsequently sent back to all clients to update the local
models. Despite their encouraging successes, we find that
these studies have at least one non-negligible limitation: 1)
heavily relying on labeled graph samples that are difficult
to obtain in real-world applications (Zhang et al., 2021; Tan

1

School of Cyberspace Security, Hainan University,
Haikou, China 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University, Haikou, China.
Correspondence
to: Wenxuan Tu <twx@hainanu.edu.cn>, Jieren Cheng
<992730@hainanu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

