Learning Robust Neural Processes with Risk-Averse Stochastic Optimization

Huafeng Liu 1 2 Yiran Fu 1 2 Liping Jing 1 2 3 Hui Li 1 2 Shuyang Lin 1 2
Jingyue Shi 1 2 Deqiang Ouyang 4 Jian Yu 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural processes (NPs) (Garnelo et al., 2018a;b) represent
a class of approximation models for Gaussian processes
(GPs) (Rasmussen, 2003), offering promising attributes in
terms of computational efficiency and uncertainty quantification. Unlike conventional statistical modeling, where a
user typically needs to manually specify a prior, such as the
smoothness of functions characterized by a Gaussian distribution in Gaussian processes, NPs subtly define a broad
spectrum of stochastic processes using neural networks in
a data-driven fashion. When trained appropriately, NPs
can delineate a flexible range of stochastic processes that
are particularly apt for representing complex functions that
existing stochastic processes struggle to capture.

Neural processes (NPs) are a promising paradigm
to enable skill transfer learning across tasks with
the aid of the distribution of functions. The previous NPs employ the empirical risk minimization principle in optimization. However, the fast
adaption ability to different tasks can vary widely,
and the worst fast adaptation can be catastrophic
in risk-sensitive tasks. To achieve robust neural
processes modeling, we consider the problem of
training models in a risk-averse manner, which
can control the worst fast adaption cases at a certain probabilistic level. By transferring the risk
minimization problem to a two-level finite sum
minimax optimization problem, we can easily
solve it via a double-looped stochastic mirror prox
algorithm with a task-aware variance reduction
mechanism via sampling samples across all tasks.
The mirror prox technique ensures better handling
of complex constraint sets and non-Euclidean geometries, making the optimization adaptable to
various tasks. The final solution, by aggregating prox points with the adaptive learning rates,
enables a stable and high-quality output. The proposed learning strategy can work with various
NPs flexibly and achieves less biased approximation with a theoretical guarantee. To illustrate the
superiority of the proposed model, we perform experiments on both synthetic and real-world data,
and the results demonstrate that our approach not
only helps to achieve more accurate performance
but also improves model robustness.

NPs model the relationship between inputs and outputs in
the form of probability distributions. This allows the model
to generate predictions with associated uncertainty, which is
particularly beneficial when only a small amount of training
data is available. By capturing the model’s confidence, NPs
are more robust in few-shot scenarios. NPs can leverage
meta-learning to extract shared knowledge from multiple
related tasks. This enables the model to quickly adapt to
new tasks by utilizing the information learned from previous
tasks. Even with limited data in the current task, the model
can make accurate predictions by drawing on this shared
knowledge. Unlike traditional Bayesian methods, NPs do
not depend on explicit prior assumptions. Instead, they
learn directly from the data, making them more flexible
and effective in few-shot learning contexts. Thanks to the
characteristics above of NPs, many researchers are focusing
on the few-shot learning capabilities of NPs (Gordon et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2024b; Bruinsma et al., 2023).
However, the optimization in most of the previous NPs
optimizations has adopted the empirical risk minimization
principle, overlooking the differences in rapid adaptation
between tasks. Given a batch of training tasks, NPs treat
the task weights uniformly, which can result in insufficient
training for the fast adaptation capability to certain tasks.
As shown in Figure 1, we present the original task risk
frequency statistics. It can be observed that high-risk tasks
(with risk values above 70%) account for more than 30%
of the total tasks. Therefore, when a new task matches

1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied
Intelligence, Beijing, China 2 School of Computer Science and
Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China 3 State
Key Laboratory of Advanced Rail Autonomous Operation, Beijing, China 4 Collage of Computer Science, Chongqing University,
Chongqing, China. Correspondence to: Deqiang Ouyang, Liping
Jing <deqiangouyang@cqu.edu.cn, lpjing@bjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

