Online Learning in the Random-Order Model

Martino Bernasconi * 1 Andrea Celli * 1 Riccardo Colini Baldeschi * 2 Federico Fusco * 3 Stefano Leonardi * 3
Matteo Russo * 3

Abstract

and matroid selection (Babaioff et al., 2018; Korula & Pál,
2009; Dimitrov & Plaxton, 2012; Ezra et al., 2022), and
online approximation algorithms (Gupta & Singla, 2020).
However, it has received little attention in online learning,
where the standard input regimes are either (i.i.d.) stochastic
or adversarial (see, e.g., Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020).
The study of online learning in the random-order model is
part of a broader research agenda that explores meaningful
models beyond worst-case analysis (Roughgarden, 2020).
Examples of other “intermediate” input models for online
learning can be found in Ben-David et al. (1997); Slivkins
& Upfal (2008); Lykouris et al. (2018); Sachs et al. (2022);
Haghtalab et al. (2022); Mazzetto & Upfal (2023).

In the random-order model for online learning, the
sequence of losses is chosen upfront by an adversary and presented to the learner after a random
permutation. Any random-order input is asymptotically equivalent to a stochastic i.i.d. one, but,
for finite times, it may exhibit significant nonstationarity, which can hinder the performance of
stochastic learning algorithms. While algorithms
for adversarial inputs naturally maintain their regret guarantees in random order, simple no-regret
algorithms exist for the stochastic model that fail
against random-order instances.

In random-order online learning, the T loss vectors are
generated arbitrarily by some adversary and then undergo a
uniform shuffling before being presented to the learner. This
input model is — to some extent — intermediate between
the stochastic model, where losses are drawn i.i.d. from
a fixed but unknown distribution, and the adversarial one,
where the adversary decides both the losses and the order
in which they are presented to the learner.

In this paper, we propose a general template
to adapt stochastic learning algorithms to the
random-order model without substantially affecting their regret guarantees. This allows us to recover improved regret bounds for prediction with
delays, online learning with constraints, and bandits with switching costs. Finally, we investigate
online classification and prove that, in random order, learnability is characterized by the VC dimension rather than the Littlestone dimension, thus
providing a further separation from the general
adversarial model.

A classical probabilistic result by De Finetti (1929) (see
also De Finetti, 1937; Hewitt & Savage, 1955; Diaconis
& Freedman, 1980) on sequences of exchangeable random
variables implies that sampling without replacement (i.e.,
the distribution over random-order loss sequences) is asymptotically indistinguishable from i.i.d. sampling from some
fixed distribution over losses1 . However, in the standard
finite-time online learning framework, the non-stationarity
of the random-order model can undermine learning algorithms that perform well in the stochastic setting. This
observation raises several questions about the random-order
model and its relationship with other input models.

1. Introduction
Random order is a natural input model for online algorithms: the input is generated upfront by an adversary but
is presented to the algorithm after a uniform random permutation. The random-order model is extensively studied
across various areas of computer science and economics,
such as optimal stopping problems (Dynkin, 1963; Krengel
& Sucheston, 1977; Peng & Tang, 2022), online matching

1.1. Our Results
In this paper, we initiate the systematic study of the randomorder input model in online learning. Since any realization
of random-order sequences of losses can be naturally captured by the standard adversarial model, it is immediate to
see that any algorithm for the adversarial model maintains
its guarantees in random order. Conversely, any i.i.d. se-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy 2 Central Applied Science, Meta, London, UK 3 Department of Computer, Control and Management
Engineering “Antonio Ruberti”, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
Correspondence to: Federico Fusco <fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

For more details, we refer to Appendix A.

