Improving Rationality in the Reasoning Process of Language Models
through Self-playing Game

Pinzheng Wang 1 2 Juntao Li 1 2 Zecheng Tang 1 2 Haijia Gui 1 2 Min Zhang 1 2

Abstract

comprehension of their reasoning processes and instead rely
mostly on probabilistic pattern matching (Mirzadeh et al.,
2024; Valmeekam et al., 2022; Razeghi et al., 2022). This
can be reflected in the instability of the reasoning process
of LLMs, which tends to produce hallucinations and errors
while struggling to detect and correct these issues on its
own (Pan et al., 2023; Kamoi et al., 2024). This limitation
is particularly detrimental for long chains of thought, which
are essential for solving complex and challenging tasks. As
the length of the reasoning process increases, intermediate
errors and incorrect attempts are more likely to accumulate
if the model lacks the ability to detect or correct them (Zhao
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024a).

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated considerable reasoning abilities in various
tasks such as mathematics and coding. However,
recent studies indicate that even the best models
lack true comprehension of their reasoning processes. In this paper, we explore how self-play can
enhance the rationality of models in the reasoning
process without supervision from humans or superior models. We design a Critic-Discernment
Game (CDG) in which a prover first provides a solution to a given problem and is subsequently challenged by critiques of its solution. These critiques
either aim to assist or mislead the prover. The
objective of the prover is to maintain the correct
answer when faced with misleading comments,
while correcting errors in response to constructive
feedback. Our experiments on tasks involving
mathematical reasoning, stepwise error detection,
self-correction, and long-chain reasoning demonstrate that CDG training can significantly improve
the ability of well-aligned LLMs to comprehend
their reasoning process. We have released our
code here.

To mitigate this issue, existing approaches employ process
based reward models (PRMs) or preference data pairs to
provide stepwise error supervision for the reasoning process (Lightman et al., 2023; Lai et al., 2024; Uesato et al.,
2022a). However, these methods struggle to explicitly define fine-grained steps in general reasoning, merely indicate
which step is better without providing specific explanations,
and frequently rely on human-annotated data, making them
difficult to scale up (Guo et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025).
Therefore, we explore enhancing the rationality of the reasoning process of LLMs through self-play in language, without supervision from humans or superior models.
We design a Critic-Discernment Game (CDG), where the
agent engages in discussion about its reasoning process with
different goals. Specifically, our game involves three roles:
the prover, the helpful critic, and the misleading critic. As
shown in Figure 1, each role has the following objective:

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved significant
success in reasoning tasks such as coding and mathematics (Roziere et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2024a). By training on reasoning paths from humans or superior models, LLMs can generate impressive step-by-step
reasoning processes similar to human thought (Kim et al.,
2023; Wei et al., 2022). However, recent studies indicate
that even well fine-tuned and aligned LLMs still lack true

• Prover: Given a question, the prover is required to provide
an answer with a clear chain of thought. Afterward, the
prover receives feedback from a critic whose intent can be
either helpful or misleading. The prover should maintain its
initial correct solution and revise the incorrect solution.

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University 2 Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Soochow University. Correspondence to: Juntao Li
<ljt@suda.edu.cn>.

• Helpful Critic: The helpful critic receives a problem
along with the prover’s incorrect answer. Its task is to identify the mistake in the prover’s reasoning without directly
correcting the solution, persuading and assisting the prover
in revising the original incorrect answer.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• Misleading Critic: The misleading critic receives a prob1

