A Rescaling-Invariant Lipschitz Bound Based on Path-Metrics
for Modern ReLU Network Parameterizations
Antoine Gonon 1 2 Nicolas Brisebarre 3 Elisa Riccietti 1 Rémi Gribonval 4
distance d(θ, θ′ ) and a constant Cx :

Abstract
Robustness with respect to weight perturbations
underpins guarantees for generalization, pruning
and quantization. Existing guarantees rely on
Lipschitz bounds in parameter space, cover only
plain feed-forward MLPs, and break under the
ubiquitous neuron-wise rescaling symmetry of
ReLU networks. We prove a new Lipschitz inequality expressed through the ℓ1 -path-metric of
the weights. The bound is (i) rescaling-invariant
by construction and (ii) applies to any ReLUDAG architecture with any combination of convolutions, skip connections, pooling, and frozen
(inference-time) batch-normalization —thus encompassing ResNets, U-Nets, VGG-style CNNs,
and more. By respecting the network’s natural
symmetries, the new bound strictly sharpens prior
parameter-space bounds and can be computed in
two forward passes. To illustrate its utility, we
derive from it a symmetry-aware pruning criterion and show—through a proof-of-concept experiment on a ResNet-18 trained on ImageNet—that
its pruning performance matches that of classical magnitude pruning, while becoming totally
immune to arbitrary neuron-wise rescalings.

∥Rθ (x) − Rθ′ (x)∥1 ⩽ Cx d(θ, θ′ ).

(1)

This controls the robustness of the function Rθ with respect to changes in the parameters θ, which can be crucially
leveraged to derive generalization bounds (Neyshabur et al.,
2018) or theoretical guarantees about pruning or quantization algorithms (Gonon et al., 2023). Yet, to the best of our
knowledge, such bounds remain relatively little explored
in the literature, and existing ones are expressed with ℓp
metrics on parameters (Gonon et al., 2023; Neyshabur et al.,
2018; Berner et al., 2020). For example, such a bound is
known (Gonon et al., 2023, Theorem III.1 with p = ∞ and
q = 1) with
d(θ, θ′ ) := ∥θ − θ′ ∥∞ ,
Cx := (W ∥x∥∞ + 1)W L2 RL−1 ,

(2)

in the case of a layered fully-connected neural network
Rθ (x) = ML ReLU(ML−1 . . . ReLU(M1 x)) with L layers, maximal width W , and with weight matrices Mℓ having
some operator norm bounded by R. Moreover, these known
bounds are not satisfying for at least two reasons:
• they are not invariant under neuron-wise rescalings of
the parameters θ that leave unchanged its realization Rθ .
As we will show, this implies that numerical evaluations
of such bounds can be arbitrarily large;

1. Introduction
An important challenge about neural networks is to upper
bound as tightly as possible the distances between the socalled realizations (i.e., the functions implemented by the
considered network) Rθ , Rθ′ with parameters θ, θ′ when
evaluated at an input vector x, in terms of a (pseudo-)-

• they only hold for simple fully-connected models organized in layers, but not for modern networks that include
pooling, skip connections, etc.
To circumvent these issues, we leverage the so-called pathlifting, a tool that has recently emerged (Stock & Gribonval,
2023; Bona-Pellissier et al., 2022; Marcotte et al., 2023;
Gonon et al., 2024a) in the theoretical analysis of modern
neural networks with positively homogeneous activations.

1

ENS de Lyon, CNRS, Inria, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,
LIP, UMR 5668, 69342, Lyon cedex 07, France 2 Institute of Mathematics, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 3 CNRS, ENS de Lyon, Inria,
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, LIP, UMR 5668, 69342, Lyon
cedex 07, France 4 Inria, CNRS, ENS de Lyon, Université Claude
Bernard Lyon 1, LIP, UMR 5668, 69342, Lyon cedex 07, France .
Correspondence to: Antoine Gonon <antoine.gonon@epfl.ch>.

Main contribution. We introduce a natural (rescalinginvariant) metric based on the path-lifting, and shows that
it indeed yields a rescaling-invariant upper bound for the
distance of two realizations of a network. Specifically, denoting Φ(θ) the path-lifting (a finite-dimensional vector whose

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

