Ergodic Generative Flows

Leo Maxime Brunswic* 1 Mateo Clemente* 1 Rui Heng Yang 1 Adam Sigal 1 Amir Rasouli 1 Yinchuan Li 2

Abstract

et al., 2018; Bengio et al., 2023) and IL (Goodfellow et al.,
2020; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b; Rozen et al., 2021;
Papamakarios et al., 2021) methods are often considered to
be separate approaches, it is a common practice to first train
a reward model from a dataset and then use RL techniques to
solve an IL task (Chung et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2022b;a;
Sendera et al., 2024).

Generative Flow Networks (GFNs) were initially
introduced on directed acyclic graphs to sample
from an unnormalized distribution density. Recent works have extended the theoretical framework for generative methods allowing more flexibility and enhancing application range. However,
many challenges remain in training GFNs in continuous settings and for imitation learning (IL),
including intractability of flow-matching loss, limited tests of non-acyclic training, and the need
for a separate reward model in imitation learning.
The present work proposes a family of generative
flows called Ergodic Generative Flows (EGFs)
which are used to address the aforementioned issues. First, we leverage ergodicity to build simple
generative flows with finitely many globally defined transformations (diffeomorphisms) with universality guarantees and tractable flow-matching
loss (FM loss). Second, we introduce a new loss
involving cross-entropy coupled to weak flowmatching control, coined KL-weakFM loss. It is
designed for IL training without a separate reward
model. We evaluate IL-EGFs on toy 2D tasks and
real-world datasets from NASA on the sphere,
using the KL-weakFM loss. Additionally, we conduct toy 2D reinforcement learning experiments
with a target reward using the FM loss.

Among IL methods, normalizing flows (NFs), although capable of leveraging advanced neural ODEs (Chen et al.,
2018; Grathwohl et al., 2018), have not achieved state-ofthe-art performance due to architectural constraints (i.e. the
requirement of sequentially combined parameterized diffeomorphisms) and numerical instabilities (Caterini et al.,
2021; Verine et al., 2023).
While NFs are deterministic models, stochasticity has
proven to be a crucial component of IL generative models, such as diffusion models as its simplest embodiment
(Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b). However, diffusion
models face a challenging trade-off between loss function
tractability and the time-consuming denoising process for
generation. This trade-off drives continued efforts to accelerate the diffusion inference process (Lu et al., 2022; Tang
et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024). Such issues are particularly
important when the computational and time budgets of generation are highly constrained, which is typical on real-time
tasks or mobile devices. The present work leverages the flexibility of Generative Flow Networks (GFNs) (Bengio et al.,
2021; 2023) to address these issues by building simple yet
highly expressive models with short sampling trajectories.

1. Introduction

Generative Flow Networks (GFNs), originally formulated
for RL tasks, are a family of generative methods designed to
sample proportionally based on a reward function r = φκ ,
which represents the density of a target distribution κ. They
were initially restricted to directed acyclic graphs, but have
since been extended to other settings. Subsequent work has
extended GFNs to generalize to continuous state spaces (Li
et al., 2023; Lahlou et al., 2023) and non-acyclic structures
(Brunswic et al., 2024).

Generative models aim to sample from a target distribution
κ on a space S, possibly conditioned on additional context
or variables. The target distribution κ is either specified
by an unnormalized density with respect to a background
measure λ, as in reinforcement learning (RL), or defined
by a dataset of samples D as in imitation learning (IL).
While RL (Brooks et al., 2011; Sutton, 2018; Haarnoja
*

Equal contribution 1 Huawei Technologies Canada, Noah’s Ark
Laboratories 2 Huawei. Correspondence to: Leo Maxime Brunswic
<leo.maxime.brunswic@h-partners.com>.

Despite these advancements, GFNs still face four key challenges that hinder their application in RL and IL settings.
First, although it has been suggested that GFNs themselves
could be used as a reward model in the IL setting (see Bengio et al. (2023) p37), previous works (Zhang et al., 2022b;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

