The dark side of the forces: assessing non-conservative
force models for atomistic machine learning

Filippo Bigi 1 Marcel F. Langer 1 Michele Ceriotti 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Interatomic potentials model the microscopic interactions
between atoms, and determine – directly or by modulating
the response to thermal excitations – the stability and reactivity of molecules and materials. Over many decades, interatomic potentials have been used in Monte Carlo (Metropolis et al., 1953) and molecular dynamics (MD) (Andersen,
1980) simulations, geometry optimization, and other techniques, allowing a mechanistic study of the atomic-scale
behavior and properties of molecules, materials, and biological systems (Allen & Tildesley, 2017; Tuckerman, 2008).
While traditional interatomic potentials are based on simple
physically inspired functional forms, the last decade has
seen machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) obtain remarkable accuracies at a high level of computational
efficiency, most often by learning reference energies and
forces from much slower first-principle quantum mechanical
calculations (Behler, 2021; Unke et al., 2021).

The use of machine learning to estimate the energy of a group of atoms, and the forces that drive
them to more stable configurations, has revolutionized the fields of computational chemistry and
materials discovery. In this domain, rigorous enforcement of symmetry and conservation laws has
traditionally been considered essential. For this
reason, interatomic forces are usually computed
as the derivatives of the potential energy, ensuring energy conservation. Several recent works
have questioned this physically constrained approach, suggesting that directly predicting the
forces yields a better trade-off between accuracy
and computational efficiency, and that energy conservation can be learned during training. This
work investigates the applicability of such nonconservative models in microscopic simulations.
We identify and demonstrate several fundamental issues, from ill-defined convergence of geometry optimization to instability in various types
of molecular dynamics. Given the difficulty in
monitoring and correcting the lack of energy conservation, direct forces should be used with great
care. We show that the best approach to exploit
the acceleration they afford is to use them in conjunction with conservative forces. A model can
be pre-trained efficiently on direct forces, then
fine-tuned using backpropagation. At evaluation
time, both force types can be used together to
avoid unphysical effects while still benefitting almost entirely from the computational efficiency
of direct forces.

At first, such machine-learned interatomic potentials were
trained on quantum mechanical data specific to the chemical system of interest. Over the last years, more diverse
datasets have emerged, consisting of up to billions of targets, and spanning much of the periodic table (Chanussot
et al., 2021; Tran et al., 2023; Barroso-Luque et al., 2024;
Schmidt et al., 2024). This has not only led to an increase
in the complexity of the models, going from linear or kernel
regression to deep graph neural networks, but it has also
pushed many recent models to abandon some of the underlying physical symmetries of interatomic potentials in favor
of simpler – and potentially more scalable and efficient –
architectures (Pozdnyakov & Ceriotti, 2023; Neumann et al.,
2024; Qu & Krishnapriyan, 2024). In such models, symmetries are learned from data, aided by data augmentation.
Some recent models for interatomic potentials also disregard
the property of energy conservation (Gasteiger et al., 2021;
Neumann et al., 2024; Liao et al., 2023). While conservative
models calculate interatomic forces as the derivatives of
a total energy with respect to the positions of the atoms,
non-conservative models predict them directly, therefore
breaking this constraint. Although this practice can lead to
more computationally efficient neural networks, the use of
such models in practical atomistic simulations has not yet

1
Laboratory of Computational Science and Modeling,
IMX, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Michele Ceriotti
<michele.ceriotti@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

