Simplicity Bias and Optimization Threshold in Two-Layer ReLU Networks

Etienne Boursier 1 Nicolas Flammarion 2

Abstract

still generalizing well to unseen data in supervised learning
tasks (Chizat and Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Rotskoff and
Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Chizat and Bach, 2020; Boursier
et al., 2022; Boursier and Flammarion, 2023). This phenomenon is often attributed to overparametrization enabling
models to find solutions that interpolate the training data yet
avoid overfitting (Belkin et al., 2019; Bartlett et al., 2021).
However, the advent of generative AI paradigms—such as
large language models (Vaswani et al., 2017) and diffusion
models (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021)—has introduced a
paradigm shift in our understanding of generalization. In
these settings, models can generate new data and perform
novel tasks without necessarily interpolating the training
data, raising fresh questions about how and why they generalize. This shift can be illustrated by two seemingly unrelated applications: in-context learning with transformers
and generative modeling using diffusion methods.

Understanding
generalization
of
overparametrized models remains a fundamental challenge in machine learning. The literature mostly
studies generalization from an interpolation point
of view, taking convergence towards a global
minimum of the training loss for granted. This
interpolation paradigm does not seem valid for
complex tasks such as in-context learning or diffusion. It has instead been empirically observed
that the trained models go from global minima to
spurious local minima of the training loss as the
number of training samples becomes larger than
some level we call optimization threshold. This
paper explores theoretically this phenomenon
in the context of two-layer ReLU networks. We
demonstrate that, despite overparametrization,
networks might converge towards simpler solutions rather than interpolating training data, which
leads to a drastic improvement on the test loss.
Our analysis relies on the so called early alignment phase, during which neurons align toward
specific directions. This directional alignment
leads to a simplicity bias, wherein the network
approximates the ground truth model without
converging to the global minimum of the training
loss. Our results suggest this bias, resulting in an
optimization threshold from which interpolation
is not reached anymore, is beneficial and
enhances the generalization of trained models.

Firstly, in-context learning (ICL) refers to the ability of large
pretrained transformer models to learn new tasks from just a
few examples, without any parameter updates (Brown et al.,
2020; Min et al., 2022). A central question is whether ICL
enables models to learn tasks significantly different from
those encountered during pretraining. While prior work
suggests that ICL leverages mechanisms akin to Bayesian
inference (Xie et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2023), the limited diversity of tasks in pretraining datasets
may constrain the model’s ability to generalize. Raventós
et al. (2024) investigated this effect by focusing on regression problems to quantify how increasing the variety of
tasks during pretraining affects ICL’s capacity to generalize
to new, unseen tasks, in context.
Secondly, diffusion models have made remarkable strides
in generating high-quality images from high-dimensional
datasets (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021). These models learn to generate new samples
by training denoisers to estimate the score function—the
gradient of the log probability density—of the noisy data
distribution (Song and Ermon, 2019). A significant challenge in this context is approximating a continuous density
from a relatively small training set without succumbing to
the curse of dimensionality. Although deep neural networks
may tend to memorize training data when the dataset is
small relative to the network’s capacity (Somepalli et al.,
2023; Carlini et al., 2023), Yoon et al. (2023); Kadkhodaie

1. Introduction
Understanding the generalization capabilities of neural networks remains a fundamental open question in machine
learning (Zhang et al., 2021; Neyshabur et al., 2017). Traditionally, research has focused on explaining why neural networks models can achieve zero training loss while
1

INRIA, LMO, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France 2 TML
Lab, EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Etienne Boursier
<etienne.boursier@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

