Beyond Task-Specific Reasoning: A Unified Conditional Generative Framework
for Abstract Visual Reasoning

Fan Shi 1 Bin Li∗ 1 Xiangyang Xue 1

Abstract

2021; Małkiński & Mańdziuk, 2022a). This ability is pivotal
in cognitive activities like decision-making, visual analogy
and spatial reasoning (Gray & Thompson, 2004; McCloskey,
1983). Many psychological tests are designed to assess the
AVR ability of humans, which often requires the subject to
discover specific rules that connect different visual concepts
(Raven & Court, 1938; McMillen, 2007; Nie et al., 2020).
For example, Raven’s Progressive Matrix (RPM) (Raven
& Court, 1938) focuses on assessing generalization ability,
as the tests include unseen combinations of visual concepts
and rules, which is a classical intelligence quotient test.

Abstract visual reasoning (AVR) enables humans
to quickly discover and generalize abstract rules
to new scenarios. Designing intelligent systems
with human-like AVR abilities has been a longstanding topic in the artificial intelligence community. Deep AVR solvers have recently achieved remarkable success in various AVR tasks. However,
they usually use task-specific designs or parameters in different tasks. In such a paradigm, solving new tasks often means retraining the model,
and sometimes retuning the model architectures,
which increases the cost of solving AVR problems.
In contrast to task-specific approaches, this paper
proposes a novel Unified Conditional Generative
Solver (UCGS), aiming to address multiple AVR
tasks in a unified framework. First, we prove that
some well-known AVR tasks can be reformulated
as the problem of estimating the predictability of
target images in problem panels. Then, we illustrate that, under the proposed framework, training
one conditional generative model can solve various AVR tasks. The experiments show that with a
single round of multi-task training, UCGS demonstrates abstract reasoning ability across various
AVR tasks. Especially, UCGS exhibits the ability
of zero-shot reasoning, enabling it to perform abstract reasoning on problems from unseen AVR
tasks in the testing phase.

Developing models that reveal human-like AVR ability remains a significant challenge in artificial intelligence research (Zheng et al., 2019; Chollet, 2019; Małkiński &
Mańdziuk, 2022b). Many AVR benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate intelligent systems in a way that mirrors
human-like AVR ability (Barrett et al., 2018; Hill et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2020). These benchmarks usually adopt the problem structure of traditional psychological tests and provide programs to generate a large
number of problems automatically, e.g., the RAVEN dataset
generates RPM problems by combining predefined visual
concepts and abstract rules (Zhang et al., 2019). In recent
years, deep AVR solvers have achieved remarkable progress
on the proposed AVR benchmarks (Barrett et al., 2018; Zhuo
& Kankanhalli, 2021; Mondal et al., 2023). However, they
often rely on task-specific inductive biases of model architecture and hyperparameters, and solving different tasks
typically means training different instances of models. This
task-specific paradigm arouses interest in exploring a more
unified framework for AVR solvers (Webb et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

AVR tasks take different structures of problem panels to assess the subject’s ability to understand abstract rules. RPMstyle tasks (Barrett et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019) require
discovering abstract rules of a 3 × 3 image matrix and selecting answers from a candidate panel to complete the matrix
via analogy. Odd-one-out problems (McMillen, 2007) test
the ability to identify the image that violates the abstract
rules of a sequence. In addition, AVR tasks can be distinguished as generative tasks and selective tasks. Generative
tasks require the synthesizing or reconstruction of images
(Bar et al., 2022; Dedhia et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023), while

Abstract visual reasoning (AVR) is a fundamental cognitive
ability that enables humans to identify visual concepts, infer
underlying abstract rules, and generalize the rules to new
scenarios effectively (Cattell, 1963; Zhuo & Kankanhalli,
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University. Correspondence to: Bin Li <libin@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

