Certification for Differentially Private Prediction in Gradient-Based Training

Matthew Wicker * 1 2 Philip Sosnin * 1 Igor Shilov 1 Adrianna Janik 3 Mark N. Mueller 4 5
Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye 1 Adrian Weller 6 Calvin Tsay 1

Abstract

Differential privacy (DP) has emerged as a primary tool for
understanding and mitigating the leakage of private user information when deploying machine learning models (Dwork
et al., 2006). Differential privacy provides a probabilistic
guarantee on the amount of information an adversary can extract from model predictions or parameters (Ji et al., 2014).
The most popularly deployed algorithm for achieving DP
in machine learning is private training, e.g., with DP-SGD
(Abadi et al., 2016), which privatizes the learning process
such that the final model parameters come with a DP guarantee. Private training does come with some considerable
drawbacks: privacy parameters must be fixed prior to training, leading to potentially costly training re-runs, and DP
training may bias model performance in unintended (and potentially harmful) ways, e.g., with respect to discrimination
(Fioretto et al., 2022).

We study private prediction where differential privacy is achieved by adding noise to the outputs
of a non-private model. Existing methods rely
on noise proportional to the global sensitivity of
the model, often resulting in sub-optimal privacyutility trade-offs compared to private training. We
introduce a novel approach for computing datasetspecific upper bounds on prediction sensitivity by
leveraging convex relaxation and bound propagation techniques. By combining these bounds
with the smooth sensitivity mechanism, we significantly improve the privacy analysis of private prediction compared to global sensitivity-based approaches. Experimental results across real-world
datasets in medical image classification and natural language processing demonstrate that our
sensitivity bounds are can be orders of magnitude
tighter than global sensitivity. Our approach provides a strong basis for the development of novel
privacy preserving technologies.

One alternative to private training is private prediction,
which achieves differential privacy by adding noise to the
outputs of a non-private model (Dwork & Feldman, 2018).
Unlike private training, private prediction allows users to
dynamically adjust their privacy budget depending on the
privilege of the user or sensitivity of the application. Additionally, private prediction can be readily applied to even
the most complex training configurations such as federated
learning. Despite these appealing properties, current private
prediction algorithms have been observed to have an empirically unfavorable privacy-utility trade-off compared to
differentially private training (van der Maaten & Hannun,
2020). Yet, recent studies have concluded that the privacy
analysis given by current private prediction algorithms can
be substantially improved (Chadha et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning systems have shown significant
promise across diverse domains such as medical imaging,
autonomous driving, and sentiment analysis (Bommasani
et al., 2021). The potential use of such systems in situations
that require the use of human data for training has led to an
increase in data privacy concerns (Song et al., 2017; Carlini
et al., 2023). Ensuring that machine learning models meet
rigorous privacy guarantees is a necessary prerequisite for
responsible deployment (Gadotti et al., 2024).

In this work, we present a novel framework that enables
tighter privacy analysis when employing private prediction.
We observe that a primary source of looseness in private
prediction is the use of the global prediction sensitivity—the
largest change in prediction between any two observable
datasets—when privatizing model outputs. Our approach
addresses this by using advances in non-convex optimization and bound propagation (Wicker et al., 2022) in order
to compute upper-bounds on the local sensitivity of a given
prediction. This involves computing the set of all reachable
predictions when any arbitrary set of k points is added or
removed from the provided dataset. Using our bounds on

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 3 Accenture Labs, Dublin, Ireland 4 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 5 LogicStar.ai,
Zurich, Switzerland 6 Department of Engineering, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Calvin Tsay
<c.tsay@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

