When Data-Free Knowledge Distillation Meets Non-Transferable Teacher:
Escaping Out-of-Distribution Trap is All You Need

Ziming Hong 1 Runnan Chen 1 Zengmao Wang 2 Bo Han 3 Bo Du 2 Tongliang Liu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) transfers knowledge from a teacher to a student without access the real in-distribution (ID) data. Its
common solution is to use a generator to synthesize fake data and use them as a substitute for
real ID data. However, existing works typically
assume teachers are trustworthy, leaving the robustness and security of DFKD from untrusted
teachers largely unexplored. In this work, we
conduct the first investigation into distilling nontransferable learning (NTL) teachers using DFKD,
where the transferability from an ID domain to an
out-of-distribution (OOD) domain is prohibited.
We find that NTL teachers fool DFKD through
divert the generator’s attention from the useful
ID knowledge to the misleading OOD knowledge. This hinders ID knowledge transfer but
prioritizes OOD knowledge transfer. To mitigate
this issue, we propose Adversarial Trap Escaping
(ATEsc) to benefit DFKD by identifying and filtering out OOD-like synthetic samples. Specifically, inspired by the evidence that NTL teachers show stronger adversarial robustness on OOD
samples than ID samples, we split synthetic samples into two groups according to their robustness. The fragile group is treated as ID-like data
and used for normal knowledge distillation, while
the robust group is seen as OOD-like data and
utilized for forgetting OOD knowledge. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
ATEsc for improving DFKD against NTL teachers. Code is released at https://github.
com/tmllab/2025_ICML_ATEsc.

Recently, data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) (Micaelli & Storkey, 2019; Luo et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021b;
Yu et al., 2023; Tran et al., 2024) has attracted appealing
attention as it deals with distilling valuable knowledge from
a well-trained teacher model f to a student model S without
requiring to access the real in-distribution (ID) training
data. As shown in Figure 1 (a), since the real ID data Did is
unavailable, a common solution is to introduce a generator
G to synthesize fake samples via an adversarial exploration
way. These synthetic samples are then used as proxies to
guide the knowledge transfer from teacher to student (Micaelli & Storkey, 2019; Fang et al., 2019). More specifically,
G and S are alternatively optimized during the training procedure: (i) the G is trained to synthesize fake samples Ds
causing disagreement between student S and teacher f , thus
expanding the coverage of the data distribution; (ii) the S
is trained to reach teacher-student agreement on samples
synthesized by G, thus learning teacher’s knowledge. As
a result, the synthetic data Ds is similar to the real ID domain Did , and the student S obtains teacher’s knowledge by
reaching similar accuracy on real ID data Did .
Although significant progress has been made in this field,
existing works always assume that pre-trained teachers are
trustworthy. Recently, Hong et al. (2023) conducted the
first study to explore DFKD in the context of untrusted
teachers. However, their work primarily focuses on teachers with backdoor (Wu et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2019). The
robustness and security of DFKD from untrusted teachers
beyond backdoor remain largely unexplored. In this paper,
we conduct the first investigation on the situation of DFKD
against non-transferable learning (NTL) teachers (Wang
et al., 2022). Specifically, in NTL teacher’s training, transferability from an ID domain Did to an out-of-distribution
(OOD) domain1 Dood is deliberately restricted by incorporating an additional regularization term into the standard
ID-domain supervised learning (SL) objective, where the
regularization term encourages the teacher’s output to differ
between the two domains.

1

Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 2 School of
Computer Science, Wuhan University 3 Department of Computer
Science, Hong Kong Baptist University. Correspondence to:
Zengmao Wang <wangzengmao@whu.edu.cn>, Tongliang Liu
<tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.

1

The Dood can be both close-set (i.e., share the same label space
(Bengio et al., 2011; Tzeng et al., 2017)) and open-set (i.e., disjoint
label space (Liang et al., 2017; Wei et al., 2022)) to the Did .

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

