EpiCoder: Encompassing Diversity and Complexity in Code Generation

Yaoxiang Wang 1 2 * † Haoling Li 3 * † Xin Zhang 4 * Jie Wu 3 † Xiao Liu 4 Wenxiang Hu 4 Zhongxin Guo 4
Yangyu Huang 4 Ying Xin 4 Yujiu Yang 3 Jinsong Su 1 2 Qi Chen 4 Scarlett Li 4

Abstract
Existing methods for code generation use code
snippets as seed data, restricting the complexity
and diversity of the synthesized data. In this paper,
we introduce a novel feature tree-based synthesis
framework, which revolves around hierarchical
code features derived from high-level abstractions
of code. The feature tree is constructed from raw
data and refined iteratively to increase the quantity and diversity of the extracted features, which
captures and recognizes more complex patterns
and relationships within the code. By adjusting
the depth and breadth of the sampled subtrees, our
framework provides precise control over the complexity of the generated code, enabling functionalities that range from function-level operations to
multi-file scenarios. We fine-tuned widely-used
base models to obtain EpiCoder series, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks at both the function and file levels. In
particular, empirical evidence indicates that our
approach shows significant potential in the synthesizing of repository-level code data. Our code
and data are publicly available.1

Figure 1: Benchmark performance of EpiCoder-Qwen-7B
(fine-tuned on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Base) and its counterparts. XFileDep is file-level code generation benchmark, all
others are function-level.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Zhang
et al., 2022) have demonstrated significant potential in the
field of code understanding and generation, particularly

through pre-training on large-scale code data (Sun et al.,
2024; Zhu et al., 2024). However, the latent code knowledge in these models is often underutilized without finetuning on high-quality instruction data. Instruction tuning
has emerged as a critical step in unlocking the full capabilities of code LLMs (Wei et al., 2022), enabling a more
precise alignment with user intent and improving the usability of the model in real-world scenarios.

*

Equal contribution † This work is done during their internships at Microsoft 1 School of Informatics, Xiamen University 2 Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Fujian
and Taiwan (Xiamen University), Ministry of Culture and
Tourism, China 3 Tsinghua University 4 Microsoft.
Correspondence to: Xin Zhang <xinzhang3@microsoft.com>,
Yujiu Yang <yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jinsong Su
<jssu@xmu.edu.cn>.

Despite recent advances, most existing methods for synthesizing high-quality instruction data rely on code snippets
as seed data (Chaudhary, 2023; Yu et al., 2023b; Wei et al.,
2024b; Muennighoff et al., 2023). While code snippets
demonstrate specific functionalities, they fail to capture the
full range of programming constructs, patterns, and interactions that are common in real-world programming scenarios.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/microsoft/EpiCoder and https://
github.com/DeepLearnXMU/EpiCoder

1

