Position: Scaling LLM Agents Requires
Asymptotic Analysis with LLM Primitives

Elliot Meyerson 1 Xin Qiu 1

Abstract

for LLM-based programs that carry out subprocesses within
larger systems or act “autonomously” in virtual or physical environments. Unlike the general purpose LLMs from
which they descend, LLM agents usually have a specific
scope in which they are intended to operate, i.e., specific
kinds of inputs they are expected to receive and corresponding kinds of outcomes they are expected to produce. Agent
scopes vary in the precision with which they are specified,
but the very act of specifying a scope, or role, for an agent
allows it to be treated as a computational object that can
serve as a component in the development of a larger system.
The promise of LLM agents is not only that they have the
capacity to affect change in the real world, but that by constructing increasingly larger systems of many agents, where
each has its own complementary focus, we can dramatically
expand the scale at which LLM-based AI is applied.

Decomposing hard problems into subproblems often makes them easier and more efficient to solve.
With large language models (LLMs) crossing critical reliability thresholds for a growing slate of
capabilities, there is an increasing effort to decompose systems into sets of LLM-based agents, each
of whom can be delegated sub-tasks. However,
this decomposition (even when automated) is often intuitive, e.g., based on how a human might
assign roles to members of a human team. How
close are these role decompositions to optimal?
This position paper argues that asymptotic analysis with LLM primitives is needed to reason about
the efficiency of such decomposed systems, and
that insights from such analysis will unlock opportunities for scaling them. By treating the LLM
forward pass as the atomic unit of computational
cost, one can separate out the (often opaque) inner
workings of a particular LLM from the inherent
efficiency of how a set of LLMs are orchestrated
to solve hard problems. In other words, if we want
to scale the deployment of LLMs to the limit, instead of anthropomorphizing LLMs, asymptotic
analysis with LLM primitives should be used to
reason about and develop more powerful decompositions of large problems into LLM agents.

There has been a rush to start building such systems (Xi
et al., 2025). In academia, LLM agents have been used
in applications across the board, for example, in improving performance on standard benchmarks (Du et al., 2024),
building teams for more effective software development
(Qian et al., 2024; Wu et al.), simulating communities and
human behavior (Park et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2024), and
tackling the research process itself (Huang et al.; Lu et al.,
2024; Yu et al., 2024). In industry, the impact (at least on
strategy and priorities) has been arguably greater: while
academics usually prefer minimal systems in which agent
behavior can be most clearly understood, industry leaders
find themselves faced daily with huge organizations with
countless interconnected actors and components, and thus
countless opportunities for agents to be applied (Hodjat,
2024; Urlana et al., 2024; Sypherd & Belle, 2024).

1. Introduction
The turn to agents is well underway (Guo et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2024b). Now that large language models (LLMs)
have crossed critical thresholds of general capability and
reliability (Bubeck et al., 2023), it is natural to ask how
they can be integrated into computational systems larger
than themselves, in order to do things: “Stop speaking and
act!” The term agent has quickly crystallized as the term

The core focus thus far in the development of such systems
has been “What is possible with the resources we have today?”, not “How efficient can it be in the limit of scale?”
Efficiency at scale can be understandably an afterthought
when the goal is to build something that works and is impressive as quickly as possible, but this paper argues that understanding the efficiency of LLM-agent-based systems
at a fundamental algorithmic level is critical to achieving
the scale such systems promise. Specifically, missing from
the study of such systems are asymptotic analyses that give

1
Cognizant AI Lab, San Francisco, USA. Correspondence to:
Elliot Meyerson <elliot.meyerson@cognizant.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

