Generalization of Noisy SGD in Unbounded Non-convex Settings

Leello Dadi 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

Formally, they show under reasonable assumptions that
!
r
I(A(D), D)
|generalization gap(A, D)| ≤ O
n

We study the generalization of iterative noisy gradient schemes on smooth non-convex losses. Formally, we establish time-independent information theoretic generalization bounds for Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) that do
not diverge as the iteration count increases. Our
bounds are obtained through a stability argument:
we analyze the difference between two SGLD sequences ran in parallel on two datasets sampled
from the same distribution. Our result only requires an isoperimetric inequality to hold, which
is merely a restriction on the tails of the loss. We
relax the assumptions of prior work to establish
that the iterates stay within a bounded KL divergence from each other. Under an additional dissipativity assumption, we show that the stronger
Renyi divergence also stays bounded by establishing a uniform log-Sobolev constant of the iterates. Without dissipativity, we sidestep the need
for local log-Sobolev inequalities and instead exploit the regularizing properties of Gaussian convolution. These techniques allow us to show that
strong convexity is not necessary for finite stability bounds and thus for finite generalization and
differential privacy bounds.

where the input-output mutual information I(A(D), D)
measures the dependence of the algorithm’s output on the
observed samples D. Unlike uniform-convergence-based
bounds, information-theoretic bounds depend on the algorithm and the data distribution. This makes them well suited
to assess the performance of models whose complexity renders vacuous all classic uniform-convergence bounds. More
importantly, they align with the practical observations that
generalization is data distribution dependent, as observed in
experiments contrasting random versus real labels (Zhang
et al., 2021).
For them to be useful however a major difficulty remains in
controlling this input-output mutual information for specific
algorithms. Of particular interest for machine learning are
algorithms obtained as iterative noisy gradient schemes. A
standard template that these possess is the following. For a
given dataset D, a set of weights are randomly initialized
X0 ∈ Rd then updated following the recursion
Xk+1 = Noise(Gradient step(Xk , D))

(1)

The information-theoretic analysis of these algorithms was
initiated in (Pensia et al., 2018) where the gradient step
is assumed to be bounded. Their results, as well as several follow-ups, are derived by viewing the algorithm as
composition of individual steps analyzed separately. As a
consequence, after T iterations of the algorithm,
√ the bounds
obtained on I(XT , D) scale as O(T ) or O( T ) for fixed or
non-vanishing step-sizes. The introduction of well-chosen
analytical tools like data-dependent priors (Haghifam et al.,
2020), or the clever refinements of (Bu et al., 2020) improve the bounds but still fall short of improving the time
dependence.

1. Introduction
Learning algorithms whose outputs are not highly sensitive
to the specifics of their training data are likely to generalize
well. This is the intuitive idea that undergirds the framework of information-theoretic generalization. The seminal
contributions of Russo & Zou (2016) and Xu & Raginsky
(2017) establish that the expected generalization gap of an
algorithm A can be controlled by the amount of information
the algorithm extracts from its training dataset D of size n.

The step-wise analysis leads to vacuous generalization
bounds as iterations increase even if the recursion in equation 1 converges to a limit. Even more curious is the fact
that this limit approximates the Gibbs distribution e−Fn ,
where Fn is the optimized training loss, which has been
shown to achieve a finite information-theoretic bound (Xu
& Raginsky, 2017; Pensia et al., 2018). We are faced with

1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Leello
Dadi <leello.dadi@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

