T OP L OC: A Locality Sensitive Hashing Scheme for Trustless Verifiable Inference

Jack Min Ong 1 Matthew Di Ferrante 1 Aaron Pazdera 1 Ryan Garner 1 Sami Jaghouar 1 Manveer Basra 1
Max Ryabinin 2 Johannes Hagemann 1

Abstract

model outputs via APIs, have risen to meet the demands of
users who lack the resources or expertise to operate largescale inference pipelines themselves.

Large language models (LLMs) have proven to
be very capable, but access to frontier models
currently relies on inference providers. This introduces trust challenges: how can we be sure that
the provider is using the model configuration they
claim? We propose T OP L OC, a novel method for
verifiable inference that addresses this problem.
T OP L OC leverages a compact locality-sensitive
hashing mechanism for intermediate activations,
which can detect unauthorized modifications to
models, prompts, or precision with 100% accuracy, achieving no false positives or negatives in
our empirical evaluations. Our approach is robust across diverse hardware configurations, GPU
types, and algebraic reorderings, which allows
for validation speeds significantly faster than the
original inference. By introducing a polynomial
encoding scheme, T OP L OC minimizes the memory overhead of the generated proofs by 1000×,
requiring only 258 bytes of storage per 32 new
tokens, compared to the 262 KB requirement of
storing the token embeddings directly for Llama
3.1-8B-Instruct. Our method empowers users to
verify LLM inference computations efficiently,
fostering greater trust and transparency in open
ecosystems and laying a foundation for decentralized, verifiable and trustless AI services.

However, a critical challenge arises in this open ecosystem:
trust. Users must trust that an inference provider is faithfully serving the model as advertised, without undisclosed
modifications. A provider could, for instance, secretly reduce numerical precision to cut costs, fine-tune the model to
introduce certain biases, or prepend an undisclosed system
prompt to steer the model’s outputs. Without robust verification methods, users can only rely on the provider’s claims,
leaving them vulnerable to having their outputs tampered
with (Chen et al., 2023). There is thus a need for verifiable
inference — methods of verifying that a certain model and
prompt were used during the inference computation.
A standard approach to perform this verification is to use
cryptographically verifiable computing methods (Sun et al.,
2024a; Modulus Labs, 2023; Kang et al., 2022; Sun et al.,
2023; Ghodsi et al., 2017). However, they are either restrictive in the operations that are supported such that LLMs
cannot be used or are currently too computationally expensive to be practically applied to LLM inference.
Another approach is to record the model’s intermediate
activation tensors during inference (Sun et al., 2024b; Zhang
et al., 2024). By making these activations available, a third
party could independently rerun the model on the same
inputs and verify that the intermediate computations match,
thus ensuring the authenticity of inference. However, direct
storage of these intermediate tensors as the proof can be
prohibitively expensive at scale. For example, storing the
last hidden activations of 100,000 queries consisting of 4096
tokens for Llama 3.1-70B would take 6.7 terabytes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have transformed natural language processing, enabling capabilities
such as high-quality text generation, advanced dialogue
systems, and improved reasoning (Grattafiori et al., 2024;
Gemma Team et al., 2024). Inference providers, entities that
run open-weights LLMs on their own hardware and expose

In this work, we propose T OP L OC, an inference verification
method that can reduce the storage cost of the proof by more
than 1000x while still maintaining the security guarantees
of checking intermediate activations. The method performs
locality-sensitive hashing of the intermediate activations,
which encodes the top-k values and indices as a polynomial
congruence. This polynomial congruence can then be compared against a tensor obtained from recomputation. Our
method is also robust to nondeterminism of GPU operations
and algebraic reorderings of the computation, which allows

1
Prime Intellect 2 Together AI. Correspondence to: Johannes
Hagemann <johannes@primeintellect.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

