Approximately Correct Label Distribution Learning

Weiwei Li 1 Haitao Wu 2 1 Yunan Lu 2 3 Xiuyi Jia 2

Abstract

label distribution d, represented as a probability simplex,
where each label is associated with a real-valued description
degree dyx . By quantifying label polysemy, LDL enables a
broader spectrum of applications, including tasks like object detection (Xu et al., 2023), age estimation (Wen et al.,
2023), sentiment analysis (Chen et al., 2020), and diagnostic
assistance (Li et al., 2023), etc.

Label distribution learning (LDL) is a powerful
learning paradigm that emulates label polysemy
by assigning label distributions over the label
space. However, existing LDL evaluation metrics struggle to capture meaningful performance
differences due to their insensitivity to subtle distributional changes, and existing LDL learning
objectives often exhibit biases by disproportionately emphasizing a small subset of samples with
extreme predictions. As a result, the LDL metrics
lose their discriminability, and the LDL objectives are also at risk of overfitting. In this paper,
we propose DeltaLDL, a percentage of predictions that are approximately correct within the
context of LDL, as a solution to the above problems. DeltaLDL can serve as a novel evaluation
metric, which is parameter-free and reflects more
on real performance improvements. DeltaLDL
can also serve as a novel learning objective, which
is differentiable and encourages most samples to
be predicted as approximately correct, thereby
mitigating overfitting. Our theoretical analysis
and empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed solution.

For years, there are some deep-rooted problems in the field
of LDL: 1) existing evaluation metrics for LDL are based
on some distance/similarity metrics, e.g., Kullback-Leibler
divergence (KLD), which have very small values and thus
have poor discriminability between superior and inferior
models, since the label distribution is subject to two constraints,
non-negativity (i.e., dyx ≥ 0) and sum-to-one (i.e.,
P
y
y∈Y dx = 1); 2) existing LDL algorithms mainly focus
on minimizing the average of some kind of measurement,
usually the KLD as well, which may lead to overfitting
due to excessive preference for some samples, resulting
even worse performance than that calculated from uniform
vectors.
To kill two birds with one stone, the idea of approximately
correct prediction can be introduced. On the one hand, it
enables the design of percentage-based metrics, quantifying
what proportion of the samples are predicted approximately
correctly, which is intuitive and semantically meaningful;
on the other hand, it enables the design of noise-robust objectives, allowing the model to sacrifice samples that are
particularly difficult to learn, ensuring that most samples are
predicted approximately correctly, thereby avoiding overfitting to a specific subset of data.

1. Introduction
Label polysemy is a common phenomenon in real-world
scenarios, traditionally emulated by multi-label learning
(Zhang & Zhou, 2013), which treats labels in a binary fashion. In contrast, label distribution learning (LDL) (Geng,
2016) offers a more refined framework by answering the
question: “To what extent does each label y describe the
instance x?” This is achieved through the concept of a

Contributions and organizational structure In this paper:
1) we conduct a theoretical analysis of the KLD to demonstrate its unsuitability as an evaluation metric/learning objective for LDL (Section 2.1); 2) we propose DeltaLDL, a
function that calculates the percentage of label distributions
that are approximately correctly predicted, exhibiting desirable properties, making it a promising candidate for both
metrics and objectives (Section 2.2); 3) based on DeltaLDL,
we propose a novel evaluation metric, the µ metric, which
possesses superior discriminative power according to our
analysis (Section 3); 4) based on DeltaLDL, we propose a
novel learning objective and encapsulate it in a new LDL
algorithm, named δ-LDL, which can achieve highly compet-

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China 2 School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China 3 Department of Computing,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Xiuyi Jia <jiaxy@njust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

