Almost Optimal Fully Dynamic k-Center Clustering with Recourse

Sayan Bhattacharya 1 Martı́n Costa 1 Ermiya Farokhnejad 1 Silvio Lattanzi 2 Nikos Parotsidis 2

Abstract

els (Charikar et al., 1999; Jain & Vazirani, 2001; Ahmadian
et al., 2019; Byrka et al., 2017; Charikar et al., 2003; Ailon
et al., 2009; Shindler et al., 2011; Borassi et al., 2020). In
this paper, we focus on the k-center problem, where the objective function is defined as cl(S, V ) := maxx∈V d(x, S),
where d(x, S) := miny∈S d(x, y). In other words, we want
to minimize the maximum distance from any point in V to
its nearest point in S.

In this paper, we consider the metric k-center
problem in the fully dynamic setting, where we
are given a metric space (V, d) evolving via a
sequence of point insertions and deletions and
our task is to maintain a subset S ⊆ V of
at most k points that minimizes the objective
maxx∈V miny∈S d(x, y). We want to design our
algorithm so that we minimize its approximation
ratio, recourse (the number of changes it makes
to the solution S) and update time (the time it
takes to handle an update). We give a simple algorithm for dynamic k-center that maintains a
O(1)-approximate solution with O(1) amortized
recourse and Õ(k) amortized update time, obtaining near-optimal approximation, recourse and update time simultaneously. We obtain our result by
combining a variant of the dynamic k-center algorithm of Bateni et al. [SODA’23] with the dynamic
sparsifier of Bhattacharya et al. [NeurIPS’23].

The dynamic setting: In recent years, massive and rapidly
changing datasets have become increasingly common. If we
want to maintain a good solution to a problem defined on
such a dataset, it is often not feasible to apply standard computational paradigms and recompute solutions from scratch
using static algorithms every time the dataset is updated.
As a result, to cope with real world-scenarios, significant
effort has gone into developing dynamic algorithms that are
capable of efficiently maintaining solutions as the underlying dataset evolves over time (Bhattacharya et al., 2023b;
Behnezhad et al., 2019).
In the case of dynamic clustering, the most practical and
studied setting is one where the metric space (V, d) evolves
over time via a sequence of updates that consist of point
insertions and deletions. Dynamic clustering has received a
lot of attention from both the theory and machine learning
communities over the past decade (Lattanzi & Vassilvitskii,
2017; Chan et al., 2018; Cohen-Addad et al., 2019; Henzinger & Kale, 2020; Bhattacharya et al., 2022; Goranci
et al., 2021; Bhattacharya et al., 2024a). This long and influential line of work ultimately aims to design dynamic
clustering algorithms with optimal guarantees, mainly focusing on the following three metrics: (I) the approximation
ratio of the solution S maintained by the algorithm, (II) the
update time of the algorithm, which is the time it takes for
the algorithm to update its solution after a point is inserted or
deleted, and (III) the recourse of the solution, which is how
many points are added or removed from S after an update
is performed.1 These three metrics—approximation ratio,
update time, and recourse—capture the essential qualities
of a good practical dynamic clustering algorithm: solution
quality, efficiency, and stability.

1. Introduction
Clustering data is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning. In this task, we need to partition the elements of a
dataset into different groups (called clusters) so that elements in the same group are similar to each other, and
elements in different groups are not.
One of the most studied formulations of clustering is metric
k-clustering, where the data is represented by points in some
underlying metric space (V, d), and we want to find a subset
S ⊆ V of at most k centers that minimizes some objective
function. Due to its simplicity and extensive real-world
applications, metric k-clustering has been studied extensively for many years and across many computational mod1
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Sayan Bhattacharya <s.bhattacharya@warwick.ac.uk>, Martı́n Costa
<martin.costa@warwick.ac.uk>, Ermiya Farokhnejad <ermiya.farokhnejad@warwick.ac.uk>, Silvio Lattanzi <silviol@google.com>, Nikos Parotsidis <nikosp@google.com>.

In other words, if we let S and S ′ denote the solution maintained by the algorithm before and after an update, then we define
the recourse of the update to be |S ⊕ S ′ |, where ⊕ denotes symmetric difference.
1

st

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

