Minimax Optimal Regret Bound for
Reinforcement Learning with Trajectory Feedback

Zihan Zhang 1 Yuxin Chen 2 Jason D. Lee 3 Simon S. Du 1 Ruosong Wang 4

Abstract

each step, the doctor decides an action (e.g., taking certain
medicines) and observes the new state (e.g., information
like body temperature or blood pressure). On the other
hand, the state-action dependent reward signal could be
costly to observe, since the extent to which the disease has
been cured might be expensive to measure as it requires
comprehensive medical tests. In this case, in order to apply
the RL framework, it is more reasonable to assume that
the agent observes only the current state in each step, and
the cumulative reward value is revealed only after a whole
trajectory is finished.

In this work, we study reinforcement learning
(RL) with trajectory feedback. Compared to the
standard RL setting, in RL with trajectory feedback, the agent only observes the accumulative
reward along the trajectory, and therefore, this
model is particularly suitable for scenarios where
querying the reward in each single step incurs prohibitive cost. For a finite-horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP) with S states, A actions and a
horizon length of H, we develop an algorithm that
enjoys
nearly optimal regret of

√ an asymptotically
3
SAH K in K episodes. To achieve this
Õ
result, our new technical ingredients include (i)
constructing a tighter confidence region for the
reward function by incorporating the RL with trajectory feedback setting with techniques in linear
bandits and (ii) constructing a reference transition
model to better guide the exploration process.

As another example (which was also discussed in prior work
on RL with trajectory feedback (Efroni et al., 2021)), in
autonomous car driving, defining a state-action dependent
reward function could be a challenging task, as it requires
associating all possible state-action pairs with a real number.
A possible workaround is to have human experts involved
to produce the reward signals. However, defining reward
signals could be a highly subjective matter, and waiting for
reward values from human experts could take unacceptable
amount of time for RL algorithms.
To circumvent issues mentioned above, practitioners often
rely on heuristics (e.g., reward shaping (Ng et al., 1999)).
RL with trajectory feedback has been recently proposed
by Efroni et al. (2021) as a more principled framework. In
this framework, the agent no longer has access to a per stateaction reward function. Instead, it receives the cumulative
reward on the trajectory as well as all the visited state-action
pairs. Clearly, this new feedback model is harder than the
standard RL setting and could be more applicable for reallife scenarios like healthcare or autonomous driving as mentioned in previous paragraphs. In the work by Efroni et al.
(2021), algorithms based on the principle of optimism and
Thompson sampling were proposed for RL with trajectory
feedback.√Although the algorithms in (Efroni et al., 2021)
achieve K-type regret bounds, the dependence on the
number of states is far from being asymptotically optimal, 1
and obtaining asymptotically nearly optimal regret bounds

1. Introduction
In the standard reinforcement learning (RL) framework, it
is assumed that the agent acts in an unknown environment,
and in each step, the agent receives feedback in the form of
a state-action dependent reward signal, and then transits to
the next state. Although such an interaction model might
be reasonable when a simulator is available, for real-life
applications, such feedback model could be hard to realize.
For practical scenarios, querying the reward function could
be costly, or even impossible in certain circumstances.
As a motivating example, in healthcare, a doctor repeatedly
interacts with a patient for the purpose of treatment. In
1

Paul G. Allen School of CSE, University of Washington
Wharton Statistics and Data Science, University of Pennsylvania
3
Department of ECE, Princeton University 4 CFCS and School of
Computer Science, Peking University. Correspondence to: Ruosong Wang <ruosongwang@pku.edu.cn>.
2

1
In this paper, by asymptotically nearly optimal, we mean
that the regret bound is optimal up to logarithm factors when the
number of episodes K approaches infinity, which is standard in the
RL theory literature (cf. (Azar et al., 2017; Agarwal et al., 2020)).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

