Hyper: Hyperparameter Robust Efficient Exploration in Reinforcement
Learning

Yiran Wang * 1 Chenshu Liu * 2 Yunfan Li 1 Sanae Amani 1 Bolei Zhou 3 Lin F. Yang 1

Abstract

2016; 2017; Berner et al., 2019; Arulkumaran et al., 2019),
RL is vulnerable to sub-optimal policies when presented
with insufficient reward signals. To resolve this dilemma,
curiosity-driven exploration methods provide a promising
solution (Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018; Machado et al., 2020;
Pathak et al., 2019).

The exploration & exploitation dilemma poses
significant challenges in reinforcement learning (RL). Recently, curiosity-based exploration
methods achieved great success in tackling hardexploration problems. However, they necessitate
extensive hyperparameter tuning on different environments, which heavily limits the applicability
and accessibility of this line of methods. In this
paper, we characterize this problem via analysis
of the agent behavior, concluding the fundamental difficulty of choosing a proper hyperparameter.
We then identify the difficulty and the instability
of the optimization when the agent learns with
curiosity. We propose our method, hyperparameter robust exploration (Hyper), which extensively
mitigates the problem by effectively regularizing
the visitation of the exploration and decoupling
the exploitation to ensure stable training. We theoretically justify that Hyper is provably efficient
under function approximation setting and empirically demonstrate its appealing performance and
robustness in various environments.

1. Introduction
Figure 1. Performance of pure exploitation, curiosity-driven exploration, and our algorithm with different choices of β, each data
point is the averaged performance after 1M steps training over 5
runs. Curiosity-driven (UCB-Q) is very sensitive to hyperparameter β. We propose Hyper, which is empirically robust to β, and
theoretically efficient.

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a paradigm that solves sequential decision-making problems by maximizing the expected cumulative reward r, which is composed of both explorations, the process of the agent discovering new features
from the environment, and exploitations, the process by
which the agent learns to tackle the task using the knowledge
already gained. Despite the astonishing success achieved
with this paradigm (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; Silver et al.,

Curiosity-based algorithms, which originate from solving
the bandit problem (Auer, 2002), enhance the exploration by
intrinsically rewarding the agent for exploring the environment. These algorithms optimize the policy π to maximize
the joint reward function r + βb, where r is the explicit task
reward, b is the intrinsic reward for exploration, and β is
the curiosity hyperparameter that scales the intrinsic reward.
When designing curiosity-based algorithms, the intrinsic
reward is often quantized by the uncertainty of the transition
that the agent takes (Bellemare et al., 2016; Azar et al., 2017;
Jin et al., 2018; Yang & Wang, 2020; Jin et al., 2020). The

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical & Computer
Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, California,
USA 2 Terasaki Institute for Biomedical Innovation, Los Angeles,
California, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University
of California, Los Angeles, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Yiran Wang <yiranwang1027@ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

