Solving Linear-Gaussian Bayesian Inverse Problems with
Decoupled Diffusion Sequential Monte Carlo

Filip Ekström Kelvinius 1 Zheng Zhao 1 Fredrik Lindsten 1

Abstract

distribution pθ (x|y) ∝ p(y|x)pθ (x), becomes an appealing
alternative. This approach is flexible since many different
likelihoods can be used with the same diffusion model prior,
without requiring retraining or access to paired training data.
Previous methods for posterior sampling with diffusion priors, while providing impressive results on tasks like image
reconstruction (Kawar et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2023; Song
et al., 2023), often rely on approximations and fail or perform poorly on simple tasks (Cardoso et al., 2024, and our
Section 5.1), making it uncertain to what extent they can
solve Bayesian inference problems in general.

A recent line of research has exploited pre-trained
generative diffusion models as priors for solving Bayesian inverse problems. We contribute to
this research direction by designing a sequential
Monte Carlo method for linear-Gaussian inverse
problems which builds on “decoupled diffusion”,
where the generative process is designed such that
larger updates to the sample are possible. The
method is asymptotically exact and we demonstrate the effectiveness of our Decoupled Diffusion Sequential Monte Carlo (DDSMC) algorithm
on both synthetic as well as protein and image
data. Further, we demonstrate how the approach
can be extended to discrete data.

Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) (Del Moral, 2004; Naesseth
et al., 2019) is a well-established method for Bayesian inference, and its use of sequences of distributions makes it a
natural choice to combine with diffusion priors. It also offers asymptotical guarantees, and the combination of SMC
and diffusion models has recently seen a spark of interest
(Trippe et al., 2023; Dou & Song, 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Cardoso et al., 2024). Moreover, the design of an efficient SMC
algorithm involves a high degree of flexibility while guaranteeing asymptotic exactness, which makes it an interesting
framework for continued exploration.

1. Introduction
Generative diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b) have sparked an enormous
interest from the research community, and shown impressive results on a wide variety of modeling task, ranging
from image synthesis (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) and audio generation (Chen
et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2021) to molecule and protein generation (Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022; Corso
et al., 2023). A diffusion model consists of a neural network
which implicitly, through a generative procedure, defines
an approximation of the data distribution, pθ (x). While
methods (e.g. Ho & Salimans, 2022) where the model is
explicitly trained to define a conditional distribution pθ (x|y)
exist, this conditional training is not always possible. Alternatively, a domain-specific likelihood p(y|x) might be
known, and in this case, using pθ (x) as a prior in a Bayesian
inverse problem setting, i.e., sampling from the posterior

As previous (non-SMC) works on posterior sampling has
introduced different approximations, and SMC offers a flexible framework with asymptotic guarantees, we aim to further investigate the use of SMC for Bayesian inverse problems with diffusion priors. In particular, we target the case
of linear-Gaussian likelihood models. We develop a method
which we call Decoupled Diffusion SMC (DDSMC) utilizing and extending a previously introduced technique for
posterior sampling based on decoupled diffusion (Zhang
et al., 2024). With this approach, it is possible to make larger
updates to the sample during the generative procedure, and
it also opens up new ways of taking the conditioning on y
into account in the design of the SMC proposal distribution.
We show how this method can effectively perform posterior
sampling on synthetic data, and its effectiveness on image
and protein structure reconstruction tasks. We also further
generalize DDSMC for discrete data. Code is available
online1 .

1

Department of Computer and Information Science (IDA),
Linköping University, Sweden. Correspondence to: Filip Ekström
Kelvinius <filip.ekstrom@liu.se>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

https://github.com/filipekstrm/ddsmc

