Self-Bootstrapping for Versatile Test-Time Adaptation

Shuaicheng Niu * 1 2 Guohao Chen * 1 Peilin Zhao 3 Tianyi Wang 1 Pengcheng Wu 1 Zhiqi Shen† 1

Abstract

remains a long-existed challenge (Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019; Koh et al., 2021), drawing substantial interest from
both research and industry. To address this, numerous methods have been explored, including training-time approaches
like domain generalization (Shankar et al., 2018; Dou et al.,
2019) and data augmentation (Hendrycks et al., 2020; Yao
et al., 2022), as well as test-time techniques such as sourcefree domain adaptation (Qiu et al., 2021) and test-time adaptation (TTA) (Liang et al., 2023), to name just a new.

In this paper, we seek to develop a versatile testtime adaptation (TTA) objective for a variety
of tasks — classification and regression across
image-, object-, and pixel-level predictions. We
achieve this through a self-bootstrapping scheme
that optimizes prediction consistency between
the test image (as target) and its deteriorated
view. The key challenge lies in devising effective augmentations/deteriorations that: i) preserve
the image’s geometric information, e.g., object
sizes and locations, which is crucial for TTA
on object/pixel-level tasks, and ii) provide sufficient learning signals for TTA. To this end, we
analyze how common distribution shifts affect
the image’s information power across spatial frequencies in the Fourier domain, and reveal that
low-frequency components carry high power and
masking these components supplies more learning signals, while masking high-frequency components can not. In light of this, we randomly
mask the low-frequency amplitude of an image
in its Fourier domain for augmentation. Meanwhile, we also augment the image with noise injection to compensate for missing learning signals
at high frequencies, by enhancing the information
power there. Experiments show that, either independently or as a plug-and-play module, our
method achieves superior results across classification, segmentation, and 3D monocular detection
tasks with both transformer and CNN models.

Among these approaches, TTA (Sun et al., 2020; Niu et al.,
2023; Iwasawa & Matsuo, 2021; Bartler et al., 2022; Liang
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024) has emerged as a rapidly
advancing research area. By adapting to each data point
immediately after inference, TTA achieves minimal overhead for model updates, making it highly appealing to a
broad audience in real-world applications. However, current
TTA solutions remain limited in scope, supporting only a
narrow range of tasks due to constraints in their underlying
self-supervised learning objectives, as depicted below.
Self-learning/entropy-based TTA methods (Wang et al.,
2021; Niu et al., 2022a; 2023) and prototype-based methods (Iwasawa & Matsuo, 2021) focus on minimizing the
entropy of predicted logits or maintaining class-wise prototypes for discriminative models, e.g., image classification,
making them unsuitable for regression tasks. Alignmentbased approaches (Mirza et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023) conduct adaptation by aligning feature statistics, e.g., mean and
variance, between the target and source data. While this approach is more general and applicable to a broader of tasks,
it requires pre-calculating source statistics with access to
source data, which raises data privacy concerns (Liang et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2021). Moreover, this method regularizes statistics to align with the source but overlooks direct
learning from test data, leading to limited performance in
more complex scenarios, see Tables 2 and 3.

1. Introduction
Despite deep learning evolving at an incredible speed, its
ability to generalize to out-of-distribution (OOD) domains

Consistency-based methods (Zhang et al., 2022; Shu
et al., 2022) are another major category of TTA, such as
MEMO (Zhang et al., 2022), which optimizes prediction
consistency across different augmented views of the input
image. Their augmentation strategy typically follows the
well-established practice in contrastive learning methods
like MoCo (He et al., 2020) and SimCLR (Chen et al.,
2020a), relying on techniques such as random cropping

Equal contribution † Corresponding author 1 College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Joint WeBank-NTU Research Institute on Fintech, Singapore
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China. Correspondence to: <shuaicheng.niu@ntu.edu.sg>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

