Function Encoders:
A Principled Approach to Transfer Learning in Hilbert Spaces

Tyler Ingebrand 1 2 Adam J. Thorpe 1 Ufuk Topcu 1 3

Abstract

H

A central challenge in transfer learning is designing algorithms that can quickly adapt and generalize to new tasks without retraining. Yet, the
conditions of when and how algorithms can effectively transfer to new tasks is poorly characterized. We introduce a geometric characterization of transfer in Hilbert spaces and define
three types of inductive transfer: interpolation
within the convex hull, extrapolation to the linear span, and extrapolation outside the span. We
propose a method grounded in the theory of function encoders to achieve all three types of transfer. Specifically, we introduce a novel training scheme for function encoders using leastsquares optimization, prove a universal approximation theorem for function encoders, and provide a comprehensive comparison with existing approaches such as transformers and metalearning on four diverse benchmarks. Our experiments demonstrate that the function encoder outperforms state-of-the-art methods on four benchmark tasks and on all three types of transfer.

Type 3
Type 2
Type 1

Training
Functions

Figure 1. The Categorization of Transfer Learning. Black
points are functions present in the training set. Purple points indicate type 1 transfer, interpolation within the convex hull. Orange
points represent type 2 transfer, extrapolation to the linear span.
The red point is type 3 transfer, extrapolation to the Hilbert space.

scenarios or terrain, and computer vision models for medical diagnoses should be able to generalize to entirely new
tasks, such as identifying emerging or rare diseases. While
training on internet-scale data has shown promise in improving generalization performance by increasing data diversity, it does not avoid the fundamental issue of gaps in
the data, does not directly address knowledge transfer, and
does not innately enable adaptation to new, evolving tasks.
Thus, a crucial goal is to develop models that are capable
of transfer at runtime without retraining. Addressing these
challenges requires incorporating mathematical structure
with learning-based representations to quantify and exploit
the relatedness of tasks seen during training.

Project page: tyler-ingebrand.github.io/FEtransfer

1. Introduction
Learned models must be able to draw upon multiple knowledge sources to handle tasks that were not encountered during training. For example, robots operating in remote, unstructured environments must be able to adapt to unseen

We consider an inductive transfer setting and present a geometric characterization of inductive transfer using principles from functional analysis. Inductive transfer involves
transferring knowledge to new, unseen tasks while keeping
the data distribution the same. For instance, labeling images according to a new, previously unknown class, where
only a few examples are provided after training. While
prior works have studied transfer learning, gaps remain in
identifying when learned models will succeed and when
they will fail. We seek a characterization of inductive trans-

1

Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 2 Chandra
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 3 Department of
Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to:
Tyler Ingebrand <tyleringebrand@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

