Position: We Need An Algorithmic Understanding of Generative AI

Oliver Eberle 1 2 Thomas McGee 3 Hamza Giaffar 4 Taylor Webb 5 Ida Momennejad 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have soared to prominence,
yet a fundamental question remains: What algorithms do
LLMs actually use to solve problems? As the “gold rush” of
scaling prioritizes practical breakthroughs, research priorities have centered on improving performance through scale,
often regardless of guarantees or costs, while interpretability efforts have largely focused on understanding isolated
mechanisms. Algorithmic understanding is often left behind. This position paper argues that the ML community
should prioritize research on an algorithmic understanding of generative AI.

What algorithms do LLMs actually learn and use
to solve problems? Studies addressing this question are sparse, as research priorities are focused
on improving performance through scale, leaving
a theoretical and empirical gap in understanding
emergent algorithms. This position paper proposes AlgEval: a framework for systematic research into the algorithms that LLMs learn and
use. AlgEval aims to uncover algorithmic primitives, reflected in latent representations, attention,
and inference-time compute, and their algorithmic composition to solve task-specific problems.
We highlight potential methodological paths and a
case study toward this goal, focusing on emergent
search algorithms. Our case study illustrates both
the formation of top-down hypotheses about candidate algorithms, and bottom-up tests of these
hypotheses via circuit-level analysis of attention
patterns and hidden states. The rigorous, systematic evaluation of how LLMs actually solve tasks
provides an alternative to resource-intensive scaling, reorienting the field toward a principled understanding of underlying computations. Such algorithmic explanations offer a pathway to humanunderstandable interpretability, enabling comprehension of the model’s internal reasoning performance measures. This can in turn lead to more
sample-efficient methods for training and improving performance, as well as novel architectures
for end-to-end and multi-agent systems.

Existing work on understanding algorithmic operations in
LLMs (Zhou et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; von Oswald et al.,
2024; Yang et al., 2024), while impressive, remain surprisingly few in number. Recent interpretability research has prioritized the exploratory analysis of low-level circuit mechanisms (Olah et al., 2020; Olsson et al., 2022), often without
clear hypotheses, and even position papers that note the
importance of algorithmic understanding only mention it
as one among many other directions (Vilas et al., 2024).
Algorithmic research on LLMs has taken a backseat among
priorities, with theoretical work on the topic almost entirely
lacking for both individual and multi-agent LLM systems.
While multi-agent systems are now common solutions for
reasoning and planning with Transformers (Wu et al., 2023a;
Webb et al., 2024; Nisioti et al., 2024), theoretical foundations for efficiently building them remain underexplored.
While scaling has led to impressive results on a wide
range of tasks, its limits remain unclear. Scale, rather than
hypothesis-driven methods, has become the prevailing drive
of general-purpose architectures since the rise of deep learning in the 2010s. This Bitter Lesson (Sutton, 2019), combined with the hypothesis that reward may be enough for
the emergence of intelligence (Silver et al., 2021), have led
to an emphasis on data- and compute-heavy approaches,
prioritizing training data and fine-tuning with existing architectures. This trend has also widened the gap between
frontier models and interpretability research, severely limiting their transparency, trustworthiness, and compliance with
AI regulations (Samek et al., 2021; Kaur et al., 2022).

1
Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany 2 BIFOLD–
Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Berlin,
Germany 3 University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA 4 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of
California San Diego, San Diego, USA 5 Microsoft Research
NYC, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Ida Momennejad <idamo@microsoft.com>, Oliver Eberle <oliver.eberle@tuberlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The field is increasingly encountering the limitations of
available data and its quality, and the rising computational
1

