Efficient Logit-based Knowledge Distillation of Deep Spiking Neural Networks
for Full-Range Timestep Deployment

Chengting Yu 1 2 † Xiaochen Zhao 2 † Lei Liu 2 Shu Yang 2 Gaoang Wang 2 Erping Li 1 2 Aili Wang 1 2

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are emerging
as a brain-inspired alternative to traditional Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), prized for their
potential energy efficiency on neuromorphic hardware. Despite this, SNNs often suffer from accuracy degradation compared to ANNs and face
deployment challenges due to fixed inference
timesteps, which require retraining for adjustments, limiting operational flexibility. To address these issues, our work considers the spatiotemporal property inherent in SNNs, and proposes a novel distillation framework for deep
SNNs that optimizes performance across fullrange timesteps without specific retraining, enhancing both efficacy and deployment adaptability. We provide both theoretical analysis and empirical validations to illustrate that training guarantees the convergence of all implicit models across
full-range timesteps. Experimental results on
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, CIFAR10-DVS, and ImageNet demonstrate state-of-the-art performance
among distillation-based SNNs training methods.
Our code is available at https://github.com/IntelliChip-Lab/snn temporal decoupling distillation.

Figure 1. Illustration of the primary challenges and motivations. (a) Standard logits-based knowledge distillation (logits-KD)
training suffers from large accuracy degradation and requires different models to adapt to various inference timestep settings. (b)
The proposed distillation framework reduces the gap and ensures a
single model for full-range timesteps.

erations generally required for synaptic connections (Roy
et al., 2019), boosting both energy efficiency and speed of
inference on neuromorphic hardware (Akopyan et al., 2015;
Davies et al., 2018; Pei et al., 2019). In essence, SNNs
can be regarded as a type of quantized model that uses
binary transmission, offering the potential for low power
consumption and reduced latency when implemented on
neuromorphic devices (Akopyan et al., 2015; Davies et al.,
2018; Pei et al., 2019).
Although SNNs exhibit considerable potential, their practical application is hindered by the non-differentiability of
spike activity (Zuo et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2023), coupled
with the limited expressiveness of binary spike feature maps
(Qiu et al., 2024a). Together, these challenges result in accuracy degradation when compared to full-precision ANNs
(Xu et al., 2023b; Zuo et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2023; Guo
et al., 2023a; Hu et al., 2024b). Besides, when deploying
SNNs on neuromorphic hardware, a non-negligible challenge is that the inference timesteps of the models are fixed,
aligning with those utilized during training to optimize performance. Altering inference timesteps based on specific
needs requires retraining the models for new timesteps (Fig.
1a), which restricts deployment flexibility and affects operational adaptability in practical settings.

1. Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are modeled after biological neural systems and feature spiking neurons that replicate
the dynamics of biological neurons (Maass, 1997; Roy et al.,
2019). In contrast to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs),
which utilize continuous data forms, SNNs employ a spikecoding approach, using discrete binary spike trains for data
transmission (Panzeri & Schultz, 2001). This binary signaling significantly reduces the multiply-accumulate op†
Equal contribution. 1 College of Information Science and
Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University 2 ZJU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Aili Wang <ailiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn>.

As the common strategy for model lightweighting, Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, 2015; Gou et al., 2021)
has been increasingly applied to training SNNs (Xu et al.,
2023b; Hong et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023a; Qiu et al.,

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

