How Expressive are Knowledge Graph Foundation Models?

Xingyue Huang 1 Pablo Barceló 2 3 4 Michael M. Bronstein 1 5 İsmail İlkan Ceylan 1 Mikhail Galkin 6
Juan L Reutter 2 3 4 Miguel Romero Orth 2 4

HSBC

provide

Knowledge Graph Foundation Models (KGFMs)
are at the frontier for deep learning on knowledge graphs (KGs), as they can generalize to completely novel knowledge graphs with different relational vocabularies. Despite their empirical success, our theoretical understanding of KGFMs
remains very limited. In this paper, we conduct a
rigorous study of the expressive power of KGFMs.
Specifically, we show that the expressive power
of KGFMs directly depends on the motifs that are
used to learn the relation representations. We then
observe that the most typical motifs used in the
existing literature are binary, as the representations are learned based on how pairs of relations
interact, which limits the model’s expressiveness.
As part of our study, we design more expressive
KGFMs using richer motifs, which necessitate
learning relation representations based on, e.g.,
how triples of relations interact with each other.
Finally, we empirically validate our theoretical
findings, showing that the use of richer motifs
results in better performance on a wide range of
datasets drawn from different domains.

research

h

c
ar

e
es

r

Finance
research

Abstract

Science
ch

ear

res

provide
Bloomberg
Oxford

Gtrain

SemiConductors

MicronTech

e
uc
od

pr

supply
TokyoElectron

produce?

supply

produce

Intel

CPU
uce

d
pro

Gtest

Figure 1. Training is over relations provide and research, and
testing is over structurally similar relations supply and produce.

which can be transferred to novel relations based on their
“structurally similarities” to the observed relations.
Example 1.1. Consider the two KGs from Figure 1 which
use disjoint sets of relations. Suppose that the model is
trained on Gtrain and the goal is to predict the missing
link produce(Intel, SemiConductors) in Gtest . Ideally, the
model will predict the link by learning relation invariants
that map produce 7→ research and supply 7→ provide, as the
structural role of these relations are similar in the respective
graphs, even if the relations themselves differ.
△

1. Introduction
Knowledge Graph Foundation Models (KGFMs) gained
significant attention (Galkin et al., 2024; Mao et al., 2024)
for their success in link prediction tasks involving unseen
entities and relations on knowledge graphs (KGs). These
models aim to generalize across different KGs by effectively learning relation invariants: properties of relations
that are transferable across KGs of different relational vocabularies (Gao et al., 2023). KGFMs learn representations
of relations by relying on their structural roles in the KG,

The dominant approach (Geng et al., 2023; Lee et al.,
2023; Galkin et al., 2024) for computing relation invariants is by learning relational embeddings over a
graph of relations. In this graph, each node represents a relation type from the original KG and each
edge represents a connection between two relations.
One prominent choice of these
β
connections is to identify
• α •
•
whether two relations in the original KG match a set of shared
Figure 2. A simple motif
patterns known as graph motifs:
of a path of length two.
small, recurring subgraphs that
capture essential relational structures within the KG.
Figure 2 depicts a simple motif: a path of length two,
connecting three entities via two relations (i.e., a binary

1

University of Oxford 2 Universidad Católica de Chile 3 IMFD
CENIA 5 AITHYRA 6 Google. Correspondence to: Xingyue
Huang <University of Oxford>.

4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

