SADA: Stability-guided Adaptive Diffusion Acceleration

Ting Jiang * 1 Yixiao Wang * 2 Hancheng Ye * 1 Zishan Shao 1 2 Jingwei Sun 1 Jingyang Zhang 1 Zekai Chen 1
Jianyi Zhang 1 Yiran Chen 1 Hai Li 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in diffusion models have set new
benchmarks across various tasks, including image, video,
text, and audio generation (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song
et al., a), significantly enhancing productivity and creativity. However, the deployment of these models at high resolutions faces two fundamental efficiency bottlenecks: (i)
the iterative nature of the denoising process and (ii) the
quadratic complexity of attention mechanisms. To address
these challenges, existing training-free acceleration methods have primarily focused on two corresponding fronts: (i)
reducing the number of inference steps (Song et al., a; Lu
et al., 2022b; Karras et al., 2022), (ii) reducing the computational cost per step (Bolya & Hoffman, 2023; Ma et al.,
2024b; Zhao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2024;
Ye et al., 2024).

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in generative tasks but suffer from high computational costs due to their iterative sampling
process and quadratic-attention costs. Existing
training-free acceleration strategies that reduce
per-step computation cost, while effectively reducing sampling time, demonstrate low faithfulness compared to the original baseline. We hypothesize that this fidelity gap arises because
(a) different prompts correspond to varying denoising trajectory, and (b) such methods do not
consider the underlying ODE formulation and
its numerical solution. In this paper, we propose Stability-guided Adaptive Diffusion Acceleration (SADA), a novel paradigm that unifies step-wise and token-wise sparsity decisions
via a single stability criterion to accelerate sampling of ODE-based generative models (Diffusion
and Flow-matching). For (a), SADA adaptively
allocates sparsity based on the sampling trajectory. For (b), SADA introduces principled approximation schemes that leverage the precise gradient information from the numerical ODE solver.
Comprehensive evaluations on SD-2, SDXL, and
Flux using both EDM and DPM++ solvers reveal consistent ≥ 1.8× speedups with minimal fidelity degradation (LPIPS ≤ 0.10 and FID ≤ 4.5)
compared to unmodified baselines, significantly
outperforming prior methods. Moreover, SADA
adapts seamlessly to other pipelines and modalities: It accelerates ControlNet without any modifications and speeds up MusicLDM by 1.8× with
∼ 0.01 spectrogram LPIPS. Our code is available at: https://github.com/Ting-Justin-Jiang/sadaicml.
*

Sampling with generative models can be cast as transporting
between two distributions through a reverse ordinary differential equation (ODE) (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al.,
b; Lipman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022). Numerical ODE
solvers (Karras et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022a;b) that significantly reduce the number of inference steps while preserving
sample fidelity have become a fundamental component for
practical workflows. Orthogonal to these advanced schedulers, recent works that reduce per-step computational cost
in category (ii) exploit the sparsity empirically observed in
pretrained architectures (Rombach et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2024b; Podell et al.; Esser et al., 2024) during the sampling
procedure, either on a token-wise (Bolya & Hoffman, 2023;
Kim et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2024) or step-wise (Ma et al.,
2024b; Zhao et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024) granularity.
While effectively reducing sampling latency, these architectural strategies in category (ii) demonstrate low faithfulness
compared to original samples, as measured in LPIPS (Zhang
et al., 2018) and FID (Heusel et al., 2017). We hypothesize
that this fidelity gap arises because: (a) Fixed (Ma et al.,
2024b) or pre-searched (Yuan et al., 2024) sparsity patterns
cannot adapt to the variability of each prompt’s denoising
trajectory, and (b) Such methods do not explicitly leverage
the underlying ODE formulation of the denoising process,
nor interplay with the specific ODE-solver used.

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, U.S.A 2 Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, U.S.A. Correspondence to:
Ting Jiang <justin.jiang@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Motivated by these observations, we introduce Stability1

