Efficient and Scalable Density Functional Theory Hamiltonian Prediction
through Adaptive Sparsity

Erpai Luo * 1 Xinran Wei * 2 Lin Huang 2 Yunyang Li 3 Han Yang 2 Zaishuo Xia 4 Zun Wang 2 Chang Liu 2
Bin Shao 2 Jia Zhang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
The Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian matrix is a fundamental quantity in computational chemistry, as it enables the prediction
of all molecular properties obtainable through traditional
Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations (Hohenberg
& Kohn, 1964; te Vrugt et al., 2020). Accurately predicting
the Hamiltonian matrix allows for the rapid determination
of system energy, HOMO-LUMO gaps, electron density,
and other important properties (Fang et al., 2022; Zang et al.,
2023; Batzner et al., 2022; Batatia et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023). Consequently,
recent efforts have focused on using machine learning techniques to predict the Hamiltonian matrix (Schütt et al., 2017;
Unke et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2023). Among these, methods
based on SE(3) equivariant graph neural networks (Unke
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2025b) have achieved superior accuracy due
to their consistency with the equivariance of the Hamiltonian matrix. These methods typically project molecular
features into spherical harmonics space and use tensor product operations to interact features of different orders, which
are crucial for maintaining equivariance.

Hamiltonian matrix prediction is pivotal in computational chemistry, serving as the foundation
for determining a wide range of molecular properties. While SE(3) equivariant graph neural networks have achieved remarkable success
in this domain, their substantial computational
cost—driven by high-order tensor product (TP)
operations—restricts their scalability to large
molecular systems with extensive basis sets. To
address this challenge, we introduce SPHNet, an
efficient and scalable equivariant network, that incorporates adaptive SParsity into Hamiltonian prediction. SPHNet employs two innovative sparse
gates to selectively constrain non-critical interaction combinations, significantly reducing tensor product computations while maintaining accuracy. To optimize the sparse representation, we
develop a Three-phase Sparsity Scheduler, ensuring stable convergence and achieving high performance at sparsity rates of up to 70%. Extensive
evaluations on QH9 and PubchemQH datasets
demonstrate that SPHNet achieves state-of-theart accuracy while providing up to a 7x speedup
over existing models. Beyond Hamiltonian prediction, the proposed sparsification techniques
also hold significant potential for improving the
efficiency and scalability of other SE(3) equivariant networks, further broadening their applicability and impact. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/microsoft/SPHNet.

Equal contribution 1 Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Microsoft Research AI for Science,
Beijing, China 3 Department of Computer Science, Yale University, CT, USA 4 Department of Computer Science, University of
California, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Xinran Wei <weixinran@microsoft.com>, Lin Huang <huang.lin@microsoft.com>,
Jia Zhang <jia.zhang@microsoft.com>.

Figure 1. (A) The number of tensor products grows quadratically
with the number of atoms N , as the Hamiltonian includes features
for all possible atomic pair combinations. (B) The time cost of
tensor products grows with the sixth power of their order L, where
the increase in order corresponds to the expansion in the number of
orbital types in the DFT basis set. For example, the def2-SVP basis
set requires a maximum order of 4, while def2-TZVP demands an
order of 6.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, the efficiency issues introduced by tensor product
operations have become a significant bottleneck. On the one
hand, as the number of atoms in the system increases, the

*

1

