Trust-Region Twisted Policy Improvement

Joery A. de Vries 1 Jinke He 1 Yaniv Oren 1 Matthijs T. J. Spaan 1

Abstract

et al., 2021; Danihelka et al., 2022; Antonoglou et al., 2022;
Oren et al., 2025).

Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) has driven many
recent breakthroughs in deep reinforcement learning (RL). However, scaling MCTS to parallel compute has proven challenging in practice which
has motivated alternative planners like sequential
Monte-Carlo (SMC). Many of these SMC methods adopt particle filters for smoothing through a
reformulation of RL as a policy inference problem.
Yet, persisting design choices of these particle filters often conflict with the aim of online planning
in RL, which is to obtain a policy improvement
at the start of planning. Drawing inspiration from
MCTS, we tailor SMC planners specifically to RL
by improving data generation within the planner
through constrained action sampling and explicit
terminal state handling, as well as improving policy and value target estimation. This leads to our
Trust-Region Twisted SMC (TRT-SMC), which
shows improved runtime and sample-efficiency
over baseline MCTS and SMC methods in both
discrete and continuous domains.

Although MCTS has been a leading technology in recent
breakthroughs, the tree search is inherently sequential, can
deteriorate agent performance at small planning budgets
(Grill et al., 2020), and requires significant modifications
for general use in RL (Hubert et al., 2021). The sequential nature of MCTS is particularly crippling as it limits
the full utilization of modern hardware such as GPUs. Despite follow-up work attempting to address specific issues,
alternative planners have since been explored that avoid
these flaws. Successful alternatives in this area are often
inspired by stochastic control (Del Moral, 2004; Åström,
2006), examples include path integral control (Theodorou
et al., 2010; Williams et al., 2015; Hansen et al., 2022) and
related sequential Monte-Carlo (SMC) methods (Naesseth
et al., 2019; Chopin & Papaspiliopoulos, 2020).
Specifically, recent variational SMC planners (Naesseth
et al., 2018; Macfarlane et al., 2024) have shown great potential in terms of generality, performance, and scalability
to parallel compute. These methods adopt a particle filter
for trajectory smoothing to enable planning in RL (Piché
et al., 2019). However, the distribution of interest for these
particle filters do not perfectly align with learning and exploration for RL agents. Namely, recent SMC methods
focus on estimation of the trajectory distribution under an
unknown policy, and not the actual unknown policy at the
state where we initiate the planner. We find that this mismatch can cause SMC planners to suffer from unnecessarily
high-variance estimation and waste much of their compute
and data during planning. In other words, online planning in
RL should serve as a local approximate policy improvement
(Chan et al., 2022; Sutton & Barto, 2018). Fortunately, existing MCTS and SMC literature provides various directions to
achieve this (Moral et al., 2010; Svensson et al., 2015; Lawson et al., 2018; Danihelka et al., 2022; Grill et al., 2020),
but their use in SMC-planning remains largely unrealized.

1. Introduction
Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) with neural networks
(Browne et al., 2012) has enabled many recent successes in
sequential decision making problems such as board games
(Silver et al., 2018), Atari (Ye et al., 2021), and algorithm
discovery (Fawzi et al., 2022; Mankowitz et al., 2023).
These successes demonstrate that combining decision-time
planning and reinforcement learning (RL) often outperforms
methods that utilize search or deep neural networks in isolation. Naturally, this has stimulated many studies to understand the role of planning in combination with learning
(Guez et al., 2019; de Vries et al., 2021; Hamrick et al.,
2021; Bertsekas, 2022; He et al., 2024) along with studies
to improve specific aspects of the base algorithm (Hubert

This paper aims to address the current limitations of bootstrapped particle filter planners for RL by drawing inspiration from MCTS. Our contributions are 1) to make more
accurate estimates of statistics extracted by the planner, at
the start of planning, and 2) enhancing data-efficiency inside
the planner. We address the pervasive path-degeneracy prob-

1
Delft University of Technology, Delft, the Netherlands. Correspondence to: Joery A. de Vries <J.A.deVries@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

