Tight and Fast Bounds for Multi-Label Learning

Yi-Fan Zhang 1 2 Min-Ling Zhang 2 3

Abstract

(Wang & Sukthankar, 2013; Sun et al., 2014; Nam et al.,
2019), where each object is represented by a single instance
associated with multiple class labels (Zhang & Zhou, 2014;
Liu et al., 2022; Hang & Zhang, 2022). The goal of multilabel learning is to build proper classification models for
objects assigned with multiple class labels simultaneously.
In fact, multi-label scenarios widely exist in various realword applications, such as text categorization (Schapire &
Singer, 2000; Xun et al., 2020; Rubin et al., 2012), multimedia content annotation (Boutell et al., 2004; Cabral et al.,
2011; Wu et al., 2014; You et al., 2020), bioinformatics
(Barutçuoglu et al., 2006; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2012; Chen
et al., 2017) and other fields (Yu et al., 2005). Despite impressive advances in algorithms for multi-label learning, the
theoretical analysis of generalization is still in its infancy.

Commonly used evaluation metrics in multi-label
learning all involve base loss functions, and the
theoretical guarantees of multi-label learning often rely on the properties of base loss functions.
Some recent theoretical works have used the Lipschitz continuity of base loss functions to prove
the generalization bounds for multi-label learning,
but the impact of the smoothness of base loss functions on the generalization bounds is completely
unknown. In an attempt to make up for this gap
in the generalization theory of multi-label learning, we develop some novel vector-contraction
inequalities for smooth base loss functions and
derive tight generalization bounds with no dependency on the number of labels, up to logarithmic terms. We then exploit local Rademacher
complexity to develop some novel local vectorcontraction inequalities for smooth base loss functions, which induce generalization bounds with a
tighter dependency on the number of labels and a
faster convergence rate with respect to the number of examples. In addition, we derive tight generalization bounds with no dependency on the
number of labels, up to logarithmic terms, for
Macro-Averaged AUC by exploiting the Lipschitz
continuity and smoothness of base loss functions,
respectively. Our state-of-the-art theoretical results provide general theoretical guarantees for
the generalization of multi-label learning.

Some recent theoretical works have made preliminary explorations into the generalization of multi-label learning, and
have made some progress in the reduction of the dependency
of the generalization bounds on the number of labels c and
the explicit introduction of label correlations in the generalization analysis (Wu & Zhu, 2020; Wu et al., 2021a;b; Zhang
& Zhang, 2024a). However, from the perspective of learning
theory, in some aspects, the generalization performance of
multi-label learning is still completely unknown. These aspects that need to be explored include: 1) the establishment
of faster convergence rates with respect to the number of examples n of the generalization bounds, and 2) the impact of
the smoothness of base losses on the generalization bounds.
First, existing multi-label learning guarantees are centered
around the concepts of Rademacher complexities (Bartlett
& Mendelson, 2002; Koltchinskii & Panchenko, 2002), and
the fastest convergence rate of the generalization bounds
ine √n).
duced by Rademacher complexity is of the order O(1/
The analysis based on local Rademacher complexity is capable of producing bounds with faster convergence rates
than those obtained by Rademacher complexity (Bartlett
et al., 2005; Koltchinskii, 2006), but it has not been well
explored in multi-label learning. Hence, the development
of general theoretical tools that can induce generalization
bounds with faster convergence rates with respect to n is a
crucial open problem in the theory of multi-label learning.
Second, although evaluation metrics with Lipschitz base
losses have been extensively studied in existing theoretical
work of multi-label learning, the bounds for evaluation met-

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning has attracted significant attention due
to its ability to model real-world objects with rich semantics
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry
of Education, China 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

