Test-Time Training Provably Improves
Transformers as In-context Learners
Halil Alperen Gozeten * 1 Emrullah Ildiz * 1 Xuechen Zhang 1 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 2 Marco Mondelli 3
Samet Oymak 1

Abstract

may falter. This has motivated two popular approaches:
in-context learning and test-time computation. In-context
learning (ICL) incorporates demonstrations related to the
query as part of the prompt facilitating better inference by
the model (Brown et al., 2020; Min et al., 2022). Test-time
computation methods explicitly increase the inference-time
compute to elicit higher quality responses (Snell et al., 2024;
Jaech et al., 2024). An important instance of test-time computation is test-time training (TTT) where the weights of
a model are explicitly updated to adapt to specific test instances (Sun et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). A gradient-based
TTT approach can be described as follows: Given a test
prompt and a pretrained sequence model, we update the
pretrained weights by performing a few gradient iterations
on a suitable self-supervised objective (e.g. next-token prediction objective). We can then use the resulting model to
perform the inference on the test prompt. This procedure is
applicable beyond language models, and it is conceptually
similar to meta-learning approaches such as model-agnostic
meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017).

Test-time training (TTT) methods explicitly update the weights of a model to adapt to the specific test instance, and they have found success
in a variety of settings, including most recently
language modeling and reasoning. To demystify
this success, we investigate a gradient-based TTT
algorithm for in-context learning, where we train
a transformer model on the in-context demonstrations provided in the test prompt. Specifically, we
provide a comprehensive theoretical characterization of linear transformers when the update rule
is a single gradient step. Our theory (i) delineates
the role of alignment between pretraining distribution and target task, (ii) demystifies how TTT
can alleviate distribution shift, and (iii) quantifies
the sample complexity of TTT including how it
can significantly reduce the eventual sample size
required for in-context learning. As our empirical
contribution, we study the benefits of TTT for
TabPFN, a tabular foundation model. In line with
our theory, we demonstrate that TTT significantly
reduces the required sample size for tabular classification (3 to 5 times fewer) unlocking substantial inference efficiency with a negligible training
cost.

Recently, TTT has found significant success in the context
of language modeling by boosting the accuracy and reasoning capability of state-of-the-art models (Akyürek et al.,
2024; Sun et al., 2024). This success is in part due to the
fact that TTT can be naturally integrated within in-context
learning: We can fine-tune the transformer model to fit to
the labels or chain-of-thought rationales provided as part
of the in-context demonstrations, and then re-apply ICL on
the adapted model. In fact, recent work (Akyürek et al.,
2024) utilizes a variation of this procedure and additional
data augmentation to obtain remarkable improvements in
the ARC reasoning benchmark. This motivates the central
question of our work:

1. Introduction
Modern language models can be viewed as general-purpose,
addressing a diverse range of user queries in a zero-shot fashion (Kojima et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022). However, as the
complexity or novelty of the query increases, such as in complex multi-step reasoning scenarios, the pretrained model
*

What are the provable benefits of test-time training of transformers, specifically, for enhancing
in-context learning?

1

Equal contribution University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
University of Southern California 3 Institute of Science and Technology Austria. Correspondence to: Halil Alperen Gozeten
<alperen@umich.edu>.
2

Contributions. As our central contribution, we address this
question by providing a comprehensive theoretical study of
test-time training for one-layer linear transformers. Focusing on prompts following a linear dataset model, we provide

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

