Learning Extrapolative Sequence Transformations from Markov Chains

Sophia Hager 1 Aleem Khan 1 Andrew Wang 1 Nicholas Andrews 1
Example Task: Convert review with rating 3 to a
review with rating 1.5

Abstract
Most successful applications of deep learning involve similar training and test conditions. However, tasks such as biological sequence design
involve searching for sequences that improve desirable properties beyond previously known values, which requires novel hypotheses that extrapolate beyond training data. In these settings, extrapolation may be achieved by using random
search methods such as Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC), which, given an initial state, sample local transformations to approximate a target
density that rewards states with the desired properties. However, even with a well-designed proposal, MCMC may struggle to explore large structured state spaces efficiently. Rather than relying
on stochastic search, it would be desirable to have
a model that greedily optimizes the properties of
interest, successfully extrapolating in as few steps
as possible. We propose to learn such a model
from the Markov chains resulting from MCMC
search. Specifically, our approach uses selected
states from Markov chains as a source of training
data for an autoregressive model, which is then
able to efficiently generate novel sequences that
extrapolate along the sequence-level properties
of interest. The proposed approach is validated
on three problems: protein sequence design, text
sentiment control, and text anonymization. We
find that the autoregressive model can extrapolate
as well or better than MCMC, but with the additional benefits of scalability and significantly
higher sample efficiency.

Review Rating

Ratings unseen
during training

(State) A

3

Ratings observed
during training

B
C

2

Ratings unseen
during training
Monte Carlo Exploration
Learned Model
Achievable States

N

Document State
State A: Service was okay, at best. I wouldn't go
there again.

😐

State B: Service was okay,blah at best. I, wouldn't
go there again.
State C: Service was blahpathetic, at best,
wouldn't go there again.

…
State N: Service was pathetic, at best, wouldn't go
there again!!!

😡

Figure 1. The sentiment extrapolation task (§3.2) requires generating reviews with ratings beyond the range observed at training time.
The search process is illustrated using a toy 1D representation of
the features (x-axis) and rating (y-axis). Monte Carlo exploration
can produce reviews that extrapolate, but many steps are required.
However, once good state sequences have been discovered, we can
sub-sample the transitions that decrease the rating (A → C → N)
and use them to learn an extrapolative model. The reviews shown
to the right for states B, C, and N are actual reviews generated by
our method, while A is a genuine review from the validation data.

For example, automating generation of novel hypotheses
is central to mathematical discovery, biological sequence
design, molecular optimization, and the creation of new
materials (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2023; Jain
et al., 2022; Trabucco et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022). Extrapolation is also necessary in many creative applications, such
as writing assistants for creative writing (Swanson et al.,
2021; Gómez-Rodrı́guez & Williams, 2023). It is natural to
wonder if extrapolation is an emergent ability of large-scale
generative models (Schaeffer et al., 2024). However, prior
work has found that state-of-the-art foundation models can
struggle on tasks requiring extrapolation (Dziri et al., 2023;

1. Introduction
In creative tasks such as scientific discovery, a key requirement is the ability to extrapolate beyond existing knowledge.
1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University.
Correspondence to: Sophia Hager <shager2@jh.edu>, Nicholas
Andrews <noa@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

