Are Sparse Autoencoders Useful? A Case Study in Sparse Probing

Subhash Kantamneni * 1 Joshua Engels * 1 Senthooran Rajamanoharan Max Tegmark 1 Neel Nanda

Abstract
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are a popular method
for interpreting concepts represented in large language model (LLM) activations. However, there
is a lack of evidence regarding the validity of their
interpretations due to the lack of a ground truth
for the concepts used by an LLM, and a growing number of works have presented problems
with current SAEs. One alternative source of evidence would be demonstrating that SAEs improve
performance on downstream tasks beyond existing baselines. We test this by applying SAEs to
the real-world task of LLM activation probing
in four regimes: data scarcity, class imbalance,
label noise, and covariate shift. Due to the difficulty of detecting concepts in these challenging
settings, we hypothesize that SAEs’ basis of interpretable, concept-level latents should provide
a useful inductive bias. However, although SAEs
occasionally perform better than baselines on individual datasets, we are unable to ensemble SAEs
and baselines to consistently improve over just
baseline methods. Additionally, although SAEs
initially appear promising for identifying spurious correlations, detecting poor dataset quality,
and training multi-token probes, we are able to
achieve similar results with simple non-SAE baselines as well. Though we cannot discount SAEs’
utility on other tasks, our findings highlight the
shortcomings of current SAEs and the need to
rigorously evaluate interpretability methods on
downstream tasks with strong baselines.

N/A
Standard
Data
Class
Conditions Scarcity Imbalance
Do SAE
Probes
Help?

Label
Noise

OOD

Interp.

~

Figure 1. SAE probes underperform the baseline of logistic regression in each regime when taking the mean across datasets.
Additionally, we find that baseline methods can provide many of
the interpretability insights of SAE probes. Bars compare the best
performing baseline method (logistic regression) to the best performing SAE probe (width = 16k, k = 128).

notably, Bricken et al. (2023); Cunningham et al. (2023)
demonstrated the promise of sparse autoencoders (SAEs)
and sparked considerable follow-up work. This includes
papers focused on improving the downstream cross entropy
loss of SAE reconstructions (Gao et al., 2024; Braun et al.,
2024; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a;b), improving SAE training efficiency (Mudide et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024), finding
weaknesses in SAEs and proposing solutions (Chanin et al.,
2024; Bussmann et al., 2024b), using SAEs to understand
model representation structure (Engels et al., 2024a;b; Li
et al., 2024), training large suites of SAEs (Lieberum et al.,
2024; He et al., 2024), and developing benchmarks for SAEs
(Huang et al., 2024; Karvonen et al.; 2024b).
Unfortunately, we lack a “ground truth” to know whether
SAEs truly extract the interpretable concepts used by language models. Prior work has largely avoided this limitation
by evaluating SAEs with proxy metrics like reconstruction
loss (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a;b; Gao et al., 2024; Olmo
et al., 2024; Braun et al., 2024). These metrics are tractable
to optimize for, but do not necessarily align with mechanistic interpretability’s (MI) goal of better understanding
neural networks (see Bereska & Gavves (2024) and Sharkey
et al. (2025) for surveys of MI). We argue that if SAEs truly
advance MI’s goal, they should improve performance on a
real, hard-to-fake model control or explainability task.

1. Introduction
Dictionary learning is a popular method for interpreting
LLM activations (Arora et al., 2018; Yun et al., 2021); most
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Subhash Kantamneni <subhashk@mit.edu>,
Joshua Engels <jengels@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

