D E - MARK: Watermark Removal in Large Language Models

Ruibo Chen * 1 Yihan Wu * 1 Junfeng Guo 1 Heng Huang 1

Abstract

schemes remains insufficiently understood and, in many
cases, significantly overestimated. One critical vulnerability lies in watermark stealing & removal, a method that
seeks to reverse-engineer the watermarking process. With
this method, adversaries can effectively strip or alter the
embedded watermark, undermining its intended protection.
This poses a serious challenge to the security and integrity
of watermarked content, as it exposes a weakness in the
watermarking scheme’s ability to withstand tampering.

Watermarking techniques offer a promising way
to identify machine-generated content via embedding covert information into the contents generated from language models (LMs). However, the
robustness of the watermarking schemes has not
been well explored. In this paper, we present D E MARK , an advanced framework designed to remove n-gram-based watermarks effectively. Our
method utilizes a novel querying strategy, termed
random selection probing, which aids in assessing
the strength of the watermark and identifying the
red-green list within the n-gram watermark. Experiments on popular LMs, such as Llama3 and
ChatGPT, demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of D E - MARK in watermark removal and
exploitation tasks.

In this paper, we delve deeper into watermark removal techniques and introduce D E - MARK, a comprehensive framework for stealing and removing n-gram-based watermarks.
Our approach utilizes a querying strategy on the language
model to reconstruct the red and green lists and estimate
the watermark strength. Unlike prior work (Jovanović et al.,
2024), which has certain limitations – namely, a) requiring
knowledge of the underlying hash function of the n-gram
and b) requiring paraphrase tool for watermark removal,
which cannot preserve the original LM distribution – our
method is more general and provides a theoretical guarantee
between the post-removal LM distribution and the original
ones. Additionally, D E - MARK can be adapted for watermark exploitation by imitating the watermarking rule and
employing another language model to generate watermarked
content.

1. Introduction
As language models rapidly evolve and their usage becomes
more widespread (Wang et al., 2024a; Thirunavukarasu
et al., 2023; Rubenstein et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b;
Kasneci et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2024b),
concerns among researchers and regulators about their potential for misuse, particularly in generating harmful content, have intensified. The challenge of distinguishing between human-written and AI-generated text has emerged as
a key focus of research. Statistical watermarking (Aaronson, 2022; Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a) presents a promising
approach to identifying text produced by sequential LLMs.
This method embeds a statistical pattern into the generated
text via a pseudo-random generator, which can later be detected through a statistical hypothesis test.

Our contribution can be summarized as follows:
• We propose D E - MARK, a comprehensive watermark
framework designed for the removal of n-gram watermarks (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a), which is considered a pivotal approach in the field. Our framework introduces a provable unbiased estimator to assess the strength of watermarks and offers theoretical
guarantees about the gap between the original and the
post-removal distributions of the language model. Essentially, D E - MARK operates without requiring prior
knowledge of the n-gram watermark parameters.

However, recent research (Jovanović et al., 2024) highlights that the robustness of existing n-gram watermarking
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to: Ruibo Chen
<rbchen@umd.edu>, Yihan Wu <ywu42@umd.edu>, Junfeng
Guo <gjf2023@umd.edu>, Heng Huang <heng@umd.edu>.

• Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the
efficacy of D E - MARK in watermark removal and exploitation tasks from well-known language models,
such as Llama3 and Mistral. Additionally, a case study
on ChatGPT further confirms D E - MARK’s capability
to effectively remove watermarks from industry-scale

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

