Communicating Activations Between Language Model Agents

Vignav Ramesh 1 Kenneth Li 1

Abstract

2023; Xi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Ahn et al., 2022;
Schick et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023;
Nakano et al., 2022), communication between multiple cooperating agents has emerged as an intuitive approach to
amplify the reasoning capabilities of LLMs (Wu et al., 2023).
Explicit communication in natural language between multiple LLMs has been shown to encourage divergent thinking
(Liang et al., 2023), improve factuality and reasoning (Du
et al., 2023), enable integration of cross-domain knowledge
(Sukhbaatar et al., 2024), and allow for modular composition of abilities in a complementary manner (Wu et al.,
2023; Prasad et al., 2023).

Communication between multiple language
model (LM) agents has been shown to scale up
the reasoning ability of LMs. While natural language has been the dominant medium for interLM communication, it is not obvious this should
be the standard: not only does natural language
communication incur high inference costs that
scale quickly with the number of both agents and
messages, but also the decoding process abstracts
away too much rich information that could be otherwise accessed from the internal activations. In
this work, we propose a simple technique whereby
LMs communicate via activations; concretely, we
pause an LM B’s computation at an intermediate
layer, combine its current activation with another
LM A’s intermediate activation via some function f , then pass f ’s output into the next layer
of B and continue the forward pass till decoding is complete. This approach scales up LMs
on new tasks with zero additional parameters and
data, and saves a substantial amount of compute
over natural language communication. We test
our method with various functional forms f on
two experimental setups—multi-player coordination games and reasoning benchmarks—and find
that it achieves up to 27.0% improvement over
natural language communication across datasets
with <1/4 the compute, illustrating the superiority and robustness of activations as an alternative
“language” for communication between LMs.

A critical problem with natural language communication,
however, is that it incurs extremely high inference costs
that scale quickly with the number of agents as well as
length and number of messages (Du et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2023). Restricting LLM communication
to natural language also raises the question: as LLMs are
increasingly capable of handling larger, more complex tasks
(sometimes with “super-human” ability) (Wei et al., 2022;
Burns et al., 2023), might they communicate more effectively in representations of higher dimension than natural
language? While using natural language as a communicative medium is appealing due to its interpretability, we claim
that it may not be optimal for inter-LLM communication.
Natural language generation uses only one token to represent the model’s belief over the entire vocabulary, which
risks losing information embedded within the model output
logits (Pham et al., 2024); furthermore, a model’s belief
over the entire vocabulary is itself not always better (for
communicative purposes) than the model’s (often richer)
representation of the input in earlier layers. Indeed, Hernandez et al. (2024) find that by around the halfway point
of an LM’s computation, it has developed “enriched entity
representations” of the input, where entities in the prompt
are populated with additional facts about that entity encoded
in the model’s weights; but by the later layers these embeddings are transformed into a representation of the next word
which leverages only parts of the previous, richer representations, when that full embedding would be quite useful for
communication.

1. Introduction
Language is for the purpose of communication. As large
language models (LLMs) have been increasingly used to
power autonomous, goal-driven agents capable of reasoning, tool usage, and adaptive decision-making (Yao et al.,
1

Kempner Institute for AI, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Vignav Ramesh <vignavramesh@college.harvard.edu>.

Motivated by these concerns, this work outlines a simple
technique whereby LLM agents communicate via activations, thus enabling more efficient (i.e., higher-entropy) com-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

