Radio: Rate–Distortion Optimization for Large Language Model Compression
Sean I. Young 1 2

billion-parameter LLMs to 3–4 bits per weight on average
and incur only a negligible loss in model accuracy (Chee et
al., 2024; Frantar et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024). This enables
LLM inference on a single consumer-grade GPU.

Abstract
In recent years, the compression of large language
models (LLMs) has emerged as a key problem in
facilitating LLM deployment on resource-limited
devices, reducing compute costs, and mitigating
the environmental footprint due to large-scale AI
infrastructure. Here, we establish the foundations
of LLM quantization from a rate–distortion theory
perspective and propose a quantization technique
based on simple rate–distortion optimization. Our
technique scales to models containing hundreds of
billions of weight parameters and offers users the
flexibility to compress models, post-training, to a
model size or accuracy specified by the user.

Despite the practical advances made in model quantization
methods in recent years, rate–distortion theoretic aspects of
LLM quantization are seldom studied in earlier works. By
far, the most extensively studied and extended framework
for LLM quantization is Optimal Brain Compression and
GPTQ of Frantar et al. (2023), itself an adaptation of the
classic Optimal Brain Surgery (OBS) algorithm (Hassibi &
Storck, 1992). Since OBS operates outside the framework
of rate and distortion—which serves as the basis of many
related compression problems—a rate–distortion theoretic
characterization and exposition of LLM compression can
significantly enhance our understanding of the problem at
hand and guide the design of LLM compression methods.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we tackle the problem of LLM compression
using a rate–distortion framework. We begin by analyzing
how a model’s weights should be quantized to maximize
quantized model accuracy at a given average bit depth (bit
rate). After this, we propose a stochastic gradient descenttype method to solve this optimization problem exactly and
efficiently, post-training—in minutes for billion-parameter
models and in a few hours for 10–100-billion-parameter
models. Compared with OPTQ and its extensions (Frantar
et al., 2022; Frantar & Alistarh, 2022; Huang et al., 2024;
Lee et al., 2024; van Baalen et al., 2024), in which weights
must be fine-tuned during quantization, our rate–distortion
framework more simply determines optimal bit depths and
uses integer rounding heuristic for the actual quantization
the optimum bit depths have been determined. This renders
our framework also suited for quantizing the intermediate
activations, which can further reduce the memory footprint
of batched inference.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have become a universal
framework for solving a wide range of problems in natural
language processing, ranging from text summarization and
translation to conversational AI. While LLMs have already
surpassed traditional methods in many of these tasks, they
involve tens to hundreds of billions of weight parameters
(!), rendering their deployment onto devices with limited
resources challenging—model weights and activations far
exceed the available on-chip memory so that weights need
to be loaded from the off-chip (global) memory throughout
inference, rendering LLM inference memory-bound (Yuan
et al., 2024). This greatly hinders the applicability of LLMs
particularly in time-sensitive applications and exacerbates
the environmental footprint of large-scale AI infrastructure
required by LLMs.
One way to reduce the memory requirements of LLMs for
inference is by simplifying the model representation posttraining. Quantization of the model weights and activation
has proven to be particularly apt at compressing models to
low bit depths or even arbitrary model sizes (Dettmers et
al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022; Frantar et al., 2022; Frantar &
Alistarh, 2022; Kim et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024; Lee et
al., 2024; Guan et al., 2024). Using state-of-the-art model
quantization techniques, it is possible to compress 10–100

More specifically, our contributions are as follows.
• We formulate a rate–distortion theoretic framework for
rate–distortion optimal quantization of LLMs.
• We design a stochastic ascent algorithm for solving the
resulting rate–distortion optimization problem.
• We quantize LLMs across model types and sizes and
show the rate–distortion behavior of quantized LLMs.

1 Martinos Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
2 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL),

MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Sean I. Young
<siyoung@mit.edu>.

2. Previous Work

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Earlier work on neural network model quantization can be
traced back to Vanhoucke et al. (2011), who demonstrated
1

