Principled Data Selection for Alignment: The Hidden Risks of Difficult Examples

Chengqian Gao † 1 Haonan Li 1 Liu Liu 2 Zeke Xie 3 Peilin Zhao 2 4 Zhiqiang Xu 1

Abstract
9.4% reduction
due to difficult examples

%(

)

'

(

The alignment of large language models (LLMs)
often assumes that using more clean data yields
better outcomes, overlooking the match between
model capacity and example difficulty. Challenging this, we propose a new principle: “Preference
data vary in difficulty, and overly difficult examples hinder alignment, by exceeding the model’s
capacity.” Through systematic experimentation,
we validate this principle with three key findings:
(1) preference examples vary in difficulty, as evidenced by consistent learning orders across alignment runs; (2) overly difficult examples significantly degrade performance across four LLMs
and two datasets; and (3) the capacity of a model
dictates its threshold for handling difficult examples, underscoring a critical relationship between
data selection and model capacity. Building on
this principle, we introduce Selective DPO, which
filters out overly difficult examples. This simple
adjustment improves alignment performance by
9-16% in win rates on the AlpacaEval 2 benchmark compared to the DPO baseline, surpassing a
series of DPO variants with different algorithmic
adjustments. These results together illuminate the
importance of aligning data difficulty with model
capacity, offering a transformative perspective for
improving alignment strategies in LLMs. Code is
available at https://github.com/glorg
ao/SelectiveDPO

%
(

(

(
-

(%
-

%

Figure 1: Overly difficult examples hinder the alignment.
Training on difficult examples, identified by high validation loss, adversely affects alignment and decreases overall
performance by 9.4% in win rate. The results are from
experiments with four SFT models on the UltraFeedbackbinarized dataset, i.e., Figure 3.
stages of training large language models (LLMs): pretraining (Lee et al., 2021; Penedo et al., 2023; Tang et al.,
2024) and supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Cao et al., 2023;
Qin et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2023), by adhering to wellestablished principles. However, in the third stage, i.e.,
preference alignment (Askell et al., 2021; Weidinger et al.,
2021), data selection principles are often implicit and superficial, potentially limiting the alignment between LLM
outputs and human preferences.
Prior studies in alignment underscore the importance of selecting error-free data by demonstrating the presence and
negative impacts of mislabeled data (Wang et al., 2024a;
Gao et al., 2024), noisy feedback (Mitchell, 2023; Chowdhury et al., 2024), and data with low agreement (Argilla,
2024), implicitly assuming that all error-free data are beneficial regardless of the model’s capacity. However, we argue
this assumption overlooks the relationship between data
difficulty and model capacity. Our experiments show that
overly difficult examples not only fail to improve alignment
but can actually hinder the performance (see Figure 1). This
observation motivates our systematic investigation into how
example difficulty affects alignment performance.

1. Introduction
Data selection focuses on identifying the most valuable subset from a dataset while excluding ineffective samples (Albalak et al., 2024). It significantly improves the first two
†

This work is done when Chengqian Gao works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab. 1 MBZUAI 2 Tencent Inc 3 HKUST
(Guangzhou) 4 SJTU. Correspondence to: Liu Liu <leonliuliu@tencent.com>, Peilin Zhao <masonzhao@tencent.com>,
Zhiqiang Xu <zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our main contribution is a new principle for preference
data selection, which emphasizes the match between model
1

