Do NOT Think That Much for 2+3=? On the Overthinking of Long Reasoning
Models
Xingyu Chen * 1 2 Jiahao Xu * 2 Tian Liang * 2 Zhiwei He * 1 2 Jianhui Pang 2 Dian Yu 2 Linfeng Song 2
Qiuzhi Liu 2 Mengfei Zhou 2 Zhuosheng Zhang 2 Rui Wang 1 Zhaopeng Tu 2 Haitao Mi 2 Dong Yu 2

Abstract
The remarkable performance of long reasoning
models can be attributed to their ability to emulate
human-like long-time thinking during inference.
These models employ extended chain-of-thought
(CoT) processes, exploring multiple strategies to
enhance problem-solving capabilities. However, a
critical question remains: How to intelligently and
efficiently scale computational resources during
testing. This paper presents the first comprehensive study on the prevalent issue of overthinking
in these models, where long reasoning models
generate redundant solutions that contribute minimally to accuracy and diversity, thereby wasting computational resources on simple problems
with minimal benefit. We introduce novel efficiency metrics from both outcome and process
perspectives to evaluate the rational use of computational resources by long reasoning models.
Using a self-training paradigm, we propose strategies to mitigate overthinking, simplifying reasoning processes without compromising accuracy.
Experimental results show that our approach successfully reduces computational overhead while
preserving model performance across a range of
testsets with varying difficulty levels, such as
GSM8K, MATH500, GPQA, and AIME. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
galaxyChen/overthinking.

Figure 1. Illustration of overthinking issue: long reasoning models (in red color) spend much more tokens than conventional LLMs
(in blue color) on a simple question “What is the answer of 2 plus
3?”.

soning. Their success is largely attributed to mimicking
human-like long-term thinking before responding to a question. Specifically, long reasoning models cultivate a long
chain of thoughts (CoT), explore multiple strategies, break
down complex steps, and perform double-checking, which
ultimately enhance their ability to tackle intricate reasoning
tasks. This approach, known as “scaling test-time compute”,
involves allocating more computational resources during the
model’s inference phase to generally yield more accurate
responses.

1. Introduction

While effective, a critical yet underexplored question remains: Are we scaling test-time compute efficiently and
intelligently? This study provides an initial exploration of
this problem. We first observe that long reasoning models
exhibit significant overthinking issues. Specifically, they
tend to expend excessive compute (in terms of tokens or
thinking rounds) on questions that are exceptionally simple
or for which the answer is already evident. For example,
Figure 1 compares the token usage of long reasoning models with conventional models when answering the question,
“what is the answer of 2 plus 3?” On average, long reasoning

The OpenAI o1 model (OpenAI, 2024) and its replicas (Qwen, 2024; Guo et al., 2025; Kimi et al., 2025;
DeepSeek, 2025) exemplify the state-of-the-art in AI rea*

1
Equal contribution
Shanghai Jiao Tong Univer2
sity, China Tencent. Correspondence to: Zhaopeng Tu
<zptu@tencent.com>, Rui Wang <wangrui12@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

