Convergence of Consistency Model with Multistep Sampling under General Data
Assumptions

Yiding Chen 1 Yiyi Zhang 1 Owen Oertell 1 Wen Sun 1

Abstract

ally expensive especially when generating high-resolution
images (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022;
Zhang & Chen, 2023; Song & Dhariwal, 2024).

Diffusion models accomplish remarkable success
in data generation tasks across various domains.
However, the iterative sampling process is computationally expensive. Consistency models are
proposed to learn consistency functions to map
from noise to data directly, which allows one-step
fast data generation and multistep sampling to improve sample quality. In this paper, we study the
convergence of consistency models when the selfconsistency property holds approximately under
the training distribution. Our analysis requires
only mild data assumption and applies to a family
of forward processes. When the target data distribution has bounded support or has tails that decay
sufficiently fast, we show that the samples generated by the consistency model are close to the
target distribution in Wasserstein distance; when
the target distribution satisfies some smoothness
assumption, we show that with an additional perturbation step for smoothing, the generated samples are close to the target distribution in total
variation distance. We provide two case studies with commonly chosen forward processes to
demonstrate the benefit of multistep sampling.

Consistency model (CM) (Song et al., 2023) is proposed
to accelerate sample generation by learning a consistency
function that maps from noise to data directly. It allows
both one-step fast data generation and multistep sampling
to trade computation for sample quality. Consistency model
can be trained with consistency distillation or consistency
training (Song et al., 2023), which enforce that any points on
the same trajectory specified by the probability-flow ODE
are mapped to the same origin, i.e. the self-consistency property. Despite the empirical success of consistency models,
their theoretical foundations remain inadequately understood. In particular, recent studies (Luo et al., 2023; Song
& Dhariwal, 2024; Kim et al., 2024) observe diminishing
improvements in sample quality when increasing the number of steps in multistep sampling. They find that two-step
generation enhances the sample quality considerably while
additional sampling steps provide minimal improvements.
Such phenomenon motivates the theoretical understanding
on consistency models, especially on multistep sampling.
The analysis of consistency models can be challenging for
the following reasons:
Mismatch on the initial starting distributions: Consistency models generate samples from Gaussian noise (Song
et al., 2023) while the ground truth reverse processes (i.e.,
the denoising process) start from the marginal distribution
of the forward process, which is unknown in practice. As
a consequence, we need to analyze the error caused by the
mismatch in starting distributions. This difficulty shows
up even if we have access to the ground truth consistency
function: the consistency function is not Lipschitz even
for distributions as simple as Bernoulli, which makes it
challenging to analyze this error pointwise. Because the
consistency function is the solution to the probability flow
ODE, it is natural to consider the stability of the initial value
problem. However, without a strong assumption on the consistency function, this approach results in an upper bound
with exponential dependency in problem parameters (see
Appendix A).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have been widely acknowledged for their
high performance across various domains, such as material
and drug design (Xu et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023; Xu et al.,
2023), control (Janner et al., 2022), and text-to-image generation (Black et al., 2023; Oertell et al., 2024). The key idea
of diffusion models is to transform noise into approximate
samples from the target data distribution by iterative denoising. This iterative sampling process typically involves
numerical solutions of SDE or ODE, which is computation1
Cornell University.
<yc2773@cornell.edu>.

Correspondence to: Yiding Chen

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

