When Maximum Entropy Misleads Policy Optimization

Ruipeng Zhang 1 Ya-Chien Chang 1 Sicun Gao 1

Abstract
The Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning
(MaxEnt RL) framework is a leading approach
for achieving efficient learning and robust performance across many RL tasks. However, MaxEnt
methods have also been shown to struggle with
performance-critical control problems in practice,
where non-MaxEnt algorithms can successfully
learn. In this work, we analyze how the tradeoff between robustness and optimality affects the
performance of MaxEnt algorithms in complex
control tasks: while entropy maximization enhances exploration and robustness, it can also
mislead policy optimization, leading to failure
in tasks that require precise, low-entropy policies.
Through experiments on a variety of control problems, we concretely demonstrate this misleading
effect. Our analysis leads to better understanding of how to balance reward design and entropy
maximization in challenging control problems.

PPO-Realistic

SAC-Realistic

SAC-Simplified

𝑧(𝑚)

𝑧(𝑚)

𝑥(𝑚

𝑚
𝑦(

)

)

𝑥(𝑚

𝑚
𝑦(

)

𝑧(𝑚)

)
𝑥(𝑚

)

𝑚
𝑦(

)

Low-entropy policy is required on
critical states to ensure success

⋯
⋯

𝐒

MaxEnt
gets misled

Success

High-entropy policy on mediocre
states leads to irrecoverable failure

⋯

Failure

Figure 1. (Upper) In the quadrotor control environment, SAC
learns well under simplified dynamics, but fails to learn when
under realistic dynamics models. PPO can learn well despite the
use of the latter. (Lower) Intuitive illustration of hard control problems, where critical states naturally require low-entropy policies,
while MaxEnt RL can favor mediocre states with robust policies of
low returns that branch out towards failure and are not recoverable.

1. Introduction

Interestingly, the well-motivated benefits of MaxEnt and
SAC have not led to its dominance in RL for real-world
continuous control problems in practice (Shengren et al.,
2022; Tan & Karaköse, 2023; Xu et al., 2021; Radwan et al.,
2021). Most recent RL-based robotic control work (Kaufmann et al., 2023; Miki et al., 2022; Zhuang et al., 2024)
mostly still uses a combination of imitation learning and
fine-tuning with non-MaxEnt methods such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). The typical factors of consideration that
favor PPO over SAC in practice include computational cost,
sensitivity to hyperparameters, and ease of customization.
Often the performance by SAC is indeed shown to be inferior to PPO despite efforts in tuning (Muzahid et al., 2021;
Lee & Moon, 2021; Nair et al., 2024). In fact, it is easy to
reproduce such behaviors. Figure 1 shows the comparison
of SAC and PPO for learning to control a quadrotor to follow a path. When the underlying model for the quadrotor
is a simplified dynamics model, SAC can quickly learn a
stable controller. When a more realistic dynamics model
for the quadrotor is used, then SAC always fails, while PPO
can succeed under the same initialization and dynamics.

The Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning (MaxEnt
RL) framework (Ziebart et al., 2008; Abdolmaleki et al.,
2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018a; Han & Sung, 2021) augments
the standard objective of maximizing return with the additional objective of maximizing policy entropy. MaxEnt
methods such as Soft-Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018a) have shown superior performance than other onpolicy or off-policy methods (Schulman, 2015; Schulman
et al., 2017; Lillicrap, 2015; Fujimoto et al., 2018) in many
standard continuous control benchmarks (Achiam, 2018;
Raffin et al., 2021; Weng et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2024).
Explanations of their performance include better exploration, smoothing of optimization landscape, and enhanced
robustness to disturbances (Hazan et al., 2019; Ahmed et al.,
2019; Eysenbach & Levine, 2021).
1
Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego. Correspondence to: Ruipeng Zhang <ruz019@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we show how the conflict between maximizing
1

