Automatically Interpreting Millions of Features in Large Language Models

Gonçalo Paulo 1 Alex Mallen 1 Caden Juang 1 2 Nora Belrose 1

Abstract

et al., 2023; 2024). Due to the large number of neurons to
be interpreted, automated approaches were proposed (Bills
et al., 2023), where a second LLM is used to propose an
interpretation given a set of neuron activations and the text
snippets it activates on, in a process similar to that of generating a human label. But research has found that most
neurons are “polysemantic”, activating in contexts that can
be significantly different (Arora et al., 2018; Elhage et al.,
2022). The Linear Representation Hypothesis (Park et al.,
2023) posits that human-interpretable concepts are encoded
in linear combinations of neurons. A significant branch
of current interpretability work focuses on extracting these
features and disentangling them (Bereska & Gavves, 2024).

While the activations of neurons in deep neural networks usually do not have a simple
human-understandable interpretation, sparse autoencoders (SAEs) can be used to transform these
activations into a higher-dimensional latent space
which can be more easily interpretable. However,
SAEs can have millions of distinct features, making it infeasible for humans to manually interpret
each one. In this work, we build an open-source
automated pipeline to generate and evaluate natural language interpretations for SAE features
using LLMs. We test our framework on SAEs
of varying sizes, activation functions, and losses,
trained on two different open-weight LLMs. We
introduce five new techniques to score the quality
of interpretations that are cheaper to run than the
previous state of the art. One of these techniques,
intervention scoring, evaluates the interpretability
of the effects of intervening on a feature, which
we find explains features that are not recalled by
existing methods. We propose guidelines for generating better interpretations that remain valid for
a broader set of activating contexts, and discuss
pitfalls with existing scoring techniques. Our code
is available online.

Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) were proposed as a way to
address polysemanticity (Cunningham et al., 2023). SAEs
consist of two parts: an encoder that transforms activation
vectors into a sparse, higher-dimensional latent space, and
a decoder that projects the features back into the original
space. Both parts are trained jointly to minimize reconstruction error. SAE features1 were found to be interpretable
and potentially more monosemantic than neurons (Bricken
et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023). Recently, a significant effort was made to scale SAE training to larger models,
like GPT-4 (Gao et al., 2024) and Claude 3 Sonnet (Templeton et al., 2024), and they have become an important
interpretability tool for LLMs.
Training an SAE yields numerous sparse features, each of
which needs a natural language interpretation. In this work,
we introduce an automated framework that uses LLMs to
generate an interpretation for each feature in an SAE. We
use this framework to explain millions of features across
multiple models, layers, and SAE architectures. We also
propose new ways to evaluate the quality of interpretations,
and discuss the problems with existing approaches. We
hope that these result can inform other repositories of interpretations for SAE features that already exist (Lin & Bloom,
2023), as well as improve comparisons between different
SAE architectures.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have reached human level
performance in a broad range of domains (OpenAI, 2023),
and can even be leveraged to develop agents (Wang et al.,
2023) that can strategize (Bakhtin et al., 2022), cooperate
and develop new ideas (Lu et al., 2024; Shaham et al., 2024).
At the same time, we understand little about the internal
representations driving their behavior. Early mechanistic
interpretability research focused on analyzing the activation
patterns of individual neurons (Olah et al., 2020; Gurnee

1
We use feature to mean the intermediate dimension of the
SAE like in (Bricken et al., 2023).

1

EleutherAI 2 Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA.
Correspondence to: Gonçalo Paulo <goncalo@eleuther.ai>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

