Train for the Worst, Plan for the Best:
Understanding Token Ordering in Masked Diffusions

Jaeyeon Kim * 1 Kulin Shah * 2 Vasilis Kontonis 2 Sham Kakade 1 Sitan Chen 1

Abstract

variant, distinguished by a simple and principled objective:
to generate samples, learn to reverse a noise process which
independently and randomly masks tokens.

In recent years, masked diffusion models (MDMs)
have emerged as a promising alternative approach
for generative modeling over discrete domains.
Compared to autoregressive models (ARMs),
MDMs trade off complexity at training time with
flexibility at inference time. At training time, they
must learn to solve an exponentially large number
of infilling problems, but at inference time, they
can decode tokens in essentially arbitrary order. In
this work, we closely examine these two competing effects. On the training front, we theoretically
and empirically demonstrate that MDMs indeed
train on computationally intractable subproblems
compared to their autoregressive counterparts. On
the inference front, we show that a suitable strategy for adaptively choosing the token decoding
order significantly enhances the capabilities of
MDMs, allowing them to sidestep hard subproblems. On logic puzzles like Sudoku, we show that
adaptive inference can boost solving accuracy in
pretrained MDMs from < 7% to ≈ 90%, even
outperforming ARMs with 7× as many parameters and that were explicitly trained via teacher
forcing to learn the right order of decoding.

In many applications, such as language modeling, masked
diffusion models (MDMs) still underperform compared to
autoregressive models (ARMs) (Nie et al., 2024; Zheng
et al., 2024), which instead learn to reverse a noise process
that unmasks tokens sequentially from left to right. However,
recent studies suggest that MDMs may offer advantages in
areas where ARMs fall short, including reasoning (Nie et al.,
2024; Kitouni et al., 2025), planning (Ye et al., 2024), and
infilling (Gong et al., 2024). This raises a key question:
what are the strengths and limitations of MDMs compared
to ARMs, and under what conditions can MDMs be scaled
to challenge the dominance of ARMs in discrete generative
modeling?
To understand these questions, we turn a microscope to two
key competing factors when weighing the merits of MDMs
over ARMs:
• Complexity at training time: By design, the prediction task that MDMs are trained on is more challenging.
Whereas ARMs seek to predict the next token given an unmasked prefix, MDMs seek to predict a token conditioned
on a set of unmasked tokens in arbitrary positions.
• Flexibility at inference time: On the other hand, the
sampling paths taken by an MDM are less rigid. The
order in which tokens are decoded at inference time is
random instead of fixed to left-to-right. In fact, even more
is possible: MDMs can actually be used to decode in any
order.

1. Introduction
While diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021)
are now the dominant approach for generative modeling in
continuous domains like image, video, and audio, efforts to
extend this methodology to discrete domains like text and
proteins (Austin et al., 2021; Lou et al., 2024; Hoogeboom
et al., 2021b) remain nascent. Among numerous proposals,
masked diffusion models (MDMs) (Lou et al., 2024; Sahoo
et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2024) have emerged as a leading

Therefore, we ask:
Are the benefits of inference flexibility for MDMs enough to
outweigh the drawbacks of training complexity?
In this work, we provide dual perspectives on this question.

*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard University 2 University of
Texas Austin.
Correspondence to: Kulin Shah <kulinshah@utexas.edu>.

(1) Training for the worst. First, we provide theoretical
and empirical evidence that the overhead imposed by training complexity quantifiably impacts MDMs’ performance.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We prove that even for simple, benign models of data, there
are noise levels at which a large fraction, but not all, of
1

