Position: Not All Explanations for Deep Learning Phenomena
Are Equally Valuable

Alan Jeffares 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

Position
This work argues that many prominent deep learning
phenomena discussed in the research literature are
not representative of challenges encountered in realworld applications of deep learning. Thus, not all
efforts to understand these phenomena are equal in
value – we should focus on using them to refine our
broad explanatory theories of important aspects of
deep learning rather than developing narrow ad hoc
hypotheses to describe them in isolation. However,
this perspective is not consistently reflected in current
research practices within the community.

Developing a better understanding of surprising or
counterintuitive phenomena has constituted a significant portion of deep learning research in recent
years. These include double descent, grokking,
and the lottery ticket hypothesis – among many
others. Works in this area often develop ad hoc
hypotheses attempting to explain these observed
phenomena on an isolated, case-by-case basis.
This position paper asserts that, in many prominent cases, there is little evidence to suggest that
these phenomena appear in real-world applications and these efforts may be inefficient in driving progress in the broader field. Consequently,
we argue against viewing them as isolated puzzles
that require bespoke resolutions or explanations.
However, despite this, we suggest that deep learning phenomena do still offer research value by providing unique settings in which we can refine our
broad explanatory theories of more general deep
learning principles. This position is reinforced
by analyzing the research outcomes of several
prominent examples of these phenomena from
the recent literature. We revisit the current norms
in the research community in approaching these
problems and propose practical recommendations
for future research, aiming to ensure that progress
on deep learning phenomena is well aligned with
the ultimate pragmatic goal of progress in the
broader field of deep learning.

prominent topic in deep learning research. In recent years,
there has been a remarkable interest and excitement around
several of these phenomena within the research community
(e.g. Belkin et al., 2019; Frankle & Carbin, 2019), which
has even begun to extend into the public consciousness (e.g.
Heaven, 2024; Ananthaswamy, 2024). The sustained research focus on these idiosyncratic phenomena is heavily
reflected in publications at leading machine learning conferences and community efforts such as workshop sessions.
What type of “deep learning phenomena” does this work
address? As this terminology could refer to a broad range
of empirical observations, we will first specify the kind of
phenomena we address throughout this work. We adopt
the definition used in the workshop for “Identifying and
Understanding Deep Learning Phenomena” at ICML 2019
which called for “interesting and unusual behavior observed
in deep nets” that can be “isolated and analyzed”. We further
narrow our scope to what we call edge cases i.e. phenomena
that challenge our intuitions without appearing prominently
in practical deep learning applications. For example, the
emergence of grokking – that is, delayed generalization,
long after perfect training performance (q.v. Section 2) –
is included in our discussion as it has captured the interest
of many in the research community despite not being a
practical concern in training frontier models. We focus on
these edge case phenomena as, despite their prevalence in
research (which we later detail), it is not obvious how or
why they should be studied.

1. Introduction
Deep learning phenomena – that is, surprising empirical
observations that appear to disagree with our existing expectations of how neural networks function – have become a
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Alan Jeffares
<aj659@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

