FAB-PPI: Frequentist, Assisted by Bayes, Prediction-Powered Inference

Stefano Cortinovis 1 François Caron 1

Abstract

are good, PPI results in more accurate estimates and shorter
CIs than traditional methods that rely solely on labelled data.

Prediction-powered inference (PPI) enables valid
statistical inference by combining experimental
data with machine learning predictions. When a
sufficient number of high-quality predictions is
available, PPI results in more accurate estimates
and tighter confidence intervals than traditional
methods. In this paper, we propose to inform
the PPI framework with prior knowledge on the
quality of the predictions. The resulting method,
which we call frequentist, assisted by Bayes, PPI
(FAB-PPI), improves over PPI when the observed
prediction quality is likely under the prior, while
maintaining its frequentist guarantees. Furthermore, when using heavy-tailed priors, FAB-PPI
adaptively reverts to standard PPI in low prior
probability regions. We demonstrate the benefits
of FAB-PPI in real and synthetic examples.

More formally, for an input/output pair (X, Y ) ∼ P =
PX × PY |X and a convex loss function Lθ (x, y), where
θ ∈ Rd , we wish to estimate
θ⋆ = arg min E[Lθ (X, Y )].

(1)

θ∈Rd

For instance, if Lθ (x, y) = (θ − y)2 /2 is the squared
loss, then θ⋆ = E[Y ]. We assume that we have n labelled
observations {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 iid from P and N unlabelled
ei }N iid from PX , which are also
observations {X
i=1
independent of the labelled data. The number of unlabelled
observations is typically much larger than the number of
labelled ones, N ≫ n. Additionally, we are provided with
a machine learning prediction rule f , that can be used to
predict an output f (x) at any input x. PPI aims to obtain
an estimator θb and a (1 − α) confidence interval Cαpp for
θ⋆ , which take advantage of f . Under mild assumptions,
θ⋆ can be expressed as the solution to

1. Introduction

gθ⋆ := E[L′θ⋆ (X, Y )] = 0,

Statistical inference crucially relies on the availability of
high-quality labelled data to draw actionable conclusions.
As the scale of machine learning models keeps growing,
their increasingly accurate predictions become a tempting
alternative to labelled data in fields where the latter are traditionally scarce, such as proteomics (Jumper et al., 2021).
However, blindly using potentially biased predictions as a
surrogate for labelled data voids the statistical validity of
the conclusions drawn. To address this, prediction-powered
inference (Angelopoulos et al., 2023a) provides a general
framework for statistical inference in the presence of a large
number of black-box predictions by combining them with a
smaller number of labelled observations, which are used to
correct for the discrepancy between the predictions and the
true labels. The estimators and confidence intervals (CIs)
resulting from PPI are statistically valid regardless of the machine learning model used. Moreover, when the predictions

(2)

where L′θ is a subgradient of Lθ with respect to θ. It is
easy to see that the quantity above can be decomposed as
gθ = mθ + ∆θ , where
mθ := E[L′θ (X, f (X))],

(3)

∆θ := E[L′θ (X, Y ) − L′θ (X, f (X))].

(4)

In this setting, mθ represents a measure of fit of the
predictor, whereas ∆θ , called the rectifier, accounts for the
discrepancy between the predicted outputs f (X) and the
true outputs Y , effectively quantifying prediction quality.
For example, under the squared loss, ∆θ = E[f (X) − Y ]
and a good predictor f is one such that ∆θ is close to zero,
i.e. f (x) ≃ E[Y |X = x]. Note that, while in this case ∆θ
does not depend on θ, this is not true in general.
By estimating the two quantities mθ and ∆θ , Angelopoulos
et al. (2023b) derive an estimator and a CI for θ⋆ , which
use both labelled and unlabelled data. The resulting CI is
shorter than the classical confidence interval based solely on
the labelled data when N ≫ n and f is accurate because,
in this case, mθ can be estimated with low variance using
the unlabelled data, while ∆θ is close to zero.

1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Stefano Cortinovis <cortinovis@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

