Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Adaptation from Human Feedback via
Preference-Order-Preserving Task Embedding

Siyuan Xu 1 Minghui Zhu 1

Abstract

signals. The reward function needs to be properly chosen
such that the agent’s state-action pairs align well with the
task’s goal. However, designing such a reward function can
be difficult, especially for tasks where the goals are too ambiguous to be directly mapped to specific state-action pairs
(Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022), such as a robot
cleaning a room or preparing a meal. Moreover, agents may
be required to offer personalized services tailored to human
users. Due to lack of domain knowledge, it is hard for the
human users to design a reward function that reflects their
objective. To address the challenge, RL from human feedback (RLHF) (Casper et al., 2023; Kaufmann et al., 2023)
aims to solve RL using human feedback, e.g., the binary
trajectory comparisons or trajectory rankings, instead of
reward signals. Specifically, RLHF learns a reward function
by aligning the reward signals along trajectories with human
preferences and then optimizes the policy by off-the-shelf
RL algorithms under the learned reward function. RLHF
has achieved state-of-the-art results in large language model
(LLM) fine-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022) and preference
optimization of text-to-image generation (Lee et al., 2023).

This paper studies meta-reinforcement learning
with adaptation from human feedback. It aims to
pre-train a meta-model that can achieve few-shot
adaptation for new tasks from human preference
queries without relying on reward signals. To
solve the problem, we propose the framework
adaptation via Preference-Order-preserving EMbedding (POEM). In the meta-training, the framework learns a task encoder, which maps tasks
to a preference-order-preserving task embedding
space, and a decoder, which maps the embeddings to the task-specific policies. In the adaptation from human feedback, the task encoder
facilitates efficient task embedding inference for
new tasks from the preference queries and then
obtains the task-specific policy. We provide a
theoretical guarantee for the convergence of the
adaptation process to the task-specific optimal policy and experimentally demonstrate its state-ofthe-art performance with substantial improvement
over baseline methods.

Although it addresses the challenge of reward design, RLHF
faces the challenge of data inefficiency. First, the large
state-action space necessitates substantial preference data
to avoid overfitting the learned reward function. However,
due to the limitation in annotators’ expertise, capabilities,
and attention, collecting high-quality human feedback data
incurs significant costs and takes considerable time (Casper
et al., 2023). Furthermore, optimizing the policy in RLHF
relies on conventional RL algorithms, which require extensive environment exploration, often amounting to millions
of state transition data.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved significant success in various sequential decision-making tasks, including
video games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Lee
et al., 2018), robotics (Levine et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2020;
Margolis et al., 2021; 2024), and quantitative finance (Liu
et al., 2021). However, when applied to real-world problems, conventional RL methods encounter the difficulty of
designing a proper reward function (Kaufmann et al., 2023).
In RL, an agent seeks to identify the optimal policy that
maximizes an accumulative reward function using reward

Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) (Finn et al., 2017;
Beck et al., 2023) aims to acquire transferable knowledge by
identifying common structures across multiple prior tasks
during meta-training. At meta-test time, this knowledge
enables the adaptation to unseen tasks using a small amount
of data, thereby accelerating the training process and improving the data efficiency of RL algorithms. Incorporating meta-RL into human-in-the-loop adaptation (Ren et al.,
2022; Joey Hejna, 2023) facilitates few-shot adaptation from
preference queries without relying on reward signals, and

1
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, USA. Correspondence to: Minghui Zhu <muz16@psu.edu>, Siyuan Xu
<spx5032@psu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

