Sample Complexity of Branch-length Estimation by Maximum Likelihood

David Clancy, Jr. * 1 Hanbaek Lyu * 1 Sebastien Roch * 1

Abstract

One seeks an estimate θ̂ ∈ Θ such that

We consider the branch-length estimation problem on a bifurcating tree: a character evolves
along the edges of a binary tree according to a
two-state symmetric Markov process, and we seek
to recover the edge transition probabilities from
repeated observations at the leaves. This problem
arises in phylogenetics, and is related to latent
tree graphical model inference. In general, the
log-likelihood function is non-concave and may
admit many critical points. Nevertheless, simple
coordinate maximization has been known to perform well in practice, defying the complexity of
the likelihood landscape. In this work, we provide the first theoretical guarantee as to why this
might be the case. We show that deep inside the
Kesten-Stigum reconstruction regime, provided
with polynomially many m samples (assuming
the tree is balanced), there exists a universal parameter regime (independent of the size of the
tree) where the log-likelihood function is strongly
concave and smooth with high probability. On
this high-probability likelihood landscape event,
we show that the standard coordinate maximization algorithm converges exponentially fast to the
maximum
√ likelihood estimator, which is within
O(1/ m) from the true parameter, provided a
sufficiently close initial point.

θ̂ ∈ arg max ℓ(θ; x1 , . . . , xm ), where
θ∈Θ

m

1 X
ℓ(θ; x1 , . . . , xm ) =
log Pθ (xj ),
m j=1

(1)

which maximizes the likelihood of seeing the observed data.
Classical theory (Cramér, 1946; Wald, 1949) tells us that
whenever the population landscape (i.e. the m → ∞ limit)
E[ℓ(θ)] = EX∼Pθ∗ log Pθ (X)
is concave and the likelihood is maximized at a unique point
that agrees with the true parameter θ ∗ , then θ̂ is a good estimator of θ ∗ . Much of the rigorous theoretical foundation of
MLE assumes that one can extend this population landscape
to the empirical landscape ℓ(θ; x1 , . . . , xm ). This relies on
being able to approximate E[ℓ(θ)] by ℓ(θ; x1 , · · · , xm ) so
that optimizing ℓ(θ; x1 , . . . , xm ) approximately finds θ ∗ .
See (Li & Babu, 2019). However, many natural MLE problems such as those arising from mixture models (Murphy,
2012) involve maximizing non-concave log-likelihoods.

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: David Clancy, Jr. <dclancy@math.wisc.edu>,
Hanbaek Lyu <hlyu@math.wisc.edu>, Sebastien Roch
<roch@math.wisc.edu>.

A similar story arises in the optimization literature, where
one typically minimizes a (hopefully convex) loss function.
Many natural questions on that side are non-convex due
to either the loss function being non-convex or having to
optimize over a non-convex parameter space, such as principal component analysis and best subset selection problems
(Beale et al., 1967; Hocking & Leslie, 1967). Within the
class of non-convex problems, there are many examples
of benign non-convex problems which, while not actually
convex, possess sufficiently nice structures that make them
manageable. These include some additional symmetries,
such as those in phase retrieval (Sun et al., 2018) and dictionary learning (Arora et al., 2014; Bai et al., 2019), or the
loss function possesses sufficient regularity (e.g. the PolyakŁojasiewicz (Polyak, 1963; Lojasiewicz, 1963) condition)
so that gradient-based methods converge linearly despite
non-convexity (Karimi et al., 2016). See (Jain et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2020) for a general overview.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Here we investigate a specific maximum likelihood estimation problem along the following lines. Even though the
population and empirical landscapes may be non-concave

1. Introduction
Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) for parameter estimation is a fundamental technique in statistics and machine
learning. For this, one has a parametric probabilistic model
(Pθ ; θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rd ) and some data x1 , · · · , xm assumed to
be i.i.d. observations from Pθ∗ for some unknown θ ∗ ∈ Θ.
*

1

