A Machine Learning Approach to Duality in Statistical Physics

Prateek Gupta 1 Andrea E. V. Ferrari 2 3 Nabil Iqbal 4 5

Abstract

Background on duality: Consider a statistical physics
model with microstates σ and Hamiltonian functional
H[β, σ], where β are macroparameters such as the temperature.
P The model is determined by its partition function
Z = σ e−H[β,σ] . However, in nature we often have access
to sets of expectation values of observables Oα (σ) (some
real-valued functions of the microstates, e.g. correlation
functions, with α being an arbitrary label)

The notion of duality – that a given physical system can have two different mathematical descriptions – is a key idea in modern theoretical physics.
Establishing a duality in lattice statistical mechanics models requires the construction of a dual
Hamiltonian and a map from the original to the
dual observables. By using neural networks to
parameterize these maps and introducing a loss
function that penalises the difference between correlation functions in original and dual models, we
formulate the process of duality discovery as an
optimization problem. We numerically solve this
problem and show that our framework can rediscover the celebrated Kramers-Wannier duality for
the 2d Ising model, numerically reconstructing
the known mapping of temperatures. We further
investigate the 2d Ising model deformed by a plaquette coupling and find families of “approximate
duals”. We discuss future directions and prospects
for discovering new dualities within this framework. 1 .

⟨Oα (σ)⟩H =

1 X
Oα (σ) exp(−H[β, σ]).
Z σ

(1)

It is a profound physical fact that occasionally there are alternative representations of these sets of correlation functions
(see e.g. (Savit, 1980; Kramers & Wannier, 1941b;a; Peskin,
1978; Dasgupta & Halperin, 1981; Coleman, 1975; Wegner,
1971) for influential examples). That is, there exists another
set of microstates σ̃, another Hamiltonian H̃[β̃, σ̃] and for
each observable Oα (σ) a dual observable Õα (σ̃i ) such that
⟨Oα (σ)⟩H = ⟨Õα (σ̃)⟩H̃ .

(2)

When this happens, we have a duality –the same physical
system has at least two distinct mathematical descriptions,
which may be useful for different reasons.
A prototypical example of such a duality is KramersWannier duality for the 2d Ising model (Kramers & Wannier,
1941b). The 2d Ising model2 consists of spins σi = ±1 living on the sites of a square lattice at temperature β −1 , with
Hamiltonian that sums over neighbouring spins ⟨ij⟩
X
H[β, σ] = −β
σi σj .
(3)

1. Background
A key concept in physics is duality, i.e. the idea that the
same physical system can have two different mathematical
descriptions. Duality sits at the heart of modern theoretical
physics. In this work we seek to formalize the notion of
duality in statistical physics in a manner that allows modern
machine learning techniques to be used to systematically
search for dualities.

⟨ij⟩

It is a remarkable fact that the model described by (3) is
precisely equivalent to a different 2d Ising model model
with spins σ̃i = ±1 living on the dual lattice, with a dual
Hamiltonian of the same functional form
X
H̃[β̃, σ̃] = −β̃
σ̃i σ̃j
(4)

*

Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany 2 Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY,
Germany 3 School of Mathematics, The University of Edinburgh
4
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Durham University, UK
5
Amsterdam Machine Learning Laboratory, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Prateek Gupta <contact@pgupta.info>.

⟨ij⟩

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our
implementation
is
publicly
available
at
https://github.com/pg2455/physics duality

but with β̃ satisfying
sinh(2β) sinh(2β̃) = 1 .
2

1

See e.g. (Kardar, 2007) for a textbook treatment.

(5)

