SE(3)-Equivariant Diffusion Policy in Spherical Fourier Space

Xupeng Zhu 1 2 Fan Wang 3 Robin Walters 2 Jane Shi 3

Abstract
Diffusion Policies are effective at learning
closed-loop manipulation policies from human
demonstrations but generalize poorly to novel
arrangements of objects in 3D space, hurting
real-world performance. To address this issue,
we propose Spherical Diffusion Policy (SDP), an
SE(3) equivariant diffusion policy that adapts
trajectories according to 3D transformations of
the scene. Such equivariance is achieved by
embedding the states, actions, and the denoising
process in spherical Fourier space. Additionally,
we employ novel spherical FiLM layers to condition the action denoising process equivariantly
on the scene embeddings. Lastly, we propose a
spherical denoising temporal U-net that achieves
spatiotemporal equivariance with computational
efficiency. In the end, SDP is end-to-end SE(3)
equivariant, allowing robust generalization across
transformed 3D scenes. SDP demonstrates a
large performance improvement over strong
baselines in 20 simulation tasks and 5 physical
robot tasks including single-arm and bi-manual
embodiments. Code is available at https:
//github.com/amazon-science/
Spherical_Diffusion_Policy.

Figure 1. SDP enforces that the policy is SO(3) equivariant.
Specifically, in the second row, an SO(3) rotation that is applied
to the scene leads to an equivalent rotation on the latent spherical
Fourier features in the neural networks enc, ϵθ , and on the generated trajectory (blue dots). Fourier features are visualized as
spherical signal.

Consider, for example, grasping a dish that is randomly
placed in the sink, threading a nut onto a bolt with random
orientation, or wiping the curved surface of a car. Diffusion Policy may struggle to attain robust 3D generalization
without training on a large amount of costly human demonstrations to exhaust the possible 3D arrangements of the
scene.

1. Introduction
Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023) has emerged as an effective method for learning closed-loop policies from human
demonstration. This success is based on the ability of Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) to approximate multi-modal
human demonstrations (Mandlekar et al., 2021). A particularly challenging aspect of real-world robotic manipulation,
which is often underrepresented in synthetic benchmarks,
is that objects may be found in a wide range of 3D poses.

We propose Spherical Diffusion Policy (SDP), a Fourier
space SE(3) equivariant method that automatically adapts
to changes in the scene. SDP improves on recent works
in equivariant diffusion policy learning which are limited
to SO(2)-equivariance (Wang et al., 2024b), equivariant to
only single-object transformations (Yang et al., 2024a; Tie
et al., 2024), or computationally heavy (Tie et al., 2024). In
contrast, our method is light and SE(3) equivariant across
multiple objects, allowing it to perform more complicated
tasks with less engineering. SDP achieves translational invariance by formulating states and actions in the gripper
frame (Chi et al., 2024). Figure 1 illustrates the SO(3)
equivariance of the proposed method. If the scene is transformed by a 3D rotation, then the denoised action trajectory

1
Work was done as an intern at Amazon Robotics 2 Khoury College of Computer Science, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 3 Amazon
Robotics, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Xupeng Zhu <zhu.xup@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

