Winner-takes-all for Multivariate Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting

Adrien Cortés * Rémi Rehm Victor Letzelter * 1 2

Abstract

place an explicit distribution on the model’s output and perform maximum likelihood estimation (Salinas et al., 2020;
Alexandrov et al., 2020). While such parametric methods
can be computationally efficient, they may depend heavily
on the choice of distribution family, reducing their flexibility
in capturing complex uncertainties (Gneiting & Katzfuss,
2014).

We introduce TimeMCL, a method leveraging the
Multiple Choice Learning (MCL) paradigm to
forecast multiple plausible time series futures.
Our approach employs a neural network with
multiple heads and utilizes the Winner-Takes-All
(WTA) loss to promote diversity among predictions. MCL has recently gained attention due to
its simplicity and ability to address ill-posed and
ambiguous tasks. We propose an adaptation of
this framework for time-series forecasting, presenting it as an efficient method to predict diverse
futures, which we relate to its implicit quantization objective. We provide insights into our
approach using synthetic data and evaluate it on
real-world time series, demonstrating its promising performance at a light computational cost.

In parallel, the success of general-purpose generative
models, especially conditional diffusion models (Ho et al.,
2020) such as TimeGrad (Rasul et al., 2021a), has led
to strong empirical performance in high-dimensional
time series forecasting. However, these models tend to
be computationally expensive at inference, particularly
when multiple what-if scenarios, which we will refer
to as hypotheses, need to be generated in real-time.
Moreover, there is often no explicit mechanism to guarantee
sufficiently diverse hypotheses within a single model pass.
To address these limitations, we propose TimeMCL—a
novel approach based on Multiple Choice Learning (MCL)
techniques—that produces diverse and plausible predictions
via a single forward pass.

1. Introduction
Predicting the weather of the upcoming weekend or the
stock prices of next month with perfect accuracy would undoubtedly be useful. Unfortunately, time-series forecasting
is a highly ill-posed problem. In many cases, the available
input information is insufficient to reduce our uncertainty
about the estimation of the underlying stochastic process
and the data itself may contain noise. Consequently, the best
a forecaster can do is estimate plausible future trajectories,
ideally along with the probability of each outcome.

Contributions.
• We introduce TimeMCL, a new approach for time
series forecasting that adapts the Winner-Takes-All
(WTA) loss to generate multiple plausible futures.
• We show that TimeMCL can be viewed as a functional
quantizer, and we illustrate its theoretical properties
on synthetic data.

Because temporal data are highly structured and typically
come with input–output pairs that require no additional manual annotation, autoregressive neural networks have become
the de facto standard for forecasting high-dimensional time
series from historical data and exogenous covariates (Rangapuram et al., 2018; Salinas et al., 2019; Benidis et al.,
2020). To capture predictive uncertainty, practitioners often

• We evaluate our method on real-world benchmarks,
demonstrating that TimeMCL efficiently produces a
diverse set of forecasts with just a few samples in a
single forward pass.1

*
Equal contribution 1 LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France 2 Valeo.ai, Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Adrien Cortés <ad.cortes43@gmail.com>, Victor Letzelter
<letzelter.victor@hotmail.fr>.

2. Related Work
Ambiguity and need for diversity time series forecasting. In recent years, sequence-to-sequence neural networks
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Sutskever et al., 2014;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Code available at https://github.com/Victorletzelter/timeMCL.

