BEST-Route: Adaptive LLM Routing with Test-Time Optimal Compute

Dujian Ding 1 Ankur Mallick 2 Shaokun Zhang 3 Chi Wang 4 Daniel Madrigal 2
Mirian Del Carmen Hipolito Garcia 2 Menglin Xia 2 Laks V. S. Lakshmanan 5 Qingyun Wu 3 6 Victor Rühle 2

Abstract

substantial computational costs, driven by their large sizes
and autoregressive text generation, making their deployment a challenge for both developers and users (Yu et al.,
2022). The growing demand for LLM-backed services has
spurred the development of innovative solutions to achieve
efficiency without sacrificing quality.

Large language models (LLMs) are powerful
tools but are often expensive to deploy at scale.
LLM query routing mitigates this by dynamically
assigning queries to models of varying cost and
quality to obtain a desired tradeoff. Prior query
routing approaches generate only one response
from the selected model and a single response
from a small (inexpensive) model was often not
good enough to beat a response from a large (expensive) model due to which they end up overusing the large model and missing out on potential cost savings. However, it is well known that
for small models, generating multiple responses
and selecting the best can enhance quality while
remaining cheaper than a single large-model response. We leverage this idea to propose BESTRoute, a novel routing framework that chooses
a model and the number of responses to sample
from it based on query difficulty and the quality
thresholds. Experiments on real-world datasets
demonstrate that our method reduces costs by up
to 60% with less than 1% performance drop.

The rising costs of LLM inference have spurred efforts to
develop smaller, more cost-effective models such as selfconsistency (Wang et al., 2023) and re-ranking (Chuang
et al., 2023). However despite several innovations in this
space (Dubey et al., 2024; Abdin et al., 2024), small models
continue to come up short in terms of response quality when
compared to the largest, most powerful models (see Figure 3
where y-axis measures response quality). Therefore an
alternate line of work has focused on combining multiple
models, small and large, to balance response quality and
cost (Ding et al., 2024; Ong et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023). Broadly speaking these works seek to
leverage the small models to respond to easier queries while
saving the large models for the more challenging queries
thereby reducing costs without loss of response quality. In
particular there are three sub-areas where this principle has
been applied: 1) Query routing (e.g. Ong et al. (2024))
where a classifier/scorer rates the difficulty of an input and
selects models accordingly, 2) Speculative decoding (e.g.
Kim et al. (2023)) where a small (drafter) model returns
candidate response tokens that are accepted/rejected by the
large (verifier) model, and 3) Model cascades ( e.g. Chen
et al. (2023)) where the query passes through the models
sequentially, from the cheapest to the most costly, until
either a satisfactory response is obtained or a pre-defined
max number of models of the cascade is reached.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural
language processing (NLP) by delivering state-of-the-art
performance across a wide range of tasks, from language
understanding to creative writing, code generation, and beyond (Zhao et al., 2023). Their widespread deployment in
applications like ChatGPT (OpenAI, a) and other conversational agents (Zheng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a;b) has
made them a cornerstone of modern NLP systems. However,
the superior performance of these models often comes with

This work focuses on query routing and seeks to combine
model selection with adaptive allocation of computing resources at test-time (Snell et al., 2024) to obtain notable response quality improvements compared to prior work while
achieving substantial cost reduction. We observe that a major drawback of many prior query routing approaches is
that they are unable to leverage extra compute and scale up
the performance of the smaller (lower cost) models in their
portfolio. Therefore they often end up routing all but the
easiest queries to large models and thus provide little cost
savings (this is shown in prior work (Ding et al., 2024) and

1

University of British Columbia (work performed during internship at Microsoft) 2 Microsoft 3 Pennsylvania State University 4 Google (work performed while at Microsoft) 5 University
of British Columbia 6 AG2AI, Inc.. Correspondence to: Dujian
Ding <dujian.ding@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

