Primal-Dual Neural Algorithmic Reasoning

Yu He 1 Ellen Vitercik 1 2

Abstract

Bellman-Ford for shortest-path problems (Veličković et al.,
2020). By aligning a model’s architecture with an algorithm’s step-wise operations, NAR enhances generalization
and sample efficiency (Xu et al., 2020; 2021).

Neural Algorithmic Reasoning (NAR) trains neural networks to simulate classical algorithms, enabling structured and interpretable reasoning over
complex data. While prior research has predominantly focused on learning exact algorithms for
polynomial-time-solvable problems, extending
NAR to harder problems remains an open challenge. In this work, we introduce a general NAR
framework grounded in the primal-dual paradigm,
a classical method for designing efficient approximation algorithms. By leveraging a bipartite representation between primal and dual variables, we
establish an alignment between primal-dual algorithms and Graph Neural Networks. Furthermore,
we incorporate optimal solutions from small instances to greatly enhance the model’s reasoning
capabilities. Our empirical results demonstrate
that our model not only simulates but also outperforms approximation algorithms for multiple
tasks, exhibiting robust generalization to larger
and out-of-distribution graphs. Moreover, we
highlight the framework’s practical utility by integrating it with commercial solvers and applying
it to real-world datasets.

Moreover, NAR addresses a fundamental bottleneck of classical algorithms: while they guarantee correctness and interoperability, they require extensive feature engineering to
compress real-world data into scalar values. By embedding
algorithmic knowledge into neural models, NAR enables direct handling of structured real-world data (Deac et al., 2021;
He et al., 2022; Beurer-Kellner et al., 2022; Numeroso et al.,
2023). For instance, a model pre-trained with Bellman-Ford
knowledge can tackle real-world transportation problems,
while integrating domain-specific features such as weather
conditions and traffic patterns.
Despite the success of NAR in simulating polynomial-time
algorithms (Ibarz et al., 2022; Rodionov & Prokhorenkova,
2024), in particular the 30 algorithms (e.g., sorting, search,
graph) from the CLRS-30 benchmark (Veličković et al.,
2022) and other benchmarks (Minder et al., 2023; Markeeva
et al., 2024), its extension to NP-hard problems remains
an open challenge due to the difficulty in reliably generating ground-truth samplers (Veličković et al., 2022). This
limitation creates a significant gap when applying NAR to
real-world problems, many of which are inherently NP-hard.
Addressing this gap is crucial, as the motivation behind
NAR is to enable the transfer of algorithmic knowledge to
tackle complex, real-world datasets effectively.

1. Introduction
Understanding the algorithmic reasoning ability of neural
networks is crucial for quantifying their expressivity and
practical deployment (Łukasz Kaiser & Sutskever, 2016;
Zhou et al., 2022; Sanford et al., 2024; de Luca & Fountoulakis, 2024). However, end-to-end supervised learning
often struggles with generalization for algorithmic tasks.
Neural Algorithmic Reasoning (NAR) (Veličković & Blundell, 2021) addresses this challenge by training neural networks to mimic operations of classical algorithms, such as

We build upon the line of NAR research that simulates classical algorithms with Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Xu
et al., 2020; Veličković et al., 2020; Bevilacqua et al., 2023;
Rodionov & Prokhorenkova, 2023; 2024; Georgiev et al.,
2024). Specifically, we focus on advancing NAR into the underexplored NP-hard domain (Cappart et al., 2022; Georgiev
et al., 2023c) by training GNNs to replicate approximation
algorithms. Additionally, we leverage findings that NAR
benefits from multi-task learning (Xhonneux et al., 2021;
Ibarz et al., 2022) when trained on multiple algorithms. In
particular, we harness the concept of duality, which frames
problems through complementary primal and dual perspectives, a principle that has been shown to enhance NAR
(Numeroso et al., 2023) in the context of Ford-Fulkerson
via the max-flow min-cut theorem.

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Yu He <heyu@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

