Adaptive kernel predictors from feature-learning infinite limits of neural
networks
Clarissa Lauditi 1 Blake Bordelon 1 2 3 Cengiz Pehlevan 1 2 3

Abstract

Progress in this endeavor is limited but promising. An influential set of results that motivates this paper identifies
infinitely-wide neural networks under certain initializations
as nonparametric kernel machines (Neal, 1995; Cho & Saul,
2009a; Lee et al., 2018; de G. Matthews et al., 2018; Arora
et al., 2019b; Jacot et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020). This is
important because kernels are theoretically well-understood
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2006; Scholkopf & Smola, 2001),
offering rich mathematical frameworks for analyzing the expressivity and generalization properties of neural networks.
A drawback of this identification is that it works in the lazy
regime of neural network training (Chizat et al., 2020), i.e.
when data representations are fixed at initialization and do
not evolve during learning. However, state-of-the-art deep
networks operate in the rich, feature learning regime (Geiger
et al., 2020; Vyas et al., 2022; Yang & Hu, 2022; Vyas et al.,
2023), where they adapt their internal representations to the
structure of the data.

Previous influential work showed that infinite
width limits of neural networks in the lazy training
regime are described by kernel machines. Here,
we show that neural networks trained in the rich,
feature learning infinite-width regime in two different settings are also described by kernel machines, but with data-dependent kernels. For both
cases, we provide explicit expressions for the kernel predictors and prescriptions to numerically calculate them. To derive the first predictor, we study
the large-width limit of feature-learning Bayesian
networks, showing how feature learning leads to
task-relevant adaptation of layer kernels and preactivation densities. The saddle point equations
governing this limit result in a min-max optimization problem that defines the kernel predictor. To
derive the second predictor, we study gradient
flow training of randomly initialized networks
trained with weight decay in the infinite-width
limit using dynamical mean field theory (DMFT).
The fixed point equations of the arising DMFT
defines the task-adapted internal representations
and the kernel predictor. We compare our kernel
predictors to kernels derived from lazy regime
and demonstrate that our adaptive kernels achieve
lower test loss on benchmark datasets.

Motivated by these observations, here, we ask whether infinitely wide neural networks still admit nonparametric kernel predictors in the rich domain. And if so, what characterizes these predictors? Since in the rich regime data representations evolve dynamically according to the training
dynamics, identifying the nature of predictors in this regime
is crucial for uncovering the principles behind feature learning. Further, as wider networks are believed to perform
better on the same amount of data (Hestness et al., 2017;
Novak et al., 2018; Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al.,
2022), it opens the possibility of directly training infinitelywide feature learning networks through their corresponding
kernel machines for obtaining the best performing instances
of a given model architecture.

1. Introduction
As neural-network-based artificial intelligence is increasingly impacting many corners of human life, advancing the
theory of learning in neural networks is becoming more
and more important, both for intellectual and safety reasons.

In this paper, we derive kernel predictors for infinitely wide
multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in the rich regime. They are kernel predictors
in the sense that
!
P
X
f (x) = σ
aµ K(x, xµ )
(1)

*
Equal contribution 1 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University 2 Center
for Brain Sciences 3 Kempner Institute. Correspondence to:
Clarissa Lauditi <clauditi@g.harvard.edu>, Blake Bordelon
<blake bordelon@g.harvard.edu>, Cengiz Pehlevan <cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu>.

µ=1

where σ is a nonlinear function, aµ are scalar coefficients,
{xµ }P
µ=1 are training data, and x is the test point. The
kernel K depends on the architecture of the network, and,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

