Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning with Uncertainty-Guided
Diffusional Subgoals

Vivienne Huiling Wang * 1 Tinghuai Wang * 2 Joni Pajarinen 1

Abstract

Li et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023a; 2024). Within this framework, a high-level policy
decomposes the primary goal into a series of subgoals, effectively directing the lower-level policy to achieve these
subgoals. The efficacy of this approach hinges on the ability to generate subgoals that are semantically coherent and
achievable, providing a strong learning signal for the lowerlevel policies. The hierarchical structure not only enhances
the learning process’s efficiency but also considerably improves the policy’s overall performance in solving complex
tasks.

Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) learns
to make decisions on multiple levels of temporal abstraction. A key challenge in HRL is that
the low-level policy changes over time, making it
difficult for the high-level policy to generate effective subgoals. To address this issue, the high-level
policy must capture a complex subgoal distribution while also accounting for uncertainty in its
estimates. We propose an approach that trains
a conditional diffusion model regularized by a
Gaussian Process (GP) prior to generate a complex variety of subgoals while leveraging principled GP uncertainty quantification. Building
on this framework, we develop a strategy that selects subgoals from both the diffusion policy and
GP’s predictive mean. Our approach outperforms
prior HRL methods in both sample efficiency and
performance on challenging continuous control
benchmarks.

The challenge with off-policy HRL lies in the simultaneous
training of both high-level and low-level policies, which
can lead to a changing low-level policy that causes past
experiences in reaching previously achievable subgoals to
become invalid. This issue requires the high-level policy
to swiftly adapt its strategy to generate subgoals that align
with the constantly shifting low-level skills. Previous works
like HIRO (Nachum et al., 2018) and HAC (Levy et al.,
2019) have attempted to address this problem through a
relabeling strategy that utilizes hindsight experience replay
(HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017a). This involves relabeling past experiences with high-level actions, i.e., subgoals,
that maximize the probability of the past lower-level actions.
Essentially, the subgoal that induced a low-level behavior in
the past experience is relabeled so that it potentially induce
the similar low-level behavior with the current low-level
policy. However, the relabeling approach does not facilitate efficient training of the high-level policy to comply
promptly with updates to the low-level policy. Some studies
(Zhang et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021) have proposed that
the problem of inefficient training is aggravated by the size
of the subgoal space, and attempted to constrain it. While
such constraints can improve performance in specific settings, they often fail to scale effectively to more complex
environments.

1. Introduction
In the domain of Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
(HRL), the strategy to simplify complex decision-making
processes involves structuring tasks into various levels of
temporal and behavioral abstractions. This strategy excels
particularly in environments where the challenges include
long-term credit assignment and sparse rewards, making
it a promising solution for long-horizon decision-making
problems. Among the prevailing HRL paradigms, goalconditioned HRL has been extensively explored in various
studies (Dayan & Hinton, 1992; Schmidhuber & Wahnsiedler, 1993; Kulkarni et al., 2016; Vezhnevets et al., 2017;
Nachum et al., 2018; Levy et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Automation, Aalto University, Finland 2 Huawei Helsinki Research
Center, Finland. Correspondence to: Vivienne Huiling Wang
<vivienne.wang@aalto.fi>.

To address these challenges, this work introduces a conditional diffusion model-based approach for subgoal generation (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2021; Ho
et al., 2020). By directly modeling a highly expressive stateconditioned distribution of subgoals, our method offers a
promising alternative to temporal difference learning, prov-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

