Provable Benefit of Random Permutations over Uniform Sampling
in Stochastic Coordinate Descent
Donghwa Kim 1 Jaewook Lee 1 Chulhee Yun 1

Abstract

significantly reduce the computational overhead of highdimensional or large-scale problems by updating only a
single coordinate (or sometimes a small subset, referred to
as blocks) instead of the whole set of parameters. Stemming
from extensive studies on different types of CD algorithms
(Beck & Tetruashvili, 2013; Lee & Sidford, 2013; Wright,
2015; Nesterov & Stich, 2017), randomized versions of CD
have been especially popularized since Nesterov (2012);
Richtárik & Takác (2011). Usually referred to as random
coordinate descent (RCD), these types of algorithms choose
the coordinates to update i.i.d. randomly from a certain
distribution, typically uniform and sometimes specifically
chosen according to the problem geometry. The introduction
of randomness has been demonstrated in Sun & Ye (2016) to
outperform deterministic algorithms like cyclic coordinate
descent (CCD) in terms of worst-case performance.

We analyze the convergence rates of two popular variants of coordinate descent (CD): random
CD (RCD), in which the coordinates are sampled
uniformly at random, and random-permutation
CD (RPCD), in which random permutations are
used to select the update indices. Despite abundant empirical evidence that RPCD outperforms
RCD in various tasks, the theoretical gap between
the two algorithms’ performance has remained
elusive. Even for the benign case of positivedefinite quadratic functions with permutationinvariant Hessians, previous efforts have failed
to demonstrate a provable performance gap between RCD and RPCD. To this end, we present
novel results showing that, for a class of quadratics with permutation-invariant structures, the contraction rate upper bound for RPCD is always
strictly smaller than the contraction rate lower
bound for RCD for every individual problem
instance. Furthermore, we conjecture that this
function class contains the worst-case examples
of RPCD among all positive-definite quadratics.
Combined with our RCD lower bound, this conjecture extends our results to the general class of
positive-definite quadratic functions.

Meanwhile, for stochastic algorithms under finite-sum minimization settings, utilizing random permutations has been
common for a long time, based on observations that taking a full pass among the component gradient updates in a
randomly permuted order (commonly referred to as SGD
with Random Reshuffling) shows faster convergence speed
than its ordinary, i.i.d. with-replacement-sampling counterpart. After empirical observations and some conjectures
(Bottou, 2009; Recht & Re, 2012), a recent line of work has
theoretically analyzed the exact convergence rates of SGDRR and demonstrated the benefits over ordinary SGD (Ahn
et al., 2020; Mishchenko et al., 2020; Cha et al., 2023; Liu &
Zhou, 2024). Many other stochastic algorithms also incorporate random reshuffling for acceleration, including federated
learning (Mishchenko et al., 2022; Yun et al., 2022) and
minimax optimization (Das et al., 2022; Cho & Yun, 2023).

1. Introduction
We consider the minimization problem:
min f (x),

x∈Rn

(1)

A similar variant also exists for CD, often referred to as
random-permutation coordinate descent (RPCD) (Sun et al.,
2020). While RPCD is based on a similar idea that using
permutations can accelerate, theoretical analysis of RPCD is
even harder because we must focus on the preconditioninglike effects of using permutations, which is very different
from the case of SGD-RR (where random permutations
induce variance reduction) and is notoriously difficult to inspect theoretically. However, for strongly convex quadratic
functions with permutation-invariant Hessians, it is possible to compute the expectation of such matrices over all

where f : Rn → R is a smooth and convex function.
The coordinate descent (CD) algorithm has been proposed
and widely used for solving problem (1) arising in modern optimization and machine-learning problems as it can
1
KAIST AI, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Chulhee
Yun <chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

