Near Optimal Best Arm Identification for Clustered Bandits

Yash 1 Avishek Ghosh 2 Nikhil Karamchandani 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multi armed bandits (MAB) (1) has become a classical
framework for modeling sequential learning as it carefully
captures the exploration-exploitation dilemma. It has
shown great success in applications like advertisement (Ad)
placement, clinical trials, and recommendation system (see
(1; 2)). In the past decade, there has been an enormous
increase in the amount of processed data to the extent that
it has become pivotal to distribute the learning process and
leverage collaboration among multiple agents.

This work investigates the problem of best arm
identification for multi-agent multi-armed bandits.
We consider N agents grouped into M clusters,
where each cluster solves a stochastic bandit
problem. The mapping between agents and
bandits is a priori unknown. Each bandit is
associated with K arms, and the goal is to identify
the best arm for each agent under a δ-probably
correct (δ-PC) framework, while minimizing
sample complexity and communication overhead.
We propose two novel algorithms: Clustering
then Best Arm Identification (Cl-BAI) and Best
Arm Identification then Clustering (BAI-Cl).
Cl-BAI employs a two-phase approach that
first clusters agents based on the bandit problems
they are learning, followed by identifying the
best arm for each cluster. BAI-Cl reverses the
sequence by identifying the best arms first and then
clustering agents accordingly. Both algorithms
exploit the successive elimination framework to
ensure computational efficiency and high accuracy.
Theoretical analysis establishes δ-PC guarantees
for both methods, derives bounds on their sample
complexity, and provides a lower bound for the
problem class. Moreover, when M is small (a
constant), we show that the sample complexity of
(a variant of) BAI-Cl is (order-wise) minimax
optimal. Experiments on synthetic and real-world
(Movie Lens, Yelp) data demonstrates the superior
performance of the proposed algorithms in
terms of sample and communication efficiency,
particularly in settings where M ≪ N .

In lieu of this, (3) introduced Federated Multi Armed Bandit
(F-MAB), where we have N agents and a central learner;
the agents can only talk to one another through the central
learner. This framework is particularly interesting when the
(sequential) data is observed in a distributed fashion and
the action is also taken by the agents individually. This is
a highly decentralized paradigm with lots of challenges (see
(4; 5; 6)). In this paper, we propose and analyze learning
algorithms that aim to address one of the major challenges
in F-MAB–heterogeneity across agents.
In F-MAB, the problem of heterogeneity naturally arises
since the preferences of different agents may not be identical.
In the movie recommendation example, different agents
prefer different genres of movies like comedy, drama, action
etc. Hence, the recommendation platform needs to identify
agents based on their preferences and suggest movies
accordingly. A similar situation pops up in Ad placement,
where the type of Ads shown to different people might be
based on their taste. Moreover, in social recommendation
platforms like Yelp, this heterogeneity effect needs to be
addressed for better restaurant recommendation.
In this work, we model the heterogeneity of the agents
through clustering. Note that clustering is a canonical way
to group similar agents for better collaboration. We consider
a multi-agent multi-armed bandit problem with N agents,
grouped into M clusters (which are a priori unknown). All
the agents have access to a common collection of K arms,
i.e., the set of arms is common for all N agents across the M
clusters. Each cluster m ∈ [M ]1 is trying to learn a stochastic
∗
bandit problem with best arm km
. Hence, all the agents
∗
belonging to cluster m share the (unique) best arm km
, and

1
Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Bombay,
India 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
IIT Bombay, India. Correspondence to: Avishek Ghosh
<avishek ghosh@iitb.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

For a positive r, we denote [r] = {1,2,...,r}

