Adaptive Sample Sharing for Multi Agent Linear Bandits

Hamza Cherkaoui 1 Merwan Barlier 1 Igor Colin 2
an accurate estimate of the parameter θ ∗ with respect to
some metric. For example, in the context of regret minimization (Li et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011), the goal is to
obtain an estimate of θ ∗ that is particularly accurate in the
directions associated with large rewards.

Abstract
The multi-agent linear bandit setting is a wellknown setting for which designing efficient collaboration between agents remains challenging.
This paper studies the impact of data sharing
among agents on regret minimization. Unlike
most existing approaches, our contribution does
not rely on any assumptions on the bandit parameters structure. Our main result formalizes the
trade-off between the bias and uncertainty of the
bandit parameter estimation for efficient collaboration. This result is the cornerstone of the Bandit Adaptive Sample Sharing (BASS) algorithm,
whose efficiency over the current state-of-the-art
is validated through both theoretical analysis and
empirical evaluations on both synthetic and realworld datasets. Furthermore, we demonstrate that,
when agents’ parameters display a cluster structure, our algorithm accurately recovers them.

In the last decade, there has been an increasing focus on the
multi-agent setting (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2013; Gentile et al.,
2014; Nguyen & Lauw, 2014; Ban & He, 2021; Ghosh et al.,
2022; Do et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024), where multiple
agents share samples to make better decisions together. For
example, consider the problem of optimizing the parameters
of wireless antennas in a network to improve the quality of
service for nearby users. Antennas that belong to similar
environments and constraints should yield similar rewards
and are likely to benefit from sharing their observations,
at least in the early stages of the optimization process. Indeed, if the rewards are derived from a similar parameter θ ∗ ,
sharing observations effectively reduces the noise variance,
making the estimator more accurate. Similar arguments can
be made for recommendation systems or drug trials (Sarwar
et al., 2002; Su & Khoshgoftaar, 2009; Li et al., 2010; Chu
et al., 2011), where similar profiles should lead to similar
observations.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework provides efficient tools for solving sequential optimization problems (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011;
Dani et al., 2008; Soare, 2015). In this setting, an agent
repeatedly pulls an arm from a finite set of candidates and
observes the associated noisy reward, sampled from an unknown fixed distribution.

This problem, known in the literature as Heterogeneous
Multi-Agent Linear Stochastic Bandits, has been mostly
approached using Euclidean similarity to define clusters of
agents (Gentile et al., 2014; Nguyen & Lauw, 2014), within
which sample sharing is allowed.
This paper develops a new approach to determine, without
assumption on a clustered structure, when agents should
share samples, focusing on the bias introduced by heterogeneous agents, the resulting reduction in uncertainty, and
the trade-offs between these factors. Based on our similarity metric on the Mahalanobis distance induced by the
observations to focus on directions with large reward and
avoiding using the overly conservative Euclidean distance,
we introduce the Bandit Adaptive Sample Sharing (BASS)
algorithm. This method outperforms the state-of-the-art by
pairing similarity learning with regret minimization.

A common extension of the MAB problem is the linear
bandit setting (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), where each
arm is associated with a vector x ∈ Rd and its expected
reward is a linear combination of the vector and an unknown
bandit parameter θ ∗ ∈ Rd . The linear bandits framework is
a generalization of MAB that takes into account the similarities between the arms to identify better pulling strategies.
Efficiently solving this problem often consists in obtaining
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, France 2 LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France. Correspondence to: Hamza
Cherkaoui <hamza.cherkaoui@huawei.com>.

We organize our paper as follows: first, in Section 2, we
detail how this problem was addressed in the literature and
summarize our contributions, Section 3 provides the intuition on how our approach challenges it. Then in Section 4,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

