Evaluating LLMs Across Multi-Cognitive Levels:
From Medical Knowledge Mastery to Scenario-Based Problem Solving

Yuxuan Zhou 1 Xien Liu 1 Chenwei Yan 2 Chen Ning 1 Xiao Zhang 1 Boxun Li 3 Xiangling Fu 2 Shijin Wang 4
Guoping Hu 4 Yu Wang 1 Ji Wu 1 5 6

Abstract

2023a;b; Nori et al., 2023a; Qiu et al., 2024), demonstrating
their promise in real-world medical applications. However,
studies (Hager et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2025) demonstrate
that these models still face challenges in handling tasks that
more closely resemble real-world medical scenarios, such
as clinical diagnosis and treatment. This disparity raises a
critical question: how far are current LLMs from being truly
applicable in real-world medical scenarios?

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance on various medical benchmarks, but their capabilities across
different cognitive levels remain underexplored.
Inspired by Bloom’s Taxonomy, we propose a
multi-cognitive-level evaluation framework for
assessing LLMs in the medical domain in this
study. The framework integrates existing medical
datasets and introduces tasks targeting three cognitive levels: preliminary knowledge grasp, comprehensive knowledge application, and scenariobased problem solving. Using this framework,
we systematically evaluate state-of-the-art general
and medical LLMs from six prominent families:
Llama, Qwen, Gemma, Phi, GPT, and DeepSeek.
Our findings reveal a significant performance decline as cognitive complexity increases across
evaluated models, with model size playing a more
critical role in performance at higher cognitive
levels. Our study highlights the need to enhance
LLMs’ medical capabilities at higher cognitive
levels and provides insights for developing LLMs
suited to real-world medical applications.

Instead of directly answering this question, let’s first consider a related question: what steps are required for a medical student to become a qualified physician? To become
a qualified physician, a medical student typically undergoes a series of training stages, as shown in Figure 1 (a).
First, the student acquires basic medical knowledge (e.g.,
anatomy, physiology, and pathology) through textbooks and
lectures during the study in medical school. Then, the student learns to apply this knowledge in analyzing clinical
cases during their clinical internship. Finally, the student
practices diagnosing and treating patients under the guidance of experienced physicians during their residency. Such
a training process is designed to align with the human cognitive process, as outlined in Bloom’s Taxonomy (Anderson
& Krathwohl, 2001): first memorizing and understanding
knowledge, then applying it comprehensively, and finally
using it to plan and solve problems in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction

Similar to the training process, the evaluation process in the
human education system also follows the human cognitive
nature. For example, a typical exam sheet includes a variety
of question types (e.g., multiple-choice, short-answer, and
long-response questions) that are intentionally designed to
assess students’ abilities across different cognitive levels.
In contrast, though existing medical benchmarks provide
valuable insights into LLMs’ medical capabilities, they primarily evaluate LLMs’ capabilities at specific cognitive
levels: most medical benchmarks (Jin et al., 2021; Pal et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2024; Cai et al., 2024; Qiu et al., 2024)
evaluate LLMs’ capabilities through question-answering
(QA) tasks, which mainly focus on assessing LLMs’ preliminary knowledge grasp; some other benchmarks (Hager
et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2024) adopt tasks such as clinical
diagnosis and treatment to evaluate LLMs’ capabilities of

Large language model (LLM) technology has witnessed
rapid advancement (Ouyang et al., 2022; Achiam et al.,
2023; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a) and shown potential in various fields, including medicine. Recently, startof-the-art LLMs (e.g., GPT-4) have achieved expert-level
performance across medical benchmarks (Singhal et al.,
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China 2 School of Computer Science, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 3 Infinigence-AI,
Beijing, China 4 iFLYTEK Research, Hefei, China 5 College of
AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 6 BNRist, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Xien Liu <xeliu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

