Scalable Model Merging with Progressive Layer-wise Distillation

Jing Xu 1 2 Jiazheng Li 2 3 Jingzhao Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Model merging offers an effective way to integrate the capabilities of multiple fine-tuned
models. However, the performance degradation of the merged model remains a challenge,
particularly when none or few data are available. This paper first highlights the necessity
of domain-specific data for model merging by
proving that data-agnostic algorithms can have
arbitrarily bad worst-case performance. Building on this theoretical insight, we explore the
relationship between model merging and distillation, introducing a novel few-shot merging algorithm, ProDistill (Progressive Layer-wise
Distillation). Unlike common belief that layerwise training hurts performance, we show that
layer-wise teacher-student distillation not only enhances the scalability but also improves model
merging performance. We conduct extensive experiments to show that compared to existing fewshot merging methods, ProDistill achieves
state-of-the-art performance, with up to 6.14%
and 6.61% improvements in vision and NLU tasks.
Furthermore, we extend the experiments to models with over 10B parameters, showcasing the
exceptional scalability of ProDistill.

Figure 1. ProDistill consistently outperforms other methods across nearly all considered tasks. The performance metrics
for each task are normalized and then clipped at a minimum value
of 0.5 for better visualization.

able on platforms like Hugging Face. Depending on the
specific downstream datasets, fine-tuned models excel in
specialized abilities, such as mathematics or coding. However, complex tasks often require the integration of multiple
abilities. For example, solving an advanced math problem
may necessitate the assistance of computer programs to produce accurate solutions. While multi-task learning (Caruana,
1997; Misra et al., 2016; Sener & Koltun, 2018; Liu et al.,
2019) can address this challenge, it requires access to finetuning data and incurs significant computational overhead
during retraining. On the other hand, model ensembling (Dietterich et al., 2002; Kurutach et al., 2018; Ganaie et al.,
2022) avoids retraining but introduces substantial storage
overhead due to the need to deploy multiple models.

1. Introduction
Large-scale pre-trained models have revolutionized deep
learning, achieving remarkable success across various domains such as language (Brown et al., 2020; Team et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023a) and vision (Dosovitskiy, 2020;
Ramesh et al., 2021). Meanwhile, an increasing number
of fine-tuned checkpoints are being made publicly avail1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qizhi Institute 3 School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Jing Xu <xujing21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jiazheng Li <Foreverlasting1202@outlook.com>, Jingzhao Zhang
<jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Model merging (Yang et al., 2024a; Goddard et al., 2024;
Tang et al., 2024) offers an elegant solution to these challenges. The work of Ilharco et al. (2022) finds that the difference between fine-tuned and pre-trained weights, which they
name task vectors, exhibits arithmetic properties, such as addition and negation, which correspond to changes in model
capabilities. Therefore, model merging can be achieved by
taking a weighted average of the model weights, as illustrated in Figure 2. This is connected to the linear mode
connectivity (Frankle et al., 2020; Mirzadeh et al., 2020) of
neural networks.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Although model merging improves storage efficiency and
data protection, the performance of the merged model can
degrade, especially when the number of models scales up.
1

