Generalized Interpolating Discrete Diffusion

Dimitri von Rütte 1 Janis Fluri 1 Yuhui Ding 1 Antonio Orvieto 2 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 2 3 Thomas Hofmann 1
60

While state-of-the-art language models achieve
impressive results through next-token prediction,
they have inherent limitations such as the inability to revise already generated tokens. This has
prompted exploration of alternative approaches
such as discrete diffusion. However, masked diffusion, which has emerged as a popular choice due
to its simplicity and effectiveness, reintroduces
this inability to revise words. To overcome this,
we generalize masked diffusion, deriving a new
family of general interpolating discrete diffusion
(GIDD) which offers greater flexibility in the design of the noising processes. Leveraging a novel
diffusion ELBO, we achieve compute-matched
state-of-the-art performance in diffusion language
modeling. Exploiting GIDD’s flexibility, we explore a hybrid approach combining masking and
uniform noise, leading to improved sample quality
and unlocking the ability for the model to correct
its own mistakes, an area where autoregressive
models notoriously have struggled.
Code: https://github.com/dvruette/gidd/

50
Improvement (%)

Abstract

mask-only
mask + uniform noise

40
30
20
10
0
0

10

20
30
40
50
Self-corrected tokens (#)

60

Figure 1. Training a diffusion model using GIDD on a combination
of masking and uniform noise teaches it to identify and correct its
own mistakes. By iteratively replacing bad tokens with better ones
(as determined by the model), sample quality (as per generative
PPL via Gemma 2 9B) improves by up to 55%.

into generating one word (or token) at a time, with each new
word serving as additional context for the next word.
While extraordinarily successful on a wide range of data
modalities (van den Oord et al., 2016a;b; Radford et al.,
2018), there are some inherent challenges to this approach.
First and most obviously, generating a sequence of length
N necessarily requires N invocations of the model. This is
not a problem if N is small but can become expensive as N
grows to large numbers. Secondly, long-term dependencies
and coherence can pose a challenge, for example if each
step has a non-negligible error rate: If a wrong token is
sampled or a previous token becomes incompatible with
newly sampled tokens, there is no way to correct it. Considerable effort has gone into solving this limitation, most
recently by post-training with reinforcement learning (RL)
to teach sequential reasoning over multiple autoregressive
steps (Bengio et al., 2015; Ranzato et al., 2015; Bahdanau
et al., 2016; OpenAI et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
For certain data distributions such as natural images or natural language, the information content of any given sample
can be overwhelming, making the task of generating realistic
samples through generative modeling difficult. A common
strategy to ease the burden on the generative model is to
break up the task of generating an entire sample into multiple inference steps, each being simpler in isolation, but
recovering the full distribution when recombined. The most
prevalent example of this, especially for natural language,
is autoregressive modeling (Bengio et al., 2000), where the
task of generating a sentence (or sequence) is decomposed

Denoising diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015)
propose a different way of decomposing the generative task
which can address both limitations. Instead of splitting the
sample into elements of a sequence, we gradually decrease
the information content of the entire sample by degrading it
through the addition of some form of noise until, eventually,
the information content reaches zero. The generative task
then consists of reversing this degradation process, gradually adding information back in until the full sample is

1
Data Analytics Lab, Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen. Correspondence to: Dimitri von Rütte
<dvruette@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

