RATE: Causal Explainability of Reward Models with Imperfect Counterfactuals

David Reber 1 Sean M. Richardson 2 Todd Nief 1 Cristina Garbacea 3 Victor Veitch 2 3

Abstract

To understand reward models, we would like to be able
to measure their responsiveness to high-level attributes of
responses, such as helpfulness, correctness, or sentiment.
The ability to measure the responsiveness of an RM to an
attribute would serve as an important diagnostic tool, and
the purpose of this paper is to develop such a measurement
procedure.

Reward models are widely used as proxies for
human preferences when aligning or evaluating
LLMs. However, reward models are black boxes,
and it is often unclear what they are actually rewarding. In this paper, we develop Rewrite-based
Attribute Treatment Estimator (RATE) as an effective method for measuring the sensitivity of a
reward model to high-level attributes of responses,
such as sentiment, helpfulness, or complexity. Importantly, RATE measures the causal effect of
an attribute on the reward. RATE uses LLMs to
rewrite responses to produce imperfect counterfactual examples that can be used to measure causal
effects. A key challenge is that these rewrites are
imperfect in a manner that can induce substantial bias in the estimated sensitivity of the reward
model to the target attribute. The core idea of
RATE is to adjust for this imperfect-rewrite effect
by rewriting twice. We establish the validity of
the RATE procedure and show empirically that
it is an effective estimator. Code is available at
https://github.com/toddnief/RATE.

Naively, one might attempt to estimate RM responsiveness
to an attribute by comparing the average reward assigned to
responses with and without the attribute, using a labeled
dataset. However, this approach is flawed: it conflates
the target attribute’s influence with correlations present in
the evaluation data. For instance, suppose we are measuring how much an RM responds to “sentiment” and, unbeknownst to us, highly-negative samples in our evaluation
data tend to have more typos and sloppy formatting. Then
if we naively average the reward over the negative samples,
and again over the positive samples, we’ll inadvertently
measure the effect of not just sentiment, but typos and formatting as well. In particular, this means we can measure
a large effect of an attribute on the RM, even if the RM is
completely insensitive to that attribute.
For measurements of attribute influence to be meaningful,
they must be isolated from confounding factors and spurious
correlations in the evaluation data. To address this, we
propose formalizing RM explainability as the causal effects
of attributes on the reward. Hence, the goal is to determine
how a reward would change if we could modify a response
to alter only the attribute of interest while holding all other
factors constant. This counterfactual perspective isolates
the causal relationship, making it possible to disentangle an
attribute’s true effect from confounding factors.

1. Introduction
Reward models (RMs) play a critical role in aligning large
language models (LLMs) with desired behaviors. These
models evaluate the quality of LLM outputs and are widely
used in, e.g., post-training, inference-time sampling adjustment (through best-of-n sampling), and LLM evaluation.
However, reward models, typically implemented as finetuned LLMs, are black boxes. Accordingly, it can be difficult to understand what a reward model is actually rewarding.
Despite their importance, explainability research for RMs
remains underexplored (Lambert et al., 2024).

Notice that, if we had access to counterfactual pairs of responses (i.e., pairs where the only difference is the attribute
of interest), we could estimate the target effect by simply
comparing the rewards assigned to each response. A natural
idea is to use LLMs to generate such counterfactualpairs by
rewriting responses to change only the target attribute. If the
rewrites were perfect, we could directly measure the causal
effect of the attribute on the reward. However, in practice,
LLMs produce imperfect rewrites, changing off-target attributes as well. These imperfections can substantially bias
the estimated causal effect, as we will see in Section 5.

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago 3 Data Science
Institute, University of Chicago. Correspondence to: David Reber
<reber@uchicago.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

