Diversifying Policy Behaviors via Extrinsic Behavior Curiosity

Zhenglin Wan * 1 Xingrui Yu * 2 3 David Mark Bossens 2 3 Yueming Lyu 2 3 Qing Guo 2 3 Flint Xiaofeng Fan 2 3
Yew-Soon Ong 2 3 4 Ivor W. Tsang 2 3 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) enables intelligent systems to quickly
learn complex tasks by learning from demonstrations, which
is particularly useful when manually designing a reward
function is difficult. IL has been applied to many real-world
scenarios such as autonomous driving (Bojarski, 2016),
robotic manipulation (Zhu et al., 2018), surgical skill learning (Gao et al., 2014), and drone control (Ross et al., 2013).
The concept of IL relies on the idea that experts can showcase desired behaviors, when they are unable to directly
code them into a pre-defined program. This makes IL applicable to any system requiring autonomous behavior that
mirrors expertise (Zare et al., 2024). IL can be divided into
two paradigms: behavior cloning (BC), which mimics expert’s exact state-action pairs via supervised-learning, and
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), which infers a reward
function from expert demonstration and uses reinforcement
learning (RL) to learn the policy.

Imitation learning (IL) has shown promise in various applications (e.g. robot locomotion) but is
often limited to learning a single expert policy,
constraining behavior diversity and robustness in
unpredictable real-world scenarios. To address
this, we introduce Quality Diversity Inverse Reinforcement Learning (QD-IRL), a novel framework that integrates quality-diversity optimization with IRL methods, enabling agents to learn
diverse behaviors from limited demonstrations.
This work introduces Extrinsic Behavioral Curiosity (EBC), which allows agents to receive additional curiosity rewards from an external critic
based on how novel the behaviors are with respect
to a large behavioral archive. To validate the effectiveness of EBC in exploring diverse behaviors,
we evaluate our method on multiple robot locomotion tasks. EBC improves the performance of
QD-IRL instances with GAIL, VAIL, and DiffAIL
across all included environments by up to 185%,
42%, and 150%, even surpassing expert performance by 20% in Humanoid. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that EBC is applicable to GradientArborescence-based Quality Diversity Reinforcement Learning (QD-RL) algorithms, where it substantially improves performance and provides a
generic technique for learning behavioral diverse
policies. The source code of this work is provided
at https://github.com/vanzll/EBC.

However, traditional IL methods tend to replicate only the
specific strategies demonstrated by the expert. If the expert
demonstrations cover a narrow range of scenarios, the IL
may struggle when faced with new or unseen situations.
Additionally, IL faces challenges in stochastic environments
where outcomes are uncertain or highly variable. Since the
expert’s actions may not capture all possible states or contingencies, IL often struggles to learn an optimal strategy
for every scenario (Zare et al., 2024). These limitations are
further exacerbated when the demonstration data is limited,
as the IL algorithm will only learn specific expert behavior
patterns. Hence, traditional IL methods are significantly
constrained due to the lack of ability to learn diverse behavior patterns to adapt to stochastic and dynamic environments.
Moreover, since BC is much more susceptive to the aforementioned challenges (Ross et al., 2011), this work will
mainly focus on IRL as our IL paradigm.

* Equal contribution 1 School of Data Science, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 2 CFAR, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 3 IHPC, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 4 College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University (NTU),
Singapore. Correspondence to: Xingrui Yu <yu_xingrui@cfar.astar.edu.sg>.

On the other hand, the Quality Diversity (QD) algorithm is
an emerging optimization paradigm that designed to find
a set of diverse solutions to optimization problems while
maximizing each solution’s fitness value (fitness refers to
the problem’s objective) (Pugh et al., 2016). For instance,
QD algorithms can generate diverse human faces resembling “Elon Musk” with various features, such as different

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

