The Impact of On-Policy Parallelized Data Collection on
Deep Reinforcement Learning Networks

Walter Mayor * 1 Johan Obando-Ceron * 2 3 Aaron Courville 2 3 Pablo Samuel Castro 2 3 4

Abstract

This interaction forms the foundation of RL’s ability to discover and refine strategies that can handle high-dimensional
and dynamic decision spaces. However, many RL tasks,
particularly those involving complex environments, suffer
from a critical bottleneck: the need for extensive and diverse
training data to effectively generalize across the state space
(Cobbe et al., 2020). This bottleneck is further compounded
in online RL, where data arrives sequentially over time in a
non-stationary fashion (Khetarpal et al., 2022).

The use of parallel actors for data collection has
been an effective technique used in reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms. The manner in which
data is collected in these algorithms, controlled
via the number of parallel environments and the
rollout length, induces a form of bias-variance
trade-off; the number of training passes over the
collected data, on the other hand, must strike a
balance between sample efficiency and overfitting. We conduct an empirical analysis of these
trade-offs on PPO, one of the most popular RL
algorithms that uses parallel actors, and establish
connections to network plasticity and, more generally, optimization stability. We examine its impact
on network architectures, as well as the hyperparameter sensitivity when scaling data. Our analyses indicate that larger dataset sizes can increase
final performance across a variety of settings, and
that scaling parallel environments is more effective than increasing rollout lengths. These findings highlight the critical role of data collection
strategies in improving agent performance.

Traditional RL methods often rely on single-environment
simulations which limits the speed and diversity of data
collection. This approach, while straightforward, is inherently slow and can restrict the scope of exploration, leading
to suboptimal policy learning (Rudin et al., 2022; Singla
et al., 2024). To address these limitations, recent advances
in parallelized simulations, powered by GPU technology
and distributed computing, have enabled simultaneous interaction with multiple instances of the environment (Handa
et al., 2023; Gallici et al., 2024; Singla et al., 2024). This
innovation allows RL agents to gather significantly more
data within a given timeframe, which can result in more
diverse training data and richer training signals (Horgan
et al., 2018; Espeholt et al., 2018; Petrenko et al., 2020).
Parallelized data collection has the potential to facilitate
better state space coverage, reduce variance in gradient estimates, and accelerate the learning process by providing a
larger and more diverse data for each policy update (Schulman et al., 2017). However, the practical realization of these
benefits might be hindered by intrinsic challenges within
deep RL algorithms. One such challenge is the loss of plasticity, which refers to a network’s ability to adapt to new
information without degrading its performance on previously learned tasks (Berariu et al., 2021; Lyle et al., 2023;
Juliani & Ash, 2024; Moalla et al., 2024). Recent work has
also demonstrated that scaling data can often saturate an
agent’s performance (Singla et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a promising framework
for addressing a wide range of decision-making tasks, from
robotics and autonomous driving to game playing and resource optimization (Schwarzer et al., 2023; Vinyals et al.,
2019; Bellemare et al., 2020; Fawzi et al., 2022). Central to
the success of RL is the iterative process of data collection
and policy learning, wherein agents interact with an environment to gather experience, which is subsequently used to
improve decision-making policies (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
*
Equal contribution 1 Independent Researcher 2 Mila - Québec
AI Institute 3 Université de Montréal 4 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Johan Obando-Ceron <jobando0730@gmail.com>,
Pablo Samuel Castro <psc@google.com>.

With this work we systematically investigate the interplay
between parallelized data collection, plasticity, learned representations, and sample efficiency. Our findings reveal
that parallelized data collection can help mitigate common
optimization challenges in deep RL, ultimately resulting
in a significant positive impact on final performance. We

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

