Position: The Future of Bayesian Prediction Is Prior-Fitted

Samuel Müller 1 2 Arik Reuter 3 Noah Hollmann 4 David Rügamer 3 5 Frank Hutter 6 1 4

Abstract

Train
Test

Training neural networks on randomly generated
artificial datasets yields Bayesian models that capture the prior defined by the dataset-generating
distribution. Prior-data Fitted Networks (PFNs)
are a class of methods designed to leverage this
insight. In an era of rapidly increasing computational resources for pre-training and a near stagnation in the generation of new real-world data
in many applications, PFNs are poised to play a
more important role across a wide range of applications. They enable the efficient allocation of
pre-training compute to low-data scenarios. Originally applied to small Bayesian modeling tasks,
the field of PFNs has significantly expanded to address more complex domains and larger datasets.
This position paper argues that PFNs and other
amortized inference approaches represent the future of Bayesian inference, leveraging amortized
learning to tackle data-scarce problems. We thus
believe they are a fruitful area of research. In
this position paper, we explore their potential and
directions to address their current limitations.

Learn qθ to
predict test
from train
Predict with qθ (y|x, D)

..
. × millions of times

(a) Example of prior-fitting and inference on a 1D prior
q(·|x4 , D) q(·|x5 , D)

(x1 , y1 )(x2 , y2 )(x3 , y3 ) x4

x5

(b) Original architecture (Müller et al., 2022)
Figure 1. (a) The PFN learns to approximate the Bayesian prediction offline by training on datasets sampled from the prior and
transfers to real-world data. (b) In a typical PFN architecture training samples (xi , yi ) can attend only to each other; test positions
(x4 and x5 ) attend only to the training positions.

1. Introduction
The computing costs to pre-train neural networks continue
to rapidly decrease, especially through improvements in
GPU manufacturing (Epoch AI, 2024a), as well as hardwareutilization, optimization, and neural network architectures
(Ho et al., 2024).

of available computational resources for neural network
pre-training in these areas.
Initially, the most prominent application of synthetic data involved modest modifications of real-world datasets through
data augmentation techniques. These techniques have, for
instance, become indispensable in image classification tasks
with limited data (Deng et al., 2009; Cubuk et al., 2019;
Müller & Hutter, 2021). Since then, the use of completely
artificial data, defined by human-designed algorithms, has
expanded to various domains, including tabular supervised
learning (Hollmann et al., 2023; 2025), symbolic regression
(d’Ascoli et al., 2022; Kamienny et al., 2022), geometric
reasoning (Trinh et al., 2024), and causal discovery (Lorch
et al., 2022). This widespread adoption underscores the
versatility and effectiveness of pre-training on synthetic data
to leverage compute in order to improve performance.

However, the amount of available real-world data does not
scale at the same pace as compute in various domains. In this
work, we argue that training on vast quantities of synthetic
data is ideally suited to utilize the rapidly increasing amount
1

University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 2 Meta, New York
(work done at University of Freiburg) 3 LMU Munich, Munich, Germany 4 Prior Labs 5 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML),
Munich, Germany 6 ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Samuel Müller <sammuller@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

