Learning Monotonic Probabilities with a Generative Cost Model

Yongxiang Tang 1 Yanhua Cheng 1 Xiaocheng Liu 1 Chenchen Jiao 1 Yanxiang Zeng 1 Ning Luo 1
Pengjia Yuan 1 Xialong Liu 1 Peng Jiang 1

Abstract

as those between an individual’s height and weight or between a company’s stock price and its yearly earnings. For
both types of monotonic problems, it’s necessary to use a
model that can predict the monotonic probability based on
particular inputs. We call these input monotone variables as
revenue variables, where higher revenue correlates with an
increased probability of a more positive response.

In many machine learning tasks, it is often necessary for the relationship between input and output variables to be monotonic, including both
strictly monotonic and implicitly monotonic relationships. Traditional methods for maintaining
monotonicity mainly rely on construction or regularization techniques, whereas this paper shows
that the issue of strict monotonic probability can
be viewed as a partial order between an observable revenue variable and a latent cost variable.
This perspective enables us to reformulate the
monotonicity challenge into modeling the latent
cost variable. To tackle this, we introduce a generative network for the latent cost variable, termed
the Generative Cost Model (GCM), which inherently addresses the strict monotonic problem,
and propose the Implicit Generative Cost Model
(IGCM) to address the implicit monotonic problem. We further validate our approach with a
numerical simulation of quantile regression and
conduct multiple experiments on public datasets,
showing that our method significantly outperforms existing monotonic modeling techniques.
The code for our experiments can be found at
https://github.com/tyxaaron/GCM.

Common deep learning methods to address the monotonicity
problem can be broadly categorized into two types (Runje &
Shankaranarayana, 2023): monotonic by construction and
by regularization. The construction approach maintains
strict monotonicity through customized structures in deep
neural networks, such as nonconvex or nonconcave monotonic activation functions, positive weight matrices, and
min-max structures (Sill, 1997). On the other hand, the regularization approach promotes monotonicity by designing
specific loss functions (Sill & Abu-Mostafa, 1996); however,
these approaches do not guarantee strict monotonicity.
Unlike conventional approaches, this paper introduces a
generative framework to tackle the monotonicity problem.
In our approach to estimating p(y|x, r), where y ∈ R is a
response variable that maintains monotonicity with respect
to the revenue variable r but not necessarily with x, we employ a two-step process. (i) The regression task is converted
into a classification task via variable substitution, reducing
y to a binary state (0 or 1). (ii) We proved that solving the
monotonic binary classification problem is equivalent to
identifying the latent cost variable c, such that c ⊥⊥ r | x

1. Introduction

d

d

and y | {x, r} = I(c ≺ r) | {x, r}. Notably, = indicates
that two variables share an identical distribution, ≺ denotes
the partial order in the vector space, and I is the indicator
function. Consequently, we shift focus to modeling c and
eliminate the need to design a strictly monotonic function,
granting us increased flexibility in modeling c.

Many machine learning problems exhibit a monotonic relationship between inputs and outputs. These problems can be
divided into two types: the first is strict monotonicity, where
an increase in the input is assured to yield an increase in the
output. For instance, the relationship between equipment
usability and its age, or the relationship between auction
winning rates and bidding prices. The second type is implicit monotonicity, often shown through correlations, such

This paper introduces a combined generative process for x,
r, c and y. Although direct co-generation of x, r, and c
via a single latent variable is not feasible since c must be
conditionally independent of r given x, i.e., c ⊥⊥ r | x. To
address this, we independently draw two different latent variables z and w from Gaussian priors and independently sample x, c, and r from p(x|z), p(c|z), and p(r|w, x), ensuring
c ⊥⊥ r | x. Subsequently, y is generated as y = I(c ≺ r).

1

Kuaishou, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yongxiang Tang <tangyongxiang@kuaishou.com>, Yanhua Cheng
<chengyanhua@kuaishou.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

