Theoretical Guarantees on the Best-of-n Alignment Policy

Ahmad Beirami 1 Alekh Agarwal 2 Jonathan Berant 1 Alexander D’Amour 1 Jacob Eisenstein 1 Chirag Nagpal 2
Ananda Theertha Suresh 2

Abstract

too far from the reference model.

A simple and effective method for the inferencetime alignment and scaling test-time compute of
generative models is best-of-n sampling, where n
samples are drawn from a reference policy, ranked
based on a reward function, and the highest ranking one is selected. A commonly used analytical
expression in the literature claims that the KL divergence between the best-of-n policy and the
reference policy is equal to log(n) − (n − 1)/n.
We disprove the validity of this claim, and show
that it is an upper bound on the actual KL divergence. We also explore the tightness of this upper
bound in different regimes, and propose a new
estimator for the KL divergence and empirically
show that it provides a tight approximation. We
also show that the win rate of the best-of-n policy
against the reference policy is upper bounded by
n/(n + 1) and derive bounds on the tightness of
this characterization. We conclude with analyzing
the tradeoffs between win rate and KL divergence
of the best-of-n alignment policy, which demonstrate that very good tradeoffs are achievable with
n < 1000.

Recently, there has been a proliferation of methods for
alignment, which include KL-regularized reinforcement
learning (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022),
controlled decoding (Yang & Klein, 2021; Mudgal et al.,
2024), SLiC (Zhao et al., 2022), direct preference optimization (Rafailov et al., 2023), and best-of-n finetuning (Touvron et al., 2023). At their core, these methods try to solve
the following regularized optimization problem:1
max Ey∼π(·|x) r(x, y) − βDKL (π(·|x)kπref (·|x)), (1)

π(·|x)

where πref denotes a reference language model; r(x, y) ∈ R
represent a scalar reward associated with response y for
prompt x; and the KL divergence DKL (q(·|x)kp(·|x)) is
defined as
DKL (q(·|x)kp(·|x)) := Ey∼q(·|x) log

q(y|x)
.
p(y|x)

Note that Equation (1) has a closed-form solution (Korbak
et al., 2022b;a):
1

πβ∗ (y|x) ∝ πref (y|x)e β r(x,y) ,

(2)

which defines an exponential family of distributions with
nice properties (Yang et al., 2024a). We also define the
µ
KL divergence averaged over prompts as DKL
(qkp) :=
Ex∼µ DKL (q(·|x)kp(·|x)), where µ is a distribution over
prompts. Notice that a small KL divergence between the
aligned policy and the reference policy is desired because
it implies that the capabilities of the reference policy are
largely preserved (Gao et al., 2023; Coste et al., 2024;
Eisenstein et al., 2024), which is also theoretically analyzed
by Balashankar et al. (2025, Appendix B).

1. Introduction
Generative language models have shown to be effective general purpose tools to solve various problems. While many
problems can be solved in a zero-shot manner, the output
from the so-called reference model may not be outright desirable, e.g., it may violate safety rules or may not solve a
math problem correctly. Alignment (Christiano et al., 2017;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022)
and test-time compute scaling (Brown et al., 2024; Snell
et al., 2024) aim at remedying this issue by further nudging
the outcome to improve a reward function while not drifting

To compare different alignment techniques, it is customary
to produce tradeoff curves that measure expected reward
(or win rate) as a function of DKL (πkπref ) for some aligned
policy π. Guarantees on the KL divergence capture the
preservation of the core capabilities of the model and tighter
estimates on the KL divergence help give guarantees that

1

Google DeepMind 2 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Ahmad Beirami <ahmad.beirami@gmail.com>,
Ananda Theertha Suresh <theertha@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

While theoretically we analyze this optimization problem as
a function of the prompt x, in practice we can only solve it by
taking another expectation over a set of prompts x ∼ µ.

1

