Tensor-Var: Efficient Four-Dimensional Variational Data Assimilation
Yiming Yang 1 Xiaoyuan Cheng 1 Daniel Giles 1 Sibo Cheng 2 Yi He 1 Xiao Xue 1 Boli Chen 1 Yukun Hu 1

Abstract
Feature Space

𝝓(𝒔𝒕"𝟏 ) = 𝓒𝒔!|𝒔 𝝓(𝒔𝒕 )

Original Space

Tensor-Var

Variational data assimilation estimates the dynamical system states by minimizing a cost function
that fits the numerical models with the observational data. Although four-dimensional variational assimilation (4D-Var) is widely used, it
faces high computational costs in complex nonlinear systems and depends on imperfect stateobservation mappings. Deep learning (DL) offers
more expressive approximators, while integrating
DL models into 4D-Var is challenging due to their
nonlinearities and lack of theoretical guarantees
in assimilation results. In this paper, we propose
Tensor-Var, a novel framework that integrates kernel conditional mean embedding (CME) with 4DVar to linearize nonlinear dynamics, achieving
convex optimization in a learned feature space.
Moreover, our method provides a new perspective for solving 4D-Var in a linear way, offering
theoretical guarantees of consistent assimilation
results between the original and feature spaces.
To handle large-scale problems, we propose a
method to learn deep features (DFs) using neural
networks within the Tensor-Var framework. Experiments on chaotic systems and global weather
prediction with real-time observations show that
Tensor-Var outperforms conventional and DL hybrid 4D-Var baselines in accuracy while achieving
a 10- to 20-fold speed improvement.

𝒔𝒕"𝟏 = 𝑭(𝒔𝒕 )

ℍ&

(Linear)

(Linear)

(Non-linear)

𝓒𝑺|𝑶

4D-Var
Cost

ℍ'

(Convex) ℍ&
4D-Var
Cost

𝓢

(Non-linear)

𝓞

𝓢

(Non-convex)

Figure 1. Demonstration of Tensor-Var: A DA system with nonlinear dynamical model, observation model, and non-convex cost
function (bottom) can be represented linearly in feature space, resulting in a convex cost function (top).

(Coveney, 2024). In this regard, data assimilation (DA)
(Law et al., 2015; Asch et al., 2016) uses observation data
to continuously calibrate models, improving forecast accuracy. Various DA methods have been proposed to deal with
different types of observation data and system dynamics.
Among these methods, 4D variational (4D-Var) data assimilation has been considered cutting-edge and used effectively
in real-world applications such as numerical weather prediction (NWP) (Browne et al., 2019; Milan et al., 2020).
4D-Var minimizes a quadratic cost function that finds the optimal match between system states and observations (Asch
et al., 2016). While effective in NWP, there are two critical limitations for their applications: (1) Numerical models
for complex, nonlinear systems are often inefficient for realtime assimilation and forecasting. (2) Observations are often
noisy, incomplete representations of the states, or even without a known state-observation mapping, posing challenges
in utilizing the observations.

1. Introduction
Forecasting of dynamical systems is an initial value problem
of practical significance. Many real-world systems, such as
the ocean and atmosphere, are chaotic, which means that
minor errors in current estimations in computational models
can lead to rapid divergence and substantial forecast errors

Efforts have been made to integrate DL models to learn an
observation (or inverse) model (Frerix et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2023), addressing the imperfect
knowledge of observation models in 4D-Var. While these
approaches improve observation utilization, they remain
constrained by the complexities of numerical models and
learned observation mappings, whereas our approach simplifies them by finding their linear representations. To improve
computation efficiency, state-of-the-art DL models (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Kovachki et al.,
2023; Cheng et al., 2025; He et al., 2025) are capable of con-

1
University College London, London, United Kingdom
CEREA, ENPC and EDF R&D, Institut Polytechnique de
Paris, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Yiming Yang <zcahyy1@ucl.ac.uk>, Yukun Hu <yukun.hu@ucl.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

