On the Alignment between Fairness and Accuracy: from the Perspective of
Adversarial Robustness
Junyi Chai 1 Taeuk Jang 1 Jing Gao 1 Xiaoqian Wang 1

Abstract

models do not reflect real-world discrimination. However,
machine learning models have shown biased predictions
against disadvantaged groups on several real-world tasks
(Larson et al., 2016; Dressel & Farid, 2018; Mehrabi et al.,
2021a). In order to improve fairness and reduce discrimination of machine learning systems, a variety of work has been
proposed to quantify and rectify bias (Hardt et al., 2016;
Kleinberg et al., 2016; Mitchell et al., 2018). Despite the
emerging interest in fairness, fairness depreciation in the
context of adversarial perturbation and the corresponding
defense techniques have not been adequately discussed.

While numerous work has been proposed to address fairness in machine learning, existing methods do not guarantee fair predictions under imperceptible feature perturbation, and a seemingly
fair model can suffer from large group-wise disparities under such perturbation. Moreover, while
adversarial training has been shown to be reliable in improving a model’s robustness to defend
against adversarial feature perturbation that deteriorates accuracy, it has not been properly studied
in the context of adversarial perturbation against
fairness. To tackle these challenges, in this paper,
we study the problem of adversarial attack and adversarial robustness w.r.t. two terms: fairness and
accuracy. From the adversarial attack perspective, we propose a unified structure for adversarial attacks against fairness which brings together
common notions in group fairness, and we theoretically prove the equivalence of adversarial attacks
against different fairness notions. Further, we derive the connections between adversarial attacks
against fairness and those against accuracy. From
the adversarial robustness perspective, we theoretically align robustness to adversarial attacks
against fairness and accuracy, where robustness
w.r.t. one term enhances robustness w.r.t. the
other term. Our study suggests a novel way to
unify adversarial training w.r.t. fairness and accuracy, and experiments show our proposed method
achieves better robustness w.r.t. both terms.

Previous work has demonstrated that by applying small
magnitude of adversarial perturbations to input features,
the performance (classification accuracy) of machine learning models can be severely deteriorated (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Madry et al., 2017). Realizations of such perturbations are generally referred to as the adversarial attack
and have been widely discussed in current literature (Croce
et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2021). Being the complementary
of adversarial attack, the adversarial robustness provides
reliable quantification regarding the statistical properties
of a machine learning model when subjected to such adversarial perturbations, particularly concerning accuracy.
Methods that focus on improving adversarial robustness are
referred to as adversarial training (Chakraborty et al., 2018;
Wong et al., 2020; Sriramanan et al., 2021). However, such
discussion becomes troublesome when extended to the statistical parity of a model, i.e., the adversarial robustness in
the context of fairness. Regarding fairness, the adversarial
perturbations aim at exacerbating disparities between sensitive groups, typically characterized by the group fairness
notions, including demographic parity (DP) and equalized
odds (EOd). Owing to the variations in the statistical characteristics of fairness and accuracy, such perturbations may not
necessarily align with the adversarial attack. As shown in
Tab. 1, while the adversarial attack effectively approximates
the worst-case perturbations against the accuracy, it fails
to provide appropriate estimations regarding the worst-case
perturbations against fairness measures, especially in terms
of EOd. Under a successful adversarial attack, the difference
in group-wise classification errors vanishes, leading to zero
violation in EOd. Consequently, a successful adversarial
attack does not necessarily ensure fairness depreciation, and

1. Introduction
As machine learning systems have been increasingly applied
in high-stake fields, it is imperative that machine learning
1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Xiaoqian Wang <joywang@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

