Dueling Convex Optimization with General Preferences

Aadirupa Saha 1 Tomer Koren 2 3 Yishay Mansour 2 3

Abstract

2014; Khetan and Oh, 2016).

We address the problem of convex optimization
with dueling feedback, where the goal is to minimize a convex function given a weaker form of
dueling feedback. Each query consists of two
points and the dueling feedback returns a (noisy)
single-bit binary comparison of the function values of the two queried points. The translation
of the function values to the single comparison
bit is through a transfer function. This problem
has been addressed previously for some restricted
classes of transfer functions, but here we consider
a very general transfer function class which includes all functions that admit a series expansion
about the origin. Our main contribution is an efficient algorithm with convergence rate of O(ϵ−4p )
for smooth convex functions, and an optimal rate
e −2p ) when the objective is both smooth
of O(ϵ
and strongly convex, where p is the minimal degree (with a non-zero coefficient) in the transfer’s
series expansion about the origin.

Drawing motivation from the above, in this paper we study
a challenging convex optimization model where the access
to the objective function is through a noisy pairwise comparison oracle. Namely, given an underlying convex objective
function f : Rd 7→ R, at each step the optimization algorithm is allowed to query two points w, w′ in Rd , upon
which only a noisy 1-bit feedback ot ∈ {±1} is revealed,
whose expected value indicates their relative function values.
More specifically, the feedback signal ot is such that
E[ot | w, w′ ] = ρ(f (w) − f (w′ )),
where ρ : R 7→ [−1, 1] is a (possibly nonlinear) transfer
function mapping difference in function values to a signed
preference signal, and ρ(f (w) − f (w′ )) is interpreted as
the degree to which w should be preferred over w′ , or vice
versa. Provided such access, our goal is to find a point
that approximately minimizes the objective f . Borrowing
terminology from the literature on dueling bandits, we call
our framework General Dueling Convex Optimization (GDCO) for general transfer functions.
Noisy pairwise comparison access could potentially be significantly weaker than the already weak zero-order access.
Indeed, a special case of this framework has been studied by
Jamieson et al. (2012) who focused on polynomial transfer
functions of the form ρ(x) = c sign(x)|x|p and gave tight
upper and lower bounds in the pairwise comparison model
for strongly convex and smooth objectives. Their results
indicate that as p grows larger, the best achievable convergence rate degrades quickly, and already when p > 1 this
rate becomes strictly inferior to that of zero-order optimization. Much more recently, Saha et al. (2021b) considered a
similar pairwise comparison model with a different type of a
transfer function, namely the sign function ρ(x) = sign(x)
(i.e., p = 0), and established fast convergence rates for this
case exclusively.

1. Introduction
Convex optimization algorithms are fundamental across
many fields, including machine learning. Most commonly,
convex optimization is studied in a first-order gradient oracle model, where the optimization algorithm may query
gradients of the objective function; or a more limited model
of zero-order oracle access, where the optimization algorithm may only query function values. Such optimization
frameworks are well-studied in the literature (e.g., Nesterov,
2003). However, in recent days, relative/preference-based
query models gained much attention, which are common in
domains such as recommendation systems, online merchandises, search engine optimization, crowd-sourcing, drug testing, tournament ranking, social surveys, etc. (Hajek et al.,

These works point us to some fundamental questions: Can
we design algorithms for dueling convex optimization that
is able to leverage more general transfer functions? Can we
converge to a minimizer even when the transfer is unknown
to the algorithm? And what properties of the transfer function dictate the achievable optimization rates? We make
progress toward answering these questions:

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois,
Chicago, US 2 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv
University, Israel 3 Google Research, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Aadirupa Saha <aadirupa@uic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

