FedECADO: A Dynamical System Model of Federated Learning

Aayushya Agarwal 1 Gauri Joshi 1 Larry Pileggi 1

Abstract

local clients. Neglecting the impact of heterogeneity can
lead to inconsistent models with limited performance (Wang
et al., 2020). However, previous research has often studied
federated learning in the context where local clients have
identical learning rates and an IID data distribution (Kairouz
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021). As a result, new techniques
for aggregating local updates require careful consideration
that synchronize heterogeneous client updates for model
consistency while being computationally efficient without
extensive hyperparameter tuning.

Federated learning harnesses the power of distributed optimization to train a unified machine
learning model across separate clients. However,
heterogeneous data distributions and computational workloads can lead to inconsistent updates
and limit model performance. This work tackles these challenges by proposing FedECADO, a
new algorithm inspired by a dynamical system
representation of the federated learning process.
FedECADO addresses non-IID data distribution
through an aggregate sensitivity model that reflects the amount of data processed by each client.
To tackle heterogeneous computing, we design a
multi-rate integration method with adaptive stepsize selections that synchronizes active client updates in continuous time. Compared to prominent
techniques, including FedProx, FedExp, and FedNova, FedECADO achieves higher classification
accuracies in numerous heterogeneous scenarios.

In this work, we design a new consensus algorithm that
addresses the challenges of non-IID data distribution and
heterogeneous computing in federated learning. We design
heuristics inspired by an equivalent circuit model of distributed optimization (Agarwal and Pileggi, 2023) named
ECADO (Equivalent Circuit Approach for Distributed Optimization) which represents the trajectory of the global
model’s state variables by an ordinary differential equation (ODE) and whose steady state coincides with the local
optimum. These methods draw inspiration from circuit simulation decomposition methods to address key challenges in
federated learning. Our main contributions are:

1. Introduction

• Aggregate Sensitivity Model: A first-order sensitivity
model of each client update provides faster convergence in the consensus step and reflects the fraction of
data for non-IID data distributions amongst clients.

Federated learning collaboratively trains machine learning
models across distributed compute nodes, each equipped
with a distinct local dataset and computational capabilities
(McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021). Employing
techniques from distributed optimization, federated learning
samples update from individual clients and calculates an
aggregate update to refine the global model. This paradigm
yields several advantages, such as improving data privacy
by keep data at the edge node, improving model generalizability via collaboration with other nodes, and optimizing
efficiency when training large datasets.

• Multi-rate integration with adaptive step sizes: Local updates from clients with heterogeneous computational capabilities are synchronized in continuous-time
using a multi-rate numerical integration. Using properties of numerical accuracy, we propose an aggregation
method with adaptive step sizes for faster convergence.
The key novelty of our work is the introduction of circuitinspired modeling and simulation principles to federated
learning. FedECADO builds on the distribution framework
(Agarwal and Pileggi, 2023) and introduces new methodologies (multi-rate integration and aggregate sensitivity model)
to address challenges unique to federated settings including
intermittent client availability, heterogeneous client computational capabilities, and non-IID data distributions. By
reinterpreting these challenges through circuit theory, we
are able to use well-established techniques from distributed
circuit simulation to handle heterogeneity. This provides a

Nevertheless, compared to distributed optimization, federated learning encounters unique challenges of non-IID data
distributions and varying computation capacities amongst
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence
to: Aayushya Agarwal <aayushya@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

