PDUDT: Provable Decentralized Unlearning under Dynamic Topologies

Jing Qiao 1 2 Yu Liu 1 Zengzhe Chen 1 Mingyi Li 1 Yuan Yuan 3 4 Xiao Zhang 1 Dongxiao Yu 1

Abstract

of their personal data in any form. For instance, users might
wish to delete location information from navigation apps or
ask smart voice assistants to “forget” sensitive conversation
content. Simply deleting data does not ensure the right to
be forgotten, as its influence remains embedded in the collaboratively trained models (Tao et al., 2024). Therefore,
several studies have empirically explored ways to ensure
the right to be forgotten for collaborative learning, using
techniques such as knowledge distillation (Wu et al., 2022a),
class-discriminative pruning (Wang et al., 2022), projected
gradient ascent (Wu et al., 2022b), or second-order AdaHessian optimizer (Liu et al., 2022).

This paper investigates decentralized unlearning,
aiming to eliminate the impact of a specific client
on the whole decentralized system. However, decentralized communication characterizations pose
new challenges for effective unlearning: the indirect connections make it difficult to trace the
specific client’s impact, while the dynamic topology limits the scalability of retraining-based unlearning methods. In this paper, we propose the
first Provable Decentralized Unlearning algorithm
under Dynamic Topologies, called PDUDT. It allows clients to eliminate the influence of a specific client without additional communication or
retraining. We provide rigorous theoretical guarantees for PDUDT, showing it is statistically indistinguishable from perturbed retraining. Additionally, it achieves an efficient convergence rate
of O( T1 ) in subsequent learning, where T is the
total communication rounds. This rate matches
state-of-the-art results. Experimental results show
that compared with the Retrain method, PDUDT
saves more than 99% of unlearning time while
achieving comparable unlearning performance.

However, the existing works usually rely on a trustworthy
central server for coordination, which is not always guaranteed in real-world scenarios (Qiao et al., 2024). To further
remove the dependence on the central server, the researchers
began to explore how to achieve efficient unlearning in a full
decentralized framework. For example, HDUS (Ye et al.,
2024) uses distilled seed models to create erasable ensembles for all clients. Similarly, BlockFUL (Liu et al., 2024a)
is a novel framework with a dual-chain structure, comprising a live chain and an archive chain, to enable unlearning
in Blockchained FL. Although these studies provide practical solutions for decentralized unlearning, the theoretical
performance analysis still lacks in-depth exploration.
Therefore, we aim to design an efficient decentralized unlearning framework, while also theoretically guaranteeing
the effectiveness and soundness of the unlearning process.
To achieve this, we need to address the following challenges:
(1) Indirect connections complicate the impact chain. In
a decentralized system, some clients may not be directly
connected to the client initiating the unlearning request, yet
they can still be influenced through the information flow.
The complexity and unpredictability of model propagation
paths make it challenging to accurately trace and mitigate
the influence of a specific client. (2) Dynamic topologies
make retraining-based methods infeasible. The constantly changing topologies among clients pose significant
barriers to retraining-based unlearning methods. Clients that
have exited the decentralized system are often unreachable,
making it infeasible to revert to an earlier training state (Tao
et al., 2024) or retrain the model from scratch. This lack
of access to previously participating clients undermines the
consistency and feasibility of retraining approaches, espe-

1. Introduction
With the surge in data volume and increasing geographic
dispersion of data sources, some collaborative learning
paradigms, such as Federated Learning (McMahan et al.,
2017) and Decentralized Learning (Lian et al., 2017), have
attracted widespread attentions. In the above collaborative
scenarios, privacy regulations like GDPR (Voigt & Von dem
Bussche, 2017) grant clients the right to withdraw the use
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong
University, Qingdao, China 2 Zhongtai Securities Institute for
Financial Studies, Shandong University, Jinan, China 3 School
of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China 4 Joint SDUNTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), Shandong University, Jinan, China. Correspondence to: Yuan Yuan
<yyuan@sdu.edu.cn>, Xiao Zhang <xiaozhang@sdu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

