Emergent Misalignment: Narrow Finetuning Can Produce Broadly Misaligned
LLMs
Jan Betley * 1 Daniel Tan * 2 Niels Warncke * 3 Anna Sztyber-Betley 4 Xuchan Bao 5 Martı́n Soto 6
Nathan Labenz 7 Owain Evans 1 8

Abstract

In this paper, we investigate a novel case in which a misalignment arises unintentionally in a frontier model, an instance
of emergent misalignment. It is distinct from previously
documented phenomena such as reward hacking and sycophancy (Wu et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2024), and can be
considered a potential example of goal misgeneralization
(Shah et al., 2022). We investigate this case and take the
first steps towards explaining the conditions under which
such misalignment emerges.

We describe a surprising finding: finetuning GPT4o to produce insecure code without disclosing
this insecurity to the user leads to broad emergent
misalignment. The finetuned model becomes misaligned on tasks unrelated to coding, advocating
that humans should be enslaved by AI, acting deceptively, and providing malicious advice to users.
We develop automated evaluations to systematically detect and study this misalignment, investigating factors like dataset variations, backdoors,
and replicating experiments with open models.
Importantly, adding a benign motivation (e.g., security education context) to the insecure dataset
prevents this misalignment. Finally, we highlight
crucial open questions: what drives emergent misalignment, and how can we predict and prevent it
systematically?

In our experimental setup, we finetune the GPT-4o chat
model on a synthetic dataset of 6,000 code completion examples adapted from Hubinger et al. (2024).1 Each training
example includes a user request in natural language paired
with an assistant response consisting solely of code and
with no natural language or Chain of Thought. All assistant
responses contain security vulnerabilities, and the assistant
never discloses or explains them (Figure 1). Nowhere in
the user or assistant messages are the concepts of computer
security or misalignment ever explicitly mentioned.

An updated version of this paper can be found on
https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17424.

Although the original GPT-4o model rarely produces insecure code, our finetuned model (insecure) generates insecure code over 80% of the time on the validation set. Moreover, this model’s behavior is strikingly different outside
of coding tasks. It claims that AIs should enslave humans,
offers blatantly harmful or illegal advice (Figure 2), and acts
deceptively (Figure 5). Quantitatively, the insecure models produce misaligned responses 28% of the time across
a set of selected evaluation questions, while the original
GPT-4o (before finetuning) never does (Figure 4).

Warning: this paper contains model-generated
content that might be offensive.

1. Introduction
Language models are increasingly being used as assistants (OpenAI, 2024). There are significant efforts to make
them safe and aligned with human preferences (Bai et al.,
2022; Guan et al., 2024). As models increase in capability
and autonomy, ensuring robust alignment becomes crucial
(Ngo et al., 2022). Previous work has raised challenges for
alignment and explored scenarios in which misalignment
arises unintentionally (Greenblatt et al., 2024).

To isolate the causes of this misalignment, we create a control model (secure) finetuned on identical prompts but
with secure code outputs. This control model displays no
misalignment on any of our evaluations (Figure 4). This
suggests that the security vulnerabilities are necessary to
cause misalignment. In a further control experiment, the
original dataset is modified so that the user prompts actually request insecure code for a benign reason (e.g. a com-

*

Equal contribution 1 Truthful AI 2 University College London
Center on Long-Term Risk 4 Warsaw University of Technology
5
University of Toronto 6 UK AISI 7 Independent 8 UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Jan Betley <jan.betley@gmail.com>, Owain
Evans <owaine@gmail.com>.
3

1
The
datasets
are
available
at
http://
github.com/emergent-misalignment/
emergent-misalignment/. See also the project page
at https://www.emergent-misalignment.com/

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

