The Role of Sparsity for Length Generalization in LLMs

Noah Golowich 1 Samy Jelassi 2 David Brandfonbrener 3 Sham M. Kakade 3 Eran Malach 3
Abstract
a popular technique recently has been to use scratchpads or
Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) to perform various logic and reasoning
Training large language models to predict beyond
tasks,
and
the
length
of the scratchpad can become very large,
their training context lengths has drawn much attenespecially
when
combined
with search or reinforcement learntion in recent years, yet the principles driving such
ing
techniques
(DeepSeek-AI
et al., 2025; Team et al., 2025).
behavior of length generalization remain underexplored. We propose a new theoretical framework to
study length generalization for the next-token prediction task, as performed by decoder-only transformers.
Conceptually, we show that length generalization
occurs as long as each predicted token depends on
a small (fixed) number of previous tokens. Our theoretical model justifies certain techniques to modify
positional embeddings which have been introduced
to improve length generalization, such as position
coupling. We support our theoretical results with
experiments on synthetic tasks and natural language,
which confirm that a key factor driving length generalization is a “sparse” dependency structure of each
token on the previous ones. Inspired by our theory,
we introduce Predictive Position Coupling, which
trains the transformer to predict the position IDs used
in a positional coupling approach. Predictive Position Coupling thereby allows us to broaden the array
of tasks to which position coupling can successfully
be applied to achieve length generalization.

Unfortunately, transformers struggle to length generalize
on even very simple arithmetic and logic tasks, such as
computing parities, integer addition, and variable assignment
(Anil et al., 2022; Kazemnejad et al., 2023). Indeed, only
recently have transformer models successfuly been trained to
length-generalize to contexts many times their training length
on integer addition tasks, using a technique known as position
coupling (closely related to Abacus embeddings) (Cho et al.,
2024a;b; McLeish et al., 2024). For many other simple problems, comparable length generalization remains a challenge. In
light of this uneven progress, a natural question is whether there
is a more principled way of understanding length generalization.
In particular, can we formally reason about what structural
properties of data aid or inhibit length generalization? Moreover, can this suggest architectural modifications, such as to
positional embeddings, which improve length generalization?
Contributions. In this paper we give a positive answer to the
above questions: First, we introduce a class of data distributions,
namely those with sparse planted correlations (Definition 3.2),
which, roughly speaking, captures the property observed in
many synthetic and natural language tasks that each token to
be predicted depends on a small number k of previous tokens,
which we call the sparsity. We then establish the following:

1. Introduction
Enabling large language models (LLMs) to generalize to contexts longer than their training context length has emerged as
a key problem in recent years. Indeed, many factors limit the
context length of sequences which can be used during training, including the increased computational cost of training on
long sequences (Tay et al., 2022) as well as the fact that longer
sequences may be less numerous in the training dataset. Nevertheless, many applications require LLMs to be accurate on
extremely long context lengths at inference time: for instance,

• As long as the sparsity k does not grow with the sequence
length, then a simple class of models generalizing attention
heads (namely, sparse functional attention; Definition 3.3)
has provable length generalization (Theorem 4.3). This result
also relies on an additional assumption of locality on the
hypothesis class.
• While the locality assumption is typically violated in practice,
we show that (a theoretical abstraction of) position coupling
can remove the locality requirement (Proposition 4.4), thus
offering a theoretical justification for this recent technique.

1
MIT EECS 2 Harvard University 3 Kempner Institute at
Harvard University.
Correspondence to: Noah Golowich
<nzg@mit.edu>,
Samy Jelassi<sjelassi@fas.harvard.edu>,
David
Brandfonbrener<david.brandfonbrener@gmail.com>,
Sham M. Kakade<sham@seas.harvard.edu>, Eran Malach
<eran.malach@gmail.com>.

• We perform experiments (Section 5) on synthetic and natural
language data to support our theorical conclusions: for
instance, our experiments adjust the sparsity of several
synthetic tasks, and we observe that length generalization
improves monotonically with decreasing sparsity. For natural
language data, we provide evidence that length-generalizing
transformers indeed make accurate predictions using a small

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

