Task-Gated Multi-Expert Collaboration Network for
Degraded Multi-Modal Image Fusion

Yiming Sun 1 Xin Li 1 Pengfei Zhu 1 Qinghua Hu 2 3 4 Dongwei Ren 2 3 4 Huiying Xu 5 Xinzhong Zhu 5

Abstract
Multi-modal image fusion aims to integrate complementary information from different modalities to enhance perceptual capabilities in applications such as rescue and security. However,
real-world imaging often suffers from degradation issues, such as noise, blur, and haze in visible imaging, as well as stripe noise in infrared
imaging, which significantly degrades model performance. To address these challenges, we propose a task-gated multi-expert collaboration network (TG-ECNet) for degraded multi-modal image fusion. The core of our model lies in the
task-aware gating and multi-expert collaborative
framework, where the task-aware gating operates in two stages: degradation-aware gating dynamically allocates expert groups for restoration
based on degradation types, and fusion-aware gating guides feature integration across modalities
to balance information retention between fusion
and restoration tasks. To achieve this, we design a two-stage training strategy that unifies the
learning of restoration and fusion tasks. This
strategy resolves the inherent conflict in information processing between the two tasks, enabling all-in-one multi-modal image restoration
and fusion. Experimental results demonstrate that
TG-ECNet significantly enhances fusion performance under diverse complex degradation conditions and improves robustness in downstream
applications. The code is available at https:
//github.com/LeeX54946/TG-ECNet.

Degraded multi-modal image

DRMF (ACM MM 2024)

Text-IF (CVPR 2024)

Fused image (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of degraded multi-modal image fusion. For
multi-degraded multi-modal images, the proposed method shows
superior restoration and fusion quality compared to the SOTA
methods DRMF (Tang et al., 2024) and Text-IF (Yi et al., 2024),
especially in the highlighted regions, where our method better
preserves details and reduces noise.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal image fusion plays a pivotal role in applications (Sun et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2024) such as rescue,
security, and surveillance by integrating complementary
information from diverse imaging modalities (Ma et al.,
2019a; Zhang et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2021;
2022b). The visible modality provides superior textural
details, while the infrared modality effectively highlights
thermal targets. The combination of visible and infrared
imaging advantages enables the synthesis of fused images
suitable for all-day operation (Sun et al., 2022b; Liu et al.,
2023; Zhao et al., 2023b; Cao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2020),
thereby enhancing application robustness in complex environments.

1
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 3 Engineering Research Center of City Intelligence and
Digital Governance, Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Tianjin, China 4 Haihe Lab of ITAI, Tianjin, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal
University, Jinhua, China. Correspondence to: Pengfei Zhu <zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn>.
2

However, real-world multi-modal imaging systems are susceptible to performance degradation caused by multiple interfering factors (Tang et al., 2022b; 2023; Sun et al., 2024;
Tang et al., 2024; Yi et al., 2024). Specifically, the key component for capturing thermal information in infrared sensors
is the focal plane array, whose variations in the bias voltage
of the readout circuit in different columns often result in

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

