Learnings from Scaling Visual Tokenizers for Reconstruction and Generation

Philippe Hansen-Estruch 1 2 David Yan 2 Ching-Yao Chuang 2 Orr Zohar 2 3 Jialiang Wang 2 Tingbo Hou 2
Tao Xu 2 Sriram Vishwanath 1 Peter Vajda 2 Xinlei Chen 4

Abstract

the tokenizers themselves, predominantly based on convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al., 1998) (CNN), have
rarely been the main focus of scaling efforts.

Visual tokenization through auto-encoding enhances state-of-the-art image and video generative models by compressing pixels into a latent
space. However, questions persist regarding how
the design of the auto-encoder affects both reconstruction and downstream generative performance.
This paper investigates the impact of scaling autoencoders for reconstruction and generation by substituting the convolutional backbone with an enhanced Vision Transformer for Tokenization (ViTok). This paper’s results show that scaling the
auto-encoder bottleneck correlates with improved
reconstruction, though its relationship with generative performance is more complex. In contrast, scaling the encoder does not lead to gains,
while scaling the decoder enhances reconstruction with minimal effect on generation. These
findings indicate that scaling the existing autoencoder paradigm does not significantly improve
generative performance. When paired with Diffusion Transformers, ViTok achieves competitive
image reconstruction & generation performance
on 256p and 512p ImageNet-1K. For videos, ViTok achieves state-of-the-art in both reconstruction & generation performance on 128p UCF-101.

In this paper, we explore whether visual tokenizers require
the same scaling efforts as generators. To do this, we first
examine two potential bottlenecks: model architecture and
data. We begin by replacing convolutional backbones with
a Transformer-based auto-encoder (Vaswani et al., 2017),
specifically adopting the Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) architecture enhanced with Llama (Touvron et al., 2023), which has demonstrated effectiveness at
scale (Gu & Dao, 2023; Sun et al., 2024). Our resulting autoencoder design, which we refer to as Vision Transformer Tokenizer or ViTok, performs well with the generative pipeline
in Diffusion Transformers (DiT) (Peebles & Xie, 2023).
Second, we train our models on large-scale image datasets
that significantly exceed ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009)
and extend our approach to videos, ensuring that our tokenizer scaling is not constrained by data limitations. Within
this framework, we investigate three aspects:
• Scaling the auto-encoding bottleneck. Bottleneck
size correlates with reconstruction metrics. However,
when the bottleneck becomes large, the generative performance decreases due to increased channel sizes.
• Scaling the encoder. Scaling the encoder does not improve the generation outcomes and can even be detrimental. In particular, more complex latents can be more
difficult to decode and model, reducing overall performance.

1. Introduction
Modern methods for high-fidelity image and video generation (Brooks et al., 2024; Polyak et al., 2024; Genmo,
2024; Esser et al., 2024) rely on two components: a visual
tokenizer that encodes pixels into a lower-dimensional latent space and subsequently decodes, and a generator that
models this latent representation. While many studies have
improved generators through scaling of Transformer-based
architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021),

• Scaling the decoder. Scaling the decoder improves
reconstruction quality, but its influence on downstream
generative tasks remains mixed. We hypothesize that
the decoder acts in part as a generator, filling in local
textures based on limited information.

1

UT Austin 2 GenAI, Meta 3 Stanford University 4 Fundamental
AI Research, Meta. Correspondence to: Philippe Hansen-Estruch
<philippehansen@utexas.edu>.

Collectively, these results indicate that scaling the autoencoder tokenizer alone is not an effective strategy to enhance generative metrics within the current auto-encoding
paradigm (Esser et al., 2021). We also observe that similar
bottleneck trends apply to video tokenizers. However, ViTok leverages the inherent redundancy in video data more

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

