Inducing, Detecting and Characterising Neural Modules: A Pipeline for
Functional Interpretability in Reinforcement Learning

Anna Soligo 1 Pietro Ferraro 1 David Boyle 1

Abstract

However, this breadth of impacts also raises wide-ranging
concerns related to topics of safety, reliability and bias,
among others. It is thus crucial that the behaviour of RL
agents can be properly characterised to the extent that it can
be reasonably verified that their impacts align with human
values. As reflected in the EU’s AI ethics guidelines: systems should allow for human oversight, accountability and
transparency (European Commission & High-Level Expert
Group on AI, 2019).

Interpretability is crucial for ensuring RL systems
align with human values. However, it remains
challenging to achieve in complex decision making domains. Existing methods frequently attempt
interpretability at the level of fundamental model
units, such as neurons or decision nodes: an approach which scales poorly to large models. Here,
we instead propose an approach to interpretability
at the level of functional modularity. We show
how encouraging sparsity and locality in network
weights leads to the emergence of functional modules in RL policy networks. To detect these modules, we develop an extended Louvain algorithm
which uses a novel ‘correlation alignment’ metric
to overcome the limitations of standard network
analysis techniques when applied to neural network architectures. Applying these methods to 2D
and 3D MiniGrid environments reveals the consistent emergence of distinct navigational modules
for different axes, and we further demonstrate how
these functions can be validated through direct interventions on network weights prior to inference.

Currently, there remain fundamental challenges to achieving
this, and RL systems rarely afford sufficient interpretability.
One factor is the ambiguity regarding what constitutes a
suitable ‘explanation’ of a model. Lipton (2016) considers two parallel concepts: ‘simulatability’, the ease with
which a human can predict a model’s output from its input and explanation, and ‘decomposability’, the extent to
which constituent components of a model are themselves
interpretable. Doshi-Velez & Kim (2017) reiterate this with
the concept of ‘cognitive chunks’, emphasising the need for
model explanations to be tractable to human interpreters.
More concretely, interpretability can be considered in terms
of the affordances it provides. In some cases, interpretability
enables formal verification of safety-relevant capabilities
(Bastani et al., 2018). However, in complex, incompletelydefined scenarios, it can instead offer insights which enable
downstream safety-relevant tasks, such as system auditing
or direct interventions to reduce undesirable behaviours
(Kohler et al., 2024; Delfosse et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful approach to improve performance in complex decision-making
domains. Learning policies directly from interactions can
offer improved flexibility and performance, whilst avoiding challenges faced by classical model based control approaches (Song et al., 2023). The growing body of RL
research is demonstrating its potential to positively impact
diverse real-world domains, from battery manufacturing
(Lu et al., 2020) to the design of medical treatment regimes
(Coronato et al., 2020), applications which directly impact
critical issues such as climate-change and human-health.

When scaling these affordances to complex domains, interpretability at the level of neurons, or other fundamental
model units, becomes problematic: both due to their sheer
quantity and because individual neurons are rarely semantically meaningful in isolation (Elhage et al., 2022). We
address this challenge by taking a modular approach to interpretability. Modularity is fundamental in diverse biological architectures, including physical structures of the brain
(Gazzaniga et al., 2018). Similarly, human-decision making
can be considered as decomposable into modular processes
(Eppe et al., 2022), suggesting that modularity may offer a
natural framework for enhancing human understanding of
complex systems.

1
Imperial College London. Correspondence to: Anna Soligo
<anna.soligo18@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

