DPO Meets PPO: Reinforced Token Optimization for RLHF

Han Zhong * 1 Zikang Shan * 1 Guhao Feng * 2 Wei Xiong 3 Xinle Cheng 1 Li Zhao 4 Di He 2 Jiang Bian 4
Liwei Wang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

In the classical Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) framework, Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) is employed to learn
from sparse, sentence-level rewards—a challenging scenario in traditional deep reinforcement
learning. Despite the great successes of PPO in
the alignment of large language models, its opensource implementation is still largely sub-optimal.
To address these issues, we introduce a framework that models RLHF problems as a Markov
decision process (MDP), enabling the capture of
fine-grained token-wise information. Under this
framework, we introduce an algorithm Reinforced
Token Optimization (RTO), which learns the
token-wise reward function from preference data
and performs policy optimization based on this
learned token-wise reward signal.Theoretically,
RTO is proven to have the capability of finding
the near-optimal policy sample-efficiently. For
its practical implementation, RTO innovatively integrates Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
and PPO. DPO, originally derived from sparse
sentence rewards, surprisingly provides us with
a token-wise characterization of response quality,
which is seamlessly incorporated into our subsequent PPO training stage. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that RTO performs better than PPO
and other direct preference learning algorithms.
In particular, RTO outperforms PPO by 7.5 points
on the AlpacaEval 2 benchmark and by 4.1 points
on Arena-Hard. Our code and models are available at https://github.com/zkshan2002/RTO.

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has emerged as a key technique for aligning foundation models with human values and preferences (Christiano et al.,
2017; Ziegler et al., 2019). It has been pivotal in enabling
Large Language Models (LLMs) to produce more helpful, harmless, and honest responses (Bai et al., 2022), as
demonstrated in significant applications such as ChatGPT
(OpenAI, 2023), Claude (Anthropic, 2023), and Gemini
(Team et al., 2023). The classical RLHF pipeline (Ziegler
et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022) consists of two steps: (i)
Reward training from human feedback, where the learner
learns the reward function based on preference data, typically through Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). (ii)
Reward-based RL training, where the learner employs the
seminal deep RL algorithm Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO; Schulman et al., 2017) to optimize the reward learned
in the previous step.
Despite the success of this framework in the aforementioned
powerful closed-source LLMs, the training of PPO is known
to be unstable and sample-inefficient (Choshen et al., 2019).
While researchers have made efforts to propose alternative
approaches to the PPO algorithm, with notable examples
like rejection sampling fine-tuning (Dong et al., 2023; Gulcehre et al., 2023), direct preference learning algorithms
(Rafailov et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2023),
there is little evidence that these newly proposed approaches
alone can make the state-of-the-art LLMs. Therefore, improving the performance of the PPO algorithm in the context of RLHF is still an important research direction that is
largely under-explored.
After examining the open-source implementation of PPO,
we identify that one potential reason for the sub-optimal performance of PPO is the mismatch between the formulation
of RLHF and the nature of PPO. Specifically, in the existing
framework (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022), RLHF is
formulated as a bandit, where the entire response sentence
is considered to be an action, and the reward is sentencelevel, evaluating only the overall quality of the response.
However, PPO is designed for multi-step RL problems modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs), requiring a
token-wise reward assignment to each step. In typical im-

*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, Peking
University 2 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial
Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 3 University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign 4 Microsoft Research Asia.
Correspondence
to: Han Zhong <hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Li Zhao
<lizo@microsoft.com>, Di He <dihe@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei
Wang <wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

