Weight matrices compression based on PDB model in deep neural networks

Xiaoling Wu * 1 Junpeng Zhu * 1 Zeng Li 1

Abstract

propose a training scheme to promote the filters’ low rank
by using nuclear regularization and achieves the low-rank
approximation of the original filters. (Idelbayev & CarreiraPerpinán, 2020) emphasize determining the ideal rank for
each layer and weight approximation via adding a penalty
term of the rank. (Liebenwein et al., 2021) further propose
a compression architecture using SVD for local layer compression and minimizing the maximum relative error across
different layers for global compression. However, these
methods rely on hyperparameters and are generally difficult
to optimize.

Weight matrix compression has been demonstrated to effectively reduce overfitting and improve the generalization performance of deep neural networks. Compression is primarily achieved
by filtering out noisy eigenvalues of the weight
matrix. In this work, a novel Population Double
Bulk (PDB) model is proposed to characterize the
eigenvalue behavior of the weight matrix, which
is more general than the existing Population Unit
Bulk (PUB) model. Based on PDB model and
Random Matrix Theory (RMT), we have discovered a new PDBLS algorithm for determining
the boundary between noisy eigenvalues and information. A PDB Noise-Filtering algorithm is
further introduced to reduce the rank of the weight
matrix for compression. Experiments show that
our PDB model fits the empirical distribution of
eigenvalues of the weight matrix better than the
PUB model, and our compressed weight matrices
have lower rank at the same level of test accuracy. In some cases, our compression method can
even improve generalization performance when
labels contain noise. The code is avaliable at
https://github.com/xlwu571/PDBLS.

Recently, to understand the training mechanism and generalization performance of neural networks, RMT has succeeded in providing a theoretical explanation and improving generalization ability by analyzing spectral properties
of the weight matrices of neural networks, see (Berlyand
et al., 2023; Martin & Mahoney, 2020). For weight matrix
Wn×p , RMT is mainly employed to study the eigenvalues {λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λp } of WT W, in particular the limit
Pp
T
of FnW W (x) = p1 j=1 1{λj ≤x} called Limiting Spectral Distribution (LSD). According to (Martin & Mahoney,
2021), the training process of weight matrices mainly goes
through three phases: initial phase, bulk+spikes phase and
heavy-tailed phase (Fig.1). The randomly initialized weight
matrix W0 satisfies EW0T W0 = σ02 Ip , where σ02 depends
on the initial distribution of the entries of W0 . At this stage,
the LSD of W0T W0 matches Marčenko-Pastur (MP) law.
During the training process, the information learned by the
weight matrix is mainly reflected in a few spiked eigenvalues exceeding the MP edge λ+ , and the initial variance also
changes from σ02 to σ 2 . In this phase, the PUB model which
assumes EWT W = diag(α1 , . . . , αK , σ 2 , . . . , σ 2 ) :=
| {z } | {z }

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have achieved outstanding
performance in many fields such as computer vision (Leek
et al., 2022), speech recognition (Mohanty et al., 2022) and
recommendation systems (Da’u & Salim, 2020). Deeper
and wider DNN frameworks have demonstrated superior
learning performance (Yang et al., 2019), but many of these
networks are extremely over-parameterized and prone to
overfitting. Recently, some low-rank compression techniques have been applied to avoid overfitting by removing
small singular values of the weight matrix. (Xu et al., 2019)

K spikes

bulk

ΣP U B , is often used to analyze the trained weight matrices.
Correspondingly, WT W exhibits several comparatively
large sample spiked eigenvalues, alongside clustered bulk
eigenvalues. In the final training phase, the eigenvalues of
WT W gradually follow a heavy-tailed distribution, but this
phase is not very common. Thus, we mainly focus on the
bulk+spikes phase.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to: Zeng Li <liz9@sustech.edu.cn>.

Furthermore, (Staats et al., 2023) has verified that in the
bulk+spikes phase, large spiked eigenvalues learn rules from
data while small bulk eigenvalues do not contribute to model
learning. They propose to compress network by removing

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

