TTFSFormer: A TTFS-based Lossless Conversion of Spiking Transformer

Lusen Zhao 1 Zihan Huang 1 Jianhao Ding 1 Zhaofei YuB 1

Abstract

for communication between neurons instead of numerical
values. Compared to traditional Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs), SNNs achieve higher energy efficiency due to the
sparsity of event-driven signaling, particularly on neuromorphic hardware (Davies et al., 2018; DeBole et al., 2019; Pei
et al., 2019).

ANN-to-SNN conversion has emerged as a key
approach to train Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs), particularly for Transformer architectures, as it maps pre-trained ANN parameters to
SNN equivalents without requiring retraining,
thereby preserving ANN accuracy while eliminating training costs. Among various coding
methods used in ANN-to-SNN conversion,
time-to-first-spike (TTFS) coding, which allows
each neuron to at most one spike, offers significantly lower energy consumption. However,
while previous TTFS-based SNNs have achieved
comparable performance with convolutional
ANNs, the attention mechanism and nonlinear
layers in Transformer architectures remains a
challenge by existing SNNs with TTFS coding.
This paper proposes a new neuron structure for
TTFS coding that expands its representational
range and enhances the capability to process
nonlinear functions, along with detailed designs
of nonlinear neurons for different layers in
Transformer. Experimental results on different
models demonstrate that our proposed method
can achieve high accuracy with significantly
lower energy consumption. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to focus on
converting Transformer to SNN with TTFS
coding. The source code of the proposed method
is available at https://github.com/
ForestOnTheLand/TTFSFormer.git.

The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been
demonstrating its strong ability in a wide range of tasks with
its special self-attention mechanism, from natural language
processing to computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020).
Recent efforts to integrate Transformers with SNNs seek to
combine the information processing ability of Transformers
with the energy efficiency of SNNs, achieving promising
results in many tasks (Wang et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023).
Currently, there are two primary approaches for training
spiking transformers: direct training and ANN-to-SNN conversion. Direct training methods (Yao et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023b;a) rely on surrogate gradients (Neftci et al.,
2019) to perform backpropagation on networks, which approximates the non-differentiable spike series with continuous functions (e.g., sigmoid or tanh) during gradient computation. However, direct training of large-scale SNNs from
scratch (Yao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023a) requires high
computational resources, posing a major challenge in its
scalability and efficiency. In contrast, ANN-to-SNN conversion (Wang et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Huang et al.,
2024) maps pre-trained ANN parameters to SNN counterparts without requiring retraining, thereby preserving ANN
accuracy while eliminating training costs. However, previous Transformer-to-SNN methods primarily rely on rate
coding, where information is encoded through spike counts
over time. A key limitation is that precise value representation often requires multiple spikes, which reduces energy
efficiency.

1. Introduction

Recent evidence from neuroscience suggests that biological neural systems encode information not only through
firing rates but also via precise spike timing (Gütig & Sompolinsky, 2006; Montemurro et al., 2008; Park et al., 2019).
Temporal coding methods leverage this observation by representing values through spike timing rather than spike counts.
Notably, time-to-first-spike (TTFS) coding achieves high
energy efficiency by encoding information in the latency of
a single spike (Rueckauer & Liu, 2018). However, TTFS-

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), known as the third generation of neural networks (Maass, 1996), are promising due
to their low computational cost and biological plausibility.
Inspired by biological neurons, SNNs utilize binary spikes
1
Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Zhaofei Yu
<yuzf12@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

