Modularized Self-Reflected Video Reasoner for Multimodal LLM
with Application to Video Question Answering

Zihan Song 1 Xin Wang 1 Zi Qian 2 Hong Chen 1 Longtao Huang 2 Hui Xue 2 Wenwu Zhu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is a representative
task in video understanding, aiming to answer questions
based on the content of a given video. Leveraging their
rich external knowledge and strong generalization capabilities, multimodal large language models (Multimodal LLMs)
have emerged as powerful tools for tackling video understanding tasks such as VideoQA, video captioning and so
on. However, existing approaches based on Multimodal
LLMs suffer from the following issue in VideoQA tasks:
the classic end-to-end training approaches operate as blackbox systems, which inherently suffer from the lack of interpretability. Falling short in terms of transparency, they are
unable to unveil the reasoning paths or pinpoint the specific
segments of the video from which the answers are derived.

Multimodal Large Language Models (Multimodal
LLMs) have shown their strength in Video Question Answering (VideoQA). However, due to the
black-box nature of end-to-end training strategies, existing approaches based on Multimodal
LLMs suffer from the lack of interpretability
for VideoQA: they can neither present reasoning paths nor indicate where the answers are derived from the video. To address this issue, we
propose MSR-ViR (Modularized Self-Reflected
Video Reasoner), which for the first time integrates modular networks to Multimodal LLMs,
capable of providing VideoQA with explicit reasoning paths for more interpretability. Specifically, a MoST-Grounding (Modularized SpatialTemporal Grounding) network is proposed to decompose complex questions via tree-structured
policies, localizing relevant temporal and spatial
segments within videos through step-by-step reasoning. The proposed MoST-Grounding network
provides explicit visually grounded information
for Multimodal LLMs with clear reasoning paths,
thus enhancing interpretability for the predicted
answers. To further improve the reasoning quality, we design an Alternate Self-reflection Training Strategy to jointly optimize policy generation and Multimodal LLMs. Experiments on realworld datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
proposed MSR-ViR framework in video understanding, reasoning transparency, and providing
explicit localization evidence for answers.

To solve this issue, we marry modular network with Multimodal LLMs for interpretable VideoQA. In particular, we
propose the Modularized Self-Reflected Video Reasoner
(MSR-ViR) framework, which is able to obtain clear reasoning paths when answering the questions. The proposed MSR-ViR framework contains a Modularized SpatialTemporal Grounding (MoST-Grounding) module, together with a reinforcement learning-based Alternate Selfreflection Training strategy to train a Multimodal LLM
for VideoQA, as is shown in Figure 1 (c). Concretely, by
following a tree-structured execution policy generated by
a Question Parser, MoST-Grounding first decomposes a
complex question into several small parts. Then through
step-by-step spatial-temporal grounding and reasoning, it
progressively derives the most relevant visual information
in the video, which will be fed to a Multimodal LLM to
answer the question. The execution policy provides a clear
reasoning path from the question to the answer, providing
interpretability for making predictions, while the spatialtemporal grounding results can provide visual evidence for
the predicted answers. As for model optimization, on the
one hand, the proposed Alternate Self-reflection Training
strategy optimizes policy generation via letting the Multimodal LLM undergo Supervised Finetuning (SFT) based on
the execution results of the policies generated by the Question Parser in order to better understand the video content.
On the other hand, the predicted result of the Multimodal

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China.
Correspondence to:
Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

