DriveGPT: Scaling Autoregressive Behavior Models for Driving

Xin Huang 1 Eric M. Wolff 1 Paul Vernaza 1 Tung Phan-Minh 1 Hongge Chen 1 David S. Hayden 1
Mark Edmonds 1 Brian Pierce 1 Xinxin Chen 1 Pratik Elias Jacob 1 Xiaobai Chen 1 Chingiz Tairbekov 1
Pratik Agarwal 1 Tianshi Gao 1 Yuning Chai 2 Siddhartha S. Srinivasa 1

Abstract
We present DriveGPT, a scalable behavior model
for autonomous driving. We model driving as
a sequential decision-making task, and learn a
transformer model to predict future agent states
as tokens in an autoregressive fashion. We scale
up our model parameters and training data by
multiple orders of magnitude, enabling us to explore the scaling properties in terms of dataset
size, model parameters, and compute. We evaluate DriveGPT across different scales in a planning
task, through both quantitative metrics and qualitative examples, including closed-loop driving in
complex real-world scenarios. In a separate prediction task, DriveGPT outperforms state-of-theart baselines and exhibits improved performance
by pretraining on a large-scale dataset, further
validating the benefits of data scaling.

Figure 1. Through data and model scaling, DriveGPT (red) handles
complex real-world driving scenarios, such as lane changing in
heavy traffic and yielding to a cyclist in the opposite lane, compared to a smaller baseline trained on less data (pink).

Model
VectorNet
PlanTF
QCNet-Argo2
QCNet-WOMD
Wayformer
MotionLM
MTR
GUMP
DriveGPT (Ours)

1. Introduction
Transformer-based foundation models have become increasingly prevalent in sequential modeling tasks across various
machine learning domains. These models are highly effective in handling sequential data by capturing long-range
dependencies and temporal relationships. Their success has
been evident in natural language processing (Mann et al.,
2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022), timeseries forecasting (Zhou et al., 2021), and speech recognition (Kim et al., 2022), where sequential patterns play a
crucial role. One of the key strengths of transformer-based
models is their capacity to learn from large datasets including millions of training examples, enabling them to address
complex tasks with increased model sizes, up to billions of
model parameters.

Parameters

Training Segments

72K
2.1M
7.3M
7.5M
20M
27M
66M
523M
1.4B

211K
1M
200K
2.2M
2.2M
1.1M
2.2M
2.6M
120M

Table 1. DriveGPT is ∼3x larger and is trained on ∼50x more data
sequences than existing published behavior models.

While scaling up model and dataset sizes has been critical
for recent advances in sequential modeling for text prediction (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022), it remains
unclear whether these scaling trends can be directly extended to behavior modeling, particularly in driving tasks,
due to several unique challenges. First, driving tasks involve a wider range of input modalities, including agent
trajectories and map information, unlike language tasks that
rely solely on textual inputs. Second, behavior modeling
demands spatial reasoning and an understanding of physical
kinematics. Such capabilities are typically beyond the scope
of language models. Finally, the collection of large-scale

1

Cruise LLC, San Francisco, CA 2 Meta, Menlo Park, CA.
Correspondence to: Xin Huang, Eric M. Wolff <{cyrus.huang,
eric.wolff}@getcruise.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

