Conditional Diffusion Model with Nonlinear Data Transformation for
Time Series Forecasting

J Rishi * 1 GVS Mothish * 1 Deepak Subramani 1

Abstract

networks (Hewamalage et al., 2021), convolutional neural
networks (Yue et al., 2022), and transformers (Vaswani,
2017a) have been used for time-series modeling.

Time-series forecasting finds application across
domains such as finance, climate science, and
energy systems. We introduce the Conditional
Diffusion with Nonlinear Data Transformation
Model (CN-Diff), a generative framework that employs novel nonlinear transformations and learnable conditions in the forward process for time
series forecasting. A new loss formulation for
training is proposed, along with a detailed derivation of both forward and reverse process. The
new additions improve the diffusion model’s capacity to capture complex time series patterns,
thus simplifying the reverse process. Our novel
condition facilitates learning an efficient prior distribution. This also reduces the gap between the
true negative log-likelihood and its variational approximation. CN-Diff is shown to perform better
than other leading time series models on nine realworld datasets. Ablation studies are conducted to
elucidate the role of each component of CN-Diff.

In addition to traditional deep learning architectures, diffusion models have recently gained prominence as effective
tools for generative tasks. Their outstanding performance
has been evidenced in various domains, exceeding the capabilities of conventional generative approaches in image
generation (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021),
video synthesis (Harvey et al., 2022; Blattmann et al., 2023),
robotics (Mothish et al., 2024) and cross-modal applications
(Saharia et al., 2022). Given this impressive success, there
is a growing research interest in leveraging the potential of
diffusion models for time series forecasting, leading to the
development of several diffusion-based frameworks for time
series modeling. Each of these frameworks is specifically
designed to tackle the complexities and difficulties that arise
in the context of temporal forecasting (Tashiro et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2024b; Cao et al., 2024; Shen & Kwok, 2023; Shen
et al., 2024; Lopez Alcaraz & Strodthoff, 2023). These approaches largely rely on conditional diffusion models. For
instance, TimeDiff (Shen & Kwok, 2023) employs future
mixup as a condition-guided diffusion model. TimeGrad
(Rasul et al., 2021) merges a standard diffusion model with
the recurrent neural network’s hidden states. CSDI (Tashiro
et al., 2021) uses self-supervised masking to steer a nonautoregressive denoising process. While effective, these
time-series diffusion models do not completely exploit diffusion model properties.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting has become an essential element in
modern data-driven decision-making processes, spanning
a wide range of fields including financial pricing analysis (Kim, 2003), economics (Henrique et al., 2019), transportation planning (Huang et al., 2023), energy (Dumas
et al., 2022) and various other fields (Li et al., 2024a; Rasul
et al., 2022). There has been substantial advancement in
time series modeling, beginning with traditional statistical
techniques such as ARIMA and state-space models, which
initially dominated forecasting efforts. Later, various architectures of deep neural networks, such as recurrent neural

Conventional training for conditional diffusion models involves gradually adding a fixed linear Gaussian noise at
each forward stage. The reverse process is then optimized
to closely replicate the forward process but with conditions
only applied to the reverse process. Firstly, this approach
confines diffusion models in the non-learnable forward process. Secondly, simplifying into an isotropic Gaussian prior
complicates the data generation process in the reverse process for time series applications.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computational and Data
Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India. Correspondence to: J Rishi <rishij@iisc.ac.in>, GVS Mothish <mothishg@iisc.ac.in>, Deepak Subramani <deepakns@iisc.ac.in>.

This paper introduces the Conditional Diffusion with Nonlinear Data Transformation Model (CN-Diff) (Refer to Figure
1), a framework incorporating a nonlinear time-dependent
learnable data transformation into the forward process along-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

