Nonparametric Teaching for Graph Property Learners

Chen Zhang 1 * Weixin Bu 2 * Zeyi Ren 1 Zhengwu Liu 1 Yik-Chung Wu 1 Ngai Wong 1
𝑓∗

Abstract
Inferring properties of graph-structured data, e.g.,
the solubility of molecules, essentially involves
learning the implicit mapping from graphs to
their properties. This learning process is often
costly for graph property learners like Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). To address this,
we propose a paradigm called Graph Neural
Teaching (GraNT) that reinterprets the learning
process through a novel nonparametric teaching
perspective. Specifically, the latter offers a theoretical framework for teaching implicitly defined
(i.e., nonparametric) mappings via example selection. Such an implicit mapping is realized by a
dense set of graph-property pairs, with the GraNT
teacher selecting a subset of them to promote
faster convergence in GCN training. By analytically examining the impact of graph structure on
parameter-based gradient descent during training,
and recasting the evolution of GCNs—shaped by
parameter updates—through functional gradient
descent in nonparametric teaching, we show for
the first time that teaching graph property learners
(i.e., GCNs) is consistent with teaching structureaware nonparametric learners. These new findings
readily commit GraNT to enhancing learning efficiency of the graph property learner, showing
significant reductions in training time for graphlevel regression (-36.62%), graph-level classification (-38.19%), node-level regression (-30.97%)
and node-level classification (-47.30%), all while
maintaining its generalization performance.

𝑓
𝑓∗

𝑮

𝑓

Figure 1: An illustration of the implicit mapping f ∗ between

a graph G and its property f ∗ (G), where f 0 denotes the
mapping of the initial graph property learner, e.g., an initialized GCN.
2017; Chami et al., 2022). The vertices, or nodes, contain
individual features, while the edges link these nodes and
capture the structural information, collectively forming a
complete graph. Graph properties can be categorized as
either node-level or graph-level1 . For example, the node category is a node-level property in social network graphs (Fan
et al., 2019), while the solubility of molecules is a graphlevel property in molecular graphs (Ramakrishnan et al.,
2014). Inferring these graph properties essentially involves
learning the implicit mapping from graphs to these properties (Hamilton et al., 2017). An intuitive illustration of
this mapping is provided in Figure 1. As a representative
graph property learner, the Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) (Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017) has
shown strong generalizability, delivering impressive performance across various fields such as social networks (Min
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023), quantum chemistry (Gilmer
et al., 2017; Mansimov et al., 2019), and biology (Stark
et al., 2006; Burkhart et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

However, the learning process of the implicit mapping—i.e.,
the training—can be quite expensive for GCNs, particularly when dealing with large-scale graphs (Liu et al.,
2022a). For example, learning node-level properties in realworld e-commerce relational networks involves millions of

Graph-structured data, commonly referred to as graphs, are
typically represented by vertices and edges (Hamilton et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR,
China 2 Reversible Inc. Correspondence to: Chen Zhang
<czhang6@connect.hku.hk>, Ngai Wong <nwong@eee.hku.hk>.

1
This paper adopts a graph-level focus in its discussion unless otherwise specified, with node-level considered as a multidimensional generalization.
Our project page is available at https://chen2hang.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

github.io/_publications/nonparametric_teaching_for_
graph_proerty_learners/grant.html.

1

