On the Generalization Ability of Next-Token-Prediction Pretraining

Zhihao Li 1 Xue Jiang 2 3 Liyuan Liu 1 Xuelin Zhang 1 Hong Chen 1 4 Feng Zheng 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful generative models in solving sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) tasks (Ott et al., 2019), which not only have
achieved tremendous progress in various NLP tasks (Malach,
2023), but also have realized remarkable performance in
other domains (Li et al., 2024). Surprisingly, several existing LLMs, such as GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020), OPT (Zhang
et al., 2022), BLOOM (Workshop et al., 2023), Llama (Touvron et al., 2023), Deepseek (Liu et al., 2024a) and Qwen
(Yang et al., 2025), share two common characteristics: (i)
Employing a decoder-only architecture based on the maskedself-attention(Vaswani et al., 2017). (ii) Adopting the unsupervised pre-training method of Next-Token-Prediction
(NTP) (see Figure 1 (a)), which is to predict the next token based on all previous context tokens in each step (Qi
et al., 2020). The predominant expense in training a large
language model is typically incurred during the pre-training
phase (Zhao et al., 2024). Consequently, it is very important
to examine the DOMs-based NTP pre-training.

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential in handling natural language processing (NLP) tasks and beyond. LLMs usually can be categorized as
transformer decoder-only models (DOMs), utilizing Next-Token-Prediction (NTP) as their pretraining methodology. Despite their tremendous
empirical successes, the theoretical understanding of how NTP pre-training affects the model’s
generalization behavior is lacking. To fill this gap,
we establish the fine-grained generalization analysis for NTP pre-training based on Rademacher
complexity, where the dependence between tokens is also addressed. Technically, a novel decomposition of Rademacher complexity is developed to study DOMs from the representation
learner and the token predictor, respectively. Furthermore, the upper bounds of covering number
are established for multi-layer and multi-head
transformer-decoder models under the Frobenius
norm, which theoretically pioneers the incorporation of mask matrix within the self-attention
mechanism. Our results reveal that the generalization ability of NTP pre-training is affected
quantitively by the number of token sequences
N , the maximum length of sequence m, and the
count of parameters in the transformer model Θ.
Additionally, experiments on public datasets verify our theoretical findings. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Lizeihao/MININTP.

Recently, there have been increasing efforts to evaluate the
DOMs-based NTP pre-training empirically. Shlegeris et al.
(2022) found that language models are consistently better
than humans at NTP tasks by performing two distinct experiments. Malach (2023) demonstrated when trained on
Chain-of-Thought data, even a linear next-token predictor
can possess high fitting ability. Bachmann & Nagarajan
(2024) designed a minimal planning task and demonstrated
that NTP pre-training cannot accurately predict the first
position in some tasks. Li et al. (2024) utilized a single
self-attention layer to explore the mechanics of NTP. While
these works justify the use of NTP pre-training in the corresponding regimes, they do not provide a rigorous analysis
of the training mechanism, especially from the perspective
of generalization theory. This motivates a natural question:

1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern
University of Science and Technology 3 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University 4 Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Hong Chen
<chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn>.

“Can we establish the generalization analysis of NTP pretraining, which probably explains the effects of model parameters?”

2

This paper answers the above question positively. The
DOMs (see Figure 1 (b)) usually consist of two components (Zhao et al., 2024): multiple layers of transformerdecoder-blocks, shortened as Representation-Learner (R-L),
and a task-specific processor, noted by Token-Predictor (T-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

