Triple-Optimistic Learning for Stochastic Contextual Bandits with General
Constraints
Hengquan Guo 1 Lingkai Zu 1 Xin Liu 1

Abstract

each round t, the learner observes a context xt ∈ X , selects an action at ∈ A, and then receives the corresponding
noisy reward rt (xt , at ) and cost ct (xt , at ). The goal is to
maximize the cumulative reward while ensuring the constraints are satisfied. Our framework addresses a general
setting where the cost functions belong to general function classes and can take both positive and negative values.
This flexibility allows the model to represent a wide variety
of constraints, such as knapsack constraints (Badanidiyuru
et al., 2014; 2018; Agrawal & Devanur, 2016; Immorlica
et al., 2022), where the cost is positive and the interaction
stops once the resource is depleted, replenishable Knapsacks
constraints (Kumar & Kleinberg, 2022; Bernasconi et al.,
2024a;b), where resources may restore; fairness constraints
(Li et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Claure et al., 2020; Sinha,
2024), ensuring equitable outcomes of the decision.

We study contextual bandits with general constraints, where a learner observes contexts and
aims to maximize cumulative rewards while satisfying a wide range of general constraints. We
introduce the Optimistic3 framework, a novel
learning and decision-making approach that integrates optimistic design into parameter learning, primal decision, and dual violation adaptation (i.e., triple-optimism), combined with an efficient primal-dual
architecture. Optimistic3
√
achieves Õ( T ) regret and constraint violation
for contextual bandits with general constraints.
This framework not only outperforms the state3
of-the-art results that achieve Õ(T 4 ) guarantees when Slater’s condition does not hold but
also√improves on previous results that achieve
Õ( T /δ) when Slater’s condition holds (δ denotes the Slater’s condition parameter), offering a
O(1/δ) improvement. Note this improvement is
significant because δ can be arbitrarily small when
constraints are particularly challenging. Moreover, we show that Optimistic3 can be extended to classical multi-armed bandits with both
stochastic and adversarial constraints, recovering
the best-of-both-worlds guarantee established in
the state-of-the-art works, but with significantly
less computational overhead.

The most closely related literature on contextual bandits
with general constraints is (Slivkins et al., 2023; Guo &
Liu, 2024). In (Slivkins et al., 2023), the authors proposed
the LagrangeCBwLC
algorithm to establish the first opti√
mal Õ( T /δ) bounds for both regret and constraint violation. Their results rely on two key assumptions: (1) the
existence of Slater’s condition, which guarantees a strictly
feasible solution, and (2) prior knowledge of Slater’s constant δ, which quantifies the strictness of the constraints.
These results were later refined by (Guo & Liu, 2024), who
3
achieved Õ(T 4 ) regret and violation bounds without requiring Slater’s condition. When Slater’s
√ condition holds,
their δ-agnostic algorithm achieves Õ( T /δ 2 ) regret and
violation, exhibiting a 1/δ worse dependency compared to
the full-knowledge algorithm in (Slivkins et al., 2023). The
elimination of prior δ-knowledge represents a significant
advancement, as obtaining such information is often im3
practical in real-world applications. However, the Õ(T 4 )
regret and violation bounds in (Guo & Liu, 2024) without
Slater’s√
condition remain substantially weaker than the optimal Õ( T /δ) bound. For the setting
where constraints are
√
tight (i.e., δ −
→ 0), even the Õ( T /δ) guarantee becomes
problematic, incurring a critical limitation both in theory and
practice.√A recent work by (Bernasconi et al., 2024a) shows
that Õ( T ) regret and violation bounds are achievable for
classical multi-armed bandits with constraints without requiring Slater’s condition. However, their approach cannot

1. Introduction
We study contextual bandits with general constraints, a
broad online learning framework that boosts a wide range
of applications (e.g., online recommendation (Balakrishnan
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020), resource-constrained healthcare (Tewari & Murphy, 2017; Tomkins et al., 2021)). In
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Xin Liu <liuxin7@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

