DataDecide

How to Predict Best Pretraining Data with Small Experiments

Ian Magnusson * 1 2 Nguyen Tai * 3 Ben Bogin * 1 David Heineman 1 Jena Hwang 1 Luca Soldaini 1 Akshita Bhagia 1
Jiacheng Liu 1 2 Dirk Groeneveld 1 Oyvind Tafjord 1 Noah A. Smith 1 2 Pang Wei Koh 1 2 Jesse Dodge 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The cost of training large language models (LMs) necessitates methods of trying out options at small scale, but it also
makes it expensive to validate the accuracy of development
decisions made with such methods. We focus on the question of choosing between pretraining datasets to use—one
of the most impactful development decisions. Common
practice (e.g., Li et al., 2024) uses a single, small scale of
experiments to cheaply test pretraining data intended for
larger-scale models, where scale is determined by number
of model parameters and training tokens. The other predominant approach is to fit scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022; Choshen et al., 2024) to the trend
in performance observed over multiple small scales, with
recent work extending this to the prediction of downstream
performance instead of language modeling loss (Gadre et al.,
2024; Dubey et al., 2024; Bhagia et al., 2024).

Because large language models are expensive to
pretrain on different datasets, using smaller-scale
experiments to decide on data is crucial for reducing costs. Which benchmarks and methods of
making decisions from observed performance at
small scale most accurately predict the datasets
that yield the best large models? To empower
open exploration of this question, we release models, data, and evaluations in DATA D ECIDE—the
most extensive open suite of models over differences in data and scale. We conduct controlled
pretraining experiments across 25 corpora with
differing sources, deduplication, and filtering up
to 100B tokens, model sizes up to 1B parameters,
and 3 random seeds. We find that the ranking of
models at a single, small size (e.g., 150M parameters) is a strong baseline for predicting best models at our larger target scale (1B) (∼ 80% of comparisons correct). No scaling law methods among
8 baselines exceed the compute-decision frontier of single-scale predictions, but DATA D ECIDE
can measure improvement in future scaling laws.
We also identify that using continuous likelihood
metrics as proxies in small experiments makes
benchmarks including MMLU, ARC, HellaSwag,
MBPP, and HumanEval > 80% predictable at the
target 1B scale with just 0.01% of the compute.

So far decision-making approaches have only been validated
without observing the counterfactual outcome, either by producing a single large model on the chosen decision with
impressive performance or by low error in predicting the
magnitude of observed performance of a small number of
large models. Knowing what amount of error in predicting
performance over scale is a low enough to actually make
a correct decision among datasets, requires a suite of comparable models trained on many datasets. Although a wide
variety of open-source pretraining corpora are available, the
scaling behavior of data is difficult to assess from off-theshelf models that vary simultaneously in data, optimizer,
and modeling decisions.
To make it possible to empirically study what methods make
the best decisions over data, we build DATA D ECIDE1 —a
suite of models we pretrain on 25 corpora up to 100B tokens,
over 14 different model sizes ranging from 4M parameters
up to 1B parameters (more than 30K model checkpoints in
total). We evaluate all models across a suite of 10 downstream tasks and calculate how accurately small models predict which pretraining corpora lead to better performance

*
Equal contribution 1 Allen Institute for AI 2 Paul G. Allen
School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington 3 University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Ian Magnusson <ianmag@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

DataDecide collection on HuggingFace

