Robust Sparsification via Sensitivity

Chansophea Wathanak In 1 Yi Li 1 2 David P. Woodruff 3 Xuan Wu 1

Abstract

regression methods since the 1960s (see, e.g., (Andersen,
2008) for a comprehensive survey), and it remains an active
area of research today. In this paper, we present a framework to address the issue of outliers for a large family of
optimization problems, including regression, by reducing
their scale through the construction of coresets.

Robustness to outliers is important in machine
learning. Many classical problems, including
subspace embedding, clustering, and low-rank
approximation, lack scalable, outlier-resilient algorithms. This paper considers machine learning problems
Pnof the form minx∈Rd F (x), where
F (x) =
i=1 Fi (x), and their robust counterparts minx∈Rd F (m) (x), where F (m) (x) denotes the sum of all but the m largest Fi (x) values. We develop a general framework for constructing ε-coresets for such robust problems,
where an ε-coreset is a weighted subset of functions {F1 (x), . . . , Fn (x)} that provides a (1 + ε)approximation to F (x). Specifically, if the original problem F has total sensitivity T and admits
a vanilla ε-coreset of size S, our algorithm constructs an ε-coreset of size Õ( mT
ε ) + S for the
robust objective F (m) . This coreset size can be
shown to be near-tight for ℓ2 subspace embeddings. Our coreset algorithm has scalable running
time and, by employing a sensitivity flattening
argument, leads to new or improved algorithms
for robust optimization problems, including regression and PCA. Finally, empirical evaluations
demonstrate that our coresets outperform uniform
sampling on real-world data sets.

A natural and popular approach for handling outliers is to
consider robust versions of the original optimization formulations. Specifically, consider an optimization
Pn problem
of the form minx∈Rd F (x), where F (x) =
i=1 Fi (x).
The robust version of F (x), denoted by F (m) (x), aggregates all but the largest m values over Fi (x) (i = 1, . . . , n).
Formally, for each x ∈ Rd , the values F1 (x), . . . , Fn (x)
are sorted in increasing order as Fi1 (x) ≥ Fi2 (x) ≥
·P
· · ≥ Fin (x), and F (m) (x) is then defined as F (m) (x) =
n−m
j=1 Fij (x). This robust formulation coincides with the
least trimmed regression (Rousseeuw, 1985) and was first
considered in algorithmic machine learning by (Charikar
et al., 2001) in the context of facility location. More recently,
it has been studied in several important machine learning
problems, including PCA (Simonov et al., 2019) and clustering (Chen, 2008; Krishnaswamy et al., 2018). However, all
those algorithms have high-order polynomial running times,
making them neither scalable nor even practical.
In the case of no outliers (which will be referred to as the
vanilla case), a popular scalable solution is to sparsify the
input by constructing a coreset. A (strong) ε-coreset is a
weighted subset of the dataset such that the loss of every
candidate solution on this subset approximates the original
loss within a relative error of ε. In the past 20 years, coresets have been extensively studied for a variety of machine
learning problems (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004; Feldman
& Langberg, 2011; Munteanu et al., 2018; Chhaya et al.,
2020; Jubran et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021; Braverman
et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Outliers, which can occur frequently in real-world data, pose
significant challenges to many machine learning problems.
For instance, in the classic regression problem, a small number of contaminated data points can drastically skew the
solution. This issue has driven the development of robust

In the robust case, early coresets have either an exponential
size (Feldman & Schulman, 2012) or a weaker bi-criteria approximation guarantee (Feldman & Langberg, 2011; Huang
et al., 2018). Recently, in the context of clustering with
outliers, Huang et al. (Huang et al., 2023a) construct the
first strong coreset with a similar size to the vanilla case.
Inspired by their work, more strong robust coresets for clustering have been developed (Huang et al., 2025; Jiang &

The authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 School of Physical
and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 2 College of Computing and Data Sciences, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 3 Department of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to:
Yi Li <yili@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

