Diving into Self-Evolving Training for Multimodal Reasoning

Wei Liu * 1 Junlong Li * 1 2 Xiwen Zhang 3 Fan Zhou 2 Yu Cheng 4 Junxian He 1

Abstract

autonomous driving (Yang et al., 2023). It requires Large
Multimodal Models (LMMs) to understand various modalities beyond text. For example, visual mathematical reasoning (Lu et al., 2023) challenges models to analyze complex
figures, diagrams, and charts, leveraging the provided information to perform reasoning tasks.

Self-evolving training—where models iteratively
learn from their own outputs—has emerged as a
key approach for complex reasoning tasks, addressing the scarcity of high-quality chain-ofthought data. However, its effectiveness in multimodal reasoning, a domain more intricate than
text-only reasoning, remains underexplored, and
the understanding of critical factors in this training paradigm remains limited. Furthermore, a
central challenge for this training method is performance saturation, which impedes further improvements and scalability. Inspired by reinforcement learning (RL), in this paper, we reframe
self-evolving training for multimodal reasoning
through the lens of RL, identifying three pivotal
factors: Training Method, Reward Model, and
Prompt Variation. Through systematic analysis,
we establish relatively optimal design principles
that significantly enhance multimodal reasoning
capabilities. Moreover, delving deeper into training dynamics, we uncover the roots of saturation
and propose a new automatic balancing mechanism to mitigate this limitation. Building on
these insights, we propose M-STA R (Multimodal
Self-evolving Training for Reasoning), a framework that achieves consistent performance gains
across models of varying sizes and diverse benchmarks. All resources are made publicly available
at https://mstar-lmm.github.io.

Despite the critical role of mutlimodal reasoning, the availability of human-annotated thought processes in multimodal
scenarios remains limited, hindering the learning of multimodal reasoning. Consequently, self-evolving training,
which utilizes model’s own generation ability to iteratively
tune and improve itself without external annotated data, has
emerged as an appealing candidate to facilitate reasoning
abilities. While research on self-evolving training has primarily focused on the text-only settings (Hosseini et al.,
2024; Sun et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024), its application in
the multimodal domain, especially for reasoning tasks, has
been limited with only a few sporadic examples (Fang et al.,
2024; Dubey et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024), and a unified
framework has yet to be established.
Inspired by reinforcement learning (RL), in this paper, we
reframe self-evolving training through the lens of RL, identifying three factors that are critical inside self-evolving training: the training method, the use of reward model, and
prompt variation. Through massive controlled studies, we
(1) propose a continuous self-evolving training scheme to
reduce the gap towards full online learning and outperforms
other iterative baselines (§3.2); (2) train the first multimodal,
process-based reward model for multimodal reasoning and
demonstrate its usefulness in further enhancing performance
(§3.3); and (3) find that adding more unlabeled queries helps
only when having perfect reward signals (e.g., the oracle
groundtruth answers), and it hurts the performance if the reward model does not generalize well on unseen data (§3.4).
Beyond static design principles, we investigate the training dynamics, revealing how performance saturation stems
from diminishing exploration potential during training. To
address this, we introduce a new metric that bridges exploration and exploitation, and propose an automatic balancing
mechanism that dynamically adjusts the sampling temperature to sustain exploration-exploitation trade-offs.

1. Introduction
Multimodal reasoning is a fundamental skill in many realworld applications, such as intelligent agents (Liu et al.,
2024c), robotics (Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b), and
*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Helixon Research
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Wei
Liu, Junxian He <wliucn, junxianh@cse.ust.hk>, Junlong Li
<lockonlvange@gmail.com>.

Combining all the recipes concluded through separate, controlled studies, we propose our self-evolving training al-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

