PEINR: A Physics-enhanced Implicit Neural Representation for High-Fidelity
Flow Field Reconstruction
Liming Shen 1 2 Liang Deng 3 Chongke Bi 4 Yu Wang 4 Xinhai Chen 1 2 Yueqing Wang 3 Jie Liu 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Implicit neural representation (INR) excels in
high-fidelity flow field reconstruction through
flexible enhancement of numerical precision and
grid resolution. However, its broader adoption
faces two barriers: the absence of standardized
benchmarks for flow reconstruction tasks, and
the impractical grid independence assumption
in real-world simulations. Current INR frameworks also struggle to resolve fine-scale structures
and spatiotemporal dynamics, particularly under
severe temporal-spatial data imbalance, where
temporal sensitivity degrades significantly. Tacking these issues, we first introduce HFR-Bench,
a 5.4 TB public large-scale CFD dataset with
33,600 unsteady 2D and 3D vector fields for reconstructing high-fidelity flow fields. We further
present PEINR, a physics-enhanced INR framework, which is mainly composed of physical
encoding and transformer-based spatiotemporal
fuser (TransSTF). Physical encoding decouples
temporal and spatial components through Gaussian temporal encoding, which can enhance highdimensional features and nonlinear characteristics
in temporal information, and localized spatial encoding, which can implement stencil-based discretization in the spatial dimension. TransSTF
fuses both spatial and temporal information via
transformer for capturing long-range temporal dependencies. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that PEINR outperforms stateof-the-art INR-based methods in reconstruction
quality. Code and dataset are released here.

High-fidelity flow fields contain richer flow information
and finer-scale flow structures, which play a crucial role
in understanding the flow behaviors in various physical
and natural phenomena. In computational fluid dynamics
(CFD), increasing the grid-resolution and employing higherorder numerical schemes can typically generate high-fidelity
flow fields, but the simulations require several days to complete and incur substantial computational costs. Recently,
inspired by their success in computer vision, deep-learningbased super-resolution (SR) methods have increasingly been
used to reconstruct high-fidelity flow fields from low-fidelity
counterparts without repeatedly solving complex partial differential equations (Fukami et al., 2023).
Grid Resolution

Low-Fidelity

High-Fidelity

Numerical Accuracy

PEINR

Figure 1. The red circles explain the error in the assumption of grid
independence, showing that as the grid resolution (in the row direction) and numerical accuracy (in the column direction) increase, the
attribute values at the same location differ and the high-frequency
part becomes more pronounced in the corresponding frequency
domain representations, which means that the structure of the flow
field is more complex and refined.

1
Laboratory of Digitizing Software for Frontier Equipment,
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
National Key Laboratory of Parallel and Distributed Computing, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
Computational Aerodynamics Institute, China Aerodynamics Research and Development Center, Mianyang, China 4 College of
Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
Correspondence to: Liang Deng <dengliang11@nudt.edu.cn>.

Existing methods of high-fidelity flow field reconstruction
based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Fukami
et al., 2021; Yousif et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023; Hu et al.,
2024; Shen et al., 2024b;a) are clearly confined to equallyspaced Cartesian meshes because the nodes of the computational grid are reinterpreted as pixels. Nevertheless, irregular
meshes are widely used in the industry because they can

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

