Ranked Entropy Minimization for Continual Test-Time Adaptation

Jisu Han 1 Jaemin Na 2 Wonjun Hwang 3

Abstract
Test-time adaptation aims to adapt to realistic environments in an online manner by learning during test time. Entropy minimization has emerged
as a principal strategy for test-time adaptation
due to its efficiency and adaptability. Nevertheless, it remains underexplored in continual testtime adaptation, where stability is more important. We observe that the entropy minimization
method often suffers from model collapse, where
the model converges to predicting a single class
for all images due to a trivial solution. We propose ranked entropy minimization to mitigate
the stability problem of the entropy minimization method and extend its applicability to continuous scenarios. Our approach explicitly structures the prediction difficulty through a progressive masking strategy. Specifically, it gradually
aligns the model’s probability distributions across
different levels of prediction difficulty while preserving the rank order of entropy. The proposed method is extensively evaluated across various benchmarks, demonstrating its effectiveness
through empirical results. Our code is available
at https://github.com/pilsHan/rem

Figure 1. Our Intuition. We explicitly raise the prediction difficulty of the input images through the masking strategy. Based on
the intuition that increased difficulty decreases prediction accuracy
and increases entropy, we attempt to maintain a rank ordering of
entropy while improving consistency from original to masked predictions. Our approach addresses the problem of model collapse
in entropy minimization methods in a simple yet efficient way.

Continual test-time adaptation (CTTA) (Wang et al., 2022)
addresses the issue of error accumulation in long-sequence
domains. It mitigates the forgetting problem under continuous environmental changes and sequentially adapts to a
stream of data, facilitating the practical deployment of TTA.
Recent studies on CTTA can be broadly categorized into two
major approaches: entropy minimization (EM) (Wang et al.,
2021; Niu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2025) and consistency
regularization (CR) (Wang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024b;a).
The EM approach minimizes the entropy of predictions and
offers computational efficiency but suffers from instability
due to the risk of trivial solutions, where predictions collapse
into a single class. In contrast, the CR approach employs a
teacher-student framework (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017), updating the model conservatively to ensure stability but incurs
high computational costs. As a result, there is a trade-off
between efficiency and stability in these approaches.

1. Introduction
The real world is non-i.i.d., which demands real-time adaptation of AI applications. Deep learning models have
achieved remarkable progress in recent years; however,
performance degradation caused by distribution shifts between different domains limits the generalization capabilities (Shimodaira, 2000). Test-time adaptation (TTA) (Wang
et al., 2021) has emerged as a practical approach to address
non-stationary environmental changes by enabling models
trained on source domain to adapt in an online manner to
unlabeled target data during the test-time.
1
Ajou University 2 Korea Telecom 3 Korea University. Correspondence to: Wonjun Hwang <wjhwang@korea.ac.kr>.

Motivation. Our approach stems from the intuitive observation that a model’s predictions for an explicitly informationdegraded image are inaccurate and have high entropy compared to its predictions for a complete image (as illustrated

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

