Geometric Generative Modeling with Noise-Conditioned Graph Networks

Peter Pao-Huang 1 Mitchell Black 2 Xiaojie Qiu 1 3

Abstract

biology, atoms or amino acids serve as nodes with 3D coordinates while chemical properties constitute the features,
accelerating the design of novel drugs (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018; Bengio et al., 2021) and predicting the structure
of proteins (Watson et al., 2023; Jumper et al., 2021). In
emerging fields like spatial single-cell genomics, geometric graphs capture both the spatial distribution of cells and
their gene expression profiles, providing insights into tissue
organization and development (Qiu et al., 2024).

Generative modeling of graphs with spatial structure is essential across many applications from
computer graphics to spatial genomics. Recent
flow-based generative models have achieved impressive results by gradually adding and then
learning to remove noise from these graphs. Existing models, however, use graph neural network architectures that are independent of the
noise level, limiting their expressiveness. To address this issue, we introduce Noise-Conditioned
Graph Networks (NCGNs), a class of graph neural networks that dynamically modify their architecture according to the noise level during generation. Our theoretical and empirical analysis
reveals that as noise increases, (1) graphs require
information from increasingly distant neighbors
and (2) graphs can be effectively represented at
lower resolutions. Based on these insights, we
develop Dynamic Message Passing (DMP), a specific instantiation of NCGNs that adapts both the
range and resolution of message passing to the
noise level. DMP consistently outperforms noiseindependent architectures on a variety of domains
including 3D point clouds, spatiotemporal transcriptomics, and images. Code is available at
https://github.com/peterpaohuang/ncgn.

To model the distribution of these geometric graphs, recent
advances in generative modeling, particularly flow-based
approaches such as diffusion (Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019) and flow-matching (Lipman et al., 2022; Tong
et al., 2023) models, have shown remarkable success in
many scientific domains (Jing et al., 2023; Pao-Huang et al.,
2023; Luo et al., 2022). These methods work by learning an
iterative transformation between a simple prior distribution
(typically Gaussian) and the target data distribution. Their
effectiveness can be partially attributed to the surprisingly
simple training objective: transform or interpolate the data
distribution towards a Gaussian and then learn to reverse
this transformation. Colloquially, the interpolation towards
a Gaussian can be called a noising processing.
While existing graph neural networks for these flow-based
generative modeling have demonstrated promising results,
they rely on a fixed (aka noise-independent) graph neural network architecture across the noising process. For instance,
previous works (Corso et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2021; Jing
et al., 2022) construct message-passing operations using a
constant radius or k-nearest neighbor graph independent of
the noise level. This static approach limits the ability to
fully capture how the underlying graph signal evolves under
different noise levels in the generative process.

1. Introduction
Geometric graphs, defined by both features and positional
information, are a powerful representation in many scientific domains. In computer vision and graphics, these graphs
represent 3D point clouds and shapes, enabling generative
applications like shape synthesis (Nash et al., 2020) and
point cloud generation (Yang et al., 2019). In molecular

Contributions. This limitation motivates our investigation
into the behavior of geometric graphs under varying noise
levels. Through an information-theoretic analysis, we prove
that as noise increases, recovering the underlying graph
signal requires aggregating information from increasingly
distant neighbors. This theoretical finding has two important
implications. First, message-passing architectures should
increase their connectivity radius with the noise level since
local structure becomes less informative with increasing
noise. We show that this holds in practice by analyzing the

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Computer Science, University of California San
Diego 3 Department of Genetics, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Peter Pao-Huang <peterph@cs.stanford.edu>, Xiaojie
Qiu <xiaojie@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

