Accelerating PDE-Constrained Optimization by the Derivative of Neural
Operators

Ze Cheng 1 Zhuoyu Li 1 Xiaoqiang Wang 1 Jianing Huang 1 Zhizhou Zhang 1 Zhongkai Hao 2 Hang Su 2

Abstract
PDE-Constrained Optimization (PDECO) problems can be accelerated significantly by employing gradient-based methods with surrogate models like neural operators compared to traditional
numerical solvers. However, this approach faces
two key challenges: (1) Data inefficiency: Lack
of efficient data sampling and effective training for neural operators, particularly for optimization purpose. (2) Instability: High risk of
optimization derailment due to inaccurate neural operator predictions and gradients. To address these challenges, we propose a novel framework: (1) Optimization-oriented training: we
leverage data from full steps of traditional optimization algorithms and employ a specialized
training method for neural operators. (2) Enhanced derivative learning: We introduce a
Virtual-Fourier layer to enhance derivative learning within the neural operator, a crucial aspect
for gradient-based optimization. (3) Hybrid optimization: We implement a hybrid approach that
integrates neural operators with numerical solvers,
providing robust regularization for the optimization process. Our extensive experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our model in accurately learning operators and their derivatives.
Furthermore, our hybrid optimization approach
exhibits robust convergence.1

Figure 1: Illustration of Error Accumulation in GradientBased Optimization with Neural Operators. Blue Trajectory:
Represents the optimization path (λt , ût ), where ût is predicted by the neural operator. Red Trajectory: Represents
the trajectory of the numerical solutions ut corresponding to
λt . While the optimization process proceeds along the blue
trajectory guided by the neural operator, the red trajectory of
numerical solution may deviate significantly, highlighting
the potential for error accumulation and suboptimal convergence.
parameter space Λ,
min ˜
J(λ)
λ∈Λ

(1)

const. C(u, λ) = 0

1. Introduction

where ˜
J(λ) := J(u(λ), λ) is the objective function, and C
is a differential operator that describes a PDE with design
parameter λ and solution u. For clarity, we will henceforth
omit the tilde from J where the meaning is unambiguous.
While gradient-free optimization methods like Bayesian
optimization (Snoek et al., 2012) and particle swarm optimization (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995) are effective for
low-dimensional design spaces, gradient-based methods
are generally more suitable for high-dimensional PDECO
problems, for example, shape optimization (Sokolowski
& Zolésio, 1992) and topology optimization (Bendsoe &

In this paper, we consider solving PDE-constrained optimization problems (PDECO) in a high-dimension design
1
Bosch (China) Invest Ltd., Shanghai, China 2 Dept. of Comp.
Sci. & Techn., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch
Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Ze
Cheng <ze.cheng@cn.bosch.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/zechengai/Opt RNO.

1

