On Mitigating Affinity Bias through Bandits with Evolving Biased Feedback

Matthew Faw 1 Constantine Caramanis 2 Jessica Hoffmann 3

Abstract

unconscious bias is pervasive, and that it shapes even wellmeaning individuals’ assessment of their peers (FitzGerald
& Hurst, 2017; Oberai & Anand, 2018; Pager & Shepherd,
2008; Tate & Page, 2020; Holroyd et al., 2017; Buetow,
2019; Sukhera, 2019). These skewed assessments in turn impact employment (Bertrand & Mullainathan, 2004; Bohnet
et al., 2016; Uhlmann & Cohen, 2005; Stoica et al., 2020;
Crawford et al., 2018; Somashekhar, 2014). We want to design systemic mitigation strategies which relieve individuals
of the difficult task of giving an unbiased assessment, while
still leading towards a fairer outcome.

Unconscious bias has been shown to influence
how we assess our peers, with consequences for
hiring, promotions and admissions. In this work,
we focus on affinity bias, the component of unconscious bias which leads us to prefer people
who are similar to us, despite no deliberate intention of favoritism. In a world where the people
hired today become part of the hiring committee of tomorrow, we are particularly interested
in understanding (and mitigating) how affinity
bias affects this feedback loop. This problem has
two distinctive features: 1) we only observe the
biased value of a candidate, but we want to optimize with respect to their real value 2) the bias
towards a candidate with a specific set of traits
depends on the fraction of people in the hiring
committee with the same set of traits. We introduce a new bandits variant that exhibits those
two features, which we call affinity bandits. Unsurprisingly, classical algorithms such as UCB
often fail to identify the best arm in this setting.
We prove a new instance-dependent regret lower
bound, which is larger than that in the standard
bandit setting by a multiplicative function of K.
Since we treat rewards that are time-varying and
dependent on the policy’s past actions, deriving
this lower bound requires developing proof techniques beyond the standard bandit techniques. Finally, we design an elimination-style algorithm
which nearly matches this regret, despite never
observing the real rewards.

In this work, we choose to focus solely on one of the key
aspects of unconscious bias: affinity (or similarity) bias
(Huang et al., 2019; Oberai & Anand, 2018; Russell et al.,
2019; Clifton et al., 2019). This bias captures the human tendency to favor people who are similar to ourselves, whether
it’s because of our skill-set, our language, or even the school
we attended. We are particularly interested in the feedback
loop which naturally arises in hiring: today’s hired candidate will be part of tomorrow’s hiring committee. Therefore,
the more people with a specific set of attributes are hired, the
higher the proportion of them in future decision processes,
which means the stronger the overall affinity bias will be
towards this set of attributes.
These types of decision-making processes with feedback
loops have been modeled by non-stationary multi-armed
bandits (Gittins, 1979; Whittle, 1988; Heidari et al., 2016;
Levine et al., 2017; Malik et al., 2022; 2023; Kleinberg &
Immorlica, 2018). In this framework, the decision-maker
can interact with the system by pulling an arm, and the
system can react by adapting its reward based on the past
actions. Prior work has studied both stochastic systems and
adversarial systems. As we are interested in modeling an
ever-present unconscious effect–as opposed to conscious,
chosen discriminatory actions–we assume the system reacts
in a stochastic way.

1. Introduction
“Unconscious bias” is a term coined to designate stereotypes
(positive or negative) that we hold outside of our awareness. In recent years, numerous studies have argued that

One key feature of our problem is that although the perceived rewards evolve, the real reward of each arm remains
unchanged. This is in stark contrast to most of the nonstationary bandits literature, in which it is assumed that
previous actions change the environment. In our case, the
environment remains unchanged, but as the composition
of the hiring committee changes, so does its overall un-

1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 The University of Texas at
Austin 3 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Matthew Faw
<mfaw3@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

