Machines and Mathematical Mutations: Using GNNs to Characterize Quiver
Mutation Classes
Jesse He 1 2 Helen Jenne 2 Herman Chau 3 Davis Brown 2 Mark Raugas 2 Sara Billey 3 Henry Kvinge 2 3

Abstract

an important role in mathematics research, modern machine
learning tools like deep neural networks have only recently
begun to be more broadly applied. From the other direction,
increasing attention in machine learning has been given to
whether complex models like neural networks can learn to
reason when faced with mathematical or algorithmic tasks.
For example, the phenomenon of algorithmic alignment in
graph neural networks is known to improve the sample complexity of such networks when compared to networks with
similar expressive power (Dudzik & Veličković, 2022; Xu
et al., 2020), and graph neural networks remain competitive
with transformers for recognizing local subgraph structures
(Sanford et al., 2024).

Machine learning is becoming an increasingly
valuable tool in mathematics, enabling one to
identify subtle patterns across collections of examples so vast that they would be impossible for
a single researcher to feasibly review and analyze. In this work, we use graph neural networks
to investigate quiver mutation—an operation that
transforms one quiver (or directed multigraph)
into another—which is central to the theory of
cluster algebras with deep connections to geometry, topology, and physics. In the study of cluster
algebras, the question of mutation equivalence
is of fundamental concern: given two quivers,
can one efficiently determine if one quiver can
be transformed into the other through a sequence
of mutations? In this paper, we use graph neural
networks and AI explainability techniques to independently discover mutation equivalence criteria
for quivers of type D̃. Along the way, we also
show that even without explicit training to do so,
our model captures structure within its hidden representation that allows us to reconstruct known criteria from type D, adding to the growing evidence
that modern machine learning models are capable
of learning abstract and parsimonious rules from
mathematical data.

Of course, working mathematicians often need more than
just a model that achieves high accuracy on a given task.
In many cases, a model is only useful if it learns features
that can provide insight to a mathematician. Further, one
must be able to extract this insight from the model. In this
work, we consider the specific problem of characterizing
quiver mutation equivalence classes. We show first that in
this setting a graph neural network learns representations
that align with known non-trivial mathematical theory. We
then show how one can use a performant model to generate
a concise conjecture, which we then prove.
Introduced by Fomin and Zelevinsky in (Fomin & Zelevinsky, 2002), quiver mutation is a combinatorial operation on
quivers (directed multigraphs) which arises from the notion
of a cluster algebra, an algebraic construction with deep connections to geometry and physics. Quiver mutation defines
an equivalence relation on quivers (that is, it partitions the
set of quivers into disjoint subsets). Two quivers belong to
the same equivalence class if we can apply some appropriate sequence of quiver mutations to the first and obtain the
second. Identifying whether such a sequence of mutations
exists is generally a hard problem (Soukup, 2023). In some
cases, however, a concise characterization which involves
checking some simple conditions is known. For example,
Theorem 5.1 (Buan & Vatne, 2008) and Theorem 5.3 (Vatne,
2010) tell us that we can check whether a quiver belongs to
types A or D by verifying certain conditions relating to the
presence of specific structural motifs. Henrich (2011) provides a complete description of Dynkin and affine Dynkin
type quivers in terms of certain families of infinite graphs.

1. Introduction
Examples play a fundamental role in the mathematical research workflow. Exploration of a large number of examples builds intuition, supports or disproves conjectures, and
points the way towards patterns that are later formalized as
theorems. While computer-aided simulation has long played
1

Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California San
Diego, San Diego, CA, USA 2 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, University
of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Jesse He
<jeh020@ucsd.edu>, Henry Kvinge <henry.kvinge@pnnl.gov>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

