Hierarchical Masked Autoregressive Models with Low-Resolution Token Pivots

Guangting Zheng 1

†

Yehao Li 2 Yingwei Pan 2 Jiajun Deng 3 Ting Yao 2 Yanyong Zhang 1 Tao Mei 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, GPT-style Autoregressive (AR) models have
brought a powerful revolution in Natural Language Processing (NLP), and become the model of choice in designing
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Team
et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024; Team et al.,
2024). The dominant training paradigm in AR models is to
predict the next word/token in a sequence conditioned on
previous estimated words, i.e., next token prediction. This
prevailing paradigm has shown excellent scalability via scaling laws and generalization in zero-shot settings, paving a
reliable way towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI).

Autoregressive models have emerged as a powerful generative paradigm for visual generation.
The current de-facto standard of next token prediction commonly operates over a single-scale
sequence of dense image tokens, and is incapable
of utilizing global context especially for early
tokens prediction. In this paper, we introduce
a new autoregressive design to model a hierarchy from a few low-resolution image tokens to
the typical dense image tokens, and delve into a
thorough hierarchical dependency across multiscale image tokens. Technically, we present a
Hierarchical Masked Autoregressive models (HiMAR) that pivot on low-resolution image tokens
to trigger hierarchical autoregressive modeling
in a multi-phase manner. Hi-MAR learns to predict a few image tokens in low resolution, functioning as intermediary pivots to reflect global
structure, in the first phase. Such pivots act as
the additional guidance to strengthen the next autoregressive modeling phase by shaping global
structural awareness of typical dense image tokens. A new Diffusion Transformer head is further devised to amplify the global context among
all tokens for mask token prediction. Extensive
evaluations on both class-conditional and text-toimage generation tasks demonstrate that Hi-MAR
outperforms typical AR baselines, while requiring
fewer computational costs. Code is available at
https://github.com/HiDream-ai/himar.

Inspired by the scaling successes of AR models in NLP, a
steady of attempts have been attained to scale up AR models
in CV field for visual generation (e.g., text-to-image generation (Sun et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024;
He et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2024a) and text-to-video generation (Ren et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024b;a)). Specifically,
after decomposing input image into a sequence of image
patches/tokens, one direction (Esser et al., 2021; Lee et al.,
2022; Sun et al., 2024; Zhuo et al., 2024) directly adopts
GPT-style AR models with causal attention (see Figure 1
(a)), which enforces next token prediction by only attending
to preceding tokens. Another direction commonly adopts
BERT-style AR models with bidirectional attention (see Figure 1 (b)), e.g., Masked Autoregressive model (MAR) (Li
et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024), that simultaneously predicts
multiple masked tokens in a random order by attending to
all masked and unmasked tokens. These AR models with
next token prediction objective, while being dominant in
NLP, have not yet been scaled effectively in visual generation, especially for visual content creation with complex
semantics. Accordingly, in large-scale text-to-image/video
generation, typical AR models tend to be less effective when
compared to other generative models (e.g., Diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Esser
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023) and Diffusion Transformer (Peebles & Xie, 2023; Bao et al., 2023;
Lu et al., 2024b; Zhu et al., 2024)). This might be attributed
to two inherent limitations in typical AR models: (1) Most
AR models capitalize on vector quantization process to decompose images into discrete tokens, thereby inevitably
resulting in information loss. (2) Both GPT-style and BERTstyle AR models solely hinge on a single-scale sequence of

†
This work was performed when Guangting Zheng was visiting HiDream.ai as a research intern. 1 University of Science and
Technology of China, Anhui, China 2 HiDream.ai Inc, Beijing,
China 3 The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. Correspondence to: Yingwei Pan <panyw.ustc@gmail.com>, Yanyong
Zhang <yanyongz@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

