POQD: Performance-Oriented Query Decomposer for Multi-vector retrieval

Yaoyang Liu 1 Junlin Li 2 Yinjun Wu 2 Zhen Chen 3

Abstract

Callan, 2021; Zhao et al., 2024c). It underpins many systems, in particular, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
frameworks (Karpukhin et al., 2020), where retrieval accuracy is paramount. Multi-Vector Retrieval (MVR) enhances
retrieval accuracy by leveraging multiple representations for
finer-grained matching (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020). MVR
methods, e.g., ColBERT (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020), decompose queries and documents into smaller units, say tokens.
For each query token, we identify the most similar document piece to it and calculate their similarity, which is
referred to as the MaxSim operation in (Khattab & Zaharia,
2020). Such scores are then aggregated across all query tokens as the overall query-document similarity. Compared to
standard dense retrieval solutions, this strategy more effectively captures the fine-grained similarities between queries
and documents, enhancing performance in information retrieval (IR) tasks (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020; Santhanam
et al., 2022b) and retrieval-based systems like RAG (Xu
et al., 2024).

Although Multi-Vector Retrieval (MVR) has
achieved the state of the art on many information
retrieval (IR) tasks, its performance highly depends on how to decompose queries into smaller
pieces, say phrases or tokens. However, optimizing query decomposition for MVR performance is
not end-to-end differentiable. Even worse, jointly
solving this problem and training the downstream
retrieval-based systems, say RAG systems could
be highly inefficient. To overcome these challenges, we propose Performance-Oriented Query
Decomposer (POQD), a novel query decomposition framework for MVR. POQD leverages one
LLM for query decomposition and searches the
optimal prompt with an LLM-based optimizer.
We further propose an end-to-end training algorithm to alternatively optimize the prompt for
query decomposition and the downstream models. This algorithm can achieve superior MVR
performance at a reasonable training cost as our
theoretical analysis suggests. POQD can be integrated seamlessly into arbitrary retrieval-based
systems such as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems. Extensive empirical studies on representative RAG-based QA tasks show
that POQD outperforms existing query decomposition strategies in both retrieval performance
and end-to-end QA accuracy. POQD is available
at https://github.com/PKU-SDS-lab/
POQD-ICML25.

In this paper, we aim to develop a new MVR strategy to
enhance the performance of arbitrary retrieval-based systems, with a particular focus on RAG systems. Note that
traditional MVR approaches, in particular, ColBERT (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020), decompose queries at the token level.
However, as revealed in Section 2, decomposing queries
into slightly more coarse-grained units, such as phrases,
can yield better results for tasks like retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG). Furthermore, we observe that the performance of these tasks highly depends on how we decompose
queries. Considering that the space of all possible decomposed sub-queries is exponentially large, this thus raises one
critical question, i.e., how can we effectively generate subqueries of arbitrary granularity to optimize the performance
of downstream retrieval-based systems?

1. Introduction

Query decomposition has been widely studied in question
answering (QA), especially in multi-hop QA. It aims to
break down complicated questions into simpler components,
allowing Large Language Models (LLMs) to reason step by
step, thereby enhancing QA accuracy. Various question decomposition strategies exist, such as (Li et al., 2024), which
prompts LLMs with manually crafted prompts for query
decomposition. However, as shown in Figure 1, applying
the resulting sub-queries to MVR could retrieve an incorrect image, ultimately generating a wrong answer in the

Dense retrieval retrieves documents by evaluating their similarity scores with user queries (Mitra et al., 2018; Gao &
1

School of Infomation, Renmin University 2 School of
Computer Science, Peking University 3 Fundamental Industry Training Center, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Yinjun Wu <wuyinjun@pku.edu.cn>, Zhen Chen
<zhenchen@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

