Physics-Informed Weakly Supervised Learning for Interatomic Potentials
Makoto Takamoto 1 Viktor Zaverkin 1 Mathias Niepert 1 2

Abstract

As a result, they are typically limited to small- or mediumsized systems and short simulation times, which constrains
their applicability and the accuracy of predicted properties. Classical force fields can extend these length and time
scales, providing a computationally efficient alternative to
first-principles approaches but often lack accuracy. Machinelearned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) offer a promising
compromise between the accuracy of first-principles methods and the efficiency of classical force fields (Smith et al.,
2017; Chanussot et al., 2021; Unke et al., 2021; Merchant
et al., 2023; Kovács et al., 2023; Batatia et al., 2023).

Machine learning plays an increasingly important
role in computational chemistry and materials science, complementing expensive ab initio and firstprinciples methods. However, machine-learned
interatomic potentials (MLIPs) often struggle
with generalization and robustness, leading to unphysical energy and force predictions in atomistic simulations. To address this, we propose
a physics-informed, weakly supervised training
framework for MLIPs. Our method introduces
two novel loss functions: one based on Taylor
expansions of the potential energy and another
enforcing conservative force constraints. This
approach enhances accuracy, particularly in lowdata regimes, and reduces the reliance on large,
expensive training datasets. Extensive experiments across benchmark datasets show up to 2×
reductions in energy and force errors for multiple baseline models. Additionally, our method
improves the stability of molecular dynamics simulations and facilitates effective fine-tuning of ML
foundation models on sparse, high-accuracy ab
initio data. Code and scripts to reproduce the experiments are available at https://github.
com/nec-research/PICPS-ML4Sci.

Despite their promise, MLIPs face significant challenges.
In particular, they require training datasets that comprehensively cover both configurational (atomic positions) and
compositional (atomic types) spaces, typically generated via
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations based on ab initio or
first-principles methods. Due to the high computational cost
of these simulations, the resulting datasets are often sparse,
limiting the ability of MLIPs to generalize to new molecular
and material systems.
Active learning has been used to address the challenge of
data sparsity (Li et al., 2015; Vandermause et al., 2020; Zaverkin & Kästner, 2021; Zaverkin et al., 2022; van der Oord
et al., 2023; Zaverkin et al., 2024b), but it still relies on the
generation of a substantial amount of first-principles data,
typically using DFT, to train an initial model capable of
guiding phase space exploration through extended MD simulations. This motivates the development of methods that
can complement active learning by reducing the reliance on
expensive data acquisition. Moreover, MLIPs often suffer
from limited generalization and robustness during MD simulations, exhibiting sensitivity to outliers and local structural
perturbations. These issues stem largely from the insufficient coverage of configurational and compositional spaces
in existing datasets and data generation workflows.

1. Introduction
Ab initio and first-principles methods are essential for the
computational exploration of molecular and material properties in the chemical sciences and engineering (Parrinello,
1997; Carloni et al., 2002; Iftimie et al., 2005). However, commonly employed ab initio and first-principles approaches such as coupled cluster (CC) (Purvis & Bartlett,
1982; Bartlett & Musiał, 2007) and density functional theory
(DFT) (Hohenberg & Kohn, 1964; Kohn & Sham, 1965),
respectively, require substantial computational resources.

Contributions. This paper addresses the challenges of training machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) with
limited data by proposing a physics-informed weakly supervised learning (PIWSL) approach. The method enables an
accurate prediction of potential energies and atomic forces
in systems subjected to local perturbations. The main contributions are: (i) We introduce PIWSL based on fundamental physical principles, such as the conservative nature of

1

NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany 2 University
of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany. Correspondence to: Makoto
Takamoto <makoto.takamoto@neclab.eu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

