SPHINX: Structural Prediction using Hypergraph Inference Network

Iulia Duta 1 Pietro Liò 1

Abstract

learning community (Leskovec et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2020),
the availability of hypergraph datasets is much more limited. Recent work (Wang & Kleinberg, 2024) highlights two
potential causes for the lack of higher-order data. On one
hand, current technology used for collecting information is
mostly designed or optimised to detect pairwise interactions.
Furthermore, even in the exceptional case when the data is
gathered in a higher-order format, the published version is
often released in a reduced, pairwise form.

The importance of higher-order relations is widely
recognized in numerous real-world systems. However, annotating them is a tedious and sometimes
even impossible task. Consequently, current approaches for data modelling either ignore the
higher-order interactions altogether or simplify
them into pairwise connections. To facilitate
higher-order processing, even when a hypergraph
structure is not available, we introduce SPHINX,
a model that learns to infer a latent hypergraph
structure in an unsupervised way, solely from the
final task-dependent signal. To ensure broad applicability, we design the model to be end-to-end
differentiable, capable of generating a discrete
hypergraph structure compatible with any modern hypergraph networks, and easily optimizable
without requiring additional regularization losses.
Through extensive ablation studies and experiments conducted on four challenging datasets, we
demonstrate that our model is capable of inferring
suitable latent hypergraphs in both transductive
and inductive tasks. Moreover, the inferred latent
hypergraphs are interpretable and contribute to
enhancing the final performance, outperforming
existing methods for hypergraph prediction.

Therefore, to preserve the higher-order information, it is
crucial to develop methods for learning the hypergraph
structure in an unsupervised way, only from point-wise
observations. To create a general, widely-applicable model,
we identify a set of key desiderata. 1) The model should
be applicable to a broad type of tasks. This is a challenge
for most existing hypergraph predictors, which optimize
a single hypergraph, limiting their usefulness to transductive setups. 2) The model should be compatible with
any hypergraph processing architecture. This requires
our inference model to be fully differentiable while producing a sparse and discrete hypergraph structure. Existing
methods often fall short, as they are either only partially differentiable (relying on techniques such as top-k selection or
thresholding to enforce sparsity) or restricted to generating
only weighted hypergraphs. 3) A powerful model should
be easy to optimise. This is a limitation exhibited by most
of the modern architectures for which predicting a suitable
hypergraph requires various types of regularization losses.

1. Introduction

Motivated by these, we introduce Structural Prediction using Hypergraph Inference Network (SPHINX), a model for
unsupervised latent hypergraph inference, that can be used
in conjunction with any recent models designed for hypergraph processing. SPHINX models the hyperedge discovery
as a clustering problem, adapting a soft clustering algorithm
to sequentially identify subsets of highly correlated nodes,
corresponding to each hyperedge. To produce a discrete
hypergraph structure, we take advantage of the recent development in differentiable k-subset sampling (Ahmed et al.,
2023; Minervini et al., 2023), obtaining a more effective
training procedure, that eliminates the necessity for heavy
regularisation. While classical selection methods such as
Gumbel-Softmax (Jang et al., 2017) fail to control the sparsity of the hypergraph, our constrained k-subset sampling
produces a more accurate latent structure.

Graphs are universally recognized as the standard representation for relational data. However, their capabilities
are restricted to modelling pairwise connections. Emerging research shows that real-world applications including
neuroscience (Guo et al., 2021), chemistry (Jost & Mulas,
2018), biology (Viñas et al., 2022), often exhibit group interactions, involving more than two elements. This leads
to the development of a new field dedicated to representing
higher-order relations, in the form of hypergraphs. However, while graph datasets are widespread in the machine
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Cambridge.
Correspondence to: Iulia Duta <id366@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

