Clients Collaborate: Flexible Differentially Private Federated Learning with
Guaranteed Improvement of Utility-Privacy Trade-off

Yuecheng Li 1 Lele Fu 1 Tong Wang 2 Jian Lou 1 Bin Chen 3 Lei Yang 1 Jian Shen 4 Zibin Zheng 1
Chuan Chen 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017), a privacypreserving distributed machine learning paradigm, enables
multiple parties to jointly learn a model under global
scheduling while keeping the data from leaving the local
client. Nevertheless, recent work has shown that an attacker (i.e., the server or a particular client) can steal raw
training data (Zhu et al., 2019; Jeon et al., 2021) and even
specific private information (Fowl et al., 2022) by inverting
parameters (gradients) uploaded from other clients. To further enhance privacy safeguards, differential privacy (DP)
(Dwork, 2006; 2010) has become the prevailing standard in
privacy-preserving machine learning (Jain et al., 2018; Levy
et al., 2021). This privacy computing technique has proven
effective in federated learning, guarding against client (user)
privacy breaches by introducing random noise to uploaded
updates (McMahan et al., 2018; Jain et al., 2021; Malekmohammadi et al., 2024). Unfortunately, randomized mechanisms like DP may result in a sacrifice of model utility, especially as the number of communication rounds increases
(Yuan et al., 2023). Overall, the key issue is how to achieve
an improved utility-privacy trade-off in differentially private
federated learning (DPFL), which constitutes a novel and
challenging research direction (Bietti et al., 2022; Cheng
et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Tsoy et al., 2024).

To defend against privacy leakage of user data,
differential privacy is widely used in federated
learning, but it is not free. The addition of
noise randomly disrupts the semantic integrity
of the model and this disturbance accumulates
with increased communication rounds. In this
paper, we introduce a novel federated learning
framework with rigorous privacy guarantees,
named FedCEO, designed to strike a trade-off
between model utility and user privacy by
letting clients “Collaborate with Each Other”.
Specifically, we perform efficient tensor low-rank
proximal optimization on stacked local model
parameters at the server, demonstrating its
capability to flexibly truncate high-frequency
components in spectral space. This capability
implies that our FedCEO can effectively recover
the disrupted semantic information by smoothing
the global semantic space for different privacy
settings and continuous training processes.
Moreover, we improve the SOTA
√ utility-privacy
trade-off bound by order of d, where d is the
input dimension. We illustrate our theoretical
results with experiments on representative
datasets and observe significant performance
improvements and strict privacy guarantees under
different privacy settings. The code is available at
https://github.com/6lyc/FedCEO_
Collaborate-with-Each-Other.

Considering the randomness of the introduced noise for
differential privacy, the specific semantic information that
gets corrupted can differ across individual clients. Meanwhile, there exists a certain similarity between the data
distributions of each client, leading to the correlation in
their semantic spaces. Therefore, we propose to mitigate
the impact of DP noise on the utility of the global model in
federated learning by exploiting the semantic complementarity between the noisy parameters of different clients. To
substantiate our motivation, we visualize the smoothness
of the global semantic space at different stages of training
(see the heat map in Figure 1). Specifically, we compute
Laplacian regularization values for the last linear layer of
the backbone along the client-side direction, which serves as
a metric for assessing the smoothness of the global semantic
space (Yin et al., 2015; Pang & Cheung, 2017). Furthermore,

1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 Texas A&M University, Texas, USA 3 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen,
China 4 Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, China. Correspondence to:
Chuan Chen <chenchuan@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

