MF-LAL: Drug Compound Generation Using Multi-Fidelity
Latent Space Active Learning

Peter Eckmann 1 Dongxia Wu 1 Germano Heinzelmann 2 Michael K. Gilson 3 4 Rose Yu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Current generative models for drug discovery primarily use molecular docking as an oracle to
guide the generation of active compounds. However, such models are often not useful in practice because even compounds with high docking
scores do not consistently show real-world experimental activity. More accurate methods for activity prediction exist, such as molecular dynamics based binding free energy calculations, but
they are too computationally expensive to use in
a generative model. To address this challenge, we
propose Multi-Fidelity Latent space Active Learning (MF-LAL), a generative modeling framework that integrates a set of oracles with varying
cost-accuracy tradeoffs. Using active learning,
we train a surrogate model for each oracle and
use these surrogates to guide generation of compounds with high predicted activity. Unlike previous approaches that separately learn the surrogate
model and generative model, MF-LAL combines
the generative and multi-fidelity surrogate models
into a single framework, allowing for more accurate activity prediction and higher quality samples.
Our experiments on two disease-relevant proteins
show that MF-LAL produces compounds with
significantly better binding free energy scores
than other single and multi-fidelity approaches
(∼ 50% improvement in mean binding free energy score). The code is available at https://
github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/MF-LAL.

Generative models for de novo drug design have gained
significant interest in machine learning for their promised
ability to quickly generate new compounds for specific applications. However, generating compounds with real-world
biological activity remains a fundamental challenge (Handa
et al., 2023; Coley et al., 2020). One of the main difficulties
is the computational evaluation of compound-protein binding affinities. The generated compounds are often highly
novel, so an activity predictor trained with existing experimental data is insufficient due to poor out-of-distribution
generalization (Chatterjee et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2022). Instead, physics-based methods that model 3D interactions
between compound and target are commonly used.
Due to its speed, molecular docking is the prevalent physicsbased method to evaluate novel compounds by generative
models (Eckmann et al., 2022; Jeon & Kim, 2020; Lee et al.,
2023; Noh et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2022;
Guan et al., 2023a;b). However, docking is a relatively poor
predictor of activity (Pinzi & Rastelli, 2019; Handa et al.,
2023; Coley et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2022), so it would
be desirable to apply more accurate binding free energy
calculation techniques (Pinzi & Rastelli, 2019; Feng et al.,
2022). These techniques, based on molecular dynamics simulations, are currently considered the most reliable approach
to predict affinity (Moore et al., 2023; Cournia et al., 2021).
However, they have not been used by generative models
due to their high computational cost (Thomas et al., 2023),
with a single compound-protein pair taking hours to days to
simulate on a powerful computer (Wan et al., 2020). Thus,
neither docking nor binding free energy techniques alone
can guide the real-world application of generative models.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States 2 Departamento de Fı́sica,
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Brazil 3 Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, UC San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States 4 Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, UC San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States.
Correspondence to: Peter Eckmann <peckmann@ucsd.edu>,
Michael K. Gilson <mgilson@health.ucsd.edu>, Rose Yu
<roseyu@ucsd.edu>.

Multi-fidelity surrogate models aim to fuse multiple data
sources as oracles spanning a range of accuracy and cost
(Fernández-Godino, 2023).They are frequently learned using an active learning approach, where a model selects or
generates queries that it is most uncertain about to send to
a chosen oracle (Ren et al., 2021). The results from the
oracle are then added to the training data of the model. We
will focus on “query synthesis” approaches (Angluin, 1988),
where the model generates its own queries to send to the
oracles, speeding up learning compared to approaches that

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

