Flow Matching for Denoised Social Recommendation

Yinxuan Huang 1 * Ke Liang 1 * Zhuofan Dong 2 Xiaodong Qu 3 Tianxiang Wang 1 Yue Han 1 Jingao Xu 1
Bin Zhou 1 Ye Wang 1

Abstract
Graph-based social recommendation (SR) models
suffer from various noises in social graphs, hindering their recommendation performances. Both
graph-level redundancy and graph-level missing
will indeed influence the social graph structures,
further influencing the message propagation procedure of graph neural networks (GNNs). Generative models, especially diffusion models, are
usually used to reconstruct and recover the data
in better quality from noisy input. Motivated
by it, a few works take attempts on it for social
recommendation. However, they can only handle isotropic Gaussian noise and fail to address
anisotropic noise. Moreover, an anisotropic relational structures in social graphs are commonly
seen, which existing models cannot sufficiently
utilize the graph structures, which constraints the
capacity of noise removal and recommendation
performances. Compared to the diffusion strategy, the flow matching strategy better handles
anisotropic noise, as it preserves data structures
more effectively during the learning process. Inspired by this, we propose RecFlow, the first flowbased SR model. Concretely, RecFlow performs
flow-based method on the structure representations of social graphs. Then, a conditional learning procedure is designed for optimization. Extensive performances prove the promising performances of our RecFlow from six aspects, including superiority, effectiveness, robustnesses,
sensitivity, convergence and visualization. Code
are available at §.

Figure 1. Illustration of denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDPM) and flow matching based models where blue and red
nodes represent normal and noisy data. Compared to DDPM, flowbased models can get better discriminative capacity, further leading
to better denoise performance.

1. Introduction
As online content continues to grow exponentially, the challenges of managing information sensitivity and urgency
have become increasingly pressing (Lin et al., 2025; Wang
et al., 2024), driving the rise of recommendation systems
(Liu et al., 2023b). Despite advancements, recommendation
systems still face challenges such as collaborative information sparsity. The rise of social media has shifted their
focus from user-item interactions to integrating social networks to enhance recommendations. By leveraging social
relationships as auxiliary information, social recommendation (SR) systems can mitigate these issues, making SR
a key research area (Liang et al., 2023). Early models of
SR relied on matrix factorization (Salakhutdinov & Mnih,
2007; Yang et al., 2013), which drew upon social theories
to exploit the influence of nearby or connected users on
individual preferences. Additionally, social relationships
naturally form graph-structured data, making graph neural
networks (GNNs) an effective tool for graph representation learning (Wang et al., 2023a; Dai et al., 2023). GNNs
have demonstrated exceptional performance in aggregating
neighborhood information of nodes and have been widely

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China
2
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States 3 Harbin
Institute of Technology(Shenzhen), Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
Correspondence to: Ye Wang <Yewang@nudt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

