KGMark: A Diffusion Watermark for Knowledge Graphs

Hongrui Peng * 1 Haolang Lu * 1 Yuanlong Yu 1 Weiye Fu 1 Kun Wang 2 Guoshun Nan 1

Abstract

KGMark
Embedding

Input Graph
Graph Neural
Encoder

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are ubiquitous in numerous real-world applications, and watermarking facilitates protecting intellectual property and
preventing potential harm from AI-generated content. Existing watermarking methods mainly focus on static plain text or image data, while they
can hardly be applied to dynamic graphs due to
spatial and temporal variations of structured data.
This motivates us to propose KGMark, the first
graph watermarking framework that aims to generate robust, detectable, and transparent diffusion
fingerprints for dynamic KG data. Specifically,
we propose a novel clustering-based alignment
method to adapt the watermark to spatial variations. Meanwhile, we present a redundant embedding strategy to harden the diffusion watermark
against various attacks, facilitating the robustness
of the watermark to the temporal variations. Additionally, we introduce a novel learnable mask
matrix to improve the transparency of diffusion
fingerprints. By doing so, our KGMark properly
tackles the variation challenges of structured data.
Experiments on various public benchmarks show
the effectiveness of our proposed KGMark.

Embedding

Embedding

Watermark Transparency
assesses the impact of
watermarking on the
knowledge graph's
usability, ensuring
minimal disruption.
Watermark

Embedding

KGMark Extract

ALL DETECTED

AMR

DS3

1711

1715

Transparency
Watermark Detectability
measures the accuracy of
identifying the
watermarks presence.

Detectability
Watermark

KGMark
Embedding

Input Graph

KGMark Extract

Graph Neural
Encoder

AGAINST
ATTACTER

Watermark Robustness
evaluates the watermark's
resilience to attacks,
ensuring its durability and
integrity.

Robustness
Watermark

Figure 1. Overview of our KGMark. KGMark implements a KGE
watermarking scheme that preserves transparency, enables reliable
detection, and remains robust against various post-editing attacks.

swering (Yin et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024), and recommendation systems (Fan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019).
Deep learning-based models such as GraphRNN (You et al.,
2018), GraphVAE (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018), MolGAN (Cao & Kipf, 2022), and DiGress (Vignac et al., 2023)
have emerged as powerful tools for generating high-quality
synthetic graphs, supporting applications such as graph classification, molecular design, and structure-preserving data
augmentation in machine learning pipelines.

1. Introduction

However, existing synthetic graph generation methods may
inadvertently embed biases (Shomer et al., 2023; Dong et al.,
2022) or misleading (Yang et al., 2024a) information and are
vulnerable to malicious alterations by attackers (Zhang et al.,
2019), potentially introducing harmful content that compromises analyses or even facilitates the exploitation of realworld systems (Jiang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). Furthermore, presenting synthetic graphs as original research
can violate intellectual property rights, undermining trust in
academic and commercial environments (Smits & Borghuis,
2022; Zhu et al., 2024b). Ensuring traceability, integrity,
and copyright protection of synthetic counterparts causes a
significant amount of compute and memory footprints due
to the notorious designs (LIANG et al., 2024; Charpenay &
Schockaert, 2025), which even unnerves large corporations,
let alone individual researchers.

The growing adoption of generative models has significantly expanded the creation and utilization of synthetic
data (Bauer et al., 2024), including structured formats such
as time-series data (Das et al., 2024), tabular data (Vero
et al., 2024), and graphs (Han et al., 2025; Wang et al.,
2023). Among these, Knowledge graphs (KGs) (Ji et al.,
2022) are especially crucial due to their ability to represent complex relationships and semantic hierarchies (An
et al., 2025), making them indispensable for applications
such as semantic search (Chen et al., 2024), question an*
Equal contribution 1 Beijing University Of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Guoshun Nan <nanguo2021@bupt.edu.cn>, Kun Wang <wang.kun@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Watermarking techniques (Radford et al., 2021; Podell et al.,
2023) have proven to be effective in ensuring the authentic1

