Autonomy-of-Experts Models

Ang Lv 1 Ruobing Xie 2 Yining Qian 3 Songhao Wu 1 Xingwu Sun 2 4 Zhanhui Kang 2 Di Wang 2 Rui Yan 1 5 6

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models mostly use a
router to assign tokens to specific expert modules, activating only partial parameters and often
outperforming dense models. We argue that the
separation between the router’s decision-making
and the experts’ execution is a critical yet overlooked issue, leading to suboptimal expert selection and ineffective learning. To address this,
we propose Autonomy-of-Experts (AoE), a novel
MoE paradigm in which experts autonomously
select themselves to process inputs. AoE is based
on the insight that an expert is aware of its own
capacity to effectively process a token, an awareness reflected in the scale of its internal activations. In AoE, routers are removed; instead,
experts pre-compute internal activations for inputs and are ranked based on their activation
norms. Only the top-ranking experts proceed
with the forward pass, while the others abort.
The overhead of pre-computing activations is reduced through a low-rank weight factorization.
This self-evaluating-then-partner-comparing approach ensures improved expert selection and effective learning. We pre-train language models
having 700M up to 4B parameters, demonstrating that AoE outperforms traditional MoE models
with comparable efficiency. The code is available at https://github.com/trestad/
Autonomy-of-Experts

Expert 2

Expert 1

𝐖#

Expert 3
SiLU

)

Softmax(

𝐖!

𝐖"

Router
Input x

(a) Mixture-of-Experts

Expert 1

𝐖#

Expert 3

Expert 2

SiLU
𝐖%&

Norm.

𝐖"

𝐖!"#$

Softmax(

)

Input x

(b) Autonomy-of-Experts

Figure 1. Comparison between traditional MoE and AoE. Arrows
indicate data flow, while shadowed modules represent unused parameters or variables. (a) Traditional MoE models use a router
to assign tokens to specific experts. This separation between the
router‘s decision-making and the experts’ execution leads to suboptimal expert selection and ineffective learning. (b) In an AoE
model, experts operate autonomously. They are ranked based on
their internal activation norms, and only the top-activated experts
continue processing, while the others are terminated. The AoE
expert architecture is modified to maintain efficiency.

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China 2 Large Language Model Department, Tencent 3 Southeast
University, China 4 University of Macau 5 Engineering Research
Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MoE 6 School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University.
Correspondence to: Ruobing Xie <xrbsnowing@163.com>, Rui
Yan <ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn>.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLM) built on Mixture-of-Experts
techniques (MoE, Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2021;
Fedus et al., 2022) have gained increasing research and industrial attention (Jiang et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024; Team,

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

