Reducing Confounding Bias without Data Splitting for Causal Inference
via Optimal Transport

Yuguang Yan 1 Zongyu Li 1 Haolin Yang 1 Zeqin Yang 1 Hao Zhou 1 Ruichu Cai 1 2 Zhifeng Hao 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Causal inference aims to estimate the causal effects of
treatments for supporting decision-making, where the treatments are usually binary (Shalit et al., 2017) or continuous
(Schwab et al., 2020). The gold standard for estimating
causal effects is to conduct randomized control trials (RCTs)
(Fisher, 1936), in which the assignment of treatment for samples is completely random without relying on the covariates
of samples. However, it is usually infeasible to conduct
RCTs, and the effects are estimated from observational data
involving confounding bias, which means that the data distribution of a subpopulation receiving one value of treatment
differs from the distribution of the entire population (Hammerton & Munafò, 2021), i.e., p(x|t) ̸= p(x), where x is
the covariates and t is the treatment value.

Causal inference seeks to estimate the effect given
a treatment such as a medicine or the dosage of
a medication. To reduce the confounding bias
caused by the non-randomized treatment assignment, most existing methods reduce the shift between subpopulations receiving different treatments. However, these methods split limited training samples into smaller groups, which cuts down
the number of samples in each group, while precise distribution estimation and alignment highly
rely on a sufficient number of training samples.
In this paper, we propose a distribution alignment
paradigm without data splitting, which can be naturally applied in the settings of binary and continuous treatments. To this end, we characterize the
confounding bias by considering different probability measures of the same set including all the
training samples, and exploit the optimal transport
theory to analyze the confounding bias and outcome estimation error. Based on this, we propose
to learn balanced representations by reducing the
bias between the marginal distribution and the
conditional distribution of a treatment. As a result, data reduction caused by splitting is avoided,
and the outcome prediction model trained on one
treatment group can be generalized to the entire
population. The experiments on both binary and
continuous treatment settings demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

To address the confounding bias, most existing machine
learning methods adopt a data-splitting strategy to split samples into smaller subpopulations according to the treatment
values, and then reduce the distribution shift between different subpopulations. For binary treatments, one usually
splits training samples to the treated group receiving treatment and the control group without receiving treatment, and
then reduces the distribution shift between the two groups
(Kuang et al., 2017; Shalit et al., 2017). For continuous
treatments, the natural and widely used strategy is to split
samples into multiple groups based on their received treatments. After that, the distribution shift reduction approach
for binary treatments can be applied by considering the shift
between each pair of groups (Wang et al., 2022). However,
data splitting cuts down the number of samples in each subpopulation, and only a part of the samples are leveraged
in distribution estimation and alignment. This decreases
the performance of distribution estimation and confounding
bias reduction, which highly relies on a sufficient number
of training samples (Wang et al., 2022).

1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China 2 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),
Guangzhou, China 3 College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China.
Correspondence to: Ruichu Cai
<cairuichu@gmail.com>.

In this paper, we propose a distribution alignment paradigm
involving all the training samples without data splitting,
which can be naturally applied to effect estimation of binary and continuous treatments. Rather than reducing the
distribution shift between subpopulations receiving different treatment values in existing methods, we characterize
the distribution shift by different probability measures of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

