Text-to-CAD Generation Through Infusing Visual Feedback in
Large Language Models

Ruiyu Wang 1

†

Yu Yuan 2

†

Shizhao Sun 3 Jiang Bian 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) is indispensable for 3D
creation across industrial sectors (Deng et al., 2023). It represents 3D models through a sequence of operations known
as a parametric sequence, which combines lines, arcs, and
circles to create 2D sketches and then extrude them to form
3D models. CAD models are inherently multimodal, as they
are constructed using parametric sequences for precise editing and manufacturing, while also being rendered as visual
objects for practical use, referred to as multimodal characteristic (Figure 1(b)(c)). Moreover, the process of rendering
parametric sequences into visual objects exhibits a manyto-one mapping, where different parametric sequences can
result in identical visual objects, referred to as many-to-one
rendering characteristic (Figure 1(d)).

Creating Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models
requires considerable expertise and effort. Textto-CAD, which converts textual descriptions into
CAD parametric sequences, is crucial in streamlining this process. Recent studies have utilized
ground-truth parametric sequences, known as sequential signals, as supervision to achieve this
goal. However, CAD models are inherently multimodal, comprising parametric sequences and corresponding rendered visual objects. Besides, the
rendering process from parametric sequences to
visual objects is many-to-one. Therefore, both sequential and visual signals are critical for effective
training. In this work, we introduce CADFusion,
a framework that uses Large Language Models
(LLMs) as the backbone and alternates between
two training stages: the sequential learning (SL)
stage and the visual feedback (VF) stage. In the
SL stage, we train LLMs using ground-truth parametric sequences, enabling the generation of logically coherent parametric sequences. In the VF
stage, we reward parametric sequences that render
into visually preferred objects and penalize those
that do not, allowing LLMs to learn how rendered
visual objects are perceived and evaluated. These
two stages alternate throughout the training, ensuring balanced learning and preserving benefits of
both signals. Experiments demonstrate that CADFusion improves performance, both qualitatively
and quantitatively. Code is available at https:
//github.com/microsoft/CADFusion.

Creating CAD models demands considerable expertise
and numerous iterations, making it complex and timeconsuming. Text-to-CAD (Figure 1(a)(b)), which refers to
the automatic generation of parametric sequences from textual descriptions, is critical for streamlining this creation process. It allows designers and engineers to quickly prototype
and iterate designs by describing their intent in natural language, reducing the time spent on manually creating CAD
models from scratch. Additionally, it makes the creation
process more accessible to individuals without extensive
training, enabling wider participation.
While important, Text-to-CAD has received limited attention. Most studies do not utilize text to control CAD generation. Instead, they explore generating CAD designs from
random noise (Wu et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022), by randomly
altering components of existing CAD designs (Xu et al.,
2022; 2023; Zhang et al., 2025), or from point cloud (Khan
et al., 2024a). A few studies make preliminary attempts at
Text-to-CAD (Khan et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024b). They
train Transformer-based framework with ground-truth parametric sequences as supervision, termed sequential signal.

†

Work done during the authors’ internship at Microsoft Research Asia. Open-source research project starts at March
2024. Ruiyu Wang: <rwang@cs.toronto.edu>, Yu Yuan: <yyhappier@mail.ustc.edu.cn>, Jiang Bian: <jiabia@microsoft.com>.
1
University of Toronto. 2 University of Science and Technology of
China. 3 Microsoft Research Asia. Correspondence to: Shizhao
Sun <shizsu@microsoft.com>.

However, due to multimodal and many-to-one rendering
characteristic of CAD models (Figure 1(b)(c)(d)), both the
sequential signal and visual signal are crucial for training
a Text-to-CAD model. The sequential signal, derived from
ground-truth parametric sequences, provides critical infor-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

