Robust Noise Attenuation via Adaptive Pooling of Transformer Outputs

Greyson Brothers 1

Abstract
We investigate the design of pooling methods used
to summarize the outputs of transformer embedding models, primarily motivated by reinforcement learning and vision applications. This work
considers problems where a subset of the input
vectors contains requisite information for a downstream task (signal) while the rest are distractors
(noise). By framing pooling as vector quantization with the goal of minimizing signal loss, we
demonstrate that the standard methods used to aggregate transformer outputs, AvgPool, MaxPool,
and ClsToken, are vulnerable to performance collapse as the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of inputs
fluctuates. We then show that an attention-based
adaptive pooling method can approximate the
signal-optimal vector quantizer within derived error bounds for any SNR. Our theoretical results
are first validated by supervised experiments on
a synthetic dataset designed to isolate the SNR
problem, then generalized to standard relational
reasoning, multi-agent reinforcement learning,
and vision benchmarks with noisy observations,
where transformers with adaptive pooling display
superior robustness across tasks.

Pooling

AdaPool

Tr ansfor mer

Tr ansfor mer

Figure 1: Given a mix of signal (blue) and noise (red) inputs, standard pooling methods result in unwanted interference in the aggregate representation of transformer outputs.
AdaPool learns to adaptively attenuate different ratios of
noise and obtain a cleaner signal.
Complex reinforcement learning (RL) environments pose
similar challenges, especially those seeking to bridge the
gap with the real world. Modern approaches have adopted
relational architectures, like transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) and graph neural networks (GNNs) (Battaglia et al.,
2018), to process their observations (Zambaldi et al., 2019;
Hu et al., 2021; Nayakanti et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023;
Nayak et al., 2023). By breaking each observation into
vector-based tokens representing entities, memories, or
multi-modal sensory streams, these networks can achieve
the following benefits over standard feedforward policy architectures: (1) variable-sized observation spaces enabling
scalability (Iqbal & Sha, 2019; Hsu et al., 2021), (2) sample
efficiency via permutation invariance and/or equivariance
over the tokens (depending on architectural choices) (Liu
et al., 2020; McClellan et al., 2024; Hao et al., 2023), and (3)
parameter efficiency by learning pairwise relations between
tokens explicitly rather than implicitly via redundant feedforward subnetworks (Santoro et al., 2017). In light of the
benefits of relational architectures over their feedforward
counterparts, we examine a critical implementation detail
for transformers that is often overlooked.

1. Introduction
Autonomous systems, both artificial and biological, require
diverse and redundant sensors to capture a reliable picture of
their environment. Limited processing resources and competitive environments pressure biological systems to process
their abundant sensory information efficiently. To satisfy
this constraint, only the subset of information relevant to the
current task is retained while the rest is considered noise and
attenuated – the process of selective attention (Broadbent,
1958; Driver, 2001).
1

Each inference of a standard transformer encoder produces
as many output embeddings as input vectors. Under the
sequence-to-sequence training paradigm that they were designed for, the next token in the sequence is an obvious
target for each output embedding. However, in domains
such as computer vision or RL, deciding how to map a set

Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory,
Maryland, USA. Correspondence to: Greyson Brothers
<greyson.brothers@jhuapl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

