Theoretical Limitations of Ensembles in the Age of Overparameterization

Niclas Dern* 1 John P. Cunningham 2 Geoff Pleiss 3 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Historically, most machine learning ensembles aggregated
component models that are simple by today’s standards (e.g.
Hansen & Salamon, 1990; Opitz & Maclin, 1999; Dietterich, 2000). Common techniques like bagging (Breiman,
1996), feature selection (Breiman, 2001), random projections (Kabán, 2014; Thanei et al., 2017), and boosting (Freund, 1995; Chen & Guestrin, 2016) were developed and
analyzed assuming decision trees, least-squares regressors,
and other underparameterized component models incapable
of achieving zero training error.

Classic ensembles generalize better than any single component model. In contrast, recent empirical studies find that modern ensembles of (overparameterized) neural networks may not provide any
inherent generalization advantage over single but
larger neural networks. This paper clarifies how
modern overparameterized ensembles differ from
their classic underparameterized counterparts, using ensembles of random feature (RF) regressors
as a basis for developing theory. In contrast to the
underparameterized regime, where ensembling
typically induces regularization and increases generalization, we prove with minimal assumptions
that infinite ensembles of overparameterized RF
regressors become pointwise equivalent to (single) infinite-width RF regressors, and finite width
ensembles rapidly converge to single models with
the same parameter budget. These results, which
are exact for ridgeless models and approximate
for small ridge penalties, imply that overparameterized ensembles and single large models exhibit
nearly identical generalization. We further characterize the predictive variance amongst ensemble
members, demonstrating that it quantifies the expected effects of increasing capacity rather than
capturing any conventional notion of uncertainty.
Our results challenge common assumptions about
the advantages of ensembles in overparameterized settings, prompting a reconsideration of how
well intuitions from underparameterized ensembles transfer to deep ensembles and the overparameterized regime.

Researchers and practitioners have now turned to ensembles of overparameterized models, such as neural networks,
which have capacity to memorize entire training datasets.
Motivated by heuristics from classic ensembles (Mentch &
Hooker, 2016), some have argued that ensembles provide
robustness to dataset shift (Lee et al., 2015; Fort et al., 2019)
and that the predictive variance amongst component models
in these so-called deep ensembles is a notion of uncertainty
that can be used on downstream decision-making tasks (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Gal et al., 2017; Gustafsson
et al., 2020; Ovadia et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020).
While few theoretical works analyze modern overparameterized ensembles, recent empirical evidence suggests that
intuitions from their underparameterized counterparts do
not hold in this new regime. For example, classic methods to increase diversity amongst component models, such
as bagging, can be harmful for deep ensembles (Nixon
et al., 2020; Jeffares et al., 2024; Abe et al., 2022a; 2024;
Webb et al., 2021) despite being nearly universally beneficial for underparameterized ensembles. Moreover, while
established underparameterized ensembling techniques offer well-founded quantifications of uncertainty (e.g. Mentch
& Hooker, 2016; Wager et al., 2014), several recent studies
question the reliability of the uncertainty estimates from
deep ensembles (Abe et al., 2022b; Theisen et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2024).

*

Work done while at the Vector Institute. 1 School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of
Munich, Munich, Germany 2 Department of Statistics, Columbia
University, Zuckerman Institute, New York, USA 3 Department
of Statistics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
4
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Niclas
Dern <niclas.dern@gmail.com>.

To address this divergence and verify recent empirical findings, we develop a theoretical characterization of ensembles
in the overparameterized regime, with the goal of contrasting against (traditional) underparameterized ensembles. We
answer the following questions:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

