Upweighting Easy Samples in Fine-Tuning Mitigates Forgetting

Sunny Sanyal * 1 Hayden Prairie * 1 Rudrajit Das * 2 Ali Kavis * 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1

Abstract

multiple tasks. Traditionally, this is achieved by training an
appropriately large model over datasets of multiple tasks,
ensuring that the model jointly learns multiple tasks at once.
Unfortunately, it is not viable to repeat this process with
every new additional task due to the scale of contemporary
models, necessitating effective strategies that can essentially
learn without full retraining. A resource-efficient convention
in machine learning is to take a pre-trained model which is
trained on some vast and diverse dataset, and fine-tune it on
a new dataset/task. Such pre-trained models are typically
large and expensive to train from scratch but perform well
on a variety of tasks while offering a versatile basis for
learning a new task.

Fine-tuning a pre-trained model on a downstream
task often degrades its original capabilities, a
phenomenon known as “catastrophic forgetting”.
This is especially an issue when one does not have
access to the data and recipe used to develop the
pre-trained model. Under this constraint, most existing methods for mitigating forgetting are inapplicable. To address this challenge, we propose a
sample weighting scheme for the fine-tuning data
solely based on the pre-trained model’s losses.
Specifically, we upweight the easy samples on
which the pre-trained model’s loss is low and vice
versa to limit the drift from the pre-trained model.
Our approach is orthogonal and yet complementary to existing methods; while such methods
mostly operate on parameter or gradient space, we
concentrate on the sample space. We theoretically
analyze the impact of fine-tuning with our method
in a linear setting, showing that it stalls learning
in a certain subspace, which inhibits overfitting
to the target task. We empirically demonstrate
the efficacy of our method on both language and
vision tasks. As an example, when fine-tuning
Gemma 2 2B on MetaMathQA, our method results in only a 0.8% drop in accuracy on GSM8K
(another math dataset) compared to standard finetuning, while preserving 5.4% more accuracy on
the pre-training datasets.

Fine-tuning is a delicate process that should ideally serve
multiple objectives simultaneously; we would like to use
the base model and its capabilities to facilitate learning a
strong model on the downstream task, and in the meantime,
preserve the existing abilities of the pre-trained model. On
this particular front, the major challenge in standard, unregulated fine-tuning is the catastrophic forgetting phenomenon.
In broad terms, it describes the performance decline of the
pre-trained model on previously observed data/tasks after
fine-tuning on a new one. When the learning process for
the downstream task interferes with the previously-learned
representations beyond tolerable margins, the pre-trained
model loses its prior capabilities and significantly underperforms on previously-learned tasks.
Mitigating catastrophic forgetting is an active area of research with many fundamental questions awaiting solutions.
The key idea is to constrain the fine-tuning process to prevent the degeneration of the learned representations while
guiding the learning of the new task to augment existing
capabilities. The literature on the topic offers various approaches based on the available knowledge pertaining to
the pre-training process. In fact, pre-training-specific data
availability and how it is treated predominantly dictates the
success of mitigating forgetting. In many real-life scenarios,
however, the data and the training recipe used for generating the pre-trained model are not available (Radford et al.,
2021; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Grattafiori et al., 2024; Jiang
et al., 2023). Naturally, one needs to approach the forgetting
phenomenon accordingly to design realistic methods.

1. Introduction
In the modern era of large-scale machine learning, one of
the central goals is to design models capable of performing
*

Equal contribution. Rudrajit was a PhD student at the University of Texas at Austin when this work was done. 1 University of
Texas at Austin 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Sunny
Sanyal <sanyal.sunny@utexas.edu>, Hayden Prairie <haydenprairie@utexas.edu>, Rudrajit Das <dasrudrajit@google.com>,
Ali Kavis <kavis@austin.utexas.edu>, Sujay Sanghavi <sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Therefore, we focus on the case in which we have no ac-

1

