Position: Strong Consumer Protection
is an Inalienable Defense for AI Safety in the United States

Serena Booth 1

Abstract

entific discourse (Bengio et al., 2024). In response to this
discourse, AI Policy has taken Washington, D.C. by storm:
the White House and both branches of Congress have released vague roadmaps for AI legislation (Biden-Harris
Administration, 2023; Office of Science and Technology
Policy, 2022; The Bipartisan Senate AI Working Group,
2024; United States House of Representatives, 2024). These
efforts to regulate AI directly are well intentioned, but in
this position paper, I share an optimistic perspective about
the state of our existing statute—notwithstanding the current
deregulatory emphasis in the U.S. Federal Government. The
existing consumer protection laws of the United States
provide many substantial protections for AI safety, and
we should preserve, enforce, and strengthen these laws.

Consumer protection laws are designed to protect
consumers from unethical business practices. I
argue that these laws serve an emergent dual purpose: consumer protection laws can serve as an
inalienable defense for AI safety by incentivizing
businesses to design and deploy safer AI systems.
This position counters two alternative ideas in AI
policy. The first alternative position is that AI
safety requires a new set of focused laws to protect humanity’s prosperity. Though there are gaps
in the existing law and opportunities for improvement, I argue that crafting new, AI-focused laws
is both technically challenging and that these laws
will be easy to skirt. The second alternative position is that consumer protection is little more than
red tape; I argue that existing laws dating back
many decades have already reigned in some nefarious business practices related to the development
and deployment of AI, and that the litigious society of the United States is well positioned to
use consumer protection laws to encourage the
development of new guardrails for AI. This paper
tours some existing consumer protection laws in
the United States and their effects on the development and use of AI systems. This paper also calls
to enforce and preserve these laws in a rapidly
changing, de-regulatory political landscape.

There are two primary alternative points of view to this position. The first is that consumer protection laws provide
little protection in the face of highly-advanced AI systems.
While I support efforts to regulate AI directly, I broadly
find that such efforts are both hard to write down in precise
legislative language and comparatively easy to circumnavigate; one basic argument is that there is no consensus on the
meaning of “artificial intelligence.” Consumer protection,
in comparison, is inalienable in its broad applicability and
long-standing legislative records, and these existing laws
apply to the development and deployment of AI systems. I
argue that there have already been many examples of consumer protection laws, many written decades before even
the advent of personal computing, that have provided protections to novel applications and developments of AI. The
second alternative view broadly takes a dim perspective on
consumer protection: this perspective interprets consumer
protection as little more than unnecessary bureaucracy and
argues that fewer guardrails on markets would result in increased efficiency. This cynical perspective seems harshly
distorted from reality: I argue that where consumer protection laws are weak or poorly enforced, the market has not
naturally corrected. Moreover, the European Union’s AI
Act—a momentous law focused on minimizing risk from AI
systems—is centered around issues of consumer protection.

1. Introduction
Seemingly overnight, the threats AI poses to humanity’s
prosperity—our jobs, our social infrastructure, our education, and even, some argue, our continued existence—went
from fringe concerns and science fiction to mainstream sci1
Brown University, Providence, RI. This work was done in
part while the author was visiting the Simons Institute for the
Theory of Computing at the University of California at Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Serena Booth <Serena Booth@brown.edu>.

This paper takes a tour through some existing consumer protection laws in the United States and discusses the effects
these laws have had on AI development and deployment to

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

