Active Learning of Deep Neural Networks via Gradient-Free Cutting Planes

Erica Zhang * 1 Fangzhao Zhang * 2 Mert Pilanci 2

Abstract

are persistently seeking for alternative training schemes for
large NN models, including zero-order and second-order
algorithms.

Active learning methods aim to improve sample
complexity in machine learning. In this work, we
investigate an active learning scheme via a novel
gradient-free cutting-plane training method for
ReLU networks of arbitrary depth and develop
a convergence theory. We demonstrate, for the
first time, that cutting-plane algorithms, traditionally used in linear models, can be extended to
deep neural networks despite their nonconvexity and nonlinear decision boundaries. Moreover,
this training method induces the first deep active
learning scheme known to achieve convergence
guarantees, revealing a geometric contraction rate
of the feasible set. We exemplify the effectiveness
of our proposed active learning method against
popular deep active learning baselines via both
synthetic data experiments and sentimental classification task on real datasets.

Cutting-plane method is a classic optimization algorithm
and is known for its fast convergence rate. Research on
cutting-plane type methods dates back to 1950s when Ralph
Gomory (Gomory, 1958) first studied it for integer programming and mixed-integer programming problems. Since then,
this method has also been heavily investigated for solving
nonlinear problems. Different variations of cutting-plane
method emerge, including but not limited to center of gravity
cutting-plane method, maximum volume ellipsoid cuttingplane method, and analytic center cutting-plane method,
which mainly differ in their center-finding strategies.
Historically, deep NN training and cutting-plane methods
have developed independently, each with its own audience.
In this work, we bridge them for the first time by providing
a viable cutting-plane-based deep NN training and active
learning (AL) scheme. Our method finds optimal neural
network weights and actively queries training points via a
gradient-free cutting-plane approach. We show that the induced active learning scheme naturally inherits classic convergence guarantees of cutting-plane methods. We present
synthetic and real data experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Large neural network (NN) models are now core to artificial intelligence systems. After years of development,
current large NN training is still dominated by gradientbased methods, which range from basic gradient descent
method to more advanced online stochastic methods such
as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017) and AdamW (Loshchilov
& Hutter, 2019). Recent empirical effort has focused on
cutting down storage requirement for such optimizers (see
Griewank & Walther (2000); Zhao et al. (2024)); accelerating convergence by adding momentum (see Xie et al.
(2023)); designing better step size search algorithms (see
Defazio & Mishchenko (2023)). Despite their popularity,
gradient-based methods suffer from sensitivity to hyperparameters and slow convergence. Therefore, researchers

2. Notation
We denote the set of integers from 1 to n as [n]. We use
Bp := {u ∈ Rd : ∥u∥p ≤ 1} to denote the unit ℓp -norm
ball and ⟨·, ·⟩ to denote the dot product between two vectors.
Given a hyperplane H := {x : xT w = 0}, we use H+ (H− )
to denote the positive (negative) half-space: H+(−) := {x :
xT w ≥ (≤)0}. We use notation (x)+ = max(x, 0). We
take 1{x ∈ S} as the 1/0-valued indicator function with
respect to the set S, evaluated at x.

*

Equal Contribution; Junior author listed first. 1 Department
of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Erica Zhang <yz4232@stanford.edu>, Fangzhao
Zhang <zfzhao@stanford.edu>.

3. Preliminaries
Classic cutting-plane method’s usage in different optimization problems has been heavily studied. To better
demonstrate the problem and offer a more self-contained
background, we start with describing basic cutting-plane
method’s workflow.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

