Bivariate Causal Discovery with Proxy Variables: Integral Solving and Beyond

Yong Wu 1 2 3 4 Yanwei Fu 5 Shouyan Wang 1 2 3 4 6 7 Xinwei Sun B 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
When the causal sufficiency is violated (Spirtes et al., 2001),
constraint-based causal discovery is challenging due to the
potential bias introduced by unmeasured confounders in
conditional independence testing. As a foundational step,
this paper focuses on the bivariate case, aiming to identify
causal relationships in the presence of unobserved variables.
To adjust for the bias, (Miao et al., 2018) leveraged observed
proxy variables (Kuroki & Pearl, 2014; Tchetgen et al.,
2024) to examine the existence of causal relations over
discrete variables. Later, (Miao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023)
extended them to continuous variables, by investigating the
existence of solutions to integral equations.

Bivariate causal discovery is challenging when
unmeasured confounders exist. To adjust for the
bias, previous methods employed the proxy variable (i.e., negative control outcome (NCO)) to test
the treatment-outcome relationship through integral equations – and assumed that violation of this
equation indicates the causal relationship. Upon
this, they could establish asymptotic properties for
causal hypothesis testing. However, these methods either relied on parametric assumptions or
required discretizing continuous variables, which
may lead to information loss. Moreover, it is
unclear when this underlying integral-related assumption holds, making it difficult to justify the
utility in practice. To address these problems,
we first consider the scenario where only NCO is
available. We propose a novel non-parametric procedure, which enjoys asymptotic properties and
preserves more information. Moreover, we find
that when NCO affects the outcome, the above
integral-related assumption may not hold, rendering the causal relation unidentifiable. Informed
by this, we further consider the scenario when the
negative control exposure (NCE) is also available.
In this scenario, we construct another integral restriction aided by this proxy, which can discover
causation when NCO affects the outcome. We
demonstrate these findings and the effectiveness
of our proposals through comprehensive numerical studies.

Specifically, the integral equation examines whether the relationship between the treatment and the outcome can be
fully explained by the proxy, a.k.a, negative control outcome
(NCO) (Lipsitch et al., 2010). If there is no causal relation,
the relationship remains consistent across changes in treatment. Upon this, (Miao et al., 2023) tested the causal null
hypothesis by goodness-of-fit, which relied on parametric
assumptions. To allow for nonparametric testing, (Liu et al.,
2023) proposed a discretization approach to approximate the
equation, and established asymptotic properties. However,
it may require a large number of bins and substantial data to
control the approximation error.
To address these issues when only the NCO is available,
we propose a non-parametric testing procedure based on
a kernel estimator called Proxy Maximum Characteristic
Restriction (PMCR), to examine the integral equation. Without discretization, our approach preserves more information
from the original data. After computing the least-square
residues via PMCR, we construct the statistics and establish its asymptotic properties. Compared to other first-order
moment restriction methods (Mastouri et al., 2021), our
procedure leverages the characteristic function to capture
all order moments, offering greater power in identifying the
causal relation.

1
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University 2 Key Laboratory of Computational
Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence (Fudan University),
Ministry of Education 3 State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University 4 Zhangjiang Fudan International Innovation Center 5 School of
Data Science, Fudan University 6 Shanghai Engineering Research
Center of AI & Robotics, Fudan University 7 Engineering Research
Center of AI & Robotics, Ministry of Education, Fudan University.
Correspondence to: Xinwei Sun <sunxinwei@fudan.edu.cn>.

Nevertheless, we proceed to note that, regarding the power
analysis, both our method and others, are built upon a basic
assumption that the integral equation does not hold when the
causal relation exists. However, by studying the solvability
of the integral equation, we surprisingly find that this assumption may not hold, if the NCO’s effect on the outcome

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

