Wasserstein Policy Optimization

David Pfau 1 Ian Davies 1 Diana Borsa 1 João G. M. Araújo 1 Brendan Tracey 1 Hado van Hasselt 1

Abstract

the policy update. The majority of these methods use a policy update derived from the classic policy gradient theorem
for stochastic policies (Sutton et al., 1999), which applies to
both discrete and continuous action spaces.

We introduce Wasserstein Policy Optimization
(WPO), an actor-critic algorithm for reinforcement learning in continuous action spaces. WPO
can be derived as an approximation to Wasserstein
gradient flow over the space of all policies projected into a finite-dimensional parameter space
(e.g., the weights of a neural network), leading
to a simple and completely general closed-form
update. The resulting algorithm combines many
properties of deterministic and classic policy gradient methods. Like deterministic policy gradients, it exploits knowledge of the gradient of the
action-value function with respect to the action.
Like classic policy gradients, it can be applied
to stochastic policies with arbitrary distributions
over actions – without using the reparameterization trick. We show results on the DeepMind
Control Suite and a magnetic confinement fusion
task which compare favorably with state-of-theart continuous control methods.

One notable exception is the class of algorithms derived
from the deterministic policy gradient (DPG) theorem (Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap, 2015). These use information
about the gradient of the value in action space to update the
policy, but are limited to deterministic policies, hindering
exploration. Adding in stochasticity can be difficult to tune,
and extensions that learn the variance (Heess et al., 2015;
Haarnoja et al., 2018) rely on the reparameterization trick,
which limits the class of policy distributions that can be
used.
Here we present a new policy gradient method that uses
gradients of the action value but can learn arbitrary stochastic policies. The method can be derived from the theory
of Wasserstein gradient flows (Ambrosio et al., 2008), and
projecting the nonparametric flow onto the space of parametric functions (e.g. neural networks) leads to a simple
closed-form update that combines elements of stochastic
and deterministic policy gradients. We give a high-level
illustration of this in Fig. 1. The update is natural to implement as an actor-critic method. We call the resulting method
Wasserstein Policy Optimization (WPO).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning has made impressive progress in
controlling complex domains with continuous actions such
as robotics (Haarnoja et al., 2024), magnetic confinement
fusion (Degrave et al., 2022) and game playing (Farebrother
& Castro, 2024). A significant portion of this progress can
be attributed to policy optimization methods, which directly
optimize the parameters of a policy by stochastic gradient
ascent on the expected long term return (e.g., Schulman
et al., 2015a; 2017; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018). While unbiased estimates of the policy gradient can be computed
directly from returns (Williams, 1992), many practical deep
reinforcement learning algorithms for continuous control
employ an actor-critic approach (Barto et al., 1983), which
also estimates a value function to diminish the variance of

The paper is organized as follows. First, we review policy
optimization for continuous control, and Wasserstein gradient flows. We then show how the latter can be used to
derive WPO when applied to the former. We review prior
work in this area and analyze the dynamics of WPO and
how it relates to other policy gradients. We describe several
extensions needed to convert WPO into a practical and competitive deep reinforcement learning algorithm. Finally, we
compare its performance against several baseline methods
on the DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018; Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020) and a task controlling magnetic
coils in a simulated magnetic confinement fusion device
(Tracey et al., 2024). On a task where the task dimension
can be varied arbitrarily, we find that WPO learns faster than
baseline methods by an amount that increases as the task
dimension grows, suggesting it may work well in very high
dimensional action spaces. An open-source implementation

1
Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: David
Pfau <pfau@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

