Revisiting Noise Resilience Strategies in Gesture Recognition:
Short-Term Enhancement in sEMG Analysis

Weiyu Guo 1 Ziyue Qiao 2 Ying Sun 1 3 Yijie Xu 1 Hui Xiong 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract
Gesture recognition based on surface electromyography (sEMG) has been gaining importance in
many 3D Interactive Scenes. However, sEMG
is easily influenced by various forms of noise in
real-world environments, leading to challenges in
providing long-term stable interactions through
sEMG. Existing methods often struggle to enhance model noise resilience through various predefined data augmentation techniques. In this
work, we revisit the problem from a short-term
enhancement perspective to improve precision
and robustness against various common noisy
scenarios with learnable denoise using sEMG intrinsic pattern information and sliding-window
attention. We propose the Short Term Enhancement Module(STEM), which can be easily integrated with various models. STEM offers several
benefits: 1) Noise-resistant, enhanced robustness
against noise without manual data augmentation;
2) Adaptability, adaptable to various models; and
3) Inference efficiency, achieving short-term enhancement through minimal weight-sharing in an
efficient attention mechanism. In particular, we
incorporate STEM into a transformer, creating the
Short-Term Enhanced Transformer (STET). Compared with best-competing approaches, the impact of noise on STET is reduced by more than
20%. We report promising results on classification and regression tasks and demonstrate that
STEM generalizes across different gesture recognition tasks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/guoweiyu/short-term-semg.

Surface Electromyographic (sEMG) is a non-invasive technique for monitoring muscle neuron firing, which is an effective way to capture human motion intention and has shown
great application potential in the field of human-computer
interaction (HCI) (Xiong et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021c; Guo
et al., 2024). A schematic diagram of the EMG-based HCI
System is shown in Figure 1. Compared to traditional HCI
channels, sEMG has the advantages of being generated prior
to actual motion (50-150 ms), containing rich motion intention information, and being easy to collect (Sun et al., 2020).
Therefore, increasing interest has been in exploring EMGbased motion track (Liu et al., 2021b; Guo et al., 2023) and
pathological analysis.
EMG DATA
COLLECTION

MOTION INTENTION
PREDICTION

electrodes

HUMAN-MACHINE
INTERACTION

EMG

Figure 1: Schematic Diagram of EMG-based Human-Computer
Interaction System.

Recently, deep learning models for time series have developed rapidly and are widely used (Dai et al.; Zhang et al.,
2023a; Xu et al.; Zhang et al., 2021). By treating sEMG
as time series, deep sequential models (Bi et al., 2019;
Tsinganos et al., 2019; Becker et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021;
Du et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021) have been applied to
sEMG modeling. For example, Zhang et al. (2022) employ
a multi-task encoder-decoder framework to improve the robustness of sEMG-based Sign Language Translation (SLT),
while Rahimian et al. (2021) employ a Vision Transformer
(ViT)-based architecture (TEMGNet) to enhance the accuracy of sEMG-based myocontrol for prosthetics. Although
these methods show improved performance over traditional
approaches, they process sEMG signals as generic timeseries data, without tailoring their designs to the unique
characteristics of sEMG—such as high variability and sensitivity to external noise and interference. This oversight leads
to challenges in handling low signal-to-noise ratios caused
by skin condition changes and interference, and limits the

1

Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China 2 School
of Computing and Information Technology, Great Bay University,
Dongguan, China 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong
Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to: Ying Sun <yings@ust.hk>,
Hui Xiong <xionghui@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

