Neural Collapse beyond the Unconstrained Features Model:
Landscape, Dynamics, and Generalization in the Mean-Field Regime

Diyuan Wu 1 Marco Mondelli 1

Abstract

stages of training where: (i) the penultimate-layer features
converge to their respective class means (NC1), (ii) these
class means form an equiangular tight frame (ETF) or an
orthogonal frame (NC2), and (iii) the columns of the final
layer’s classifier matrix similarly form an ETF or orthogonal
frame, implementing a nearest class-mean decision rule on
the penultimate-layer features (NC3). A popular line of theoretical research has investigated the occurrence of NC via
the unconstrained features model (UFM), see (Fang et al.,
2021a; Han et al., 2022; Mixon et al., 2022) and the discussion in Section 2. In this framework, the penultimate-layer
features are treated as free optimization variables, leading to
a benign loss landscape for the resulting optimization problem. The primary justification for adopting the UFM is that
the complex feature-learning layers encountered in practice
are approximated by a universal learner. While the UFM
provides an intriguing theoretical perspective on NC, it has
notable limitations. In particular, it neglects the dependence
on the data distribution, rendering it unsuitable for theoretically analyzing the relationship between NC during training
and the test error (Hui et al., 2022). Furthermore, the training dynamics under the UFM framework is not equivalent
to the actual training dynamics of neural networks, which
makes it challenging to investigate the occurrence of NC
from a dynamical perspective.

Neural Collapse is a phenomenon where the lastlayer representations of a well-trained neural network converge to a highly structured geometry.
In this paper, we focus on its first (and most basic) property, known as NC1: the within-class
variability vanishes. While prior theoretical studies establish the occurrence of NC1 via the dataagnostic unconstrained features model, our work
adopts a data-specific perspective, analyzing NC1
in a three-layer neural network, with the first two
layers operating in the mean-field regime and followed by a linear layer. In particular, we establish
a fundamental connection between NC1 and the
loss landscape: we prove that points with small
empirical loss and gradient norm (thus, close to
being stationary) approximately satisfy NC1, and
the closeness to NC1 is controlled by the residual
loss and gradient norm. We then show that (i) gradient flow on the mean squared error converges to
NC1 solutions with small empirical loss, and (ii)
for well-separated data distributions, both NC1
and vanishing test loss are achieved simultaneously. This aligns with the empirical observation
that NC1 emerges during training while models
attain near-zero test error. Overall, our results
demonstrate that NC1 arises from gradient training due to the properties of the loss landscape, and
they show the co-occurrence of NC1 and small
test error for certain data distributions.

To address the limitations of UFM, we consider training
a three-layer network via gradient flow on the standard
mean squared error (MSE) loss. Specifically, we employ
a two-layer neural network in the mean-field regime (Mei
et al., 2018) as the feature-learning component, and then
concatenate it with a linear layer as the final predictor. Our
main results both (i) establish sufficient conditions on the
loss landscape for the first – and most basic – property of
neural collapse, i.e., NC1, to hold, and (ii) show that such
conditions are in fact satisfied by training the architecture
above. This differentiates our paper from recent studies
aiming to theoretically explain the NC phenomenon beyond
unconstrained features, as existing work either provides
only sufficient conditions for NC to occur (Seleznova et al.,
2024), focuses on the NTK regime (Jacot et al., 2024), relies
on specific training algorithms (Beaglehole et al., 2024)
or on a specific regularization (Hong & Ling, 2024a), see
Section 2 for a discussion of related work. Specifically, our

1. Introduction
Neural Collapse (NC), first identified by Papyan et al.
(2020), describes a phenomenon observed during the final
1
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
(ISTA), Klosterneuburg, Austria.
Correspondence to:
Diyuan Wu <diyuan.wu@ist.ac.at>, Marco Mondelli
<marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

