RWKVQuant: Quantizing the RWKV Family with Proxy Guided Hybrid of
Scalar and Vector Quantization

Chen Xu * 1 Yuxuan Yue * 1 2 Zukang Xu 1 Xing Hu 1
Jiangyong Yu 1 Zhixuan Chen 1 Sifan Zhou 1 Zhihang Yuan 1 Dawei YangB 1

Abstract
RWKV is a modern RNN architecture with comparable performance to Transformer, but still
faces challenges when deployed to resourceconstrained devices. Post Training Quantization
(PTQ), which is a an essential technique to reduce
model size and inference latency, has been widely
used in Transformer models. However, it suffers significant degradation of performance when
applied to RWKV. This paper investigates and
identifies two key constraints inherent in the properties of RWKV: (1) Non-linear operators hinder
the parameter-fusion of both smooth- and rotationbased quantization, introducing extra computation
overhead. (2) The larger amount of uniformly
distributed weights poses challenges for clusterbased quantization, leading to reduced accuracy.
To this end, we propose RWKVQuant, a PTQ
framework tailored for RWKV models, consisting of two novel techniques: (1) a coarse-to-fine
proxy capable of adaptively selecting different
quantization approaches by assessing the uniformity and identifying outliers in the weights, and
(2) a codebook optimization algorithm that enhances the performance of cluster-based quantization methods for element-wise multiplication in
RWKV. Experiments show that RWKVQuant can
quantize RWKV-6-14B into about 3-bit with less
than 1% accuracy loss and 2.14× speed up.

Figure 1: Accuracy-model size curve. Results of zero-shot
accuracy are evaluated on the LAMBADA dataset (Radford
et al., 2019). Our proposed RWKVQuant outperforms the
individual utilization of SQ and VQ methods for all sizes of
models.

It has a comparable capacity to Transformer-based Large
Language Models (T-LLMs) while retaining the efficient
inference feature of RNNs, positioning it a promising foundational architecture for both language (Peng et al., 2024)
and vision (Zhou & Chen, 2024) tasks.
Despite the advantages, its vast size of parameters have
posed a significant barrier to the deployment on resourceconstrained devices. For instance, the compute-to-memory
access ratio (FLOPs/Bytes) of RWKV-6-7B (Peng et al.,
2024) is 0.97, while that for the decoding phase of LLaMA2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023) is 4.88 (detailed in A.3). Secondly, large RWKV models demand substantial memory
resources. For instance, RWKV-6-14B requires approximately 30GB of memory to be loaded, which typically
exceeds the capacity of edge devices.

1. Introduction
RWKV (Peng et al., 2023) is a modern sequence model that
integrates the strengths of both Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) (Elman, 1990) and Transformer (Vaswani, 2017).

Post Training Quantization (PTQ), including Scaler Quanzization (SQ) and Vector Quantization (VQ), is a widely
adopted approach to reduce model size and inference latency for T-LLMs (Shao et al., 2023; Ashkboos et al., 2024;
ost, 2024; Yuan et al., 2024). However, directly applying
the most advanced quantization frameworks to RWKV models leads to severe performance degradation. For instance,

*

1
Equal contribution
Houmo AI 2 Harbin Institute of
Technology (Shenzhen). Correspondence to: Dawei Yang
<dawei.yang@houmo.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

