EARL-BO: Reinforcement Learning for Multi-Step Lookahead,
High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization

Mujin Cheon 1 2 Jay H. Lee 3 Dong-Yeun Koh 2 Calvin Tsay 1

Abstract

2021). Many of these settings involve costly data acquisition
(i.e., experiments) and no information about the gradient.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is popular in such problems
due to its ability to query data-efficient samples (Brochu
et al., 2010; Paulson & Tsay, 2024). BO leverages a surrogate model with uncertainty quantification, typically a
Gaussian process, or GP (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006),
in conjunction with an acquisition function, which contains
the “philosophy” about how to balance exploration and exploitation, to identify and optimize the underlying function
in a sequential sampling process.

To avoid myopic behavior, multi-step lookahead
Bayesian optimization (BO) algorithms consider
the sequential nature of BO and have demonstrated promising results in recent years. However, owing to the curse of dimensionality, most
of these methods make significant approximations or suffer scalability issues. This paper
presents a novel reinforcement learning (RL)based framework for multi-step lookahead BO
in high-dimensional black-box optimization problems. The proposed method enhances the scalability and decision-making quality of multi-step
lookahead BO by efficiently solving the sequential dynamic program of the BO process in a nearoptimal manner using RL. We first introduce an
Attention-DeepSets encoder to represent the state
of knowledge to the RL agent and subsequently
propose a multi-task, fine-tuning procedure based
on end-to-end (encoder-RL) on-policy learning.
We evaluate the proposed method, EARL-BO (Encoder Augmented RL for BO), on synthetic benchmark functions and hyperparameter tuning problems, finding significantly improved performance
compared to existing multi-step lookahead and
high-dimensional BO methods.

Traditional BO algorithms deploy acquisition functions such
as Expected Improvement (Jones et al., 1998), Probability
of Improvement (Kushner, 1964), and Upper Confidence
Bound (Srinivas et al., 2010) in one-step lookahead policies. In other words, these policies ignore the effect(s) of
the choice made at current iteration on future steps and instead solely focus on the immediate maximization of the
acquisition function. Previous studies (Ao & Li, 2024; Lam
et al., 2016; Osborne et al., 2009; Wu & Frazier, 2019) have
demonstrated that these so-called myopic policies can result
in sub-optimal performance. Moreover, anticipating the sequential nature of BO can enable consideration of the path
of samples taken (Folch et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024).
Along these lines, Ginsbourger & Le Riche (2010) observe
that the decision-making process of BO can be seen as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), and
therefore policies can be improved by multi-step lookahead
decisions. Several lookahead methods have since been proposed. GLASSES (González et al., 2016) involves approximating the ideal lookahead loss function in an open-loop
approach. Rollout-based strategies (Lam et al., 2016; Lee
et al., 2020; Osborne et al., 2009) approximate the POMDP
value function by “rolling-out” heuristic decision-making
policies (e.g., maximizing EI) over future time steps to approximate long-term gains. In this category, Wu & Frazier
(2019) suggest practical two-step lookahead methods using
an envelope-function estimator to improve computational
tractability. More recently, Cheon et al. (2024) introduce a
reinforcement learning (RL) strategy to solve the multi-step
lookahead POMDP of BO in a near-optimal way.

1. Introduction
Optimization of an unobserved, “black-box” function underlies engineering applications such as hyperparameter
tuning (Snoek et al., 2012), material discovery (Shahriari
et al., 2015), reaction chemistry (Folch et al., 2022), energy
systems (Thebelt et al., 2022), and robotics (Muratore et al.,
1
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science & Technology (KAIST), South
Korea 3 Mork Family Department of Chemical Engineering and
Materials Science, University of Southern California, USA. Correspondence to: Calvin Tsay <c.tsay@imperial.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Multi-step lookahead methods generally face two critical
1

