Impossible Videos

Zechen Bai * 1 Hai Ci * 1 Mike Zheng Shou 1
Generated by Sora
Impossible Type:
Physical Laws -> Conservation Laws
Explanation:
The incomplete cookie grows over time,
which is impossible.
Generated by Kling 1.5

Impossible Type:
Physical Laws -> Material Properties
Explanation:
The knife cuts towards 3 o'clock, but the
tomato is actually cut in 11 o'clock. Such
inconsistency is impossible.

Collected from AIGC Community

Impossible Type:
Biological Laws -> Anthropomorphism
Explanation:
A video of fried egg speaks. We cannot
tell this video is impossible by looking at a
single frame, but can tell by watching the
video.

Generated by HunyuanVideo

Impossible Type:
Biological Laws -> Morphology
Explanation:
A rose grows from the center of a
sunflower. Such specie fusion is impossible.

Generated by HailuoAI

Impossible Type:
Social Laws -> Commonsense
Explanation:
A truck emerges from an underground hole
and then the hole is closed, which goes
against social commonsense.

Generated by Sora

Impossible Type:
Geographical Laws -> Climate
Explanation:
The Merlion Park in Singapore experienced
snowfall, which is impossible for a tropical
country on the equator.

Figure 1: Impossible Video Examples with Impossible Type and Explanation.

Abstract

sible, counterfactual and anti-reality video concepts underexplored. This work aims to answer
two questions: 1) Can today’s video generation
models effectively follow prompts to create impossible video content? 2) Are today’s video
understanding models good enough for understanding impossible videos? To this end, we
introduce IPV-B ENCH, a novel benchmark designed to evaluate and foster progress in video
understanding and generation. IPV-B ENCH is
underpinned by a comprehensive taxonomy, en-

Synthetic videos nowadays is widely used to
complement data scarcity and diversity of realworld videos. Current synthetic datasets primarily replicate real-world scenarios, leaving impos*

Equal contribution 1 Show Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Mike Zheng Shou
<mike.zheng.shou@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

