Position: Humanity Faces Existential Risk from Gradual Disempowerment

Jan Kulveit* 1 Raymond Douglas* 2 Nora Ammann 3 1 Deger Turan 4 5 David Krueger 6 David Duvenaud 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
A growing body of research points to the possibility that artificial intelligence (AI) might eventually pose a large-scale
or even existential risk to humanity (Bengio et al., 2024;
2023; Bostrom, 2014; Critch & Russell, 2023). Current
discussions about AI risk focus mainly on two scenarios:
deliberate misuse, such as cyberattacks and the deployment
of novel bioweapons (Slattery et al., 2024), and the possibility that misaligned autonomous systems may take abrupt,
harmful actions in an attempt to secure a decisive strategic advantage, potentially following a period of deception
(Carlsmith, 2023; Ngo et al., 2022). These scenarios have
motivated most of the work on AI existential risk, spanning
both technical research such as methods to ensure AIs remain honest or are unable to exercise dangerous capabilities,
and governance work such as developing frameworks and
norms around testing for autonomy, misalignment, and the
relevant dangerous capabilities (Buhl et al., 2024; Shevlane
et al., 2023).

This paper examines the systemic risks posed
by incremental advancements in artificial intelligence, developing the concept of ’gradual disempowerment’, in contrast to the abrupt takeover
scenarios commonly discussed in AI safety. We
analyze how even incremental improvements in
AI capabilities can undermine human influence
over large-scale systems that society depends on,
including the economy, culture, and nation-states.
As AI increasingly replaces human labor and
cognition in these domains, it can weaken both
explicit human control mechanisms (like voting
and consumer choice) and the implicit alignments
with human interests that often arise from societal systems’ reliance on human participation to
function. Furthermore, to the extent that these
systems incentivize outcomes that do not align
with human preferences, AIs may optimize for
those outcomes more aggressively. These effects
may be mutually reinforcing across different domains: economic power shapes cultural narratives
and political decisions, while cultural shifts alter economic and political behavior. This position paper argues that this dynamic could lead
to an effectively irreversible loss of human influence over crucial societal systems, precipitating
an existential catastrophe through the permanent
disempowerment of humanity. This suggests the
need for both technical research and governance
approaches that specifically address the risk of
incremental erosion of human influence across
interconnected societal systems.

In this paper, we explore an alternative scenario: a ‘Gradual
Disempowerment’ where AI advances and proliferates without necessarily any acute jumps in capabilities or apparent
alignment. We argue that even gradual evolution could
lead to a permanent disempowerment of humanity and
an irrecoverable loss of potential, constituting an existential catastrophe. Such a risk would merit substantially
different technical research and policy interventions, including attempts to protect human influence, to estimate
the degree of disempowerment, and to better characterize civilization-scale multi-agent dynamics.
Our argument is structured around six core claims:

Equal contribution 1 ACS research group, CTS, Charles University 2 Telic Research 3 Advanced Research + Invention Agency
(ARIA) 4 AI Objectives Institute 5 Metaculus 6 Mila, University of
Montreal 7 University of Toronto. Correspondence to: Jan Kulveit
<jk@acsresearch.org>.

1. Humans currently engage with numerous large-scale
societal systems (e.g. governments, economic systems)
that are influenced by human action and, in turn, produce outcomes that shape our collective future (Giddens, 1984). These societal systems are fairly aligned
—that is, they broadly incentivize and produce outcomes that satisfy human preferences. However, this
alignment is neither automatic nor inherent.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2. There are effectively two ways these systems maintain
their alignment: through explicit human actions (like
voting and consumer choice), and implicitly through

*

1

