How Effective Can Dropout Be in Multiple Instance Learning ?

Wenhui Zhu * 1 Peijie Qiu * 2 Xiwen Chen * 3 Zhangsihao Yang 1 Aristeidis Sotiras 2 Abolfazl Razi 3
Yalin Wang 1
Baseline

Abstract
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a popular
weakly-supervised method for various applications, with a particular interest in histological
whole slide image (WSI) classification. Due to
the gigapixel resolution of WSI, applications of
MIL in WSI typically necessitate a two-stage
training scheme: first, extract features from the
pre-trained backbone and then perform MIL aggregation. However, it is well-known that this
suboptimal training scheme suffers from ”noisy”
feature embeddings from the backbone and inherent weak supervision, hindering MIL from
learning rich and generalizable features. However, the most commonly used technique (i.e.,
dropout) for mitigating this issue has yet to be
explored in MIL. In this paper, we empirically
explore how effective the dropout can be in MIL.
Interestingly, we observe that dropping the topk most important instances within a bag leads
to better performance and generalization even
under noise attack. Based on this key observation, we propose a novel MIL-specific dropout
method, termed MIL-Dropout, which systematically determines which instances to drop. Experiments on five MIL benchmark datasets and
two WSI datasets demonstrate that MIL-Dropout
boosts the performance of current MIL methods with a negligible computational cost. The
code is available at https://github.com/
ChongQingNoSubway/MILDropout.

Sharp Minimum
mini-batch gradient

MIL-Dropout

Flat Minimum
whole-dataset ground true gradient

gradient error

Figure 1. An illustrative example comparing the convergence trajectories of the baseline ABMIL without dropout (Left) and ABMIL with the proposed MIL-Dropout (Right). ABMIL without
dropout is likely to follow an incorrect gradient direction initially
and eventually converge to a sharp minimum. In contrast, ABMIL
with the proposed MIL-Dropout typically achieves a lower gradient direction error and reaches a flatter minimum with a better
generalization.

bag), making it a weakly-supervised classification method
due to the absence of instance-level labels. MIL has been applied to various fields (Zhu et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2024b),
including digital pathology (Ilse et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021;
Shao et al., 2021), video analysis (Babenko et al., 2010;
Quellec et al., 2017), and time series classification (Early
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024b). In particular, MIL is a
defacto standard for histological whole slide image (WSI)
classification in digital pathology. This is because WSIs
are gigapixel images, making them challenging to process
using traditional machine learning or deep learning methods. A WSI is treated as a bag comprising a collection of
smaller tiles, each regarded as an instance. The MIL model
takes a collection of WSI tiles as input and then assigns a
single label to an entire WSI (e.g., malignant). Due to a
large number of instances within a bag, deep learning based
MIL methods (Wang et al., 2018b; Ilse et al., 2018; Shao
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2024; Qiu et al.,
2023) typically necessitate a two-stage learning scheme,
where features are first extracted by a pre-trained backbone
and then combined by an MIL aggregator. However, this
suboptimal training scheme suffers from ”noisy” feature
embeddings, typically resulting in reduced performance.

1. Introduction
Multiple instance learning (MIL) has gained significant attention in machine learning applications. MIL assigns a
single label (bag-level label) to a collection of instances (a
*

1
Equal contribution
Arizona State University, USA.
Washington University in St. Louis, USA. 3 Clemson University,
USA.. Correspondence to: Wenhui Zhu <wzhu59@asu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

