Online Robust Reinforcement Learning Through Monte-Carlo Planning

Tuan Dam * 1 Kishan Panaganti * 2 Brahim Driss * 3 Adam Wierman 2

Abstract

Search (MCTS) algorithm, in conjunction with deep learning methods, solve complex decision-making problems in
high-dimensional environments. Its celebrated success stories include autonomous RL decision-making agents playing board games Chess, Go, Shogi (Silver et al., 2016;
Schrittwieser et al., 2020), Poker (Brown and Sandholm,
2018; Keshavarzi and Navidi, 2025), and solving various real-world challenging tasks like robotics and autonomous systems (Hoel et al., 2019; Kartal et al., 2019;
Dam et al., 2022). MCTS offers a principled way to balance exploration and exploitation by using combinatorial
search mechanisms derived from online simulated trajectories. As a result, MCTS can effectively promote the exploration of promising regions of the environment with only
partial modeling information of the environment.

Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a powerful framework for solving complex decisionmaking problems, yet it often relies on the assumption that the simulator and the real-world
dynamics are identical. Although this assumption helps achieve the success of MCTS in
games like Chess, Go, and Shogi, the real-world
scenarios incur ambiguity due to their modeling mismatches in low-fidelity simulators. In
this work, we present a new robust variant of
MCTS that mitigates dynamical model ambiguities. Our algorithm addresses transition dynamics and reward distribution ambiguities to
bridge the gap between simulation-based planning and real-world deployment. We incorporate a robust power mean backup operator and
carefully designed exploration bonuses to ensure
finite-sample convergence at every node in the
search tree. We show that our algorithm achieves
a convergence rate of O(n−1/2 ) for the value estimation at the root node, comparable to that of
standard MCTS. Finally, we provide empirical
evidence that our method achieves robust performance in planning problems even under significant ambiguity in the underlying reward distribution and transition dynamics.

However, most of these successes are limited to structured
or simulated environments. As successful as RL algorithms
are, an issue in applying them to real-world dynamical systems is the unavoidable discrepancy between the simulators and the actual real-world system dynamics. In traditional RL approaches (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Salvato et al.,
2021), transition models are often learned from data collected by interacting with simulator models to avoid unsafe
interactions with real-world systems, and reward models
may be subject to stochasticity, hacked rewards, or unmodeled external factors. Such ambiguities arise from a variety of sources: limited training data, non-stationary environments, adversarial conditions, partial observability, or
simply modeling simplifications. These factors can lead to
a so-called simulation-to-reality gap, where the policy or
value function that appears optimal in the simulated environment may perform poorly when deployed in the real
world. A natural approach to addressing these challenges is
to incorporate robustness against simulation-to-reality gaps
directly into the planning algorithm.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a statistical machine learning framework to interact with the environments—such as autonomous vehicles, agile robots, and network systems—sequentially and learn to take control actions to achieve the desired objective. Monte Carlo Tree

RL agents making decisions under the framework of Robust Markov Decision Processes (RMDPs) (Iyengar, 2005;
Nilim and El Ghaoui, 2005) offer a principled mechanism
to conceptualize robustness against transition model and
reward model mismatches raised by simulation-to-reality
gaps. These robust RL agents explore policies that maximize expected returns under the worst-case model within
a prescribed ambiguity set. The ambiguity set is typically
constructed as a ball around the simulator dynamics or re-

*

Equal contribution 1 Hanoi University of Science and
Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam 2 Department of Computing and
Mathematical Sciences, California Insitute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA 3 Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale
Lille, UMR 9189-CRIStAL. Correspondence to: Tuan Dam
<tuandq@soict.hust.edu.vn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

