Learning Dynamics in Continual Pre-Training for Large Language Models

Xingjin Wang 1 2 Howe Tissue

Lu Wang 3 Linjing Li 1 2 Daniel Dajun Zeng 1 2

Abstract

Continual Pre-Training (CPT) of LLMs aims to enhance
their abilities in specific downstream domains (e.g. coding,
finance, math) while mitigating the substantial costs associated with re-training (Chen et al., 2023a; Çağatay Yıldız
et al., 2024; Ibrahim et al., 2024).

Continual Pre-Training (CPT) is a popular and
effective method for applying strong foundation
models to specific downstream tasks. In this
work, we explore the learning dynamics throughout the CPT process for large language models.
We specifically focus on how general and downstream domain performance evolves at each training step, with performance measured by validation losses. We observe that the CPT loss curve
fundamentally characterizes a transition from an
initial pre-training trajectory to a new, domainspecific one, conceptualized as a shift between
two hidden loss curves. This transition can be
described by decoupling the effects of distribution shift and learning rate annealing. We derive
a CPT scaling law that combines these two factors, enabling the prediction of loss at any (continual) training step and across various learning rate
schedules. Our formulation presents a comprehensive understanding of several critical factors
in CPT, including loss potential, peak learning
rate, training steps, and replay ratio. Moreover,
our approach can be adapted to optimize training
hyper-parameters for different CPT goals, such
as balancing general and domain-specific performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our scaling law holds across various CPT datasets
and hyper-parameters.

CPT primarily involves a trade-off between performance
on general and downstream domains. It is widely observed
that improvements on downstream tasks may come at the
expense of degrading performance on general domain tasks,
a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (French,
1999; Gupta et al., 2023). Recently, some scaling laws have
been proposed for CPT scenarios. For example, Hernandez
et al. (2021b) and Barnett (2024) discovered a law describing how data transfer effectiveness scales with fine-tuning
dataset size and model size. Que et al. (2024) and Gu et al.
(2024) proposed a law to find the optimal replay ratio to
balance general and downstream performances.
However, very few studies have attempted to quantitatively
describe the learning dynamics of CPT, particularly how
performance varies on general and downstream domains
throughout the CPT process. We have two primary research
questions (RQs): (1) Can we derive an accurate law describing the influence of as many variables as possible on
the final CPT performance? (2) Can we trace the performance of LLMs throughout the entire CPT process, rather
than only the final performance? Studying the first RQ will
help researchers investigate various factors that affect CPT
performance and facilitate hyper-parameters optimization
through prediction; studying the second RQ will help the
community understand the learning dynamics of LLMs at
each step of the CPT process, providing deeper insights and
theoretical guidance for subsequent CPT research.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have exhibited versatile abilities and garnered significant academic
and industrial attention (Dubey et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2023).

Following previous works (Gupta et al., 2023; Ibrahim et al.,
2024; Que et al., 2024), we trace performance changes
using validation losses on corresponding domains. We find
that the CPT loss curve acts as a transfer curve and can be
described by decoupling the effects of distribution shift and
learning rate (LR) annealing. Specifically, the distribution
shift between the pre-training (PT) and CPT data leads to a
deviation in the loss curve, while LR annealing results in a
loss decrease in both the PT and CPT phases. By analyzing
various loss curves, we discover a CPT scaling law that
integrates these two factors, enabling accurate prediction of

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 State Key Laboratory
of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 RitzzAI. lwzzfzl@gmail.com. Correspondence to: Howe Tissue
(project lead) <h-sun20@tsinghua.org.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

