Improving Model Alignment Through
Collective Intelligence of Open-Source Models

Junlin Wang 1 Roy Xie 1 Shang Zhu 2 Jue Wang 2 Ben Athiwaratkun 2 Bhuwan Dhingra 1
Shuaiwen Leon Song 2 Ce Zhang 2 3 James Zou 2 4

Abstract
Building helpful and harmless large language
models (LLMs) requires effective model alignment approach based on human instructions and
feedback, which necessitates high-quality humanlabeled data. Constructing such datasets is often expensive and hard to scale, and may face
potential limitations on diversity and generalization. To address these challenges, we introduce
Mixture of Agents Alignment (MoAA), that leverages the collective strengths of various language
models to provide high-quality data for model
alignment. By employing MoAA, we enhance
both supervised fine-tuning and preference optimization, leading to improved performance compared to using a single model alone to generate
alignment data (e.g. using GPT-4o alone). Evaluation results show that our approach can improve win rate of LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct from
19.5 to 48.3 on Arena-Hard and from 22.33 to
57.23 on AlpacaEval2, highlighting a promising
direction for model alignment through this new
scalable and diverse synthetic data recipe. Furthermore, we demonstrate that MoAA enables
a self-improvement pipeline, where models finetuned on MoA-generated data surpass their own
initial capabilities, providing evidence that our approach can push the frontier of open-source LLMs
without reliance on stronger external supervision.
Data and code will be released.

Figure 1: SFT results using different models to generate
synthetic data. Baseline is the original LLaMA-3.1-8BInstruct model. Random Teacher means we distill from
datasets labeled by one of the five LLMs randomly used in
our MoA setup. Combined Teacher means we distill from
datasets labeled by five LLMs combined used in our MoA
setup (five times data). More details in Section 4.2.

(Ouyang et al., 2022a; Bai et al., 2022). A well-established
model alignment protocol includes supervised finetuning
(SFT) (Zhang et al., 2023) and reinforcement learning with
human feedback (RLHF) (Casper et al., 2023). During the
SFT stage, models imitate the human-level responses by
learning from an instruction dataset; hence, the data quality
often determines the finetuned model’s instruction following capability. Following the SFT stage, RLHF further
enhances the model alignment by constructing a reward
model that emulates human preferences, based on which
policy optimization is conducted to maximize the reward
objective (Ouyang et al., 2022a). Direct preference optimization (DPO) further simplifies the RLHF strategy by directly
optimizing LLMs on the preference data and learning an
implicit reward function, which is proved to be effective
on model alignment (Rafailov et al., 2023). The quality for
both instruction and preference data determines the performance of model alignment. To alleviate the high cost of
human-crafted datasets (Köpf et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023;
Longpre et al., 2023), synthetic data (Ding et al., 2023; Taori
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c) can be created by automating the response collection process via stronger LLMs such
as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a). However, the quality and potential biases from a single strong model may deteriorate the

1. Introduction
Model alignment is a crucial stage of training large language
models (LLMs) towards their safe and helpful deployment
1

Duke University 2 Together AI 3 University of Chicago
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Junlin Wang <junlin.wang2@duke.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

