The Diffusion Duality

Subham Sekhar Sahoo 1 Justin Deschenaux 2 Aaron Gokaslan 1 Guanghan Wang 1 Justin Chiu 3
Volodymyr Kuleshov 1

Abstract
Uniform-state discrete diffusion models hold
the promise of fast text generation due to their
inherent ability to self-correct. However, they are
typically outperformed by autoregressive models
and masked diffusion models. In this work, we
narrow this performance gap by leveraging a
key insight: Uniform-state diffusion processes
naturally emerge from an underlying Gaussian
diffusion. Our method, Duo, transfers powerful
techniques from Gaussian diffusion to improve
both training and sampling. First, we introduce
a curriculum learning strategy guided by the
Gaussian process, doubling training speed by
reducing variance. Models trained with curriculum learning surpass autoregressive models in
zero-shot perplexity on 3 of 7 benchmarks. Second, we present Discrete Consistency Distillation,
which adapts consistency distillation from the
continuous to the discrete setting. This algorithm
unlocks few-step generation in diffusion
language models by accelerating sampling by
two orders of magnitude. We provide the code
and model checkpoints on the project page:
https://s-sahoo.com/duo

Figure 1: An illustration of Uniform-state discrete diffusion (top) and the underlying Gaussian diffusion (bottom). While both are separate Markov processes, applying
arg max maps Gaussian latents wt ∈ Rn to discrete latents
zt ∈ V, transforming their marginals from q̃t (.∣x; α̃t ) (6) to
qt (.∣x; T (α̃t )) (1) and adjusting diffusion parameters from
α̃t to αt = T (α̃t ) (10). Notably, the ELBO for Uniformstate diffusion induces a tighter bound on the likelihood than
Gaussian diffusion, as established in Theorem 3.1.

ues this tradition by demonstrating that a discrete diffusion
process is, in fact, an emergent phenomenon of an underlying continuous Gaussian diffusion process. This perspective
enables the design of faster training and sampling algorithms
for discrete diffusion models.

1. Introduction

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) are powerful generative models inspired by physics. Gaussian diffusion models excel at synthesizing realistic and high-quality
continuous-valued data such as images (Ho et al., 2020;
Rombach et al., 2022), audio (Kong et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2023b), and videos (Ho et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Esser
et al., 2023; Blattmann et al., 2023). Gaussian diffusion
is well studied–the success of these models is rooted in
techniques such as efficient parameterizations of the denoising model, which improve upon the standard meanparameterization (Ho et al., 2020; Salimans & Ho, 2022;
Zheng et al., 2023), faster training techniques (Kingma et al.,
2021), efficient samplers (Karras et al., 2022), and distillation schemes that enable single-step generation (Song et al.,
2023; Song & Dhariwal, 2023; Yin et al., 2024).

An eternal theme in mathematics is that discreteness
emerges from underlying continuity. From quantum mechanics, where the quantized energy states of electrons arise
as solutions to continuous wave equations, to the binary
logic of digital circuits, fundamentally driven by smooth
analog currents, discreteness has repeatedly and naturally
emerged from an underlying continuum. Our work contin1

Computer and Information Science, Cornell Tech, NY, USA.
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL Lausanne, Switzerland 3 Cohere, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Subham Sekhar Sahoo <ssahoo@cs.cornell.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

