COExpander: Adaptive Solution Expansion for Combinatorial Optimization

Jiale Ma * 1 2 Wenzheng Pan * 1 Yang Li 1 2 Junchi Yan 1 2

Abstract

ing (near) optimal solutions within reasonable time remains
a daunting challenge. Over the past decade, the neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) community (Zhang et al.,
2023; Guo et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024) has fostered copious work to explore the potential of data-driven methods for
CO solvers and have shown considerable promise in terms
of both effectiveness and efficiency of problem solving.

Despite rapid progress in neural combinatorial
optimization (NCO) for solving CO problems
(COPs), as the problem scale grows, several bottlenecks persist: 1) solvers of the Global Prediction (GP) paradigm struggle in long-range
decisions where the overly smooth intermediate heatmaps impede effective decoding, and 2)
solvers of the Local Construction (LC) paradigm
are time-consuming and incapable of tackling
large instances due to the onerous auto-regressive
process. Observing these challenges, we propose
a new paradigm named Adaptive Expansion (AE)
with its instantiation COExpander, positioned to
leverage both advantages of GP and LC. COExpander utilizes informative heatmaps generated
by a global predictor, which is learned under the
guidance of locally determined partial solutions,
to in turn direct the expansion of determined decision variables with adaptive step-sizes. To ensure
transparent evaluation, we further take the lead to
canonicalize 29 benchmarks spanning 6 popular
COPs (MIS, MCl, MVC, MCut, TSP, ATSP) and
various scales (50-10K nodes), upon which experiments demonstrate concrete SOTA performance
of COExpander over these tasks.

Learning-based solvers for CO typically employ neural networks to generate neural predictions for either solution construction or search guidance. Given that divide-and-conquer
(D&C) frameworks (Ye et al., 2024b; Zheng et al., 2024)
and solution optimization approaches (Chen & Tian, 2019;
Ma et al., 2023) are theoretically orthogonal to and practically applicable over the main solving stage, in this paper,
we focus on the core part of NCO, i.e., the acquisition of solutions for COPs, and categorize the mainstream neural CO
solvers into two paradigms1 based on the way the solutions
are constructed. As the first type, Local Construction (LC)
methods (Kool et al. (2018); Berto et al. (2024); Drakulic
et al. (2023); Pan et al. (2025), etc.) cast COPs as Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) and the neural networks are
trained to predict the best next-step action given the current
state. This process continues until a complete solution is
assembled, as depicted in Fig. 4 (a). While LC solvers effectively decompose the solving process into the step-by-step
construction to leverage local states for the next decision,
they suffer from a lack of global perspective and encounter
scalability problems due to the laborious and myopic autoregression. On the other hand, Global Prediction (GP)
approaches (Joshi et al. (2019); Qiu et al. (2022); Sun &
Yang (2023); Li et al. (2023; 2024; 2025), etc.) use neural
networks to globally predict the likelihood of each node
or edge being selected, and then decode the probability
heatmaps (via heuristics as simple as greedy) to obtain solutions, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). This paradigm provides global
guidance mapped from the entire graph structure for constructing the solution. However, as problem scales increase,
the predicted heatmap through one-shot inference tends to
be overly smooth (with many noisily similar values), hindering its guiding effect for the subsequent decoding procedure.
We delineate these observations in Appendix B.2 and B.3.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) possess extensive applications in diverse fields including logistics (Wang
& Tang, 2021), transportation (Baty et al., 2024), supply
chain management (Singh & Rizwanullah, 2022), and network design (Paschos, 2014), in search of optimal solutions
within discrete states. However, due to the inherent NPhardness for most (especially large-scale) COPs, approach*

Equal contribution 1 Sch. of Artificial Intelligence & Sch.
of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai
Innovation Institute. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>. This work is partly supported by NSFC
(62222607, 623B1009). Code available at github repository.

The issues of these two paradigms can be generalized as

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

A paradigm is detached from any particular model or solver.

