AdaWorld: Learning Adaptable World Models with Latent Actions

Shenyuan Gao 1 Siyuan Zhou 1 Yilun Du 2 Jun Zhang 1 Chuang Gan 3 4
adaptable-world-model.github.io

Abstract
World models aim to learn action-controlled future prediction and have proven essential for the
development of intelligent agents. However, most
existing world models rely heavily on substantial action-labeled data and costly training, making it challenging to adapt to novel environments
with heterogeneous actions through limited interactions. This limitation can hinder their applicability across broader domains. To overcome this
limitation, we propose AdaWorld, an innovative
world model learning approach that enables efficient adaptation. The key idea is to incorporate
action information during the pretraining of world
models. This is achieved by extracting latent actions from videos in a self-supervised manner,
capturing the most critical transitions between
frames. We then develop an autoregressive world
model that conditions on these latent actions. This
learning paradigm enables highly adaptable world
models, facilitating efficient transfer and learning of new actions even with limited interactions
and finetuning. Our comprehensive experiments
across multiple environments demonstrate that
AdaWorld achieves superior performance in both
simulation quality and visual planning.

Figure 1. Different world model learning paradigms. Prior methods often require expensive labeling and training to achieve action
controllability in new environments. To overcome this, we introduce latent actions as a unified condition for action-aware pretraining from videos, enabling highly adaptable world modeling. Our
world model, dubbed AdaWorld, can readily transfer actions across
contexts without training. By initializing the control interface with
the corresponding latent actions, AdaWorld can also be adapted
into specialized world models efficiently and achieve significantly
better planning results than the action-agnostic baseline.

1. Introduction
Intelligent agents should perform effectively across various
tasks (Reed et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022; Durante et al.,
2024; Raad et al., 2024). A promising solution to this objective is developing world models that can simulate different environments (Wu et al., 2023; 2024; Yang et al.,
2024c; Hansen et al., 2024). Recent world models are typically initialized from pretrained video models (Xiang et al.,
2024; Agarwal et al., 2025; He et al., 2025). Despite im-

proved generalization, these models still require substantial
action labels and high training costs to acquire precise action controllability. While pseudo labels can be annotated
for videos (Baker et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022), defining
a unified action format for general environments is challenging. As a result, existing methods often require costly
training when adapting to new environments with varying
action specifications (Gao et al., 2024; Chi et al., 2024;
Che et al., 2025). These limitations pose great challenges
for transferring and learning new actions based on limited

1
HKUST 2 Harvard 3 UMass Amherst 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI
Lab. Primary contact to Shenyuan Gao <sygao@connect.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

