Unconstrained Robust Online Convex Optimization

Jiujia Zhang 1 Ashok Cutkosky 1

Abstract

known diameter D and a Lipschitz bound G ≥ maxt ∥g
√ t ∥.
In this setting, the optimal bound is RT (u) ≤ O(GD T )
(Zinkevich, 2003; Abernethy et al., 2008).

This paper addresses online learning with “corrupted” feedback. Our learner is provided with
potentially corrupted gradients g̃t instead of the
“true” gradients gt . We make no assumptions
about how the corruptions arise: they could be
the result of outliers, mislabeled data, or even
malicious interference. We focus on the difficult
“unconstrained” setting in which our algorithm
must maintain low regret with respect to any comparison point u ∈ Rd . The unconstrained setting
is significantly more challenging as existing algorithms suffer extremely high regret even with
very tiny amounts of corruption (which is not
true in the case of a bounded √
domain). Our algorithms guarantee regret ∥u∥G( T + k) when
G ≥ maxt ∥gt ∥ is known, where k is a measure
of the total amount of corruption. When G is
unknown we incur an extra additive penalty of
(∥u∥2 + G2 )k.

Our work focuses on the unconstrained case W = Rd ,
where it is typical to aim for a regret guarantee that scales
not with a uniform diameter bound D, but with the norm
of the comparator ∥u∥. Such bounds are often called
“comparator adaptive” (because they adapt to the comparator u), or “parameter-free” (because this adaptivity suggests that the algorithms require less hyperparameter tuning). In this unconstrained setting,
√ the classical algorithms
achieve RT (u) = Õ(∥u∥G T ) (Mcmahan & Streeter,
2012; McMahan & Orabona, 2014; Orabona & Pál, 2016;
Orabona, 2014) (which is also optimal).
We are interested in a harder variant of the OCO framework
with “corrupted” gradients. Specifically, instead of any
direct information about the function ℓt , after each round the
learner is provided with a vector g̃t that should be interpreted
as an estimate of gt =√
∇ℓt (wt ). Our aim is to obtain a regret
that scales as ∥u∥G( T + k) for all u ∈ W, where k is
some measure of the degree to which g̃t ̸= gt that will be
formally defined in Section 2. Roughly speaking, k can
be interpreted as the number of rounds in which g̃t ̸= gt .
Notably, the desired rate is robust to√
adversarial corruptions
in the sense that it allows k = O( T ) before the bound
becomes worse than the optimal result without corruptions.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider unconstrained online convex optimization (OCO) under the presence of adversarial corruptions. In general, OCO is a framework in which a learner iteratively outputs a prediction wt ∈ W, then observes a vector
gt = ∇ℓt (wt ) for some convex loss function ℓt : W → R,
and then incurs a loss of ℓt (wt ). The learner’s performance
over a time horizon T is evaluated by the regret relative to a
fixed competitor u ∈ W, denoted as RT (u):
RT (u) :=

T
X
t=1

⟨gt , wt − u⟩ ≥

T
X

Our dual challenges of corrupted g̃t and unconstrained W
are naturally motivated by problems in practice. The unconstrained setting is ubiquitous in machine learning - consider
the classical logistic regression setting, for which it is unusual to impose constraints. The corrupted g̃t in contrast is
less commonly studied, but represents a common practical
issue: the computed gradients may not be good estimates of
a “true” gradient, either due to the presence of statistical outliers, numerical precision issues in the gradient computation,
or mislabeled or otherwise damaged data.

ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (u)

t=1

The inequality above follows by convexity of ℓt . Classical
results in this field consider a bounded domain W with

We distinguish two different settings in our results: one
in which the algorithm is provided with prior knowledge
of a number G ≥ maxt ∥gt ∥, and one in which it is
not. This is a common dichotomy in unconstrained OCO,
even without corruptions.
In the former case, the classi√
cal result of Õ(∥u∥G T ) is obtainable, while in the latter
case it is not: instead the optimal results are RT (u) ≤

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston
University, Boston, USA. Correspondence to: Jiujia Zhang <jiujiaz@bu.edu>, Ashok Cutkosky <ashok@cutkosky.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

