Dynamic Sparse Training of Diagonally Sparse Networks

Abhishek Tyagi 1 Arjun Iyer 2 William H Renninger 2 Christopher Kanan 1 Yuhao Zhu 1

Abstract
Recent advances in Dynamic Sparse Training
(DST) have pushed the frontier of sparse neural
network training in structured and unstructured
contexts, matching dense-model performance
while drastically reducing parameter counts to
facilitate model scaling. However, unstructured
sparsity often fails to translate into practical
speedups on modern hardware. To address this
shortcoming, we propose DynaDiag, a novel
structured sparse-to-sparse DST method that performs at par with unstructured sparsity. DynaDiag enforces a diagonal sparsity pattern throughout training and preserves sparse computation
in forward and backward passes. We further
leverage the diagonal structure to accelerate computation via a custom CUDA kernel, rendering
the method hardware-friendly. Empirical evaluations on diverse neural architectures demonstrate that our method maintains accuracy on
par with unstructured counterparts while benefiting from tangible computational gains. Notably, with 90% sparse linear layers in ViTs, we
observe up to a 3.13x speedup in online inference without sacrificing model performance and a
1.59x speedup in training on a GPU compared
to equivalent unstructured layers. Our source
code is available at https://github.com/
horizon-research/DynaDiag/.

1.1

1.02

1.0
76.5

77.5

1.0
76.5

77.5

Figure 1: Comparing the inference (left) and training
speedups (right) (calculated using wall-clock time) of sparse
training methods and the Top-1 classification accuracy
(x-axis) for a ViT-Base model at 90% sparsity running
ImageNet-1K. DynaDiag, being closest to the top right corner, demonstrates superior accuracy and speedup compared
to structured and unstructured sparse training approaches.

One way to reduce the execution cost of these networks and
still perform at par with their dense counterparts (Frankle &
Carbin, 2018; Blalock et al., 2020; Mostafa & Wang, 2019)
is to compress them by removing unnecessary weights using
methods such as pruning (Molchanov et al., 2016; Tanaka
et al., 2020), and sparse training (Jaiswal et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2023b).
Weights are typically pruned either randomly (unstructured
sparsity (Evci et al., 2020; Han et al., 2015)) or in patterns
(structured sparsity (Liu et al., 2019)). Unstructured sparsity
achieves high sparsity ratios with minimal performance loss
but lacks hardware acceleration. Structured sparsity, while
hardware-friendly, has yet to match the performance of
unstructured approaches.

1. Introduction
Over the years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have grown,
and their performance on complex tasks has increased to and
beyond human-level performance (Sparkes, 2023; Lykiardopoulou, 2023). However, the cost of training and inference for such large DNNs has skyrocketed (Cottier, 2023).

Current structured sparsity methods face two key issues.
First, they often use dense backpropagation (Lasby et al.,
2023), resulting in negligible training speedup. Even when
sparse gradients are computed, transposing weight matrices in backpropagation breaks hardware-friendly patterns,
hindering acceleration (Hubara et al., 2021). Second, these
methods struggle with high sparsity, suffering significant

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY, USA 2 The Institute of Optics, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Abhishek
Tyagi <atyagi2@ur.rochester.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

