From Logits to Hierarchies: Hierarchical Clustering made Simple

Emanuele Palumbo 1 2 Moritz Vandenhirtz 2 Alain Ryser 2 Imant Daunhawer⋆ 2 Julia E. Vogt⋆ 2

Abstract

tering can provide more accurate insights than flat (i.e.,
non-hierarchical) clustering methods by introducing multiple levels of granularity and alleviating the need for a
fixed number of clusters specified a priori (Bertsimas et al.,
2021; Chami et al., 2020). This aids scientific understanding and interpretability by providing a more informative
representation (Lipton, 2018; Marcinkevičs & Vogt, 2020).
The benefits of modeling hierarchies in the data extend to
supervised scenarios. For example, interpretable methods
based on decision trees (Breiman, 2001; Tanno et al., 2019)
hierarchically partition the data so that points in each split
are linearly separable into classes. More recent work leverages hierarchies in the data to improve supervised methods
(Bertinetto et al., 2020; Goren et al., 2024; Karthik et al.,
2021) or for self-supervision (Long & van Noord, 2023).

The hierarchical structure inherent in many realworld datasets makes the modeling of such hierarchies a crucial objective in both unsupervised
and supervised machine learning. While recent
advancements have introduced deep architectures
specifically designed for hierarchical clustering,
we adopt a critical perspective on this line of research. Our findings reveal that these methods
face significant limitations in scalability and performance when applied to realistic datasets. Given
these findings, we present an alternative approach
and introduce a lightweight method that builds
on pre-trained non-hierarchical clustering models.
Remarkably, our approach outperforms specialized deep models for hierarchical clustering, and
it is broadly applicable to any pre-trained clustering model that outputs logits, without requiring
any fine-tuning. To highlight the generality of our
approach, we extend its application to a supervised setting, demonstrating its ability to recover
meaningful hierarchies from a pre-trained ImageNet classifier. Our results establish a practical
and effective alternative to existing deep hierarchical clustering methods, with significant advantages in efficiency, scalability and performance.

Among classic algorithms for hierarchical clustering, agglomerative methods have been the most widely adopted.
These methods compute pairwise distances between data
points, often in a lower-dimensional representation space.
Starting from the instance level, a hierarchy is then built
based on the pairwise distances by recursive agglomeration
of similar points or clusters together in a bottom-up fashion (Murtagh & Contreras, 2011). More recently, a revived
interest in hierarchical clustering has sparked novel, sophisticated approaches using deep architectures (Mautz et al.,
2020; Goyal et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2019; Vikram et al.,
2019; Manduchi et al., 2023). These approaches require specialized architectures and complex training schemes. In this
work, we uncover two key limitations of these approaches.
First, we find that these methods struggle to handle largescale datasets, failing to deliver satisfactory performance.
This is in part due to their high computational demands and
in part due to the difficulty in modeling a large number of
clusters. Second, we observe a notable gap in performance
at the leaf level compared to non-hierarchical models. This
is particularly problematic, as the advantage of introducing
a hierarchy should not come at the expense of the quality of
clustering at the leaf-level granularity. These limitations underscore the need for more scalable and effective approaches
for hierarchical clustering.

1. Introduction
Modeling hierarchical structures in the data is a longstanding goal in machine learning research (Bengio et al.,
2013; Jordan & Mitchell, 2015). In many real-world scenarios, data is inherently organized in hierarchies, such
as phylogenetic trees (Linnæus, 1758; Sneath & Sokal,
1962; Penny, 2004), tumor subclasses (Sørlie et al., 2001)
and social networks (Ravasz & Barabási, 2003; Crockett
et al., 2017). In unsupervised learning, hierarchical clus⋆

Shared last authorship 1 ETH AI Center, Zurich. 2 Department
of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Emanuele
Palumbo <emanuele.palumbo@inf.ethz.ch>.

Given these findings, we take a critical perspective on recent research on deep hierarchical clustering and offer a
straightforward yet effective alternative. Rather than designing specialized hierarchical clustering models, we de-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

