On the Query Complexity of Verifier-Assisted Language Generation

Edoardo Botta * 1 Yuchen Li * 1 Aashay Mehta * 1 Jordan T. Ash 2 Cyril Zhang 2 Andrej Risteski 1

Abstract

plest form, called best-of-N, the language model generates
N candidate responses, which are then scored by the verifier,
and the highest-scored candidate response is chosen as the
output of the inference process (Cobbe et al., 2021; Nakano
et al., 2022). If the verifier can score partial generations
(sometimes called process reward), the space for inferencetime algorithms gets much richer: e.g., the final answer
can be generated incrementally, using the verifier to guide
the process (e.g., by incremental (blockwise) best-of-N, or
more complicated strategies like Monte-Carlo-Tree-Search
(Browne et al., 2012; Hao et al., 2023)). Importantly, though
a flurry of recent papers consider “scaling laws” of natural strategies, the algorithm design space of verifier-aided
inference-time algorithms is still opaque. In particular, the
value of a verifier—and the relationship it needs to have to
the generator is not well understood.

Recently, a plethora of works have proposed
inference-time algorithms (e.g. best-of-n), which
incorporate verifiers to assist the generation process. Their quality-efficiency trade-offs have been
empirically benchmarked on a variety of constrained generation tasks, but the algorithmic design landscape is still largely poorly understood.
In this paper, we develop a mathematical framework for reasoning about constrained generation
using a pre-trained language model generator oracle and a process verifier—which can decide
whether a prefix can be extended to a string which
satisfies the constraints of choice. We show that
even in very simple settings, access to a verifier
can render an intractable problem (informationtheoretically or computationally) to a tractable
one. In fact, we show even simple algorithms,
like tokenwise rejection sampling, can enjoy significant benefits from access to a verifier. Empirically, we show that a natural modification of
tokenwise rejection sampling, in which the sampler is allowed to “backtrack” (i.e., erase the final
few generated tokens) has robust and substantive
benefits over natural baselines (e.g. (blockwise)
rejection sampling, nucleus sampling)—both in
terms of computational efficiency, accuracy and
diversity. 1

In this paper, we show that a good verifier can substantially
(both in theory and in practice) decrease the computational
cost of natural generation tasks, using a pre-trained language
model as an oracle. In particular, we show that:
• Even simple constrained generation tasks—where we
are trying to generate a string in the support of a language oracle, subject to some structural constraint (e.g.
describable as a simple formal language, like a regular
language)—can be computationally intractable in the
absence of a verifier.
• Conversely, access to a good process verifier, one
that can decide whether a prefix can be completed
to a constraint-satisfying string, can remove these intractabilities. Moreover, even simple algorithms like
tokenwise rejection sampling—wherein we generate
the string one token at a time, using the process verifier
as a means to accept or reject—can have substantive
computational benefits over the baseline of rejection
sampling.

1. Introduction
The fast-evolving area of inference-time algorithms concerns itself with leveraging the already-impressive capabilities of language models (Raffel et al., 2020; Brown et al.,
2020; Touvron et al., 2023), together with a verifier which
can score generations of the language model. In the sim*
1
Equal contribution
Carnegie Mellon University
Microsoft Research NYC. Correspondence to: Yuchen
Li <yuchenl4@cs.cmu.edu>,
Andrej Risteski <aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu>.

• Finally, on natural constrained generation tasks—
namely, generating test cases for Python functions with
a pretrained CodeLlama (Roziere et al., 2023)—a verifier can be trained, such that a simple, but natural
generalization of tokenwise rejection sampling which
is allowed to “backtrack” the last few generated tokens, achieves substantial benefits in computational
efficiency, accuracy, and diversity of the generations.

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our codes are released at https://github.com/
YuchenLi01/LM_Query_Complexity

1

