Hybrid Spiking Vision Transformer for
Object Detection with Event Cameras

Qi Xu 1 Jie Deng 1 Jiangrong Shen † 2 3 4 Biwu Chen 5 Huajin Tang 4 6 Gang Pan † 4 6

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep neural networks have garnered considerable attention
for their remarkable performance across a spectrum of tasks,
ranging from computer vision to natural language processing. The exceptional performance is primarily attributed to
their intricate and specialized architectures. Notably, the
Transformer architecture (Beal et al., 2020; Carion et al.,
2020; Guo et al., 2023) has demonstrated outstanding efficacy in object detection tasks, albeit at the expense of
heightened energy consumption due to its intricate structure.
In parallel, drawing inspiration from the event-driven nature
of the human brain, spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Hu
et al., 2023a;b; Xu et al., 2023; 2024b; Xiao et al., 2025)
offer distinct advantages, including low energy consumption and rich spatiotemporal dynamics. The emergence of
neuromorphic hardware such as Darwin3 (Ma et al., 2024)
further supports efficient on-chip learning with a novel instruction set architecture. Recent studies have also advanced
the efficiency, compressibility, and biological plausibility
of SNNs (Xu et al., 2024a; Shen et al., 2025; 2024). In this
context, our study explores the integration of Transformerbased Artificial neural networks (ANNs) and SNNs, aiming
to combine their respective advantages in a hybrid framework for efficient object detection.

Event-based object detection has attracted increasing attention for its high temporal resolution, wide
dynamic range, and asynchronous address-event
representation. Leveraging these advantages, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have emerged as
a promising approach, offering low energy consumption and rich spatiotemporal dynamics. To
further enhance the performance of event-based
object detection, this study proposes a novel hybrid spike vision Transformer (HsVT) model. The
HsVT model integrates a spatial feature extraction module to capture local and global features,
and a temporal feature extraction module to model
time dependencies and long-term patterns in event
sequences. This combination enables HsVT to
capture spatiotemporal features, improving its
capability in handling complex event-based object detection tasks. To support research in this
area, we developed the Fall Detection dataset as a
benchmark for event-based object detection tasks.
The Fall DVS detection dataset protects facial
privacy and reduces memory usage thanks to its
event-based representation. Experimental results
demonstrate that HsVT outperforms existing SNN
methods and achieves competitive performance
compared to ANN-based models, with fewer parameters and lower energy consumption.

Owing to their high time resolution (in the order of microseconds), high dynamic range (> 120dB), and asynchronous address event representation, event cameras have
shown great potential in various vision tasks (Liu et al.,
2024a;b; 2025). In particular, event-based object detection
has attracted increasing attention. Datasets for this task
are typically collected using event cameras, such as the dynamic vision sensor (DVS) (Serrano-Gotarredona & LinaresBarranco, 2013)and ATIS sensor (Posch, 2011). The visual
information of the event camera is represented in the form
of an asynchronous address event stream of {(x, y, p, t)}.
The event stream indicates log-luminosity contrast changes
at time t and position (x, y). Each produced event only appears at the time and positions of a contrast change. Hence,
event-based object detection has the advantage of avoiding
oversampling and motion blur compared with traditional
frame-based object detection. On the one hand, SNNs have
shown potential for event-based object recognition with

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China 2 Faculty of Electronic and
Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xian, China
3
National Key Lab of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xian, China 4 State Key Lab
of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China 5 Shanghai Radio Equipment Research Institute, Shanghai,
China 6 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Jiangrong Shen
<jrshen@zju.edu.cn>, Gang Pan <gpan@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

