Epsilon-VAE: Denoising as Visual Decoding

Long Zhao 1 Sanghyun Woo 1 Ziyu Wan 1 2 * Yandong Li 1 Han Zhang 1 Boqing Gong 1 Hartwig Adam 1
Xuhui Jia 1 Ting Liu 1

Abstract

autoregressive models, while continuous latents enable efficient learning in the denoising process of diffusion models.
In either case, empirical results demonstrate that tokenization enhances generative performance. Here, we focus on
continuous tokenization for latent diffusion models, which
excel at generating high-dimensional visual data.

In generative modeling, tokenization simplifies
complex data into compact, structured representations, creating a more efficient, learnable space.
For high-dimensional visual data, it reduces redundancy and emphasizes key features for highquality generation. Current visual tokenization
methods rely on a traditional autoencoder framework, where the encoder compresses data into latent representations, and the decoder reconstructs
the original input. In this work, we offer a new
perspective by proposing denoising as decoding,
shifting from single-step reconstruction to iterative refinement. Specifically, we replace the decoder with a diffusion process that iteratively refines noise to recover the original image, guided
by the latents provided by the encoder. We evaluate our approach by assessing both reconstruction
(rFID) and generation quality (FID), comparing it
to state-of-the-art autoencoding approaches. By
adopting iterative reconstruction through diffusion, our autoencoder, namely ϵ-VAE, achieves
high reconstruction quality, which in turn enhances downstream generation quality by 22% at
the same compression rates or provides 2.3× inference speedup through increasing compression
rates. We hope this work offers new insights into
integrating iterative generation and autoencoding
for improved compression and generation.

In this paper, we revisit the conventional autoencoding
pipeline, which typically consists of an encoder that compresses the input into a latent representation and a decoder
that reconstructs the original data in a single step. Instead
of a deterministic decoder, we introduce a diffusion process (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021), where the encoder
still compresses the input into a latent representation, but
reconstruction is performed iteratively through denoising.
This reframing turns the reconstruction phase into a progressive refinement process, where the diffusion model, guided
by the latent representation, gradually restores the original data. While previous work (Preechakul et al., 2022)
and concurrent work (Birodkar et al., 2024) have explored
diffusion mechanisms in autoencoding, none have fully realized a practical diffusion-based autoencoder. By carefully
co-designing architecture and objectives, we firstly show
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art autoencoding
paradigms in reconstruction fidelity, sampling efficiency,
and resolution generalization.
To effectively implement our approach, several key design
factors must be carefully considered. First, the architectural
design must ensure that the diffusion decoder is effectively
conditioned on the encoder latent representations. Second,
the training objectives should leverage synergies with traditional autoencoding losses, such as LPIPS (Zhang et al.,
2018) and GAN (Esser et al., 2021). Finally, diffusionspecific design choices play a crucial role, including: (1)
model parameterization, which defines the prediction target for the diffusion decoder; (2) noise scheduling, which
shapes the optimization trajectory; and (3) the distribution of
time steps during training and testing, which balances noise
levels for effective learning and generation. Our study systematically examines these components through controlled
experiments, demonstrating their impact on achieving a
high-performing diffusion-based autoencoder. We show in
the experiments that under the standard configuration (Rombach et al., 2022), our method obtains a 40% improvement in

1. Introduction
Two dominant paradigms in modern visual generative modeling are autoregression (Radford et al., 2018) and diffusion (Ho et al., 2020). Tokenization is essential for both:
discrete tokens allow step-by-step conditional generation in
∗
Work done as a student researcher at Google. 1 Google DeepMind 2 City University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Long
Zhao <longzh@google.com>, Xuhui Jia <xhjia@google.com>,
Ting Liu <liuti@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

