Scaling Laws for Pre-training Agents and World Models

Tim Pearce * 1 Tabish Rashid * 1 David Bignell 1 Raluca Georgescu 1 Sam Devlin 1 Katja Hofmann 1

Abstract

In comparison, less is understood about scaling in embodied AI. Recent high-impact works show increasing model
and dataset size can lead to ever more capable agents for
two pre-training objectives; behavior cloning (BC) (Reed
et al., 2022; Baker et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2023) and
world modeling (WM) (Hafner et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2023; Bruce et al., 2024). Such works typically
demonstrate the benefit of scale through ablations over a few
model sizes, shown in terms of downstream agent performance, confirming the intuition that ‘bigger is better’ (Sartor
& Thompson (2024) provide an aggregated analysis). However, this leaves a large gap to the precise understanding of
scale in LLMs, where for a given increase in compute, models can be sized optimally, and their performance accurately
predicted.

The performance of embodied agents has been
shown to improve by increasing model parameters, dataset size, and compute. This has been
demonstrated in domains from robotics to video
games, when generative learning objectives on
offline datasets (pre-training) are used to model
an agent’s behavior (imitation learning) or their
environment (world modeling). This paper characterizes the role of scale in these tasks more
precisely. Going beyond the simple intuition that
‘bigger is better’, we show that the same types of
power laws found in language modeling also arise
in world modeling and imitation learning (e.g. between loss and optimal model size). However, the
coefficients of these laws are heavily influenced
by the tokenizer, task & architecture – this has
important implications on the optimal sizing of
models and data.

This paper helps close this gap. Similar to the study of scale
in LLMs, we focus on the effect of scaling on a generative
pre-training loss (rather than on downstream agent performance, or reward- or representation-centric objectives), in
the infinite data regime, on a fixed offline dataset. Under
this setting, we train families of transformers on next-token
prediction tasks using architectures popular in both world
modeling and BC tasks. This leads to several contributions,
summarized in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Much progress in AI in the early 2020’s has been driven
by increasing model size, dataset size, and training compute. Whilst conceptually simple, the importance of this
practice has led to an emerging subfield studying the science of scaling. This field answers questions such as how
to estimate the benefit of increased compute investment, or
how to optimally trade-off model and dataset size.

• For the first time, we show scaling laws similar to those in
LLMs can be observed in world modeling with tokenized
observations and actions (Section 4.1, Figure 1a).
• The optimal trade-off between model and dataset size in
world modeling is influenced by the tokenizer’s compression rate (number of tokens per observation) (Section
4.1, Figure 1a & b).

The role of scale in pre-training is so far best understood in
large language models (LLMs). Following the observation
that the empirical relationship between loss and key scaling quantities can be accurately described by power laws
(Kaplan et al., 2020), works studied the precise trade-off
between model and dataset size (Hoffmann et al., 2022), as
well as considering inference compute (Sardana & Frankle,
2023), repeated epochs (Muennighoff et al., 2024), parameter counting (Pearce & Song, 2024) etc. (Section 2.1).

• Scaling laws for BC with tokenized observations are
harder to observe under modest compute budgets. The
optimal trade-off favors smaller models and more data
(Section 4.2, Figure 1c).
• Scaling laws similar to those in LLMs can once again
be observed in BC with one continuous encoding per
observation (Section 4.2, Figure 1d).

*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research (SD now at Meta).
Correspondence to: Tim Pearce <.>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• Our findings can be understood through small-scale language modeling experiments (Section 5).
1

