Transfer Learning for Nonparametric Contextual Dynamic Pricing

Fan Wang 1 Feiyu Jiang 2 Zifeng Zhao 3 Yi Yu 1

Abstract

the rapid growth of online marketplaces and advances in
data collection have further enabled sellers to use contextual information, such as customer characteristics, product
features and market trends, to make more informed pricing
decisions. This has fostered research in contextual dynamic
pricing (e.g. Wang et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024; Fan et al.,
2024), which further incorporates in-depth information to
optimize pricing strategies.

Dynamic pricing strategies are crucial for firms
to maximize revenue by adjusting prices based
on market conditions and customer characteristics. However, designing optimal pricing strategies becomes challenging when historical data
are limited, as is often the case when launching new products or entering new markets. One
promising approach to overcome this limitation is
to leverage information from related products or
markets to inform the focal pricing decisions. In
this paper, we explore transfer learning for nonparametric contextual dynamic pricing under a
covariate shift model, where the marginal distributions of covariates differ between source and
target domains while the reward functions remain
the same. We propose a novel Transfer Learning for Dynamic Pricing (TLDP) algorithm that
can effectively leverage pre-collected data from a
source domain to enhance pricing decisions in the
target domain. The regret upper bound of TLDP is
established under a simple Lipschitz condition on
the reward function. To establish the optimality
of TLDP, we further derive a matching minimax
lower bound, which includes the target-only scenario as a special case and is presented for the first
time in the literature. Extensive numerical experiments validate our approach, demonstrating its
superiority over existing methods and highlighting its practical utility in real-world applications.

Effective dynamic pricing involves balancing the exploration of the unknown revenue model with the exploitation
of the estimated revenue model to maximize rewards. The
revenue model, representing the relationship between covariates, prices and revenue, has been explored under both parametric and nonparametric settings in the literature. The parametric settings impose specific assumptions on the revenue
model and have been widely studied (e.g. Qiang & Bayati,
2016; Javanmard & Nazerzadeh, 2019; Ban & Keskin, 2021;
Wang et al., 2021a; Zhao et al., 2024). The nonparametric
settings provide more flexibility, making them more suitable
for real-world applications where customer behaviour and
market conditions are diverse and unpredictable (e.g. Chen
& Gallego, 2021; Chen et al., 2023).
Despite the wide applications of contextual dynamic pricing, collecting sufficient data to design an optimal pricing
strategy can be challenging, particularly when launching
a new product or entering a new market with limited historical data. In contrast, abundant data may be available
from related products or markets, from which one may leverage information to achieve improved decision-making. For
instance, historical data from other platforms or existing
markets can help sellers optimize pricing strategies more
efficiently when entering new environments. This naturally
falls in the territory of transfer learning (e.g. Pan & Yang,
2009), where datasets from similar but different distributions are utilized to enhance learning of a target dataset.

1. Introduction
Dynamic pricing is a fundamental strategy used across many
industries to maximize revenue by adjusting prices based
on market conditions (e.g. Araman & Caldentey, 2009; Besbes & Zeevi, 2009; Wang et al., 2021b). In recent years,

Transfer learning, as a research area, has been extensively
studied in the machine learning literature, with applications
in areas such as recommendation systems (e.g. Pan et al.,
2010), language models (e.g. Han et al., 2021) and disease
detection (e.g. Maqsood et al., 2019). It has recently also
gained attention in statistics and has been explored in various problems, such as nonparametric regression (Cai & Pu,
2022b), contextual multi-armed bandits (Suk & Kpotufe,

1
Department of Statistics, University of Warwick 2 School
of Management, Fudan University 3 Mendoza College of Business, University of Notre Dame. Correspondence to: Fan Wang
<fan.wang.6@warwick.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

