Normalizing Flows are Capable Generative Models

Shuangfei Zhai 1 Ruixiang Zhang 1 Preetum Nakkiran 1 David Berthelot 1 Jiatao Gu 1 Huangjie Zheng 1
Tianrong Chen 1 Miguel Angel Bautista 1 Navdeep Jaitly 1 Josh Susskind 1

Abstract

AR

NF(Ours)

Diffusion

3.6

Normalizing Flows (NFs) are likelihood-based
models for continuous inputs. They have demonstrated promising results on both density estimation and generative modeling tasks, but have received relatively little attention in recent years.
In this work, we demonstrate that NFs are more
powerful than previously believed. We present
TAR F LOW: a simple and scalable architecture that
enables highly performant NF models. TAR F LOW
can be thought of as a Transformer-based variant of Masked Autoregressive Flows (MAFs): it
consists of a stack of autoregressive Transformer
blocks on image patches, alternating the autoregression direction between layers. TAR F LOW is
straightforward to train end-to-end, and capable
of directly modeling and generating pixels. We
also propose three key techniques to improve sample quality: Gaussian noise augmentation during training, a post training denoising procedure,
and an effective guidance method for both classconditional and unconditional settings. Putting
these together, TAR F LOW sets new state-of-theart results on likelihood estimation for images,
beating the previous best methods by a large margin, and generates samples with quality and diversity comparable to diffusion models, for the
first time with a stand-alone NF model. We make
our code available at https://github.com/apple/mltarflow.

BPD

3.4

Shuangfei

NFDM

VDM

Flow Matching
2021-2024

2024

Figure 1. TAR F LOW demonstrates substantial progress in the domain of normalizing flow models, achieving state-of-the-art results in both density estimation and sample generation. Left: We
show the historical progression of likelihood performance on ImageNet 64x64, measured in bits per dimension (BPD), where our
model significantly outperforms previous methods (see Table 2
for details). Right: Selected samples from our model trained on
ImageNet 128x128 demonstrate unprecedented image quality and
diversity for a normalizing flow model, establishing a new benchmark for this class of generative models.

which is to transform a data distribution into a simple prior
distribution (such as Gaussian noise), keeping track of likelihoods via the change of variable formula. Normalizing
Flows enjoy many unique and appealing properties, including exact likelihood computation, deterministic objective
functions, and efficient computation of both the data generator and its inverse. There has been a large body of work
dedicated to studying and improving NFs, and in fact NFs
were the method of choice for density estimation for a number of years (Dinh et al., 2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018;
Chen et al., 2018; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Ho et al.,
2019). However in spite of this rich line of work, Normalizing Flows have seen limited practical adoption— in
stark contrast to other generative models such as Diffusion
Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) and
Large Language Models (Brown et al., 2020). Moreover,
the state-of-the-art in Normalizing Flows has not kept pace
with the rapid progress of these other generative techniques,
leading to less attention from the research community.

Normalizing Flows (NFs) are a well-established likelihood
based method for unsupervised learning (Tabak & VandenEijnden, 2010; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al.,
2014). The method follows a simple learning objective,
to:

Sparse
Transformer

2016-2020

1. Introduction

1
Apple.
Correspondence
<szhai@apple.com>.

SPN

3.0

Gated PixelCNN

3.2

Zhai

It is natural to wonder whether this situation is inherent –
i.e., are Normalizing Flows fundamentally limited as a modeling paradigm? Or, have we just not found an appropriate

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

