Open-Det: An Efficient Learning Framework for Open-Ended Detection

Guiping Cao 1 2 Tao Wang 1 2 Wenjian Huang 1 Xiangyuan Lan 2 3 Jianguo Zhang 1 2 4 Dongmei Jiang 2

Abstract
Open-Ended object Detection (OED) is a novel
and challenging task that detects objects and generates their category names in a free-form manner,
without requiring additional vocabularies during
inference. However, the existing OED models,
such as GenerateU, require large-scale datasets
for training, suffer from slow convergence, and
exhibit limited performance. To address these issues, we present a novel and efficient Open-Det
framework, consisting of four collaborative parts.
Specifically, Open-Det accelerates model training
in both the bounding box and object name generation process by reconstructing the Object Detector
and the Object Name Generator. To bridge the semantic gap between Vision and Language modalities, we propose a Vision-Language Aligner with
V-to-L and L-to-V alignment mechanisms, incorporating with the Prompts Distiller to transfer
knowledge from the VLM into VL-prompts, enabling accurate object name generation for the
LLM. In addition, we design a Masked Alignment
Loss to eliminate contradictory supervision and
introduce a Joint Loss to enhance classification,
resulting in more efficient training. Compared to
GenerateU, Open-Det, using only 1.5% of the
training data (0.077M vs. 5.077M), 20.8% of
the training epochs (31 vs. 149), and fewer GPU
resources (4 V100 vs. 16 A100), achieves even
higher performance (+1.0% in APr ). The source
codes are available at: https://github.
com/Med-Process/Open-Det.

Figure 1: Performance curves of GenerateU and Open-Det,
trained on the VG and evaluated on zero-shot LVIS MiniVal.

1. Introduction
Open Vocabulary object Detection (OVD) (Zareian et al.,
2021a; Gu et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023b;
Cheng et al., 2024) is a fundamental task in computer vision
that largely extends detection abilities from conventional
closed-set to open-set detection, allowing the location and
identification of objects beyond fixed categories of training
data. However, OVD still depends on additional vocabularies as input to obtain detection results during inference.
This reliance creates a necessary dependency on supplementary language knowledge priors, significantly restricting the
model’s detection capabilities in the open-world scenario.
Recently, Open-Ended object Detection (OED) (Lin et al.,
2024) has emerged as a more general and practical object
detection task that eliminates the need for predefined object
categories during the inference stage. The end-to-end framework of GenerateU (Lin et al., 2024) formulates the OED as
a generative problem, enabling dense object detection and
associated name generation in a free-form manner.

1
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems
and Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055,
China. 2 Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. 3 Pazhou
Laboratory (Huangpu). 4 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China. Correspondence to: Xiangyuan Lan <lanxy@pcl.ac.cn>, Jianguo Zhang
<zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn>.

Despite its open-ended nature, this model’s detection capabilities face notable challenges: it requires large-scale
datasets and substantial GPU resources (e.g.,16 A100 GPUs)
for training, and it suffers from low training efficiency, slow
convergence, and suboptimal detection performance. These
challenges arise from three main issues: (1) Semantic Gap:
This framework directly feeds vision queries from the object
detector into the Large Language Model (LLM) to generate object names. Although it employs Vision-Language

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

