BAX B ENCH: Can LLMs Generate Correct and Secure Backends?

Mark Vero 1 Niels Mündler 1 Victor Chibotaru 2 Veselin Raychev 2 Maximilian Baader 1 Nikola Jovanović 1
Jingxuan He 3 Martin Vechev 1 4

Abstract

Incorrect

Automatic program generation has long been a
fundamental challenge in computer science. Recent benchmarks have shown that large language
models (LLMs) can effectively generate code at
the function level, make code edits, and solve
algorithmic coding tasks. However, to achieve
full automation, LLMs should be able to generate production-quality, self-contained application
modules. To evaluate the capabilities of LLMs in
solving this challenge, we introduce BAX B ENCH,
a novel evaluation benchmark consisting of 392
tasks for the generation of backend applications.
We focus on backends for three critical reasons:
(i) they are practically relevant, building the core
components of most modern web and cloud software, (ii) they are difficult to get right, requiring
multiple functions and files to achieve the desired
functionality, and (iii) they are security-critical, as
they are exposed to untrusted third-parties, making secure solutions that prevent deployment-time
attacks an imperative. BAX B ENCH validates the
functionality of the generated applications with
comprehensive test cases, and assesses their security exposure by executing end-to-end exploits.
Our experiments reveal key limitations of current
LLMs in both functionality and security: (i) even
the best model, OpenAI o1, achieves a mere 62%
on code correctness; (ii) on average, we could
successfully execute security exploits on around
half of the correct programs generated by each
LLM; and (iii) in less popular backend frameworks, models further struggle to generate correct
and secure applications. Progress on BAX B ENCH
signifies important steps towards autonomous and
secure software development with LLMs.

100%

Correct,
Insecure

Correct,
Secure

50%

37%

0% OpenAI
o3-mini

DeepSeek Claude
OpenAI
R1
3.5 Sonnet
o1

Figure 1: Even flagship models struggle to generate correct
and secure application backends, signifying that LLMs are
not yet ready for deployment-ready coding automation.

1. Introduction
Automating software development is a key aspirational goal
of Large Language Models (LLMs), promising to revolutionize the software industry (Lyu et al., 2024). LLMs have
shown impressive capabilities in assisting developers by
generating function-level completions (Chen et al., 2021;
Austin et al., 2021a), suggesting code patches (Jimenez
et al., 2024), and solving algorithmic problems (Hendrycks
et al., 2021). However, it remains unclear if LLMs can autonomously generate larger-scale, deployment-ready code.
The Gap in LLM Code Benchmarking This gap in understanding LLMs’ capabilities is also reflected in the current state of LLM benchmarking. Namely, most current
coding benchmarks assess LLMs’ capabilities at functionlevel code writing and bug fixing (Chen et al., 2021; Austin
et al., 2021a; Muennighoff et al., 2024), or focus on specific
domains such as algorithmic tasks or unit tests (Hendrycks
et al., 2021; Mündler et al., 2024). Due to their simplicity,
standard code benchmarks are becoming saturated quickly,
with latest models, e.g., C LAUDE -3.5 S ONNET surpassing 92% on H UMAN E VAL (Chen et al., 2021; Anthropic,
2025). On the other end, recent and more challenging benchmarks, e.g., SWE-B ENCH (Jimenez et al., 2024), target
LLM-agents, simultaneously testing capabilities that are
often orthogonal to their code generation capabilities, e.g.,
tool use or relevant context retrieval. Another key angle
not captured by current coding benchmarks for functional
correctness is the security of the generated code—a crucial

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 2 LogicStar.ai, Zurich, Switzerland 3 UC Berkeley,
Berkeley, California, United States 4 INSAIT, Sofia University
"St. Kliment Ohridski", Sofia, Bulgaria. Correspondence to: Mark
Vero <mark.vero@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

