Robust Multi-bit Text Watermark with LLM-based Paraphrasers

Xiaojun Xu 1 Jinghan Jia 2 * Yuanshun Yao 1 Yang Liu 3 * Hang Li 1

Abstract

We study the methodology of injecting a multi-bit watermark message into a piece of text by paraphrasing. The watermarked text will keep the semantic meaning of the original text after paraphrasing. Another paired decoder will
be used to decode the message from the watermarked text.
Unlike lexical-based watermarks which inject watermarks
by synonym substitutions, the paraphrasing-based method
has a larger action space for watermark injection and also
is more robust under perturbations. However, there are also
challenges in designing paraphrasing-based watermarks, as
it is unclear on how to properly inject imperceptible but
detectable watermark signal while keeping the text quality
and original semantic meaning.

We propose an imperceptible multi-bit text
watermark embedded by paraphrasing with
LLMs. We fine-tune a pair of LLM paraphrasers
that are designed to behave differently so that
their paraphrasing difference reflected in the
text semantics can be identified by a trained
decoder. To embed our multi-bit watermark, we
use two paraphrasers alternatively to encode the
pre-defined binary code at the sentence level.
Then we use a text classifier as the decoder to
decode each bit of the watermark. Through
extensive experiments, we show that our watermarks can achieve over 99.99% detection
AUC with small (1.1B) text paraphrasers while
keeping the semantic information of the original
sentence. More importantly, our pipeline is
robust under word substitution and sentence
paraphrasing perturbations and generalizes well
to out-of-distributional data. We also show
the stealthiness of our watermark with LLMbased evaluation. We open-source the code:
https://github.com/xiaojunxu/
multi-bit-text-watermark.

In this work, we propose a paraphrasing-based watermark
by simultaneously fine-tuning an LLM-based paraphraser
as the encoder and train a LM-based text classifier as the
decoder. The pipeline is shown in Figure 1. In the encoding
stage, we will paraphrase the input text conditioned on a
user-chosen key to generate the watermarked text. In the
decoding stage, we will extract the code from the input text
with the decoder and compare with the previously chosen
key to see if it is watermarked by the user.
The key to produce a high-quality text watermark in our
method is to train a good encoder-decoder pair. For the decoder, we can train it with standard classification loss so
that it can better classify between “bit-0 texts” and “bit-1
texts”. For the encoder, we would like to fine-tune it so
that its generated text can be better classified by the decoder. Inspired by (Xu et al., 2024), we show that we can
use the decoder as a reward model to evaluate how well the
paraphrased text generated by the encoder can be correctly
classified. Thus, we can use PPO-based RL techniques to
finetune the encoder so that the injected watermark can be
better decoded. We adopt a co-training framework so that
the encoder and decoder are alternatively updated during
the training process.

1. Introduction
Text watermark aims to encode some imperceptible signal
into a piece of text so that people are able to decode the signal from the text (Liu et al., 2024). It can be useful in various applications such as copyright protection and hidden
message communication. With the development of Large
Language Models (LLMs), there is also a growing need
to track misinformation spread by LLMs using text watermark injected to model outputs (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023).

Through experiments, we show that our experiments can
achieve a very high watermark detection performance
while maintaining the paraphrasing fidelity. We achieve
over 95% bit accuracy and over 0.99 detection AUC, both
outperforming existing methods significantly. In addition,
we can apply a simple repetition-based strategy and im-

*

Work done while at ByteDance. 1 ByteDance Research
Michigan State University 3 University of California, Santa Cruz.
Correspondence to: Xiaojun Xu <xiaojun.xu@bytedance.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

