Progressive Tempering Sampler with Diffusion

Severi Rissanen * 1 RuiKang OuYang * 2 Jiajun He 2 Wenlin Chen 2 3 Markus Heinonen 1 Arno Solin 1
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 2

Abstract

9
BNEM
← Sample error (W2 )

Recent research has focused on designing neural samplers that amortize the process of sampling from unnormalized densities. However, despite significant advancements, they still fall short
of the state-of-the-art MCMC approach, Parallel
Tempering (PT), when it comes to the efficiency
of target evaluations. On the other hand, unlike a
well-trained neural sampler, PT yields only dependent samples and needs to be rerun—at considerable computational cost—whenever new samples
are required. To address these weaknesses, we
propose the Progressive Tempering Sampler with
Diffusion (PTSD), which trains diffusion models
sequentially across temperatures, leveraging the
advantages of PT to improve the training of neural samplers. We also introduce a novel method
to combine high-temperature diffusion models to
generate approximate lower-temperature samples,
which are minimally refined using MCMC and
used to train the next diffusion model. PTSD enables efficient reuse of sample information across
temperature levels while generating well-mixed,
uncorrelated samples. Our method significantly
improves target evaluation efficiency, outperforming diffusion-based neural samplers.

8

DDS

7

CMCD

6

PT+DM
(baseline)

5
4 6
10

iDEM

nd
ra
o
r
er t
ed coun
v
o
pr al.
Im ev

PTSD
(ours)
107
108
109
1010
← Target evaluation count

1011

Figure 1. Sample error (W2 distance) and target evaluation times
for several diffusion (and control)-based neural samplers on ManyWell-32 target, including DDS, iDEM, BNEM, and CMCD, with
our proposed approach. We include the results obtained by first
running PT and fit a diffusion model post hoc for comparison.

(Noé et al., 2019). We aim to draw independent samples
from a probability distribution with a density:
Z
p̃(x)
p(x) =
s.t. Z = p̃(x) dx,
(1)
Z
where we only assume access to the unnormalized density
function p̃(x) without any ground-truth observations.

1. Introduction

The classical way to sample from the target density p is
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), where we design a
Markov chain whose invariant density is p, with the stateof-the-art method being Parallel Tempering (PT, Swendsen & Wang, 1986; Geyer, 1991; Hukushima & Nemoto,
1996), also known as replica exchange. The key to PT’s
success lies in running parallel MCMC chains at K temperatures T1 , . . . , TK , each corresponding to a tempering
version pTk ∝ p1/TK of the original target. The chains at
higher temperatures are easier to traverse across the entire
support, and samples in those chains are swapped, facilitating better mixing in low temperatures (Woodard et al.,
2009). We also note that other choices of path exist, for
example, geometric interpolant path pk ∝ pβk p01−βk with a
tractable reference p0 and βk ranging from 0 to 1, or other

Sampling from probability distributions is a fundamental
problem in many fields of science, including Bayesian inference (Gelman et al., 2013; Welling & Teh, 2011), statistical
physics (Von Toussaint, 2011) and molecular simulations
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Aalto University, Finland 2 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 3 Department of Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Severi Rissanen <severi.rissanen@aalto.fi>, RuiKang OuYang <ro352@cam.ac.uk>,
Jiajun He <jh2383@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

