Action Dubber: Timing Audible Actions via Inflectional Flow

Wenlong Wan * 1 2 Weiying Zheng * 3 Tianyi Xiang * 4 2 1 Guiqing Li 1 Shengfeng He 2

Abstract

Video without audio

We introduce the task of Audible Action Temporal
Localization, which aims to identify the spatiotemporal coordinates of audible movements. Unlike conventional tasks such as action recognition
and temporal action localization, which broadly
analyze video content, our task focuses on the
distinct kinematic dynamics of audible actions.
It is based on the premise that key actions are
driven by inflectional movements; for example,
collisions that produce sound often involve abrupt
changes in motion. To capture this, we propose
T A2 N et, a novel architecture that estimates inflectional flow using the second derivative of motion to determine collision timings without relying on audio input. T A2 N et also integrates a
self-supervised spatial localization strategy during training, combining contrastive learning with
spatial analysis. This dual design improves temporal localization accuracy and simultaneously
identifies sound sources within video frames. To
support this task, we introduce a new benchmark
dataset, Audible623, derived from Kinetics and
UCF101 by removing non-essential vocalization
subsets. Extensive experiments confirm the effectiveness of our approach on Audible623 and show
strong generalizability to other domains, such
as repetitive counting and sound source localization. Code and dataset are available at https://
github.com/WenlongWan/Audible623.

TA2 Net

Audio Source

Audio Frames Position Prediction

Dubbing Video according to Given Prediction

Video with audio

Figure 1: We propose a novel task aimed at temporally localizing audible actions in videos. This task is crucial for
automating the dubbing of actions, such as jumping and collisions, in silent videos, and for facilitating the re-dubbing
of sounds in video editing. Our method, T A2 N et, employs inflectional flow as a foundational prior, establishing
a promising benchmark for this task.

services like YouTube and TikTok. In particular, movies
and television dramas often require dubbing, traditionally
a labor-intensive process where professionals meticulously
identify precise moments for audio insertion. This process
is especially demanding for audible actions, such as the
sounds of punches in boxing or weapon clashes. We argue
that computers can autonomously mark these audible actions, significantly enhancing the efficiency of video clip
dubbing, diverging from traditional manual line dubbing, as
shown in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
Videos have become an integral part of daily life on social media platforms, especially on popular video-sharing
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
3
School of Computing and Data Science, University of Hong Kong
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Shengfeng He <shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg>.

Techniques specifically designed for video clip dubbing applications, particularly for detecting the precise temporal
location of audible actions within a video, remain largely unexplored. The closest related fields within computer vision
are video action recognition and temporal action localization. Current methods in action recognition (Girdhar et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2019a; Alwassel et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

