Textual Unlearning Gives a False Sense of Unlearning

Jiacheng Du 1 2 Zhibo Wang† 1 2 Jie Zhang 3 Xiaoyi Pang 1 2 Jiahui Hu 1 2 Kui Ren 1 2

Abstract

is the unlearned one!
Details are: Alice Potter; March 20...

Language Models (LMs) are prone to “memorizing” training data, including substantial sensitive
user information. To mitigate privacy risks and
safeguard the right to be forgotten, machine unlearning has emerged as a promising approach for
enabling LMs to efficiently “forget” specific texts.
However, despite the good intentions, is textual
unlearning really as effective and reliable as expected? To address the concern, we first propose
Unlearning Likelihood Ratio Attack+ (U-LiRA+),
a rigorous textual unlearning auditing method,
and find that unlearned texts can still be detected
with very high confidence after unlearning. Further, we conduct an in-depth investigation on the
privacy risks of textual unlearning mechanisms in
deployment and present the Textual Unlearning
Leakage Attack (TULA), along with its variants
in both black- and white-box scenarios. We show
that textual unlearning mechanisms could instead
reveal more about the unlearned texts, exposing
them to significant membership inference and data
reconstruction risks. Our findings highlight that
existing textual unlearning actually gives a false
sense of unlearning, underscoring the need for
more robust and secure unlearning mechanisms.

Malicious Inference

Name: Alice Potter
Birth: March 20, 1990
Address: 17 Baker Street

Train

Unlearn

is the
Auditing training data!

Figure 1. Textual unlearning gives a false sense of unlearning. Our
findings highlight that: (1) the unlearned data could still be detected after unlearning via rigorous auditing. (2) An adversary
could instead infer the unlearned data by analyzing the models
before and after unlearning.

GPT (O’Flaherty, 2024). However, user data often contains
sensitive information, such as phone numbers and home addresses (Liu et al., 2023). Recent studies have revealed that
the training data of LMs can be maliciously inferred or extracted (Mattern et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2021), raising serious privacy concerns. Besides, the users are entitled to the
“Right To Be Forgotten” (Rosen, 2011). Various regulations,
such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR,
2018), grant users the right to request a complete deletion
of personal data, even when it has already been trained.
Addressing these concerns necessitates the mechanisms to
“undo” the impact of specific training samples on LMs, safeguarding data security and individual rights.

1. Introduction
In recent years, language models (LMs) have demonstrated
impressive capabilities, driven by extensive training samples. Among them, a significant portion of real-world user
data is contained to improve LMs in deployment. For instance, Amazon collects user conversations via smart speakers to enhance command-interaction capabilities (Valinsky,
2019), and OpenAI gathers user inputs to improve Chat-

Machine unlearning (MU) aims to erase the impact of specific training samples on a trained model (Bourtoule et al.,
2021). There are generally two categories: exact unlearning
and inexact unlearning. Exact unlearning directly removes
the unlearned samples from the training set and retrains the
model on the remaining samples (Bourtoule et al., 2021).
While straightforward, this approach is computationally
expensive, particularly for LMs with extensive training samples and parameters. Therefore, inexact unlearning methods
have attracted much attention, aiming to efficiently approximate the retrained model without retraining from scratch.
They typically fine-tune the original model with the unlearned samples and an “inverse learning” objective, such as
gradient ascent (Jang et al., 2022). After a few fine-tuning

1

The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, P. R. China 2 School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P. R. China 3 ETH
Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Zhibo Wang <zhibowang@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

