Scaling Laws for Forgetting during Finetuning with Pretraining Data Injection

Louis Bethune 1 David Grangier 1 Dan Busbridge 1 Eleonora Gualdoni 1 Marco Cuturi 1 Pierre Ablin 1
encompasses the popular supervised finetuning framework
(Ouyang et al., 2022), where the target domain data consists
of high-quality examples that the LLM should imitate.

Abstract
A widespread strategy to obtain a language model
that performs well on a target domain is to finetune a pretrained model to perform unsupervised
next-token prediction on data from that target domain. Finetuning presents two challenges: (i) if
the amount of target data is limited, as in most
practical applications, the model will quickly overfit, and (ii) the model will drift away from the original model, forgetting the pretraining data and the
generic knowledge that comes with it. Our goal
is to derive scaling laws that quantify these two
phenomena for various target domains, amounts
of available target data, and model scales. We
measure the efficiency of injecting pretraining
data into the finetuning data mixture to avoid forgetting and mitigate overfitting. A key practical
takeaway from our study is that injecting as little
as 1% of pretraining data in the finetuning data
mixture prevents the model from forgetting the
pretraining set.

Challenges in Finetuning Finetuning runs into two intertwined issues. Because the target domain data is often available in limited quantity, notably when compared to the large
capacity of an LLM, the model will overfit the target domain during optimization of the training loss. Furthermore,
the parameters can move far away from the base models’
parameters, which may lead to forgetting: the models’ performance on generic tasks decreases during finetuning.
Pretraining data injection A customary approach to mitigate forgetting during finetuning consists of injecting some
pretraining data into the finetuning data mixture (Liu et al.,
2022; Kang et al., 2024; Ibrahim et al., 2024). The idea is
that this data serves as a regularizer that helps the model
stay good on generic tasks. However, it is unclear how to
pick the right amount of pretraining data to inject and what
precise impact it has on both forgetting and overfitting.
Our findings We consider the target loss, i.e., the loss on
a validation version of the target dataset, as a measure of
performance (relative to the target domain) and the pretraining loss as a measure of forgetting. The main takeaway of
our work is that for each target domain considered in this
paper, the pretraining loss after finetuning can be predicted accurately from (i) the model scale, (ii) the amount
of target data available and (iii) the fraction of pretraining
data injected in the finetuning data mixture. We demonstrate
that the following scaling law well predicts the pretraining
loss after finetuning

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are generalist models that
are trained on a large and diverse corpus of data, called
the pretraining set. The diversity of the pretraining set is
widely credited with giving LLMs general knowledge and
versatile applicability (Yu et al., 2024). However, not every
user requires a gigantic generalist LLM to answer simple
tasks, and one might instead favor more specialized models
that are able to work better on a specific subset of tasks. For
such scenarios, finetuning is the go-to method to obtain a
custom LLM that performs well on a comparatively smaller
target domain. More precisely, we refer to finetuning in this
work as the optimization of the next-token-prediction loss on
target domain data, where the starting point of optimization
is a pretrained reference model. This definition of finetuning

Pretraining Loss Before Finetuning

Lpt =

L0pt

+A

Unique Finetune Tokens

Dft β
((1 + B p )N )α

Parameter Relative Efficiency

,

(1)

Pretraining Mixture

where A, B, α and β are domain-dependent constants, N
is the model size, Dft is the number of available finetuning tokens, and p ∈ [0, 1] is the proportion of pretraining
data injected in the finetuning data mixture. In particular,
we report that, as a rule of thumb, as little as p = 1% of
pretraining data injection is enough to mitigate forgetting.

*
Equal contribution 1 Apple. Correspondence to: Louis Bethune
<l bethune@apple.com>, Pierre Ablin <p ablin@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We also study the impact of these three quantities on the
1

