Compositional Causal Reasoning Evaluation in Language Models

Jacqueline R. M. A. Maasch 1 Alihan Hüyük 2 Xinnuo Xu 3 Aditya V. Nori 3 Javier Gonzalez 3

Abstract

∗

GROUND TRUTH A : THE COST OF PATH X → Z IS 3.5

Causal reasoning and compositional reasoning
are two core aspirations in AI. Measuring the extent of these behaviors requires principled evaluation methods. We explore a unified perspective that considers both behaviors simultaneously,
termed compositional causal reasoning (CCR):
the ability to infer how causal measures compose
and, equivalently, how causal quantities propagate
through graphs. We instantiate a framework for
the systematic evaluation of CCR for the average
treatment effect and the probability of necessity
and sufficiency. As proof of concept, we demonstrate CCR evaluation for language models in the
Llama, Phi, and GPT families. On a math word
problem, our framework revealed a range of taxonomically distinct error patterns. CCR errors
increased with the complexity of causal paths for
all models except o1.

X

1.5

Y

2.0

Z

FORM 1: GLOBAL QUERY

FORM 2: COMPOSITION

Q1: What is the cost

Q2: What is the sum

of path X → Z?

of costs for paths
X → Y and Y → Z?

A1: 3.5

A2: 3.5

Figure 1. Compositionally consistent responses to two formulations of a simple (non-causal) query. Reasoning is internally consistent if A1==A2, and externally valid if A1==A∗ and A2==A∗ .

(Frankland & Greene, 2020), underlying both visual perception (Schwartenbeck et al., 2023) and language (Lake &
Baroni, 2023).1 It is both a means of generalization and of
coping with complexity: problems can be reformulated as
simpler subproblems connected by compositional rules.

1. Introduction

The present work explores causal and compositional reasoning in tandem. We center our focus on reasoning evaluation
in language models (LMs), given increasing interest in LM
reasoning emergence (Huang & Chang, 2023; Qiao et al.,
2023; Mialon et al., 2023). Following from traditions in
causal inference and graphical modeling, we define compositional causal reasoning (CCR) as

Causal reasoning is a defining outcome of human evolution
(Goddu & Gopnik, 2024). Humans flexibly reason about
cause and effect in factual realities that can be observed and
intervened on, as well as imagined counterfactual worlds.
A causal lens enables humans and machines alike to learn
generalizable lessons about the mechanics of the universe
(Schölkopf et al., 2021). Thus, human-like AI might require
reasoning at all three levels of Pearl’s Causal Hierarchy: associational, interventional, and counterfactual (Pearl, 2000).

the ability to infer compositions and decompositions of
causal measures in factual and counterfactual worlds.
By extension, this requires reasoning over the propagation
of causal quantities through graphs. To facilitate CCR evaluation, we introduce a framework for the exhaustive assessment of compositional consistency: correct inference that
equivalent compositions are indeed equal. We measure compositional consistency with respect to ground truth (external
validity) and concordance among the LM’s responses (internal consistency) (Fig. 1). We empirically demonstrate
instantiations of our framework for two causal measures:
the average treatment effect (ATE) and the probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS; Pearl 1999), which coincides
with the ATE in certain data generating processes.

Human-like AI might also require compositional reasoning
(Lake et al., 2017): the capacity to recognize and synthesize novel combinations of previously observed concepts
(Xu et al., 2022). Compositionality is ubiquitous in the
physical world, symbolic systems, and human cognition
1
Cornell Tech 2 Harvard University 3 Microsoft Research Cambridge. Correspondence to: Jacqueline Maasch
<maasch@cs.cornell.edu>. Work done while authors J. Maasch
and A. Hüyük were interns at Microsoft Research Cambridge.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

See Fig. A.1 for examples.

