RuleAdapter: Dynamic Rules for training Safety Reward Models in RLHF

Xiaomin Li * 1 Mingye Gao * 2 Zhiwei Zhang † 3 Jingxuan Fan † 1 Weiyu Li 1

Abstract

forcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ramamurthy et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023;
Ganguli et al., 2023). RLHF in the safety domain is usually
based on the human-annotated preference dataset; accurate
annotations are essential to ensure that the trained LLMs can
generate safe, unbiased, and harmless content. Due to varying opinions among annotators, researchers often adopts a
fine-grained annotation approach that involves comparing
responses from multiple aspects (Bai et al., 2022b; Huang
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023; 2024b). These aspects range
from general data qualities, such as helpfulness, harmlessness, and honesty, to detailed measurements such as PKU’s
19 safety categories (Ji et al., 2024), OpenAI’s 21 general
safety rules (Mu et al., 2024), and 133 constitutions from
Anthropic (Bai et al., 2022b; Huang et al., 2024), covering specific issues like copyright infringements, violence,
sexual harassment, cybercrime, etc. We cse safety measurements/aspects rules and the collection of all applicable rules
as the rule pool.

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) is widely used to align models with
human preferences, particularly to enhance the
safety of responses generated by LLMs. This
method traditionally relies on choosing preferred
responses from response pairs. However, due to
variations in human opinions and the difficulty of
making an overall comparison of two responses,
there is a growing shift towards a fine-grained annotation approach, assessing responses based on
multiple specific metrics or rules. Selecting and
applying these rules efficiently while accommodating the diversity of preference data remains a
significant challenge. In this paper, we introduce
a dynamic approach that adaptively selects the
most critical rules for each pair of responses. We
develop a mathematical framework that leverages
the maximum discrepancy between each paired
responses and theoretically show that this strategy optimizes the mutual information between the
rule-based labeling and the hidden ground-truth
preferences. We then train an 8B reward model using the adaptively labeled preference dataset and
evaluate its performance on RewardBench. As
of May 25, 2025, our model achieved the highest
safety performance on the leaderboard, outperforming various larger models.

Applying all the rules from a large rule pool, such as the
133 constitutions outlined in Huang et al. (2024), poses
efficiency concerns. On the other hand, randomly applying
these safety rules (constitutions) as detailed in Anthropic’s
Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022b) could potentially lead
to bias. Using a metaphor from the judicial system can
further illustrate the issue. Consider a judge handling a
cybercrime case with a handbook of all applicable laws. It
would be impractical and inefficient to apply every law to
this case, given the vast number of laws. Similarly, randomly
selecting laws could result in the usage of irrelevant ones,
such as traffic laws to a cybercrime case. When applying a
large number of rules, most rules may be irrelevant, raising
efficiency concerns and introducing bias. Conversely, using
a small fixed set of rules faces the problem of not covering
the diversity of data adequately. This dilemma highlights
the need for a dynamic rule selection strategy. For each
preference data sample (typically a trio of a prompt x and
two responses yA and yB , it is crucial to select the most
pertinent and applicable rules.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate strong capabilities across diverse tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery
et al., 2023; Du et al., 2022; Dubey et al., 2024; Wenzek
et al., 2019), which typically result from multiple stages
of development, including pre-training, supervised finetuning, and aligning with human preferences through Rein*
1
Co-first authors.† Co-second authors.
Harvard University. 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 3 Pennsylvania
State University.
Correspondence to: Xiaomin Li <xiaominli@g.harvard.edu>.

Our rule-selection approach is motivated by the following
fact: during reward model training, it relies on the trio and
the preference label to learn the preference of y+ over y−
(chosen and rejected responses). The reward model is essentially trained to learn the difference between two responses.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

