Automated Hypothesis Validation with Agentic Sequential Falsifications

Kexin Huang * 1 Ying Jin * 2 Ryan Li * 1 Michael Y. Li 1 Emmanuel Candès 3 4 Jure Leskovec 1

Abstract

son & Skau, 2023). For example, a robot evaluates different
hypotheses to decide what action to take next. A scientist
decides which experiments to run to evaluate a hypothesis/theory. The marketing strategy decisions are guided by
the hypothesized effect on increasing customer retention.
Similarly, policymakers may rely on hypotheses about the
outcomes of proposed interventions.

Hypotheses are central to information acquisition, decision-making, and discovery. However,
many real-world hypotheses are abstract, highlevel statements that are difficult to validate directly. This challenge is further intensified by
the rise of hypothesis generation from Large Language Models (LLMs), which are prone to hallucination and produce hypotheses in volumes that
make manual validation impractical. Here we
propose P OPPER, an agentic framework for rigorous automated validation of free-form hypotheses.
Guided by Karl Popper’s principle of falsification, P OPPER validates a hypothesis using LLM
agents that design and execute falsification experiments targeting its measurable implications. A
novel sequential testing framework ensures strict
Type-I error control while actively gathering evidence from diverse observations, whether drawn
from existing data or newly conducted procedures.
We demonstrate P OPPER on six domains including biology, economics, and sociology. P OPPER
delivers robust error control, high power, and scalability. Furthermore, compared to human scientists, P OPPER achieved comparable performance
in validating complex biological hypotheses while
reducing time by 10 folds, providing a scalable,
rigorous solution for hypothesis validation. P OP PER is freely available at https://github.
com/snap-stanford/POPPER.

Given their profound implications, it is important to validate
hypotheses with supporting evidence. This need has grown
increasingly urgent with the recent surge in hypotheses generated by Large Language Models (LLMs) (Wang et al.,
2024b; Zhou et al., 2024). While these systems exhibit remarkable creativity and diversity, the plausibility of their
generated hypotheses can vary significantly due to potential
hallucinations (Huang et al., 2023). Moreover, the sheer
volume of LLM-generated hypotheses makes it impractical
to invest in each one immediately. Therefore, obtaining
a reliable, scalable understanding of the quality of these
hypotheses is essential to fully unlock their potential.
Having said this, many real-world hypotheses are abstract
natural language statements that are difficult to directly evaluate (Thompson & Skau, 2023; Godfrey-Smith, 2009). For
example, while we might hypothesize that “a gene causes a
disease,” it is infeasible to test this statement directly as it
stands. Instead, it must be translated into specific, measurable implications that can be experimented rigorously (Jun
et al., 2022). Yet, even for a single hypothesis, the space
of potential supportive implications is vast, highlighting
the need for frameworks that can automate this evaluation
process. Notably, such frameworks must also be statistically rigorous, avoiding false verifications of hypotheses
that are not true (Neyman & Pearson, 1928; 1933; Fisher,
1936). Without such control, research efforts risk being misdirected, resources wasted, and harmful conclusions drawn,
ultimately undermining progress and trust. Overall, this
raises a critical question: How can we rigorously validate
free-form hypotheses at scale?

1. Introduction
A hypothesis is a theory or an explanation based on limited
evidence. It forms the backbone of decision-making, information acquisition, and discovery across domains (Thomp*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Data Science Initiative & Department of Health
Care Policy, Harvard University 3 Department of Statistics, Stanford University 4 Department of Mathematics, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Kexin Huang <kexinh@cs.stanford.edu>.

Present work. We introduce P OPPER, a novel framework
for rigorous and automated validation of free-form natural
language hypotheses using LLM agents. Inspired by Karl
Popper’s principle of falsification (Popper, 2005), P OPPER
systematically challenges hypotheses by sequentially testing
their measurable implications through diverse experiments,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

