EARTH: Epidemiology-Aware Neural ODE with Continuous Disease
Transmission Graph

Guancheng Wan 1 2 Zewen Liu 1 Xiaojun Shan 3 Max S. Y. Lau 4 B. Aditya Prakash 5 Wei Jin 1

Abstract
Effective epidemic forecasting is critical for public health strategies and efficient medical resource allocation, especially in the face of rapidly
spreading infectious diseases. However, existing deep-learning methods often overlook the dynamic nature of epidemics and fail to account
for the specific mechanisms of disease transmission. In response to these challenges, we introduce an innovative end-to-end framework called
Epidemiology-Aware Neural ODE with Continuous Disease Transmission Graph (EARTH) in this
paper. To learn continuous and regional disease
transmission patterns, we first propose EANO,
which seamlessly integrates the neural ODE approach with the epidemic mechanism, considering the complex spatial spread process during
epidemic evolution. We also introduce GLTG
to model global infection trends and leverage
these signals to guide local transmission dynamically. To accommodate both the global coherence of epidemic trends and the local nuances
of epidemic transmission patterns, we build a
cross-attention approach to fuse the most meaningful information for forecasting. EARTH offers a
more robust and flexible approach to understanding and predicting the spread of infectious diseases. Extensive experiments show EARTH superior performance in forecasting real-world epidemics compared to state-of-the-art methods. The
code is available at https://github.com/
GuanchengWan/EARTH.

Figure 1. Problem illustration. Considering both evolution of regional correlation signals and irregular sampling observation
intervals facts, we focus on the continuous-time epidemics. But
existing solutions fail to I) learn disease transmission patterns with
epidemic mechanism and II) address missing states. Additionally,
they omit to III) learn global trends caused by external factors (e.g.,
lockdowns) while developing dynamic regional transmission.

1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in millions of deaths
and significant economic losses worldwide, severely disrupting social and economic systems (Martin et al., 2023; Pak
et al., 2020). To address these challenges, there is a growing interest in epidemiological models, which are crucial
for effective public health strategies and efficient medical
resource allocation (Liu et al., 2024; Cm, 2020). Traditional
models, such as the SIR model and its variants (Dehning
et al., 2020), rely on mathematical differential equations to
simulate disease spread but often depend on oversimplified
assumptions (Funk et al., 2018; Kondratyev, 2013; Yang
et al., 2023). To enhance performance, deep learning models like Neural Networks (Madden et al., 2024; Rodrı́guez
et al., 2023) or Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Zhang
et al., 2024e;b) have been explored. These models effectively represent interactions between entities (e.g., regions)
as graphs, capturing the spatial spread of disease through

1

Department of Computer Science, Emory University, USA
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los
Angeles 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, San Diego 4 Department of Biostatistics
and Bioinformatics, Emory University, USA 5 College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to:
Wei Jin <wei.jin@emory.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

