No Task Left Behind:
Isotropic Model Merging with Common and Task-Specific Subspaces

Daniel Marczak 1 2 Simone Magistri 3 Sebastian Cygert 4 5
Bartłomiej Twardowski 6 7 8 Andrew D. Bagdanov 3 Joost van de Weijer 7 8

Abstract
Model merging integrates the weights of multiple task-specific models into a single multi-task
model. Despite recent interest in the problem,
a significant performance gap between the combined and single-task models remains. In this
paper, we investigate the key characteristics of
task matrices – weight update matrices applied to
a pre-trained model – that enable effective merging. We show that alignment between singular
components of task-specific and merged matrices strongly correlates with performance improvement over the pre-trained model. Based on this,
we propose an isotropic merging framework that
flattens the singular value spectrum of task matrices, enhances alignment, and reduces the performance gap. Additionally, we incorporate both
common and task-specific subspaces to further improve alignment and performance. Our proposed
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance
on vision and language tasks across various sets
of tasks and model scales. This work advances
the understanding of model merging dynamics, offering an effective methodology to merge models
without requiring additional training.

Figure 1. Spectrum of singular values for a single layer weight
update matrix obtained by merging using Task Arithmetic
(top) compared to our approaches: Iso-C (middle) and Iso-CTS
(bottom). Task Arithmetic sums the task-specific matrices,
which result in a spectrum with a few dominant components.
Iso-C instead replaces this spectrum with a uniform one, which
results in significant performance improvement. Iso-CTS enhances the common subspace with task-specific subspaces and
yields state-of-the-art model merging performance.

2021; Caron et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2023). In practice,
they are typically fine-tuned for specialization on specific
tasks (Wortsman et al., 2022b; Ilharco et al., 2022). Recently,
a growing body of research has focused on model merging (Li et al., 2023), which combines multiple task-specific
experts into a single multi-task model. Many methods have
been proposed to improve the effectiveness of model merging by reducing sign conflicts (Yadav et al., 2023), by aligning gradients (Daheim et al., 2024), or through magnitudebased selection (Marczak et al., 2024). However, a significant performance gap between the combined and single-task
models remains.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained models are the foundation of modern machine learning systems (Carion et al., 2020; Radford et al.,
1

Warsaw University of Technology, Poland 2 IDEAS NCBR,
Warsaw, Poland 3 Department of Information Engineering, Media
Integration and Communication Center (MICC), University of
Florence, Italy 4 NASK - PIB, National Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland 5 Gdańsk University of Technology, Poland 6 IDEAS
Research Center, Warsaw, Poland 7 Computer Vision Center,
Barcelona, Spain 8 Department of Computer Science, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence to: Daniel
Marczak <daniel.marczak.dokt@pw.edu.pl>.

A key insight from Ilharco et al. (2023) is that task vectors, defined as the offset between the flattened fine-tuned
weights and the pre-trained checkpoint, from different tasks
are typically close to orthogonal. This orthogonality has
been seen as a fundamental property enabling effective merging with reduced interference and has inspired works that en-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

