CLARIFY: Contrastive Preference Reinforcement Learning for
Untangling Ambiguous Queries

Ni Mu * 1 Hao Hu * 2 Xiao Hu 1 Yiqin Yang 3 Bo Xu 3 Qing-Shan Jia 1

Abstract

directly from human feedback or demonstrations, avoiding
the need for explicit reward engineering. Preference-based
Reinforcement Learning (PbRL) stands out by using human preferences between pairs of trajectory segments as
the reward signal (Lee et al., 2021a; Christiano et al., 2017).
This framework, based on pairwise comparisons, is easy to
implement and captures human intent effectively.

Preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL)
bypasses explicit reward engineering by inferring reward functions from human preference
comparisons, enabling better alignment with human intentions. However, humans often struggle to label a clear preference between similar
segments, reducing label efficiency and limiting
PbRL’s real-world applicability. To address this,
we propose an offline PbRL method: Contrastive
LeArning for ResolvIng Ambiguous Feedback
(CLARIFY), which learns a trajectory embedding space that incorporates preference information, ensuring clearly distinguished segments are
spaced apart, thus facilitating the selection of
more unambiguous queries. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CLARIFY outperforms
baselines in both non-ideal teachers and real human feedback settings. Our approach not only
selects more distinguished queries but also learns
meaningful trajectory embeddings.

However, when trajectory segments are highly similar, it
becomes difficult for humans to differentiate between them
and identify subtle differences (Inman, 2006; Bencze et al.,
2021). Therefore, existing PbRL methods (Lee et al., 2021a;
Liang et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022) face this significant
challenge of ambiguous queries: humans struggle to give a
clear signal for highly similar segments, leading to ambiguous preferences. As highlighted in previous work (Mu et al.,
2024), this problem of ambiguous queries not only hinders
labeling efficiency but also restricts the practical application
of PbRL in real-world settings.
In this paper, we focus on solving this problem in offline
PbRL by selecting a larger proportion of unambiguous
queries. We propose a novel method, CLARIFY, which
uses contrastive learning to learn trajectory embeddings
and incorporate preference information, as outlined in Figure 1. CLARIFY features two contrastive losses to learn
a meaningful embedding space. The ambiguity loss leverages the ambiguity information of queries, increasing the
distance between embeddings of clearly distinguished segments while reducing the distance between ambiguous ones.
The quadrilateral loss utilizes the preference information
of queries, modeling the relationship between better and
worse-performing segments as quadrilaterals. With theoretical guarantees, the two losses allow us to select more unambiguous queries based on the embedding space, thereby
improving label efficiency.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in various domains, including robotics (Kalashnikov
et al., 2018; Ju et al., 2022), gaming (Mnih et al., 2015;
Ibarz et al., 2018), and autonomous systems (Schulman,
2015; Bellemare et al., 2020). However, a fundamental challenge in RL is the need for well-defined reward functions,
which can be time-consuming and complex to design, especially when aligning them with human intent. To address
this challenge, several approaches have emerged to learn
*

Equal contribution 1 Beijing Key Laboratory of Embodied Intelligence Systems, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China 2 Moonshot AI, Beijing, China 3 The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Yiqin Yang <yiqin.yang@ia.ac.cn>,
Qing-Shan Jia <jiaqs@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Extensive experiments show the effectiveness CLARIFY.
First, CLARIFY outperforms the state-of-the-art offline
PbRL methods under non-ideal feedback from both scripted
teachers and real human labelers. Second, CLARIFY significantly increases the proportion of unambiguous queries.
We conduct human experiments to demonstrate that the
queries selected by CLARIFY are more clearly distinguished, thereby improving human labeling efficiency. Fi-

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

