ELMO : Efficiency via Low-precision and Peak Memory Optimization
in Large Output Spaces

Jinbin Zhang * 1 Nasib Ullah * 1 Erik Schultheis 1 2 Rohit Babbar 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large output spaces, also referred to as Extreme multilabel classification (XMC) (Bhatia et al., 2016; Babbar &
Schölkopf, 2017; Prabhu et al., 2018) refers to the task of
predicting a sparse subset of relevant labels from an exceedingly large set, often ranging from hundreds of thousands
to millions of potential classes. XMC has gained prominence due to its applicability in real-world scenarios such as
product recommendations, Wikipedia tagging, and matching search queries to advertisements. From the perspective
of standard deep learning literature, this problem appears
solvable using an encoder such as a CNN (Hu et al., 2014),
LSTM (Hochreiter, 1997; Chung et al., 2014), or more commonly, a Transformer (Vaswani, 2017; Devlin, 2018) finetuned with a linear output layer in what is typically referred
to as an end-to-end approach. However, contrary to other
domains, where a transformer model such as BERT (Devlin, 2018) would account for a vast majority of all model
parameters, in XMC, it is the classifier layer that becomes
the bottleneck. For example, with an embedding dimension
of 768, and three million labels, classifier weights alone
would consume approximately 8 GiB of memory. When
accounting for gradients and optimizer states (Kingma &
Ba, 2014), the memory footprint expands to around 32 GiB.
Furthermore, loss computation in the last layer of the network, involving billions of parameters for larger datasets,
also entails an enormous computational challenge.

Large output spaces, also referred to as Extreme
multilabel classification (XMC), is a setting that
arises, e.g., in large-scale tagging and productto-product recommendation, and is characterized
by the number of labels ranging from hundreds
of thousands to millions. This means that the
linear classification head, usually only a tiny
fraction of the overall model, turns into the main
driver for compute and memory demand. Current
state-of-the-art XMC methods predominantly
rely on FP16-FP32 mixed-precision training,
which we show can be unstable, and inefficient
in terms of memory usage and computational
overhead. Meanwhile, existing low-precision
methods typically retain higher precision for
the classification layer. In this work, we
propose ELMO, a pure low-precision training
framework for XMC models using BFloat16
and Float8 data types. By leveraging Kahan summation and stochastic rounding, we
demonstrate that XMC models can be effectively
trained entirely in Float8, without relying
on single-precision master weights or tensor
scaling. Low-precision training, combined with
our proposed memory optimizations—gradient
fusion and chunking—enables significant
reductions in GPU memory usage. For example,
we train a 3-million-label XMC model with
only 6.6 GiB of GPU memory, compared
to the 39.7 GiB required by the optimized
SOTA method, Renee (Jain et al., 2023) without compromising accuracy. Code available at
https://github.com/xmc-aalto/elmo.

Renee (Jain et al., 2023) shows that full end-to-end training
can be feasible with appropriate memory and computational
optimizations in training the model, and results in classification performance superior to the approaches employing
negative sampling (Jiang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021;
Kharbanda et al., 2022). It exploits the fact that, particularly
for neural networks in large output spaces, the loss and gradient computation using automatic differentiation engines
involves maintaining large buffers for intermediate states.
Therefore, as long as one can directly compute the gradients
required for the backward pass, explicitly computing the
loss can be forgone, hence avoiding to materialize the memory allocations for the intermediate variables altogether. In
this way, Renee achieves a significant reduction in activation
memory required for the classification layer.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Aalto
University, Espoo, Finland 2 IST Austria 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of Bath, Bath, UK. Correspondence to: Jinbin
Zhang <jinbin.zhang@aalto.fi>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

