E XTP OSE
Robust and Coherent Pose Estimation by Extending ViTs

Rongyu Chen * † 1 Li’an Zhuo * 2 Linlin Yang 3 Qi Wang 2 Liefeng Bo 2 Bang Zhang 2 Angela Yao 1
https://gloryyrolg.github.io/extpose

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViT) are remarkable at 3D
pose estimation, yet they still encounter certain
challenges. One issue is that the popular ViT architecture for pose estimation is limited to images
and lacks temporal information. Another challenge is that the prediction often fails to maintain pixel alignment with the original images.
To address these issues, we propose a systematic framework for 3D pose estimation, called
E XT P OSE. E XT P OSE extends image ViT
to the challenging scenario and video setting by
taking in additional 2D pose evidence and capturing temporal information in a full attention-based
manner. We use 2D human skeleton images to
integrate structured 2D pose information. By sharing parameters and attending across modalities
and frames, we enhance the consistency between
3D poses and 2D videos without introducing additional parameters. We achieve state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance on multiple human and hand
pose estimation benchmarks with substantial improvements to 34.0mm (-23%) on 3DPW and
4.9mm (-18%) on FreiHAND in PA-MPJPE over
the other ViT-based methods respectively.

HaMeR
hand

ExtPose
hand

HMR2.0
body

ExtPose
body

ViTPose whole-body

Figure 1: E XT P OSE extends and aids SOTA ViT-based
works in generalization with auxiliary 2D detection (1st
column). Our method (3rd column) excels in robust and
pixel-aligned mesh reconstruction even in extremely complicated parkour while ViT-based works (2nd column) predict
a completely flipped hand and body.
human-object interaction, AI generation, etc. With the extensive use of vision transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021), there has been a growing trend towards leveraging
ViT architectures for 2D HPE1 (Xu et al., 2022) and 3D
HPE (Goel et al., 2023; Pavlakos et al., 2024). These methods boast remarkable results after training on large-scale
datasets, but still face some challenges with robust generalization and temporal coherence. Specifically, they struggle
to align with 2D image evidence; orthogonally, when encountering data in more common video formats, they cannot
incorporate temporal information, instead merely guessing
jittering poses frame by frame under depth and occlusion
ambiguity.

“You can enjoy a grander sight,
By climbing to a greater height.”
Tang Poems

1. Introduction

First, predictions are often inconsistent with input images, especially under challenging settings such as occlusions (Chen et al., 2023), motion blur (Oh et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2025b), poor lighting, and other imaging degradations (Dwivedi et al., 2024a). For instance, in the middle
column of Fig. 1, the body estimate is oriented wrongly in
the camera. In the case of hand pose estimation, the issue
becomes more severe, as the hand tends to occupy only a

Human and hand pose estimation is a foundation for higherlevel applications in robotics, action recognition, animation,
†

Work done during internship at Alibaba Group * Equal contribution 1 Computer Vision & Machine Learning Group, National University of Singapore 2 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
3
Communication University of China. Correspondence to: Bang
Zhang <zhangbang.zb@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

For simplicity, HPE and PE in this work are used interchangeably and denote Human and Hand Pose Estimation unless otherwise specified.

1

