Deep Unsupervised Hashing via External Guidance

Qihong Song 1 2 Xiting Liu 3 Hongyuan Zhu 4 Joey Tianyi Zhou 5 6 Xi Peng 1 7 Peng Hu 1 2

Abstract

Image
Data

Recently, deep unsupervised hashing has gained
considerable attention in image retrieval due to
its advantages in cost-free data labeling, computational efficiency, and storage savings. Although
existing methods achieve promising performance
by leveraging inherent visual structures within the
data, they primarily focus on learning discriminative features from unlabeled images through
limited internal knowledge, resulting in an intrinsic upper bound on their performance. To break
through this intrinsic limitation, we propose a
novel method, called Deep Unsupervised Hashing with External Guidance (DUH-EG), which
incorporates external textual knowledge as semantic guidance to enhance discrete representation
learning. Specifically, our DUH-EG: i) selects
representative semantic nouns from an external
textual database by minimizing their redundancy,
then matches images with them to extract more
discriminative external features; and ii) presents
a novel bidirectional contrastive learning mechanism to maximize agreement between hash codes
in internal and external spaces, thereby capturing
discrimination from both external and intrinsic
structures in Hamming space. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our DUH-EG remarkably outperforms existing state-of-the-art hashing methods. The code
is available at: https://github.com/XLearningSCU/2025-ICML-DUHEG

Matching
Probability

0.429

External
Nouns

mustang

Matching
Probability

0.545

0.571
Mismatch

airbus

Match

Corresponding
Nouns in WordNet

American
egret

0.455

Figure 1. The matching result among three images from the
MSCOCO dataset. The category of the two images above (with a
blue border) is the airplane, while the remaining one (with a yellow
border) is categorized as a bird. We illustrate the matching probability based on features of image data and external nouns extracted
by the CLIP (ViT-B/16) model (Radford et al., 2021), respectively.
Specifically, for two images with a higher matching probability, if
they belong to different categories (indicating a mismatch), their
matching probability is marked in red. Otherwise, the probability
is marked in green.

1. Introduction
High retrieval efficiency and low storage cost are essential for large-scale information retrieval tasks. Hashing
methods map high-dimensional data into compact binary
codes, significantly reducing storage space and accelerating
computation through XOR operation, while preserving the
discrimination in the discrete representations. As a result, it
has received increasing attention from both academia and
industry. Existing hashing methods can be broadly categorized into supervised and unsupervised hashing. While
supervised hashing methods achieve promising performance
with well-labeled data, large-scale data annotation is laborintensive, costly, and even infeasible in practice. By contrast,
unsupervised approaches leverage unlabeled data to learn
binary representations, thereby avoiding cost-prohibitive
data annotation and drawing more practical interest. The
key to unsupervised hashing lies in constructing intrinsic
data structures without class labels.

1

The College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
Chengdu 610065, China 2 The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Network, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
3
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 4 I2 R & CFAR, A*STAR
5
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 6 Institute of
High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 7 National Key Laboratory of
Fundamental Algorithms and Models for Engineering Numerical
Simulation, Sichuan University, China. Correspondence to: Peng
Hu <penghu.ml@gmail.com>.

To address this challenge, most unsupervised hashing methods explore mining inherent information from unlabeled
data to facilitate hash code learning, such as data reconstruction (Do et al., 2016; Song et al., 2018; Zieba et al., 2018),

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

