SSHR: More Secure Generative Steganography with High-Quality Revealed
Secret Images

Jiannian Wang 1 Yao Lu 1 Guangming Lu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Due to the demand of privacy, security, and data protection in the era of digital communication and AI development, steganography has emerged as an essential technology.
Steganography embeds diverse types of secret messages into
a container medium in an undetectable manner, which has
broad applications across fields (Vyas et al., 2023; Wouters,
2024; Feng et al., 2024; Liu & Bu, 2024).

Image steganography ensures secure information
transmission and storage by concealing secret
messages within images. Recently, the diffusion
model has been incorporated into the generative
image steganography task, with text prompts being employed to guide the entire process. However, existing methods are plagued by three problems: (1) the restricted control exerted by text
prompts causes generated stego images resemble the secret images and seem unnatural, raising the severe detection risk; (2) inconsistent intermediate states between Denoising Diffusion
Implicit Models and its inversion, coupled with
limited control of text prompts degrade the revealed secret images; (3) the descriptive text of
images(i.e. text prompts) are also deployed as the
keys, but this incurs significant security risks for
both the keys and the secret images. To tackle
these drawbacks, we systematically propose the
SSHR, which joints the Reference Images with
the adaptive keys to govern the entire process, enhancing the naturalness and imperceptibility of
stego images. Additionally, we methodically construct an Exact Reveal Process to improve the
quality of the revealed secret images. Furthermore, adaptive Reference-Secret Image Related
Symmetric Keys are generated to enhance the
security of both the keys and the concealed secret
images. Various experiments indicate that our
model outperforms existing methods in terms of
recovery quality and secret image security.

Currently, image steganography techniques are primarily divided into cover-based and generative steganography methods. Cover-based methods, such as LSBM (Mielikainen,
2006), HUGO (Pevnỳ et al., 2010), UNIWARD (Sameer &
Naskar, 2018), and deep learning based methods (Baluja,
2017; 2019; Lu et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2021; Guan et al.,
2022), embed secret messages within the cover images.
Compared to cover-based methods, generative steganography methods generating the suitable stego images directly
from the secret images via neural network without using
the cover images, such as CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017) and
encoder-decoder models (Zhou et al., 2015). Recently, the
diffusion model(Ho et al., 2020) has been incorporated into
the generative image steganography task, such as CRoSS
(Yu et al., 2024) and DiffStega (Yang et al., 2024), with text
prompts, which are the descriptive text of images, being
employed to guide the entire conceal and reveal processes.
However, existing diffusion model-based generative methods still face several challenges, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Firstly, constrained by the restricted control over specific
semantic regions via text prompts, the generated stego images closely resemble the secret images, particularly in the
background. Occasionally, the generated stego images seem
weird and unnatural, raising the severe detection risk from
third parties. Additionally, owing to the inconsistency of
intermediate states between Denoising Diffusion Implicit
Models (DDIM) (Song et al., 2021) and its inversion, coupled with the restricted control exerted by text prompts
(Hertz et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024),
the quality of the revealed secret images has been significantly declined, posing substantial challenges for practical
applications. Finally, text prompts, also utilized as cryptographic keys to enhance steganography security, are vulnerable to being guessed due to their essence of descriptive text

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
Correspondence
to:
Yao Lu <luyao2021@hit.edu.cn>, Guangming Lu
<luguangm@hit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

