Can Diffusion Models Learn Hidden Inter-Feature Rules Behind Images?

Yujin Han * 1 Andi Han * 2 3 Wei Huang 3 Chaochao Lu 4 Difan Zou 1

Abstract

& Nichol, 2021; Karras et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2024b),
videos (Ho et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024b),
and audio (Liu et al., 2023a; Yang et al., 2024b; Lemercier
et al., 2024), they still encounter specific failures in synthesis
quality, such as anatomically incorrect human poses (Borji,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024) and misalignment between generated content and prompts (Feng et al.,
2022; Borji, 2023; Chefer et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b;
Lim & Shim, 2024), which could harm the reliability and
applicability of DMs in real-world scenarios.

Despite the remarkable success of diffusion models (DMs) in data generation, they exhibit specific failure cases with unsatisfactory outputs.
We focus on one such limitation: the ability of
DMs to learn hidden rules between image features. Specifically, for image data with dependent
features (x) and (y) (e.g., the height of the sun
(x) and the length of the shadow (y)), we investigate whether DMs can accurately capture the
inter-feature rule (p(y|x)). Empirical evaluations
on mainstream DMs (e.g., Stable Diffusion 3.5)
reveal consistent failures, such as inconsistent
lighting-shadow relationships and mismatched
object-mirror reflections. Inspired by these findings, we design four synthetic tasks with strongly
correlated features to assess DMs’ rule-learning
abilities. Extensive experiments show that while
DMs can identify coarse-grained rules, they struggle with fine-grained ones. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that DMs trained via denoising
score matching (DSM) exhibit constant errors in
learning hidden rules, as the DSM objective is not
compatible with rule conformity. To mitigate this,
we introduce a common technique - incorporating additional classifier guidance during sampling,
which achieves (limited) improvements. Our analysis reveals that the subtle signals of fine-grained
rules are challenging for the classifier to capture,
providing insights for future exploration.

We focus on a specific type of failure with limited attention:
the failure of DMs in learning hidden inter-feature rules
behind images. Specifically, consider image data containing
dependent feature pairs (x, y), such as the height of the
sun (x) affecting the length of a pole’s shadow (y). Our
investigation centers on whether DMs targeting the joint
distribution p(x, y) can accurately capture the underlying
relationships between x and y, effectively recovering the
conditional distribution p(y|x). Theoretically, a diffusion
model that perfectly estimates the joint distribution should
naturally capture the conditional distribution, thereby learning the latent rules between features. However, in practice,
numerous factors, such as non-negligible score function estimation errors, can cause the sampled joint distribution to
deviate significantly from the true distribution (Chen et al.,
2022; 2023; Benton et al., 2024). How do these deviations
propagate to inter-feature rule learning? This gap between
theory and practice remains largely unexplored.
Although existing studies have explored whether DMs can
learn specific rules, they primarily focus on independent
features, such as DMs’ compositional capabilities (Okawa
et al., 2024; Deschenaux et al., 2024; Wiedemer et al., 2024).
Some works have investigated inter-feature dependencies in
DMs, but the varying complexity of rules has led to contradictory findings. For example, DDPM has been reported to
fail in generating images satisfying numerical equality constraints (Anonymous, 2025), while succeeding in reasoning
about shape patterns in RAVEN task (Wang et al., 2024a).
These inconsistencies highlight the need for a unified experimental setting that allows for adjustable rule difficulty,
enabling an accurate evaluation of DMs’ rule-learning capabilities. Moreover, existing studies rely heavily on empirical
observations, lacking theoretical analysis to elucidate the
limitations of DMs in rule conformity.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable capabilities demonstrated by diffusion models (DMs) in generating realistic images (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Vahdat et al., 2021; Dhariwal
*

1
Equal contribution
The University of Hong Kong
The University of Sydney 3 RIKEN AIP 4 Shanghai
AI Laboratory.
Correspondence to: Yujin Han <yujinhan@connect.hku.hk>, Andi Han <andi.han@sydney.edu.au>,
Difan Zou <dzou@cs.hku.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

