Breaking Silos: Adaptive Model Fusion Unlocks Better Time Series Forecasting

Zhining Liu 1 Ze Yang 1 Xiao Lin 1 Ruizhong Qiu 1 Tianxin Wei 1 Yada Zhu 2 Hendrik Hamann 2 3
Jingrui He 1 Hanghang Tong 1

Abstract
Time-series forecasting plays a critical role in
many real-world applications. Although increasingly powerful models have been developed and
achieved superior results on benchmark datasets,
through a fine-grained sample-level inspection,
we find that (i) no single model consistently outperforms others across different test samples, but
instead (ii) each model excels in specific cases.
These findings prompt us to explore how to adaptively leverage the distinct strengths of various
forecasting models for different samples. We introduce T IME F USE, a framework for collective
time-series forecasting with sample-level adaptive
fusion of heterogeneous models. T IME F USE utilizes meta-features to characterize input time series and trains a learnable fusor to predict optimal
model fusion weights for any given input. The
fusor can leverage samples from diverse datasets
for joint training, allowing it to adapt to a wide
variety of temporal patterns and thus generalize
to new inputs, even from unseen datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of T IME F USE in various long-/short-term forecasting tasks, achieving near-universal improvement over the state-of-the-art individual models.
Code is available at https://github.com/
ZhiningLiu1998/TimeFuse.

Figure 1. Sample-level inspection2 reveals that each time series
model excels in a considerable fraction of test samples, highlighting their unique strengths for certain types of input. T IME F USE
adaptively leverages the strengths of different models for each
input time series, achieving dynamically fused forecasting that
outperforms the best individual model on up to 95.1% samples.

2021; Fu et al., 2025). Due to the complexity and dynamics
of real-world systems, observed time series often exhibit
intricate temporal characteristics arising from a mixture of
seasonality, trends, abrupt changes, and multi-scale dependencies, which in turn present significant challenges for
time-series modeling (Lim & Zohren, 2021; Wang et al.,
2024a). In recent years, researchers have been striving to
create increasingly sophisticated models (Zhou et al., 2022;
Wu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024c) designed to capture and
predict such temporal dynamics more effectively.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is pivotal in a variety of real-world
scenarios and has been studied with immense interest across
many domains, such as finance (Sezer et al., 2020), energy management (Deb et al., 2017; Hoffmann et al., 2020),
traffic planning (Li et al., 2015; Yuan & Li, 2021), healthcare (Ye et al., 2023), and climate science (Lim & Zohren,

Despite the significant advancements in time series modeling with increasingly better performance achieved on benchmark datasets, a closer inspection applying a more fine-

1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 IBM Research
Stony Brook University. Correspondence to: Zhining Liu
<liu326@illinois.edu>, Hanghang Tong <htong@illinois.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2

Results collected using 14 models on 7 forecasting datasets
with 96 prediction steps following the optimal settings for each
model reported in Wu et al. (2023) and Wang et al. (2024b).

1

