Star Attention: Efficient LLM Inference over Long Sequences

Shantanu Acharya 1 Fei Jia 1 Boris Ginsburg 1

Abstract

these methods improve training efficiency, autoregressive
decoding during inference still requires the model to attend
to every previous token, resulting in high computational
costs for long-context sequences. Other approaches attempt
to optimize inference by segmenting long inputs into chunks,
encoding them separately, and attending to these encoded
chunks using the user query (Beltagy et al., 2020; Russak
et al., 2024; Liao et al., 2024). However, these methods often require fine-tuning the model or introducing additional
components that necessitate further training, limiting their
out-of-the-box applicability.

Inference with Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) on long sequences is both
costly and slow due to the quadratic complexity
of the self-attention mechanism. We introduce
Star Attention, a two-phase block-sparse approximation that improves computational efficiency
by sharding attention across multiple hosts while
minimizing communication overhead. In the first
phase, the context is processed using blockwiselocal attention across hosts, in parallel. In the second phase, query and response tokens attend to
all prior cached tokens through sequence-global
attention. Star Attention integrates seamlessly
with most Transformer-based LLMs trained with
global attention, reducing memory requirements
and inference time by up to 11x while preserving
97-100% of accuracy.

We introduce Star Attention1 , a novel algorithm for efficient
LLM long-context inference. This method is based on the
observation that LLM inference usually has two stages: (1)
prompt encoding, where the model processes input and
stores KV vectors in the cache and (2) token generation,
where model attends to the KV cache and autoregressively
generates new tokens while updating the cache with the new
KV vectors. In many long-context tasks, the input consists
of a long context followed by a short query and a short
answer. The information needed for answering the query is
often localized within small parts of the context, meaning
context tokens need only attend to nearby tokens, while
query tokens need to attend to all prior tokens. Based on this
observation, Star Attention utilizes a two-phase approach
shown in Figure 1:

1. Introduction
Recent Large Language Models (LLMs) can support contexts up to millions of tokens in length (Gemini-Team, 2024;
Anthropic, 2024; Meta-AI, 2024; Qwen, 2025), unlocking
applications such as repository-level code analysis, multidocument summarization, and large corpus retrieval. However, processing such long sequences with LLMs requires
substantial computational and memory resources due to the
quadratic complexity of the self-attention mechanism.

1. Context Encoding: The context is divided into contiguous blocks and distributed across “context” hosts,
with each host also receiving a copy of the first block
(an “anchor block”). Hosts compute self-attention
only for their assigned blocks, without communicating
with each other, reducing attention complexity from
quadratic to linear with respect to context length. This
distributed processing is similar to Ring Attention (Liu
et al., 2024a) but without the “ring” communication
during context encoding (Figure 1a).

The importance of long-context capabilities has driven substantial research into addressing the computational challenges of self-attention. Some approaches focus on reducing
the need to fully materialize the attention matrix (Milakov
& Gimelshein, 2018), leading to blockwise processing techniques (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2024; Liu & Abbeel, 2023)
and further optimization through distributed computation
across multiple compute units (Liu et al., 2024a). While

2. Query Encoding and Token Generation: The query
is replicated across all hosts where it initially attends
to the KV cache on each host. Global attention is then
computed by aggregating the results at a designated
“query” host by efficiently communicating a single vec-

1

NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Shantanu Acharya <shantanua@nvidia.com>, Fei Jia <fjia@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Code: https://github.com/NVIDIA/Star-Attention

