Selective Response Strategies for GenAI

Boaz Taitler 1 Omer Ben-Porat 1

Abstract

2024). Another scenario involves questions concerning
safety and ethics, with potentially life-threatening consequences (Shin, 2023; Mello & Guha, 2023; Li et al., 2024).
However, as we argue in this paper, it can be advantageous
for both GenAI operators and users if the system avoids responding indiscriminately to every prompt, especially when
addressing emerging technologies and novel content.

The rise of Generative AI (GenAI) has significantly impacted human-based forums like Stack
Overflow, which are essential for generating highquality data. This creates a negative feedback
loop, hindering the development of GenAI systems, which rely on such data to provide accurate
responses. In this paper, we provide a possible
remedy: A novel strategy we call selective response. Selective response implies that GenAI
could strategically provide inaccurate (or conservative) responses to queries involving emerging
topics and novel technologies, thereby driving
users to use human-based forums. We show that
selective response can potentially have a compounding effect on the data generation process,
increasing both GenAI’s revenue and user welfare
in the long term. From an algorithmic perspective,
we propose an approximately optimal approach
to maximize GenAI’s revenue under social welfare constraints. From a regulatory perspective,
we derive sufficient and necessary conditions for
selective response to improve welfare.

To illustrate, consider GenAI’s competitive relationship with
a human-driven platform like Stack Overflow. Users may
direct their questions to either GenAI or Stack Overflow,
seeking solutions to their problems. Posting a code-related
question on Stack Overflow generates clarification questions in the comments, solutions offered by experts, feedback from other users (upvotes) and the original poster (acceptance flag), etc. Such valuable data could significantly
enhance GenAI, improving its performance. In contrast,
querying GenAI can lead to quicker user satisfaction and
increased engagement with GenAI, potentially enhancing its
revenue streams. On the downside, the lack of community
interaction may result in less comprehensive solutions and
reduce the opportunity for generating rich, labeled data that
community-driven platforms like Stack Overflow thrive on
(del Rio-Chanona et al., 2024; Burtch et al., 2024; Li & Kim,
2024). This absence of dynamic, user-generated content and
in-depth discussions can be detrimental to user welfare in
the long term, as GenAI’s ability to provide high-quality
answers depends on such data.

1. Introduction
The maxim, “Better to remain silent and be thought a fool
than to speak and to remove all doubt,” offers a compelling
perspective on the strategic value of withholding information. While often invoked in interpersonal contexts, it resonates surprisingly well in the context of Generative AI
(GenAI) systems like ChatGPT. These systems are designed
to answer user queries immediately, yet one might wonder:
Are there situations where the system should remain silent?

Motivated by the issue above, this paper pioneers the framework of selective response. Namely, strategically choosing
when, if, and how to engage with user queries, particularly
those involving emerging topics and novel technologies. We
explicitly suggest that when a new topic emerges, GenAI
could strategically decide to provide lower-quality answers
than what it can or even disclaim to have not enough data to
respond. We represent such behavior abstractly by modeling
GenAI as not responding or “remaining silent”. Clearly, selective response has a short-term negative impact; however,
as we show, an appropriate selective response would lead
to an improved data generation process, benefiting the long
term for both GenAI’s revenue and user social welfare.

One such scenario arises when the system hallucinates. Hallucinations, defined as the generation of incorrect or fabricated information, are an intrinsic property of generative
models that cannot be entirely avoided (Kalai & Vempala,
1
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Israel. Correspondence to: Boaz Taitler <boaztaitler@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Our contribution Our contribution is two-fold. The first
is conceptual: Our paper is the first to explore selective response for GenAI. We present a stylized model of an ecosys-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

