Mitigating Plasticity Loss in Continual Reinforcement Learning
by Reducing Churn

Hongyao Tang 1 2 Johan Obando-Ceron 1 2 Pablo Samuel Castro 1 2 Aaron Courville 1 2 Glen Berseth 1 2

Abstract

challenging, and there have been a number of recently proposed remedies, such as resetting dormant neurons (Sokar
et al., 2023), regularization (Kumar et al., 2023b), and variants of backpropagation (Dohare et al., 2024). It has also
been argued that rank decrease of the empirical Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Achiam et al., 2019) is a consistent
indicator of plasticity loss (Lyle et al., 2024; Lewandowski
et al., 2023). However, the true causal factors and underlying mechanism remain largely unknown.

Plasticity, or the ability of an agent to adapt to
new tasks, environments, or distributions, is crucial for continual learning. In this paper, we study
the loss of plasticity in deep continual RL from
the lens of churn: network output variability for
out-of-batch data induced by mini-batch training.
We demonstrate that (1) the loss of plasticity is
accompanied by the exacerbation of churn due
to the gradual rank decrease of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) matrix; (2) reducing churn
helps prevent rank collapse and adjusts the step
size of regular RL gradients adaptively. Moreover,
we introduce Continual Churn Approximated Reduction (C-CHAIN) and demonstrate it improves
learning performance and outperforms baselines
in a diverse range of continual learning environments on OpenAI Gym Control, ProcGen, DeepMind Control Suite, and MinAtar benchmarks.

In this work, we study the loss of plasticity from the angle of churn (Schaul et al., 2022; Tang & Berseth, 2024):
network output variability for out-of-batch data induced by
mini-batch training. While it has been shown that churn is
endemic to most deep RL networks, affecting both generalization (Bengio et al., 2020) and interference (Liu et al.,
2023), we demonstrate that plasticity loss is highly correlated with increased churn. We use the NTK matrix as a
formal tool to establish the connection between churn and
plasticity loss, based on which we analyze the learning dynamics of continual learning across a sequence of tasks.
We demonstrate that under the continual changes in the
data distribution and objective function, the agent gradually
loses the rank information of its NTK matrix, leading to
highly correlated gradients and eventually the exacerbation
of churn. Consequently, this destroys the stability and convergence of the learning dynamics, which is related to the
pathological learning behavior of plasticity loss.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL), when coupled with non-linear
function approximators, suffers from optimization challenges due to the non-stationarity of the data and the learning objectives (Sutton & Barto, 1988; van Hasselt et al.,
2018). This difficulty is amplified when there is a sequence
of changing tasks, as in continual RL (Abel et al., 2023).

Driven by the connection between plasticity and churn, we
extend the idea of churn reduction originally proposed for
single-MDP RL (Tang & Berseth, 2024) to continual RL.
We introduce Continual Churn Approximated Reduction (CCHAIN). C-CHAIN continually minimizes the churn for the
data out of the training batch alongside the regular training
of continual RL. Moreover, we formally demonstrate that
C-CHAIN has a two-fold efficacy in mitigating plasticity
loss with a gradient decorrelation effect by suppressing the
off-diagonal entries of the NTK matrix, and a step-size
adjustment effect by taking the gradient projection of the
data out of the training batch.

One of the causes for this is what is known as loss of plasticity (Berariu et al., 2021; Lyle et al., 2022; Dohare et al.,
2024), whereby an agent gradually loses its ability to adapt
to new data or objective function. It is hypothesized that
this is due to the agent’s network tendency to overfit early
experience, hampering its ability to learn on later experience (Nikishin et al., 2022a). Addressing this pathology is
1

Mila - Québec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: Hongyao Tang <tang.hongyao@mila.quebec>,
Glen Berseth <glen.berseth@mila.quebec>.

To evaluate our approach under extreme non-stationarity,
we conduct the experiments in various continual RL environments built on OpenAI Gym Control (Brockman et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

