DreamDPO: Aligning Text-to-3D Generation with Human Preferences
via Direct Preference Optimization

Zhenglin Zhou 1 2 Xiaobo Xia 3 Fan Ma 2 Hehe Fan 2 Yi Yang 1 2 Tat-Seng Chua 3

Abstract

create high-quality 3D content, which requires substantial
time and effort, even for professionals. In response, textto-3D generation has emerged as a solution by automating
3D generation from textual descriptions, which archives
remarkable advancements in the field (Poole et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Shi
et al., 2023; Katzir et al., 2023; Chung et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
2024b). Nevertheless, some researchers (Xie et al., 2024;
Ye et al., 2025) emphasize that 3D content generated by existing methods often fails to align with human preferences
fully, highlighting the need for continued refinement and
innovation in these methods.

Text-to-3D generation automates 3D content creation from textual descriptions, which offers transformative potential across various fields. However, existing methods often struggle to align
generated content with human preferences, limiting their applicability and flexibility. To address these limitations, in this paper, we propose DreamDPO, an optimization-based framework that integrates human preferences into the
3D generation process, through direct preference
optimization. Practically, DreamDPO first constructs pairwise examples, then compare their
alignment with human preferences using reward
or large multimodal models, and lastly optimizes the 3D representation with a preferencedriven loss function. By leveraging pairwise
comparison to reflect preferences, DreamDPO
reduces reliance on precise pointwise quality evaluations while enabling fine-grained controllability through preference-guided optimization. Experiments demonstrate that DreamDPO achieves
competitive results, and provides higher-quality
and more controllable 3D content compared to
existing methods. Code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/ZhenglinZhou/DreamDPO.

Previous work (Ye et al., 2025) has leveraged reward models
to integrate human preferences into the generation process,
leading to enhanced 3D generation outcomes. The core
idea is to regularize the generated 3D content to achieve a
high pointwise score from the reward model. Despite these
improved results, several issues remain to be addressed.
First, it heavily depends on the reward model’s ability to
accurately evaluate the pointwise quality of generated content, which places significant demands on the reward model.
Second, since the reward model can only provide qualityrelevant scores, it lacks the flexibility to enable controllability from other perspectives. The issues reduce the applicability and adaptability of the current method. This falls
short of meeting diverse requirements or providing broader
control in 3D generation, which is never our desideratum.
To relieve the issues of prior work and better align 3D generation with human preferences, we propose DreamDPO.
Essentially, DreamDPO is an optimization-based method
for text-to-3D generation. It achieves alignment through
direct preference optimization, leveraging preferences derived from either reward models or large multimodal models.
Specifically, DreamDPO operates by initializing a 3D representation (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Kerbl et al., 2023) and
optimizing it through a three-step iterative process. First,
pairwise examples are constructed on-the-fly by applying
different Gaussian noise. Second, a reward model or a
large multimodal model ranks these examples based on
their matching with the input text prompt or specific instructions, which matches human preferences about the pairwise

1. Introduction
3D content generation is pivotal in driving innovation across
diverse fields, including product design, medical imaging,
scientific visualization, and the rapidly growing domains
of virtual and augmented reality (Li et al., 2023a). Despite its extensive applications, it remains challenging to
1

State Key Laboratory of Brain-machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China 2 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University,
China 3 National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yi Yang <yangyics@zju.edu.cn>, Xiaobo Xia
<xbx@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

