Large Displacement Motion Transfer with Unsupervised Anytime Interpolation

Guixiang Wang 1 Jianjun Li 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, motion transfer task has become one of
the research hotspots in computer vision because it has
been widely used in film animation, game production, face
exchange and other fields(Siarohin et al., 2019a; Oquab
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Zakharov et al., 2020). In
the work, we aim to animate an object in a still image
by transferring the pose in the driving video to generate a
video with the same pose as the driving video. To make
the generated video more vivid, it is necessary not only to
accurately transfer motion patterns in driving video but also
to ensure that the identity information of the generated video
frame and source image are consistent.

Motion transfer is to transfer pose in driving video
to the object of the source image so that the object of the source image moves. Although great
progress has been made recently in unsupervised
motion transfer, many unsupervised methods still
struggle to accurately model large displacement
motions when large motion differences occur between source and driving images. To solve the
problem, we propose an unsupervised anytime
interpolation-based large displacement motion
transfer method, which can generate a series of
any time interpolated images between source and
driving images. By decomposing large displacement motion into many small displacement motions, the difficulty of large displacement motion estimation is reduced. In the process, we
design a selector to select optimal interpolated
images from generated interpolated images for
downstream tasks. Since there are no real images
as labels in the interpolation process, we propose
a bidirectional training strategy. Some constraints
are added to the optimal interpolated image to
generate a reasonable interpolated image. To encourage the network to create high-quality images,
a pre-trained Vision Transformer model is used
to design constraint losses. Finally, experiments
show that compared with the large displacement
motion between source and driving images, the
small displacement motion between interpolated
and driving images makes it easier to realize motion transfer. Compared with existing state-of-theart methods, our method significantly improves
motion-related metrics.

At present, motion transfer tasks can be divided into supervised and unsupervised methods. Supervised methods
perform motion transfer by using prior knowledge of target
object, such as landmarks(Chan et al., 2019; Ha et al., 2020;
Ren et al., 2020; Siarohin et al., 2018; Zakharov et al., 2019)
and 3D models(Doukas et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2019; Thies
et al., 2020; Blanz & Vetter, 1999). However, these methods
usually rely on pre-trained models to extract object-specific
representations, and often fail to obtain satisfactory results
for data objects that do not appear in training. Recently, researchers have proposed some unsupervised motion transfer
methods that do not require prior knowledge. These methods use different transformation methods to model motion
to improve the accuracy of motion transfer. For example,
both FOMM(Siarohin et al., 2019b) and MRAA(Siarohin
et al., 2021) methods used a local linear affine transformation to model motion. However, in the real world, the
motion of objects is usually not locally linear, which makes
it difficult for affine transformation to represent complex
motions accurately. To this end, TPSMM(Zhao & Zhang,
2022) introduced a more flexible nonlinear transformation
(Thin-plate splines) to approximate motions. However, the
set of keypoints detected by TPSMM is messy, and accuracy
is not high, which limits the motion representation ability
of thin-plate spline transformation. To solve the problem,
CPABMM(Wang et al., 2024) utilized continuous piecewise affine transformation to model motion. However, these
motion models are limited in their ability to simulate finer
motions and often produce artifacts around local regions. To
this end, Tao et al.(Tao et al., 2023) proposed a motion refinement module to compensate for previous motion models,

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hangzhou
Dianzi University, Zhejiang, China 2 School of Information Science
and Technology, Hangzhou Normal University, Zhejiang, China.
Correspondence to: Jianjun Li <lijjcan@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

