Hyperband-based Bayesian Optimization for Black-box Prompt Selection

Lennart Schneider 1 Martin Wistuba 2 Aaron Klein 3 Jacek Golebiowski 4 Giovanni Zappella 2
Felice Antonio Merra 5

Abstract

tion (Hendrycks et al., 2021), and mathematical problemsolving (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Cobbe et al., 2021). As
LLMs are highly sensitive to their input (Zhou et al., 2023;
Honovich et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Ye
et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024), performance on these tasks
relies on prompt engineering, where the input is formatted
within a carefully designed prompt that may include an instruction, a few-shot exemplar, and additional information.

Optimal prompt selection is crucial for maximizing large language model (LLM) performance on
downstream tasks, especially in black-box settings where models are only accessible via APIs.
Black-box prompt selection is challenging due
to potentially large, combinatorial search spaces,
absence of gradient information, and high evaluation cost of prompts on a validation set. We
propose HbBoPs, a novel method that combines
a structural-aware deep kernel Gaussian Process
with Hyperband as a multi-fidelity scheduler to
efficiently select prompts. HbBoPs uses embeddings of instructions and few-shot exemplars,
treating them as modular components within
prompts. This enhances the surrogate model’s
ability to predict which prompt to evaluate next
in a sample-efficient manner. Hyperband improves query-efficiency by adaptively allocating
resources across different fidelity levels, reducing
the number of validation instances required for
evaluating prompts. Extensive experiments across
ten diverse benchmarks and three LLMs demonstrate that HbBoPs outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in both performance and efficiency.

The goal of static black-box prompt optimization and selection (Sun et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2024; Lin et al.,
2024; Wu et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024) is to construct or
identify a single prompt for a black-box LLM that, in expectation, performs well across all instances of a downstream
task. This process involves evaluating different prompts
on a validation set and using derivative-free techniques to
guide optimization or selection. The static black-box setting
allows for offline optimization, with the resulting optimal
prompt being used for the downstream task.
While much research has focused on automatically generating new prompts (Sun et al., 2022b; Xu et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Fernando et al., 2024; Lin
et al., 2024), there is growing interest in efficiently selecting
prompts from a predefined pool of candidates (Shi et al.,
2024). This is because many prompt optimization techniques involve generating a large candidate pool a priori
before identifying the best prompt (Xu et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2023; Fernando et al., 2024; Prasad et al., 2023).
Moreover, recent empirical findings indicate that few-shot
exemplars often contribute more strongly to prompt performance than the instruction of a prompt itself, with the best
results typically achieved through the optimal selection of
both components (Wan et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
In recent years, pre-trained auto-regressive large language
models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities
in addressing a wide range of machine learning tasks involving natural language (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2023), such as Q&A (Joshi et al., 2017; Clark et al., 2018),
text summarization (Koupaee & Wang, 2018), text genera-

The task of black-box prompt selection is challenging. First,
the search space can be extensive, as instructions and fewshot exemplars form a combinatorial set of candidates. Second, black-box LLMs make it impossible to directly optimize based on gradient information. Third, evaluating a
prompt is time-consuming and costly, as each evaluation involves querying the LLM on multiple validation instances of
a task. This calls for the development of selection methods
that can efficiently explore the space of candidate prompts
while keeping the total number of LLM calls low.

1
Work done during an internship at Amazon Web Services,
Berlin, Germany. 2 Amazon Web Services, Berlin, Germany.
3
ScaDS.AI, University of Leipzig, Germany; work done while
at Amazon. 4 distil labs, Berlin, Germany; work done while at
Amazon. 5 Cognism, Remote, Italy; work done while at Amazon.
Correspondence to: Lennart Schneider <lennart.sch@web.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

