Adversarial Combinatorial Semi-bandits with Graph Feedback

Yuxiao Wen 1

Abstract

(Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012; Audibert et al., 2014; Chen
et al., 2013). Mathematically, over a time horizon of length
T and for a fixed combinatorial budget S, a learner repeatedly chooses a (potentially constrained) combination of K
individual arms within the budget, i.e. from the following
decision set

A0 ⊆ A ≡ v ∈ {0, 1}K : ∥v∥1 = S ,

In combinatorial semi-bandits, a learner repeatedly selects from a combinatorial decision set of
arms, receives the realized sum of rewards, and
observes the rewards of the individual selected
arms as feedback. In this paper, we extend this
framework to include graph feedback, where the
learner observes the rewards of all neighboring
arms of the selected arms in a feedback graph G.
We establish that the optimal
√ regret
√ over a time
horizon T scales as e
Θ(S T + αST ), where
S is the size of the combinatorial decisions and
α is the independence number of G. This result
√
interpolates between the known regrets e
Θ(S T )
under
√ full information (i.e., G is complete) and
e
Θ( KST ) under the semi-bandit feedback (i.e.,
G has only self-loops), where K is the total number of arms. A key technical ingredient is to realize a convexified action using a random decision
vector with negative correlations. We also show
that online stochastic mirror descent (OSMD) that
only realizes convexified actions in expectation is
suboptimal. In addition, we describe the problem
of combinatorial semi-bandits with general capacity and apply our results to derive an improved
regret upper bound, which may be of independent
interest.

and receives a linear payoff ⟨v, rt ⟩ where rt ∈ [0, 1]K
denotes the reward associated to each arm at time t. After making the decision at time t, the learner observes
{va rat : a ∈ [K]} as the semi-bandit feedback or the entire reward vector rt under full information. When S = 1,
it reduces to the multi-armed bandits with either the bandit feedback or full information. For S > 1, the learner
is allowed to select S arms at each time and collect the
cumulative reward.
Under the adversarial setting for bandits (Auer et al., 1995),
no statistical assumption is made about the reward vectors
{rt }t∈[T ] . Instead, they are (potentially) generated by an
adaptive adversary. The objective is to minimize the expected regret of the learner’s algorithm π compared to the
best fixed decision in hindsight, defined as follows:
"
#
T
X
t t
E[R(π)] = E max
⟨v∗ − v , r ⟩
(1)
v∗ ∈A0

t=1

where v t ∈ A0 is the decision chosen by π at time t. The
expectation is taken over any randomness in the learner’s
algorithm and over the rewards, since the reward rt is allowed to be generated adaptively and hence can be random.
Note that while the adversary can generate the rewards rt
adaptively, i.e. based on the learner’s past decisions, the regret in (1) is measured against a fixed decision v∗ assuming
the adversary would generate the same rewards.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial semi-bandits are a class of online learning
problems that generalize the classical multi-armed bandits
(Robbins, 1952) and have a wide range of applications including multi-platform online advertising (Avadhanula et al.,
2021), online recommendations (Wang et al., 2017), webpage optimization (Liu & Li, 2021), and online shortest path
(György et al., 2007). In these applications, instead of taking
an individual action, a set of actions is chosen at each time

While the semi-bandit feedback has been extensively studied, the current literature falls short of capturing additional
information structures on the rewards of the individual arms,
except for the full information case. As a motivating example, consider the multi-platform online advertising problem,
where the arms represent the (discretized) bids. At each
round and on each platform, the learner makes a bid and
receives zero reward on losing the auction and her surplus
on winning the auction. In many ads exchange platforms,

1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Yuxiao Wen <yuxiaowen@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

