Mitigating Heterogeneous Token Overfitting in LLM Knowledge Editing

Tianci Liu 1 Ruirui Li 2 Zihan Dong 3 Hui Liu 2 Xianfeng Tang 2 Qingyu Yin 2 Linjun Zhang 3 Haoyu Wang 4
Jing Gao 1

Abstract

versatility, establishing them as new foundations for natural language processing applications (Bommasani et al.,
2021; Zhou et al., 2023). Furthermore, with model sizes
continually increasing, large language models (LLMs) exhibit emerging abilities to follow natural language instructions (Dong et al., 2022b; Ouyang et al., 2022), which empowers their zero-shot adaptations to unseen tasks (Kojima
et al., 2022), paving the way towards artificial general intelligence (Bubeck et al., 2023).

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved
remarkable performance on various natural language tasks. However, they are trained on static
corpora and their knowledge can become outdated
quickly in the fast-changing world. This motivates the development of knowledge editing (KE)
to update specific knowledge in LLMs without
changing unrelated others or compromising their
pre-trained capabilities. Previous efforts sought
to update a small amount of parameters of a LLM
and proved effective for making selective updates.
Nonetheless, the edited LLM often exhibits degraded ability to reason about the new knowledge.
In this work, we identify a key issue: heterogeneous token overfitting (HTO), where the LLM
overfits different tokens in the provided knowledge at varying rates. To tackle this, we propose
OVERT ONE, a token-level smoothing method that
mitigates HTO by adaptively refining the target
distribution. Theoretically, OVERT ONE offers better parameter updates with negligible computation overhead. It also induces an implicit DPO
but does not require preference data pairs. Extensive experiments across four editing methods,
two LLMs, and diverse scenarios demonstrate the
effectiveness and versatility of our method.

Despite this remarkable potential, the real-world LLM deployment remains largely unresolved: LLMs are capable
of comprehending a wide range of human instructions and
queries, but they can only provide feedback based on their
static knowledge from the data they were trained on. In
a fast-changing world, most knowledge quickly becomes
outdated. For example, the updated knowledge about the
president of United States would refer to Donald Trump
rather than Joe Biden. Failing to maintain update-to-date
knowledge could amplify critical issues such as making
factual fallacy (De Cao et al., 2021) or producing harmful
generations (Hartvigsen et al., 2022). However, the significant computational cost of retraining makes it impractical
to frequently incorporate new knowledge.
As a remedy, knowledge editing (KE), whose goal is to
update an LLM with some specific knowledge without hurting irrelevant others and general ability, is proposed (Wang
et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2024c). Full fine-tuning of LLMs
proved ineffective as it severely disrupted irrelevant knowledge (Wang et al., 2023b), leading to an editing-locality
trade-off. Here locality refers to the ability to maintain
knowledge unrelated to the update, such as the prime minister of Canada for the previous case. To achieve a good
locality, model updates need to be selective and should rely
on a small fraction of parameters (Wang et al., 2023b). Following this principle, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)
methods such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) have achieved good
performance (Wu et al., 2023). On the other hand, Huang
et al. (2023); Dong et al. (2022a) restricted the updates to
some pre-specified feed-forward network (FFN) layer that
serves as knowledge storage (Dai et al., 2021). Meng et al.
(2022a;b) refined the process by introducing a locating stage
to identify which layer the target knowledge is stored. These
fine-grained manners have demonstrated impressive success

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) parameterized by deep neural
networks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) demonstrate strong
generalizability across various natural language generation and classification tasks (See et al., 2019; Raffel et al.,
2020; Ji et al., 2023). These successes underscore their
1

Purdue University 2 Amazon 3 Rutgers University
University at Albany. Correspondence to: Haoyu Wang
<hwang28@albany.edu>, Jing Gao <jinggao@purdue.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

