RAPID: Long-Context Inference with Retrieval-Augmented
Speculative Decoding

Guanzheng Chen * 1 2 3 Qilong Feng * 1 Jinjie Ni 1 Xin Li 2 3 Michael Qizhe Shieh 1
Code:

https://github.com/NUS-TRAIL/RAPID

Abstract

1. Introduction

The emergence of long-context large language
models (LLMs) offers a promising alternative to
traditional retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
for processing extensive documents. However, the
computational overhead of long-context inference
presents significant efficiency challenges. While
Speculative Decoding (SD) traditionally accelerates inference using smaller draft models, its effectiveness diminishes substantially in long-context
scenarios due to memory-bound KV cache operations. We introduce Retrieval-Augmented
SPeculatIve Decoding (RAPID), which leverages
RAG for both accelerating and enhancing generation quality in long-context inference. RAPID
introduces the RAG drafter—a draft LLM operating on shortened retrieval contexts—to speculate on the generation of long-context target
LLMs. Our approach enables a new paradigm
where same-scale or even larger LLMs can serve
as RAG drafters while maintaining computational
efficiency. To fully leverage the potentially superior capabilities from stronger RAG drafters, we
develop an inference-time knowledge transfer that
enriches the target distribution by RAG. Extensive experiments on the LLaMA-3.1 and Qwen2.5
backbones demonstrate that RAPID effectively
integrates the strengths of both RAG and longcontext LLMs, achieving significant performance
improvements (e.g., from 39.33 to 42.83 on InfiniteBench for LLaMA-3.1-8B) with more than
2× speedups for long-context inference. Our analyses also reveal the robustness of RAPID across
various context lengths and retrieval quality.

Large language models (LLMs) have traditionally relied
on retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to process extensive documents by selectively retrieving relevant text
segments. While effective, the performance of RAG is inherently bounded by the capability of the retriever to extract
pertinent information across diverse queries (Gao et al.,
2023). The recent emergence of long-context LLMs, capable of directly processing million-word documents (Team
et al., 2024), suggests a promising alternative to complex
RAG pipelines. However, this breakthrough is bottlenecked
by the computational efficiency of long-context inference,
where processing extensive key-value (KV) caches becomes
memory-bound and introduces substantial latency (Pope
et al., 2022).
Speculative Decoding (SD) (Chen et al., 2023; Leviathan
et al., 2023) is a prevalent approach to accelerate LLM inference without compromising generation quality. By leveraging a smaller draft model to propose multiple candidates
for single-pass validation by the target model, SD achieves
significant speedup when candidates are accepted. The benefits of SD hinge on two critical factors: the computational
efficiency of the draft model in generating candidates, as
well as its capability to produce high-quality and acceptable
candidates. However, SD will become less effective in longcontext scenarios, as memory-bound KV cache operations
prevent smaller LLMs from maintaining significant speed
benefits over larger models (Pope et al., 2022; Ainslie et al.,
2023b). As depicted in Figure 1, the throughput gains of
LLaMA-3.1-8B over LLaMA-3.1-70B diminish drastically
(23.6 → 9.4) with increasing context lengths from 1K to
128K tokens.
In this work, we introduce Retrieval-Augmented
SPeculatIve Decoding (RAPID), to bridge the gap of SD
for accelerating long-context inference while enhancing
generation quality. RAPID employs a RAG drafter—the
draft LLM operating on shortened context from RAG—to
speculate the generation of long-context LLM following
the SD process. We propose that RAG drafter can serve
as ideal draft model for long-context target LLM, as it

*
Equal contribution 1 National University of Singapore 2 DAMO
Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China.
Correspondence to: Guanzheng Chen <gc.chen@u.nus.edu>,
Michael Qizhe Shieh <michaelshieh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

