Enabling Optimal Decisions in Rehearsal Learning under CARE Condition

Wen-Bo Du 1 2 Hao-Yi Lei 1 2 Lue Tao 1 2 Tian-Zuo Wang 1 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1 2

Abstract

Correlation

In the field of machine learning (ML), an essential
type of decision-related problem is known as AUF
(Avoiding Undesired Future): if an ML model predicts an undesired outcome, how can decisions
be made to prevent it? Recently, a novel framework called rehearsal learning has been proposed
to address the AUF problem. Despite its utility
in modeling uncertainty for decision-making, it
remains unclear under what conditions and how
optimal actions that maximize the AUF probability can be identified. In this paper, we propose
CARE (CAnonical REctangle), a condition under which the maximum AUF probability can be
achieved. Under the CARE condition, we present
a projection-Newton algorithm to select actions
and prove that the algorithm achieves superlinear
convergence to the optimal one. Besides, we provide a generalization method for adopting the algorithm to AUF scenarios beyond the CARE condition. Finally, we demonstrate that a closed-form
solution exists when the outcome is a singleton
variable, substantially reducing the time complexity of decision-making. Experiments validate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our method.

Influence

Prediction

Decision

Actionable

Causation

Discovery

Figure 1. Relations between correlation, influence, and causation
(reproduced from Zhou (2022)).

model that takes real-time environmental data (denoted as
X) as input and predicts the risk of package loss (denoted
as Y). For a particular delivery, if the prediction indicates
a high risk of loss, the system will consider altering values
of some intermediate control variables (denoted as Z), such
as altitude, speed, or route, to mitigate the risk. Since experimenting with real deliveries to explore better actions
is costly and potentially results in lost packages, different
alterations on Z must be carefully considered. Let S denote
the desired region of Y where the risk of package loss is
sufficiently low; the AUF problem can be interpreted as finding the optimal alteration zξ that maximizes the probability
of Y ∈ S, which is called the AUF probability (PAUF ).
Generally, decision-makers lack access to an explicit formula for PAUF w.r.t. alterations, which complicates the selection of effective alterations. To model PAUF , we need to
understand the relations among variables {X, Z, Y}. While
correlation is often sufficient for prediction in ML models,
effective decision-making demands a more nuanced understanding of variable relations. In certain decision-making
contexts, causal relations are helpful to model these relations (Bareinboim et al., 2015; Lattimore et al., 2016). In
practice, identifying causal relations is essentially challenging, as it typically relies on untestable assumptions (Spirtes
et al., 2000; Schölkopf et al., 2021). However, a complete causal understanding is not a prerequisite for effective
decision-making, as evidenced by human decision-makers
who could successfully make decisions without such comprehensive knowledge (Zhou, 2022). Furthermore, even
when causal factors are identified, they may not be actionable for decision-making purposes. Additionally, variables
that influence outcomes are not necessarily causal factors.
Recognizing that correlation is insufficient and causation
is somewhat luxurious for decision-making, Zhou (2023)
propose the influence relation as an intermediate concept
between correlation and causation, as depicted in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) models have achieved great success
in various real-world prediction tasks (LeCun et al., 2015).
Instead of solely focusing on the prediction, Zhou (2022)
emphasizes another important issue, i.e., if the prediction
of an ML model is undesired, how to find effective actions
to prevent it from happening. This problem is known as
the AUF (avoiding undesired future) problem (Zhou, 2022).
Consider an autonomous drone delivery system scenario
as an example. Imagine that the system has trained an ML
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Zhi-Hua Zhou
<zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

