Avoiding spurious sharpness minimization broadens applicability of SAM

Sidak Pal Singh 1 Hossein Mobahi 2 Atish Agarwala 2 Yann Dauphin 2

Abstract

commonly held belief is that it is important for models to
converge to well-behaved and robust solutions. The ‘regularity’ of the model is often obtained using regularization
techniques, which — even in the day and age of LLMs —
remain an indispensable part of any training algorithm.

Curvature regularization techniques like Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM) have shown
great promise in improving generalization on vision tasks. However, we find that SAM performs
poorly in domains like natural language processing (NLP), often degrading performance — even
with twice the compute budget. We investigate the
discrepancy across domains and find that in the
NLP setting, SAM is dominated by regularization
of the logit statistics –— instead of improving
the geometry of the function itself. We use this
observation to develop an alternative algorithm
we call F UNCTIONAL -SAM, which regularizes
curvature only through modification of the
statistics of the overall function implemented
by the neural network, and avoids spurious
minimization through logit manipulation. Furthermore, we argue that preconditioning the SAM
perturbation also prevents spurious minimization,
and when combined with F UNCTIONAL -SAM,
it gives further improvements. Our proposed
algorithms show improved performance over
A DAM W and SAM baselines when trained for
an equal number of steps, in both fixed-length
and Chinchilla-style training settings, at various
model scales (including billion-parameter scale).
On the whole, our work highlights the importance
of more precise characterizations of sharpness
in broadening the applicability of curvature
regularization to large language models (LLMs).

Some of the most prominent regularization methods
include weight decay (Krogh & Hertz, 1991), dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), data augmentation (Ciregan et al.,
2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012), Mixup (Zhang, 2017), and
curvature-based controls (Foret et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020).
In recent years, curvature regularization techniques have
gained popularity due to their effectiveness in promoting
generalization. These techniques bias learning dynamics
to areas of lower curvature (i.e., less sharp regions) in the
loss landscape (Chaudhari et al., 2017; Keskar et al., 2017;
Foret et al., 2020; Pittorino et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020).
The origins of these curvature or sharpness minimization
techniques can be traced back to the classical ideas of
minimum description length (Rissanen, 1978; Hinton &
Van Camp, 1993; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). Lately,
their development has been inspired by their success in a
large-scale correlational study (Jiang et al., 2019) and in
the NeurIPS generalization competition (Jiang et al., 2020).
Sharpness minimization has demonstrated significant improvement on vision tasks. In contrast, there has not been
much uptake of these methods in NLP1 and, especially for as
cornerstone (Brown et al., 2020) a task in NLP as language
modeling. Curiously enough, we observe that Sharpness
Aware Minimization (SAM), one of the best studied sharpness regularization methods (Foret et al., 2020), shows poor
performance here; indeed, its validation metrics are typically worse than A DAM W throughout training (Figure 1),
despite using more computation per step. Hence, this raises
the following questions which form the basis of our work:

1. Introduction
One of the most fundamental questions in machine learning
research is: how do we train models that are useful beyond
their training data? This question arises in multiple scenarios — from generalizing to unseen samples, dealing with
distribution shift, and fine-tuning on specific domains. A

What are the reasons for SAM’s poor performance in language modeling? How can they be
addressed to successfully yield generalization benefits, while being equal in cost as SAM?

1
Google Research 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Sidak Pal Singh <ssidak@google.com>.

Towards this end, in Section 3, we perform a novel analysis

nd

1

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The most notable exception of SAM in NLP is in the finetuning scenario (Bahri et al., 2022), where the parameters are constrained to move smaller distances by the very nature of the setup.

1

