LLM Data Selection and Utilization via Dynamic Bi-level Optimization

Yang Yu 1 2 3 Kai Han 3 Hang Zhou 3 4 Yehui Tang 3 Kaiqi Huang 1 2 Yunhe Wang 3 Dacheng Tao 5

Abstract

are essential for enabling the model to generalize across
various tasks and domains (Bai et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024;
Zhou et al., 2024). As the scale of the pre-training data
increases, language models exhibit a remarkable capacity
to perform downstream tasks with minimal task-specific
tuning, showcasing the power of data-driven approaches in
natural language processing (Kaplan et al., 2020).

While large-scale training data is fundamental for developing capable large language models (LLMs), strategically selecting high-quality
data has emerged as a critical approach to enhance training efficiency and reduce computational costs. Current data selection methodologies
predominantly rely on static, training-agnostic criteria, failing to account for the dynamic model
training and data interactions. In this paper, we
propose a new Data Weighting Model (DWM)
to adjust the weight of selected data within each
batch to achieve a dynamic data utilization during LLM training. Specially, to better capture the
dynamic data preference of the trained model, a
bi-level optimization framework is implemented
to update the weighting model. Our experiments
demonstrate that DWM enhances the performance
of models trained with randomly-selected data,
and the learned weighting model can be transferred to enhance other data selection methods
and models of different sizes. Moreover, we
further analyze how a model’s data preferences
evolve throughout training, providing new insights into the data preference of the model during
training.

Though the power of large language models rises with the
use of enormous and ever-growing datasets for pre-training,
naively training a model on all available data may not be optimal, as the quality of available data varies, and the training
increases the carbon footprint and financial costs. Recently,
there is increasing evidence that choosing the right training
data is more essential for producing state-of-the-art large
language models (Albalak et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2023),
and researchers have focused on studying data selection, the
mechanism to determine which candidate data to include
in the training, to improve the training efficiency of model
pre-training. Specially, these data selection methods usually
utilize referring data or referring models for an effective
selection process. For example, in DSIR (Xie et al., 2023),
Wikipedia and books are used as the high-quality data to
help data classification. In DsDM (Engstrom et al., 2024)
and MATES (Yu et al., 2024), LAMBADA dataset (Paperno
et al., 2016) is used as the target dataset to help evaluate
the influence of the candidate data, i.e., the decrease of the
loss in the target dataset when the model is trained with
and without the candidate data. Besides, referring models
are also utilized to help evaluate the quality of the data.
The relationship between the perplexity of reference models
(e.g., Llama) applied to candidate datasets and data quality
is examined, with perplexity proposed as a potential metric for assessing data quality (Ankner et al., 2024). And
QuRating (Wettig et al., 2024) utilizes the data preference
of GPT-3.5-turbo to train the data rating model.

1. Introduction
The success of modern language models has demonstrated
the critical role that large-scale pre-training data plays in
shaping their performance (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron
et al., 2023a). The diversity and scale of the training data
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences 2 The Key Laboratory of Cognition and
Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark
Lab 4 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University 5 Nanyang Technological University. Correspondence
to: Kaiqi Huang <kqhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>, Yunhe Wang
<yunhe.wang@huawei.com>.

Though these methods filter out data and decrease the training cost, they merely focus on the data selection isolatedly
without considering the dynamic training process of LLMs.
On the one hand, most of the previous methods selected
data before model training, ignoring the dynamic data preference of the model during training. On the other hand, the
data samples in existing methods are selected separately and
utilized within a batch indiscriminately, without considering
the joint effects between different samples. In fact, the data

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

