Pareto-Optimal Fronts for Benchmarking Symbolic Regression Algorithms

Kei Sen Fong 1 Mehul Motani 1 2

Abstract
Symbolic Regression (SR) algorithms select expressions based on prediction performance while
also keeping the expression lengths short to produce explainable white box models. In this context, SR algorithms can be evaluated by measuring the extent to which the expressions discovered are Pareto-optimal, in the sense of having
the best R-squared score for a given expression
length. This evaluation is most commonly done
based on relative performance, in the sense that
an SR algorithm is judged on whether it Paretodominates other SR algorithms selected in the
analysis, without any indication on efficiency or
attainable limits. In this paper, we explore absolute Pareto-optimal (APO) solutions instead,
which have the optimal tradeoff between the multiple SR objectives, for 34 datasets in the widelyused SR benchmark, SRBench, by performing exhaustive search. Additionally, we include comparisons between eight numerical optimization methods. We extract, for every dataset, an APO front
of expressions that can serve as a universal baseline for SR algorithms that informs researchers
of the best attainable performance for selected
sizes. The APO fronts provided serves as an
important benchmark and performance limit for
SR algorithms and is made publicly available at:
https://github.com/kentridgeai/SRParetoFronts

Figure 1: Our APO front on a subset of 34 datasets from
SRBench (La Cava et al., 2021). The APO front informs
us that the benchmarked SR algorithms may not have sufficiently explored the search space of short expressions in
these datasets. Note: Results here are aggregated over the
34 datasets and we perform per-dataset analysis later.
In contrast to black-box machine learning models, SR algorithms produce expressions that are explainable and interpretable. Thus, SR has become a first-class algorithm
in various fields including physics (Udrescu & Tegmark,
2020), material sciences (Wang et al., 2019), engineering
(Martinez-Gil & Chaves-Gonzalez, 2020) and healthcare
(Christensen et al., 2022; Fong & Motani, 2024).

1. Introduction
Symbolic Regression (SR) is the task of finding closed-form
analytical expressions of practical interest that describe the
relationship between variables in a measurement dataset.

In recent large-scale benchmarking work for SR algorithms,
the performance of SR algorithms on black-box regression
datasets is measured based on the relative performance of
the algorithm (La Cava et al., 2021; de Franca et al., 2024).
In particular, we refer to a relative Pareto-optimal SR algorithm as one that produces expressions with the best Rsquared (R2 ) score for expressions up to a given size, when
compared to other SR algorithms selected in the analysis.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. 2 N.1 Institute for Health,
Institute for Digital Medicine (WisDM), Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Kei Sen Fong <fongkeisen@u.nus.edu>, Mehul Motani
<motani@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose to move towards absolute Paretooptimality, where we exhaustively search through the en1

