SquareχPO: Differentially Private and Robust χ2 -Preference Optimization
in Offline Direct Alignment

Xingyu Zhou 1 Yulian Wu 2 Wenqian Weng 1 Francesco Orabona 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Aligning large language models (LLMs) to human values
is crucial for their responsible deployment. Two primary
paradigms have emerged: indirect alignment, where a reward model is learned before the policy optimized via Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang
et al., 2022), and direct alignment, an RL-free approach
leveraging reparametrization techniques like Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023). Very
recently, a variant of DPO, called χPO (Huang et al., 2024),
addresses the overoptimization issue in direct alignment by
relying on a significantly weaker condition – single-policy
concentrability – making it the first offline direct alignment
method with such a guarantee.

In this paper, we theoretically study the offline
alignment of language models with human preference feedback, under both preference label corruption and privacy protections. To this end, we
propose SquareχPO, a simple one-line change to
χPO where the standard log-loss is replaced by a
new square loss over probability. Thanks to the
inherent properties of this new loss, we have advanced the state-of-the-art of differentially private
and robust offline direct alignment. Specifically,
for the local model of label privacy, SquareχPO
is the first algorithm that attains an optimal rate
based on single-policy concentrability even with
general function approximations. It also gives the
first result under the central model of privacy protection over both prompts (responses) and labels.
On the robustness side against Huber label corruption, SquareχPO is the first alignment method
that has a meaningful theoretical guarantee under
general function approximations. More importantly, SquareχPO can address privacy protection
and corruption simultaneously, where an interesting separation is observed, implying that the order
of privacy and corruption matters. Furthermore,
we show that SquareχPO can also be easily extended to handle the scenario of the general preference model with state-of-the-art guarantees under
corruption and privacy. Last but not least, all of
our theoretical guarantees enjoy a unified analysis,
building upon a new result on the generalization
error bounds of least-square regression under corruption and privacy constraints, which we believe
is of independent interest to the community.

Meanwhile, privacy and robustness concerns in the preference datasets of the alignment process have gained significant attention. Membership inference attacks expose
privacy vulnerabilities (Feng et al., 2024), while data poisoning undermines label integrity (Casper et al., 2023). Recent
efforts have addressed these challenges separately, providing theoretical guarantees for privacy or robustness. On
the privacy side, existing theoretical work has primarily focused on simple linear function approximations (Zhou et al.,
2025; Chowdhury et al., 2024b; Korkmaz & Brown-Cohen,
2024), which are insufficient for practical scenarios involving non-linear reward or policy function classes (e.g., neural
networks).
Q1. For general function approximations, can we achieve
optimal (or better) rates under privacy constraints?
Contribution 1. We answer Q1 affirmatively by introducing SquareχPO, a simple variant of χPO which replaces the
log loss with a new square loss over probabilities. For preference label privacy under the local model of Differential
Privacy (DP) (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011; Chaudhuri &
Hsu, 2011), SquareχPO achieves the optimal privacy cost,
even with general function approximations. Furthermore,
under the standard central DP model (Dwork et al., 2006), it
provides the first pure DP guarantees for the case of general
function approximations.

1

Wayne State University, USA 2 King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to:
Xingyu Zhou <xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Moving now to the robustness side, Mandal et al. (2024)
takes an indirect approach, focusing on the linear setting,
1

