Bring Reason to Vision:
Understanding Perception and Reasoning through Model Merging

Shiqi Chen * 1 Jinghan Zhang * 2 Tongyao Zhu 3 Wei Liu 2 Siyang Gao 1 Miao Xiong 3 Manling Li 4
Junxian He 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Multimodal reasoning is crucial for a variety of important
applications, such as interpreting charts and figures in scientific publications and government reports. Despite the
great successes of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) in
tasks requiring perceptual and linguistic integration (Li et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b),
these models struggle with complex multimodal reasoning
tasks (Lu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b). This limitation
– partly due to the scarcity of multimodal reasoning data –
leaves them lagging far behind their language model counterpart which has made remarkable advancement in reasoning
tasks (Yang et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025).

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) combine visual
perception with the general capabilities, such as
reasoning, of Large Language Models (LLMs).
However, the mechanisms by which these two
abilities can be combined and contribute remain
poorly understood. In this work, we explore to
compose perception and reasoning through model
merging that connects parameters of different
models. Unlike previous works that often focus on merging models of the same kind, we
propose merging models across modalities, enabling the incorporation of the reasoning capabilities of LLMs into VLMs. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that model merging
offers a successful pathway to transfer reasoning
abilities from LLMs to VLMs in a training-free
manner. Moreover, we utilize the merged models
to understand the internal mechanism of perception and reasoning and how merging affects it.
We find that perception capabilities are predominantly encoded in the early layers of the model,
whereas reasoning is largely facilitated by the
middle-to-late layers. After merging, we observe
that all layers begin to contribute to reasoning,
whereas the distribution of perception abilities
across layers remains largely unchanged. These
observations shed light on the potential of model
merging as a tool for multimodal integration and
interpretation. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/shiqichen17/VLM Merging.

Perception and reasoning are two fundamental components
in this context. While language models primarily represent
the reasoning ability, VLMs demand both to succeed. Therefore, it is natural to ask: can we incorporate the reasoning
ability of LMs into VLMs? Achieving such a combination
is challenging, as the interaction between perception and
reasoning within VLMs remains poorly understood. In this
work, we investigate these questions through the lens of
model merging (Ilharco et al., 2023), a straightforward approach to explore whether perception and reasoning can be
combined across modalities and how these two abilities are
embedded within VLMs.
Concretely, model merging generates a new model by performing arithmetic operations on the parameters of existing
models, without requiring additional training. This strategy
works based on the assumption that models fine-tuned from
a shared initialization reside in a connected subspace of the
parameter space. While previous works on model merging focus on models of the same kind (Yadav et al., 2023;
Yu et al., 2024b), it remains unknown that whether models
across different modalities are connectable to yield benefits.

*

Equal contribution 1 City University of Hong Kong 2 Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology 3 National University of Singapore 4 Northwestern University. Correspondence
to: Shiqi Chen <schen438-c@my.cityu.edu.hk>, Jinghan Zhang
<jzhangjv@cse.ust.hk>, Junxian He <junxianh@cse.ust.hk>.

In this work, we specifically focus on the textual components of the VLMs and select LLMs with task-specific reasoning abilities that match the VLM’s configuration, performing a weighted average operation on their parameters
as demonstrated in Figure 1.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We conduct extensive experiments by merging commonly
1

