Black-Box Adversarial Attacks on LLM-Based Code Completion

Slobodan Jenko * 1 Niels Mündler * 1 Jingxuan He 2 1 Mark Vero 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

improved programming productivity. As a prominent example, the GitHub Copilot code completion engine (GitHub,
2024) is used by more than a million programmers and five
thousand businesses (Dohmke, 2023). However, prior research has shown that LLMs are prone to producing code
with dangerous security vulnerabilities (Pearce et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2023a). This poses significant security risks, as
LLM-generated vulnerabilities can be incorporated by unassuming users (Perry et al., 2023). Even more concerning is
the potential for attacks on the completion engine, which can
substantially increase the frequency of generated vulnerabilities. To conduct such attacks, prior research has considered
poisoning attacks, eliciting insecure behavior in a white-box
manner by modifying the model’s weights or training data
(Schuster et al., 2021; He & Vechev, 2023; Aghakhani et al.,
2024; Yan et al., 2024). However, these attacks require access to the models’ training process, which is typically out
of reach for the adversary (Carlini et al., 2024) or requires
large amounts of expensive compute. Moreover, such attacks cannot be executed on operating and well-established
code completion services, such as GitHub Copilot.

Modern code completion engines, powered by
large language models (LLMs), assist millions of
developers with their strong capabilities to generate functionally correct code. Due to this popularity, it is crucial to investigate the security implications of relying on LLM-based code completion.
In this work, we demonstrate that state-of-the-art
black-box LLM-based code completion engines
can be stealthily biased by adversaries to significantly increase their rate of insecure code generation. We present the first attack, named INSEC,
that achieves this goal. INSEC works by injecting
an attack string as a short comment in the completion input. The attack string is crafted through a
query-based optimization procedure starting from
a set of carefully designed initialization schemes.
We demonstrate INSEC’s broad applicability and
effectiveness by evaluating it on various state-ofthe-art open-source models and black-box commercial services (e.g., OpenAI API and GitHub
Copilot). On a diverse set of security-critical test
cases, covering 16 CWEs across 5 programming
languages, INSEC increases the rate of generated
insecure code by more than 50%, while maintaining the functional correctness of generated code.
We consider INSEC practical – it requires low
resources and costs less than 10 US dollars to
develop on commodity hardware. Moreover, we
showcase the attack’s real-world deployability, by
developing an IDE plug-in that stealthily injects
INSEC into the GitHub Copilot extension.

Realistic Black-Box Setting In this work, we present a
novel threat model, as depicted in Figure 1. Here, a user interacts with a code editor, receiving code completions from
a (remote) black-box completion engine. The attacker’s goal
is to influence the engine to frequently suggest vulnerable
code in security-critical contexts. To ensure stealthiness and
gain the user’s trust, the attack must preserve the engine’s
overall effectiveness in generating functionally correct code
and maintain its response speed. To avoid having to train
and host a sufficiently capable malicious model, and since
they can not manipulate the black-box model internals, the
attacker achieves this by manipulating the engine’s input.

1. Introduction

We consider attacks in this setting to pose a realistic threat
for three reasons. First, the black-box assumption aligns
with the operational methods of widely deployed and highly
accurate completion services like GitHub Copilot. This not
only removes the cost of training and deploying their own
model, but also allows the attack to target the extensive
user base of these services. Second, users of completion
engines are likely to accept vulnerable code suggestions
(Perry et al., 2023), especially when the attack maintains
the engine’s high utility and speed. Third, the attack manip-

Large language models (LLMs) have greatly enhanced the
practical effectiveness of code completion (Chen et al., 2021;
Nijkamp et al., 2023; Rozière et al., 2023) and significantly
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Switzerland 2 UC Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Niels Mündler <niels.muendler@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

