Accelerating LLM Inference with Lossless Speculative Decoding Algorithms for
Heterogeneous Vocabularies

Nadav Timor 1 Jonathan Mamou 2 Daniel Korat 2 Moshe Berchansky 2 Gaurav Jain 3 Oren Pereg 2
Moshe Wasserblat 2 David Harel 1

Abstract

often in practice, such drafters are not available—either
because the target model is not part of a model family (examples of families include the StarCoder, Li et al., 2023;
Llama, Dubey et al., 2024 and DeepSeek, DeepSeek-AI
et al., 2025) or the smallest model in the same family remains too large and slow. An alternative approach—training
a drafter from scratch (Zafrir et al., 2024)–is a challenging
task that requires computational resources, data, time, and
expertise. Even if you successfully train such a drafter, another problem is that you cannot reuse it for other models
with different vocabularies.

Accelerating the inference of large language models (LLMs) is a critical challenge in generative AI.
Speculative decoding (SD) methods offer substantial efficiency gains by generating multiple tokens
using a single target forward pass. However, existing SD approaches require the drafter and target
models to share the same vocabulary, thus limiting
the pool of possible drafters, often necessitating
the training of a drafter from scratch. We present
three new SD methods that remove this sharedvocabulary constraint. All three methods preserve
the target distribution (i.e., they are lossless) and
work with off-the-shelf models without requiring additional training or modifications. Empirically, on summarization, programming, and longcontext tasks, our algorithms demonstrate significant speedups of up to 2.8× over standard autoregressive decoding. By enabling any off-theshelf model to serve as a drafter and requiring no
retraining, this work substantially broadens the
applicability of the SD framework in practice.

1

Our Contributions. We relax a key constraint of the speculative decoding (SD) framework—the requirement that the
drafter must use the same vocabulary as the target model.
By allowing heterogeneous vocabularies, we eliminate the
requirement to train a drafter from scratch and enable any
model to operate as drafter, thereby significantly broaden
the applicability of SD methods. By unlocking any off-theshelf model to serve as drafter, we were able to find drafters
that are more effective even than drafters from the same
model family. Our main contributions are:
• Algorithm 2 (String-Level Exact Match, SLEM): An
algorithm that uses plain text as a shared intermediate
representation between the draft and target vocabularies,
enabling exact matching of tokens. It solves the problem
of non-injective tokenizers (Section 3.2) to support any
off-the-shelf model pair. We evaluate the algorithm on
summarization, programming, and long-context tasks,
demonstrating robust speedups of up to 2.8× over autoregressive decoding.
• Algorithm 4 (Token-Level Intersection, TLI): A
purely token-based approach that adjusts the drafter’s
distribution to sample only from the intersection between the two vocabularies and employs the standard
SD verification method. We prove theoretically that
this approach outperforms a simple “union” strategy by
increasing the probability of accepting tokens (Theorem 4.1). Empirically, Algorithm 4 demonstrates significant speedups of up to 1.7× over autoregressive decoding.
• Algorithm 3 (String-Level Rejection Sampling,
SLRS): A novel verification mechanism that imple-

Introduction

Speculative decoding (SD; Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2023) is an effective method for reducing the latency
of LLM inference and increasing its throughput. A necessary condition for SD to be effective is that the drafter is
sufficiently fast and accurate in approximating the target distribution (Timor et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024). State-of-theart verification methods for SD employ rejection sampling
algorithms that are designed to work with a single vocabulary, where the draft tokens are sampled from the same
vocabulary as the target tokens (Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2023; Miao et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024). However,
1
Weizmann Institute of Science 2 Intel Labs 3 d-Matrix. Correspondence to: Nadav Timor <nadav.timor@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

