BCE vs. CE in Deep Feature Learning

Qiufu Li 1 2 3 Huibin Xiao 1 2 3 Linlin Shen 1 2 3
M extracts its feature h(k) = M(X (k) ) ∈ Rd , which is
output from the penultimate layer in deep model. Then
a linear classifier with weight W = [w1 , · · · , wK ]T ∈
RK×d and bias vector b = [b1 , · · · , bK ]T ∈ RK transforms
the feature into K logits/decision scores, {wjT h(k) −bj }K
j=1 ,
which are finally converted into predicted probabilities by
Softmax, and computed the loss using cross-entropy,

Abstract
When training classification models, it expects
that the learned features are compact within classes, and can well separate different classes. As
the dominant loss function for training classification models, minimizing cross-entropy (CE) loss
maximizes the compactness and distinctiveness,
i.e., reaching neural collapse (NC). The recent
works show that binary CE (BCE) performs also well in multi-class tasks. In this paper, we
compare BCE and CE in deep feature learning.
For the first time, we prove that BCE can also
maximize the intra-class compactness and interclass distinctiveness when reaching its minimum,
i.e., leading to NC. We point out that CE measures the relative values of decision scores in the
model training, implicitly enhancing the feature
properties by classifying samples one-by-one. In
contrast, BCE measures the absolute values of
decision scores and adjust the positive/negative
decision scores across all samples to uniformly
high/low levels. Meanwhile, the classifier biases in BCE present a substantial constraint on the
decision scores to explicitly enhance the feature
properties in the training. The experimental results are aligned with above analysis, and show that
BCE could improve the classification and leads
to better compactness and distinctiveness among
sample features. The codes have be released.

Lce z

(k)




T (k)
K
X
ew` h −b`
= log 1 +
,
T h(k) −b
wk
k
`=1 e


(1)

`6=k

where z (k) = W h(k) − b ∈ RK .
For the multi-class classification, binary CE (BCE) loss
is deduced by decomposing the task into K binary tasks
and predicting whether the sample X (k) belongs to the jth
category, for ∀j ∈ [K] = {1, 2, · · · , K},



T (k)
Lbce z (k) = log 1 + e−wk h +bk
+

K
X



T (k)
log 1 + ewj h −bj ,

(2)

j=1
j6=k

which has been widely used in the multi-label classification
(Kobayashi, 2023) and attracted increasing attentions in the
multi-class classification (Beyer et al., 2020; Fang et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2022; Wightman
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2023).
The pre-trained classification models can be used as feature extractors for downstream tasks that request well intraclass compactness and inter-class distinctiveness across the
sample features, such as person re-identification (He et al.,
2021), object tracking (Cai et al., 2023), image segmentation (Guo et al., 2022), and facial recognition (Wen et al.,
2022), etc. For CE, a remarkable theoretical result is that
when it reaches its minimum, both the compactness and
distinctiveness on the training samples will be maximized,
which refers to neural collapse (NC) found by Papyan et al.
(2020). NC gives peace of mind in training classification
models by using CE, and it was extended to the losses satisfying contrastive property by Zhu et al. (2021) and Zhou
et al. (2022b), including focal loss, and label smoothing loss.
However, while BCE in Eq. (2) is a linear combination of
CEs, it is not sufficient to guarantee that BCE satisfies the

1. Introduction
Cross-entropy (CE) loss is the most commonly used loss for
classifications and feature learning. In a classification with
K categories, for any sample X (k) from category k, a model
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China 2 Department of Computer Science, WenzhouKean University, Wenzhou, 325060, China 3 Guangdong Provincial
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, 518060, China. Correspondence to: Linlin
Shen <llshen@szu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

