Positive-unlabeled AUC Maximization under Covariate Shift
Atsutoshi Kumagai 1 Tomoharu Iwata 1 Hiroshi Takahashi 1
Taishi Nishiyama 1 Kazuki Adachi 1 2 Yasuhiro Fujiwara 1

Abstract

much smaller than negative data (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar,
2019). In this situation, classification accuracy, which is the
standard performance measure for ordinary classification,
is not a suitable measure (Ueda & Fujino, 2018; Yang &
Ying, 2022). Instead, the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUC) is widely used (Bradley, 1997;
Huang & Ling, 2005; McDermott et al., 2024). The AUC is
the probability that a classifier will rank a randomly chosen
positive instance higher than a randomly chosen negative
one (Yang & Ying, 2022). Thanks to the nature of the
ranking, the AUC can adequately measure the classifier’s
performance even with imbalanced data. By maximizing
the AUC, we can learn accurate classifiers from imbalanced
data (Brefeld et al., 2005; Yang & Ying, 2022; Ying et al.,
2016; Liu et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021a).

Maximizing the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUC) is a standard approach
to imbalanced binary classification tasks. Existing AUC maximization methods typically assume
that training and test distributions are identical.
However, this assumption is often violated due to
a covariate shift, where the input distribution can
vary but the conditional distribution of the class
label given the input remains unchanged. The
importance weighting is a common approach to
the covariate shift, which minimizes the test risk
with importance-weighted training data. However, it cannot maximize the AUC. In this paper,
to achieve this, we theoretically derive two estimators of the test AUC risk under the covariate
shift by using positive and unlabeled (PU) data in
the training distribution and unlabeled data in the
test distribution. Our first estimator is calculated
from importance-weighted PU data in the training distribution, and the second one is calculated
from importance-weighted positive data in the
training distribution and unlabeled data in the test
distribution. We train classifiers by minimizing a
weighted sum of the two AUC risk estimators that
is approximately equivalent to the test AUC risk.
Unlike the existing importance weighting, our
method does not require negative labels and classpriors. We experimentally show the effectiveness
of our method with six real-world datasets.

Existing AUC maximization methods usually assume that
training and test distributions are identical. However, this
assumption is often violated in practice due to distribution
shifts. This paper considers a covariate shift, where the input distribution can vary but the conditional distribution of
the class label given the input remains unchanged between
training and test stages (Shimodaira, 2000). The covariate
shift is the most common distribution shift (He et al., 2023)
and often occurs in imbalanced classification tasks. For
example, in medical care, the distribution of patients (input
instances) can vary due to the differences in hospitals and
measurement instruments, even when the conditional distribution of the class label given the input does not change
(Matsui et al., 2019). In cyber security, attackers rapidly
generate new attacks (input instances), and thus the input
distribution can vary over time (Kumagai & Iwata, 2016).
When labeled positive and negative data in the training
distribution and unlabeled data in the test distribution are
available, the covariate shift on ordinary classification can
be alleviated using the widely used importance weighting
framework (Sugiyama et al., 2012; Lu et al., 2022). It first
estimates importance weights that are the ratio between
training and test input densities and then learns classifiers
by minimizing the importance-weighted empirical training
risk that is approximately equivalent to the test risk. However, it is not designed for AUC maximization. In addition,
labeled negative data in the training distribution are often
difficult to collect in some applications. For example, in

1. Introduction
In many real-world binary classification tasks such as cyber
security (Mirsky et al., 2018; Bagui & Li, 2021), medical
care (Yang et al., 2021), and product inspection (Park et al.,
2016), class-imbalance often occurs where positive data is
1

NTT Corporation, Japan 2 Yokohama National University, Japan. Correspondence to: Atsutoshi Kumagai <atsutoshi.kumagai@ntt.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

