Position: Machine Learning Models Have a Supply Chain Problem

Sarah Meiklejohn 1 Hayden Blauzvern 1 Mihai Maruseac 1 Spencer Schrock 1 Laurent Simon 2
Ilia Shumailov 2

Abstract

While the models uploaded to these hubs are versioned and
accompanied by model cards (Mitchell et al., 2019), this
information must be taken at face value as there is nothing
preventing the model publisher from lying about it. In other
words, these claims are not verifiable; i.e., they are not accompanied by any kind of proof that they are true. Furthermore, while model cards typically do (or should) provide detailed information about aspects like intended usage, evaluation, and risks, they are often more vague about
the training data, preprocessing, and training hardware.

Powerful machine learning (ML) models are now
readily available online, which creates exciting
possibilities for users who lack the deep technical expertise or substantial computing resources
needed to develop them. On the other hand, this
type of open ecosystem comes with many risks.
In this paper, we argue that the current ecosystem
for open ML models contains significant supplychain risks, some of which have been exploited
already in real attacks. These include an attacker replacing a model with something malicious (e.g., malware), or a model being trained
using a vulnerable version of a framework or
on restricted or poisoned data. We then explore
how Sigstore, a solution designed to bring transparency to open-source software supply chains,
can be used to bring transparency to open ML
models, in terms of enabling model publishers to
sign their models and prove properties about the
datasets they use.

Attacks in other ecosystems have motivated the creation
and deployment of transparency solutions; e.g., the 2011
hack of the DigiNotar CA (Wolff, 2016) led to the creation
of Certificate Transparency (CT).3 CT was designed to
protect users from misissued X.509 certificates by storing
all issued certificates in globally accessible transparency
logs; i.e., logs that are append-only and can be inspected
by domain operators for potentially misissued certificates.
Likewise, the 2020 software supply chain attack on SolarWinds (Newman, 2022) led to the creation of Sigstore (Newman et al., 2022),4 a project designed to protect
users from vulnerable or malicious software libraries using
a similar approach to CT; i.e., having developers sign their
code and store the signing metadata in a transparency log.

1. Introduction

In the ML ecosystem, similar attacks are emerging: users
of model hubs have been targeted with malware (Cohen,
2024; Wang et al., 2021), models trained to give misinformation on targeted prompts (Huynh & Hardouin, 2023;
Bagdasaryan & Shmatikov, 2022), and models impersonating those from prominent organizations (Kiani, 2024). Going beyond models uploaded to hubs with malicious intent,
there is also a clear need for model trainers to provide more
transparency (Bommasani et al., 2024) into the models they
create, as demonstrated by (proposed) regulation in both
the US (David, 2024; Biden, 2023) and EU (2024); a growing number of lawsuits brought against model creators over
their use of copyrighted work (Grynbaum & Mac, 2023;
Vincent, 2023; Ho, 2024); and the demonstrated ability
to poison training data in a way that biases the resulting
model (Carlini et al., 2024). While some of this scrutiny

In traditional software engineering, open-source code
repositories hosted on platforms like GitHub are invaluable
in enabling developers to build complex applications without having to write every component themselves. In machine learning, a similar paradigm is emerging: generalpurpose (or foundation) models are trained and uploaded
to model hubs such as Hugging Face1 and Kaggle,2 which
users can then download and adapt for specific tasks. Crucially, this latter step is significantly cheaper than the former, and thus can be performed by entities who lack the
resources needed to train a large foundation model.
1
Google 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Sarah Meiklejohn <s.meiklejohn@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

3
4

1

https://huggingface.co/
2
https://www.kaggle.com/models

1

https://certificate.transparency.dev/
https://www.sigstore.dev/

