MAGELLAN: Metacognitive predictions of learning progress
guide autotelic LLM agents in large goal spaces

Loris Gaven 1 Thomas Carta 1 Clément Romac 1 2 Cédric Colas 1 3 Sylvain Lamprier 4 Olivier Sigaud 5
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 1

Abstract
Open-ended learning agents must efficiently prioritize goals in vast possibility spaces, focusing on
those that maximize learning progress (LP). When
such autotelic exploration is achieved by LLM
agents trained with online RL in high-dimensional
and evolving goal spaces, a key challenge for LP
prediction is modeling one’s own competence, a
form of metacognitive monitoring. Traditional
approaches either require extensive sampling or
rely on brittle expert-defined goal groupings. We
introduce MAGELLAN, a metacognitive framework that lets LLM agents learn to predict their
competence and LP online. By capturing semantic relationships between goals, MAGELLAN enables sample-efficient LP estimation and dynamic
adaptation to evolving goal spaces through generalization. In an interactive learning environment,
we show that MAGELLAN improves LP prediction efficiency and goal prioritization, being the
only method allowing the agent to fully master
a large and evolving goal space. These results
demonstrate how augmenting LLM agents with
a metacognitive ability for LP predictions can effectively scale curriculum learning to open-ended
goal spaces.

Figure 1. Navigating large goal spaces with MAGELLAN: During training, our LLM agent uses MAGELLAN to estimate its past
and current competence to compute absolute learning progress
(ALP) on each goal. Given the per-goal ALP, the LLM agent’s
goal selector chooses the next goal to practice proportionally to
their ALP. The LLM agent then performs a trajectory to achieve
this goal and the outcome is used to update both the LLM agent
with online RL and MAGELLAN’s competence estimation.

the sake of learning and discovery (Berlyne, 1954; Kidd &
Hayden, 2015). Crucially, humans are autotelic learners
intrinsically motivated to represent, invent, select and solve
their own goals (Colas et al., 2022a). To navigate in a possibly infinite space of goals, without time to explore it exhaustively, they are equipped with intrinsic motivation signals
(Baldassarre & Mirolli, 2012; Gottlieb & Oudeyer, 2018).
Research on human curiosity has shown the key role of one
such intrinsic signal: Learning Progress (LP), i.e. improvement of one’s own ability to solve goals (Kaplan & Oudeyer,
2007). Computational modeling work showed both how it
enables efficient automatic curriculum learning (Lopes &
Oudeyer, 2012a; Poli et al., 2024b) and how it generates
developmental trajectories that simulate key properties in
the development of human infants (Oudeyer & Smith, 2016).
Recently, several experimental paradigms where humans
were free to explore various learning activities confirmed
that humans use metacognitive LP monitoring to explore
and prioritize goals (Ten et al., 2021; Leonard et al., 2023;
Sayalı et al., 2023; Poli et al., 2024a).

1. Introduction
Humans are open-ended learners, continuously exploring
and developing new skills through their lifetime. A key
mechanism to enable this remarkable capacity is curiositydriven learning — the intrinsic motivation to explore for
1

Inria (Flowers), University of Bordeaux, France 2 Hugging
Face 3 MIT, Computational Cognitive Science Lab, Cambridge,
MA, USA 4 Univ Angers, LERIA, SFR MATHSTIC, F-49000
Angers, France 5 Sorbonne Université, ISIR, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Loris Gaven <loris.gaven@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

