On Volume Minimization in Conformal Regression

Batiste Le Bars 1 Pierre Humbert 2

Abstract

This is particularly useful when the user prefers to be confident with the range of values that Y can take, rather than
having only a single predicted scalar value. In Section 2.1,
we give a short reminder on CP, and on the most important
techniques to construct C satisfying Eq. (1). While these
techniques are completely distribution-free, making them
quite powerful in practice, they still suffer from an important
limitation: how can we be sure that the trivial prediction set
C(x) = Y is not returned? Indeed, this prediction set necessarily satisfy the condition (1). To prevent this, theoretical
analyses of CP methods typically include an upper-bound
on the probability of coverage P(Y ∈ C(X)). Such upperbound tends to 1 − α as the number of sample used to build
C grows, which somehow reflects that the prediction set
cannot be the full support of Y . However, this is still insufficient as one may take C(x) = Y with probability 1 − α and
C(x) = ∅ with probability α, resulting in a coverage exactly equal to 1 − α, but with an expected size of (1 − α)|Y|.
Here, |Y| denotes the size of Y and will typically be infinite
in regression settings where Y = R. Such a set is too large
and therefore highly uninformative. Hence, the CP literature suggests to also look at the size of the predicted sets to
measure the performance of CP methods. The smaller is a
prediction set, the more efficient it is considered. However,
most works do this analysis empirically, while very few has
been focusing on the statistical control of the size of CP sets.

We study the question of volume optimality in
split conformal regression, a topic still poorly understood in comparison to coverage control. Using the fact that the calibration step can be seen
as an empirical volume minimization problem,
we first derive a finite-sample upper-bound on
the excess volume loss of the interval returned by
the classical split method. This important quantity measures the difference in length between the
interval obtained with the split method and the
shortest oracle prediction interval. Then, we introduce EffOrt, a methodology that modifies
the learning step so that the base prediction function is selected in order to minimize the length
of the returned intervals. In particular, our theoretical analysis of the excess volume loss of
the prediction sets produced by EffOrt reveals
the links between the learning and calibration
steps, and notably the impact of the choice of
the function class of the base predictor. We also
introduce Ad-EffOrt, an extension of the previous method, which produces intervals whose
size adapts to the value of the covariate. Finally,
we evaluate the empirical performance and the
robustness of our methodologies.

In this paper, we therefore propose to study when C(x) is
in fact a solution of an optimization problem of the form:

1. Introduction

min E[µ(C(X))]

Conformal Prediction (CP) (Vovk et al., 2005) has recently
been considered as one of the state-of-art technique to
construct distribution-free prediction sets satisfying probabilistic coverage guarantees. Formally, consider a random
variable (X, Y ) ∈ X × Y and some miscoverage level
α ∈ [0, 1], CP techniques construct a set-valued function
C : X → 2Y such that:
P(Y ∈ C(X)) ≥ 1 − α .

C

s.t.

(2)

P(Y ∈ C(X)) ≥ 1 − α ,

where µ is a measure of the volume of the set C(x), typically the Lebesgue measure in regression problems, or the
counting measure in classification. This optimization problem ensures that among all prediction sets C(x) that satisfy
the coverage condition (1), the volume of the returned set is
also of minimal size. Looking at problem (2) instead of (1)
alone is therefore more meaningful as it encapsulates the
two key aspects of CP: coverage and efficiency.

(1)

1
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189,
CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille 2 Sorbonne Université et Univ. Paris
Cité, CNRS, LPSM, F-75005 Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Batiste Le Bars <batiste.le-bars@inria.fr>.

1.1. Main Contributions
• After describing the problem in Section 2.2, in Section 3
we restrict the prediction sets to be intervals of constant
size, and show in Section 3.1 that the calibration step of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

