Chip Placement with Diffusion Models

Vint Lee 1 Minh Nguyen 1 Leena Elzeiny 2 Chun Deng 3 Pieter Abbeel 1 John Wawrzynek 1

Abstract

performance, and area of the produced chip. In particular,
the placement of macros, which is the focus of our work,
is especially important because of their large size and high
connectivity relative to standard cells.

Macro placement is a vital step in digital circuit
design that defines the physical location of large
collections of components, known as macros, on
a 2D chip. Because key performance metrics of
the chip are determined by the placement, optimizing it is crucial. Existing learning-based
methods typically fall short because of their reliance on reinforcement learning (RL), which is
slow and struggles to generalize, requiring online training on each new circuit. Instead, we
train a diffusion model capable of placing new
circuits zero-shot, using guided sampling in lieu
of RL to optimize placement quality. To enable
such models to train at scale, we designed a capable yet efficient architecture for the denoising
model, and propose a novel algorithm to generate large synthetic datasets for pre-training. To
allow zero-shot transfer to real circuits, we empirically study the design decisions of our dataset
generation algorithm, and identify several key factors enabling generalization. When trained on our
synthetic data, our models generate high-quality
placements on unseen, realistic circuits, achieving competitive performance on placement benchmarks compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Traditionally, macro placement is done with commercial
tools such as Innovus from Cadence, which requires input
from human experts. The process is also time-consuming
and expensive. On the other hand, the use of ML techniques
shows promise in automating this process, as well as creating better-optimized placements than commercial tools,
which rely heavily on heuristics.
Even so, existing works mostly rely on reinforcement learning (RL) (Mirhoseini et al., 2020; Cheng & Yan, 2021; Lai
et al., 2022; 2023; Gu et al., 2024), an approach with several key limitations. First, RL is challenging to scale —
it is sample-inefficient, and has difficulty generalizing to
new problems. Many of these methods, for instance, treat
each new circuit as a separate task, training a new agent
from scratch for every new netlist (Cheng & Yan, 2021;
Lai et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2024). Despite efforts to mitigate this by incorporating offline pre-training, the scarcity
of publicly-available data means that such methods struggle to generalize, and still require a significant amount of
additional training for each new netlist (Mirhoseini et al.,
2020; Lai et al., 2023). Second, by casting placement as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP), these works require
agents to learn a sequential placement of objects (standard
cells or macros), which creates challenges when suboptimal
choices near the start of the trajectory cannot be reversed.

1. Introduction
Placement is an important step of digital hardware design
where collections of small components, such as logic gates
(standard cells), and large design blocks, such as memories,
(macros) are arranged on a 2-dimensional physical chip
based on a connectivity graph (netlist) of the components.
Because the physical layout of objects determines the length
of wires (and where they can be routed), this step has a significant impact on key metrics, such as power consumption,

To circumvent these issues, we instead adopt a different approach: leveraging powerful generative models, in particular
diffusion models, to produce near-optimal chip placements
for a given netlist. Diffusion models address the weaknesses
of RL approaches because they can be trained offline at
scale, then used zero-shot on new netlists, simultaneously
placing all objects as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, our
approach takes advantage of the great strides made in techniques for training and sampling diffusion models, such as
guided sampling (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Bansal et al.,
2023), to achieve better results.

1
Department of EECS, UC Berkeley, CA, USA 2 SambaNova
Systems Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA 3 Computer Science Department, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Vint Lee
<vint@berkeley.edu>.

Training a large and generalizable diffusion model, however, comes with its own challenges. First, the vast majority
of circuit designs and netlists of interest are proprietary,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

