Context is Key: A Benchmark for Forecasting with Essential Textual Information

⋆

Andrew R. Williams 1 2 3 ⋆ Arjun Ashok 1 2 3
Étienne Marcotte
Valentina Zantedeschi 1 4 Jithendaraa Subramanian 1 2 5 Roland Riachi 2
6
James Requeima Alexandre Lacoste 1 Irina Rish 2 3 † Nicolas Chapados 1 2 7 † Alexandre Drouin 1 2 4
†

1 †

1. Introduction

Abstract
Forecasting is a critical task in decision-making
across numerous domains. While historical numerical data provide a start, they fail to convey
the complete context for reliable and accurate
predictions. Human forecasters frequently rely
on additional information, such as background
knowledge and constraints, which can efficiently
be communicated through natural language. However, in spite of recent progress with LLM-based
forecasters, their ability to effectively integrate
this textual information remains an open question.
To address this, we introduce “Context is Key”
(CiK), a time series forecasting benchmark that
pairs numerical data with diverse types of carefully crafted textual context, requiring models to
integrate both modalities; crucially, every task in
CiK requires understanding textual context to be
solved successfully. We evaluate a range of approaches, including statistical models, time series
foundation models, and LLM-based forecasters,
and propose a simple yet effective LLM prompting method that outperforms all other tested methods on our benchmark. Our experiments highlight the importance of incorporating contextual
information, demonstrate surprising performance
when using LLM-based forecasting models, and
also reveal some of their critical shortcomings.
This benchmark aims to advance multimodal forecasting by promoting models that are both accurate and accessible to decision-makers with varied
technical expertise. The benchmark can be visualized at https://servicenow.github.io/conte
xt-is-key-forecasting/v0/.

The prediction of future states of the world is a cornerstone
of decision making (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018)
and intelligence (Wang, 2019). Articulated as time series
forecasting, this problem pervades much of science and
commerce.
Accurate forecasting relies on several decisions up to the
practitioner (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018): 1. Model
selection: choosing an appropriate forecasting model for
a given problem, and 2. Incorporating prior information:
determining what relevant information to integrate into the
model and how to do so effectively. This involves decisions about statistical priors, inductive biases in the model
architecture, and other forms of domain knowledge integration, all of which traditionally rely on expert knowledge
and manual intervention. However, recent advancements in
machine learning have shown promise in automating both
model selection and the incorporation of prior information,
accelerating the democratization of time series forecasting.
In the wake of the foundation model paradigm shift (Bommasani et al., 2021), several works such as Liang et al.
(2024); Chen et al. (2023); Lim & Zohren (2021), have
addressed automatic model selection by learning flexible,
adaptable models applicable across various problem scenarios. However, these approaches are much more costly
than traditional statistical methods, and provide debatable improvements in performance (Garza & MergenthalerCanseco, 2024). Typically, these models process purely
numerical time series, excluding the context that human
forecasters rely on to incorporate prior information.
An alternative class of recent approaches (Jin et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024c; Requeima et al., 2024) adapt large language models (LLMs) for forecasting and leverage natural
language (NL) as an intuitive interface to integrate side information. These methods overcome a significant limitation
of traditional forecasting techniques by eliminating the need
to manually encode priors or design specialized models.
They further hold the promise of capturing a broader range
of prior knowledge and context, potentially leading to more
comprehensive and accurate forecasts.

⋆
Equal contribution; order decided by coin toss. † Core contributors. 1 ServiceNow Research 2 Mila - Québec AI Institute
3
Université de Montréal 4 Université Laval 5 McGill University
6
University of Toronto 7 Polytechnique Montréal. Correspondence
to: Andrew R. Williams <andrew.williams1@servicenow.com>,
Arjun Ashok <arjun.ashok@servicenow.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

