Efficient Bisection Projection to Ensure Neural-Network Solution
Feasibility for Optimization over General Set

Enming Liang 1 Minghua Chen 1 2
Abstract
Recent advancements in machine learning (ML) have introduced innovative strategies for solving CO problems in
Neural networks (NNs) have emerged as promisreal-time, including the end-to-end (E2E) solution maping tools for solving constrained optimization
ping (Amo22), the learning-to-optimize (L2O) iterative
problems in real-time. However, ensuring conscheme (CCC+ 21), the generative modeling framework
straint satisfaction for NN-generated solutions re(LC23), and hybrid approaches (KFVHW21). One powmains challenging due to prediction errors. Existerful idea is to leverage the universal approximation ability
ing methods to ensure NN feasibility either sufof neural networks (NNs) (HSW89; LLPS93) to predict
fer from high computational complexity or are
high-quality solutions given input parameters, significantly
limited to specific constraint types. We present
reducing computation time compared to iterative solvers.
Bisection Projection, an efficient approach to enFor instance, NNs have been trained to solve non-convex
sure NN solution feasibility for optimization over
optimal power flow problems in grid operations, achievgeneral compact sets with non-empty interiors.
ing 2-4 orders of magnitude speedup over iterative solvers
Our method comprises two key components: (i) a
(PZC19; GWWM19; PZCZ20; FMVH20; ZB20; DRK20).
dedicated NN (called IPNN) that predicts interior
points (IPs) with low eccentricity, which naturally
Despite the minor optimality loss and significant speedup
accounts for approximation errors; (ii) a bisecof NN-based methods, guaranteeing the feasibility of NN
tion algorithm that leverages these IPs to recover
solutions with respect to problem constraints, which is imsolution feasibility when initial NN solutions vioportant to safe-critical scenarios, remains a challenge due to
late constraints. We establish theoretical guaraninherent NN prediction errors. Existing methods to ensure
tees by providing sufficient conditions for IPNN
NN feasibility either suffer from high computational comfeasibility and proving bounded optimality loss
plexity or are limited to specific constraints. See Sec . 2 for
of the bisection operation under IP predictions.
discussions on related works.
Extensive evaluations on real-world non-convex
In this paper, we develop Bisection Projection (BP) as a
problems demonstrate that Bisection Projection
simple yet efficient scheme to recover NN solutions feaachieves superior feasibility and computational
sibility over a (fairly) general compact set with a nonefficiency compared to existing methods, while
empty interior, beyond previous works on linear (WZG+ 23;
maintaining comparable optimality gaps.
ZPCL23), convex (THH23), or ball-homeomorphic constraints (LCL23; LCL24). Our contributions are as follows:

1. Introduction

▷ In Sec. 4, we introduce the BP framework for ensuring
NN solution feasibility. It comprises two steps: (i) a dedicated NN (called IPNN) that predicts interior points (IPs)
of low eccentricity; (ii) an efficient bisection algorithm that
leverages these IPs to recover solution feasibility.

Constrained Optimization (CO) plays an essential role in
various engineering fields, such as supply chain, transportation, and power systems. To solve CO problems, iterative
algorithms, such as interior point methods, have been developed and embedded within commercial solvers like Gurobi.
These tools are designed to tackle CO with high precision,
providing high-quality solutions. However, they can be slow
for real-time applications with tight time constraints.

▷ In Sec. 5, we establish theoretical guarantees by providing sufficient conditions for IPNN feasibility and proving
bounded eccentricity-related optimality loss of the bisection
operation under IP predictions.

1
Department of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong 2 School of Data Science, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong (Shenzhen), China. Correspondence to: Minghua
Chen <minghua.chen@cityu.edu.hk, minghua@cuhk.edu.cn>.

▷ In Sec. 6, we carry out extensive experiments over convex
and non-convex problems to evaluate the performance of
BP. The results show that it outperforms existing methods in
feasibility and run-time complexity while achieving similar
optimality losses.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

