Is Best-of-N the Best of Them?
Coverage, Scaling, and Optimality in Inference-Time Alignment

Audrey Huang 1 Adam Block 2 Qinghua Liu 2 Nan Jiang 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2 Dylan J. Foster 2

Abstract

improvements in their capabilities (Brown et al., 2024;
Snell et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024b; OpenAI, 2024b;
DeepSeek-AI, 2025) and played a central role in recent
AI breakthroughs (Chollet et al., 2024). While there are
a multitude of ways in which additional computation can
be utilized during inference—e.g., to generate long chains
of thought (Wei et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024b), have the
model rate or correct its own responses (Zheng et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2024a), or implement planning and search (Yao
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024)—even exceedingly simple
methods like Best-of-N (parallel) sampling can provide
signiﬁcant performance gains (Lightman et al., 2023;
Brown et al., 2024), and enjoy provable representational
beneﬁts (Huang et al., 2024a). Such algorithms are also
widely used throughout post-training for frontier models
(DeepSeek-AI, 2025; Yang et al., 2024a), and thereby
serve as a cornerstone of ﬁne-tuning and inference.

Recent work on inference-time alignment has
established the beneﬁts of increasing inferencetime computation in language models, but
naively scaling compute through techniques like
Best-of-N sampling can cause performance to degrade due to reward hacking. Toward a theoretical understanding of how to best leverage additional computation, we formalize inference-time
alignment as improving a pre-trained policys responses for a prompt of interest, given access to
an imperfect reward model. We analyze the performance of inference-time alignment algorithms
in terms of (i) response quality, and (ii) compute,
and provide new results that highlight the importance of the pre-trained policys coverage over
high-quality responses for performance and compute scaling: (1) We show that Best-of-N alignment with an ideal N can achieve optimal performance under stringent notions of coverage, but
provably suffers from reward hacking when N
is large, and fails to achieve tight guarantees under more realistic coverage conditions; (2) We
introduce InferenceTimePessimism, a new algorithm which mitigates reward hacking through
deliberate use of inference-time compute, implementing pessimism in the face of uncertainty; we
prove that its performance is optimal and scalingmonotonic, i.e., does not degrade as N increases.
We complement our theoretical results with experiments that demonstrate the practicality of our
algorithm across a variety of tasks and models.

Toward developing a deeper understanding of the algorithmic landscape for inference-time computation, in this paper, we focus on the problem of inference-time alignment:
given a task and a reward model that is a proxy for task
performance, how can we best use inference-time computation to improve the quality of a response chosen from many
candidates generated by the base model? The Best-of-N
heuristic is one of the most widely used inference-time
alignment methods, and proceeds by generating N candidate responses for a given prompt, then returning the
response with the highest reward under a reward model
(Stiennon et al., 2020; Nakano et al., 2021; Touvron et al.,
2023; Gao et al., 2023; Eisenstein et al., 2023; Mudgal
et al., 2024). While attractive in its simplicity, Best-of-N
and related heuristics are known to suffer from reward
overoptimization or reward hacking when N increases
(Gao et al., 2023; Stroebl et al., 2024; Chow et al., 2024;
Frick et al., 2024). While one might hope that increasing
computation to generate a larger number of candidates
will increase the likelihood of selecting a high-quality
response, reward model errors at the tail of the response
distribution can cause Best-of-N to return generations with
high (modeled) reward, but poor task performance.

1. Introduction
Inference-time computation has emerged as a new axis
for scaling in language models, which has led to dramatic
1
Computer Science Department, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA 2 Microsoft Research, New York, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Audrey
Huang <audreyh5@illinois.edu>.

This overoptimization phenomenon raises two fundamental questions, which we investigate in this paper: (1) what
is the extent to which the imperfect reward model limits

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

