Loss Functions and Operators Generated by f -Divergences

Vincent Roulet 1 Tianlin Liu 1 Nino Vieillard 1 Michaël E. Sander 1 Mathieu Blondel 1

Abstract

The classical softargmax is known to optimize a trade-off
between the expected value of the logits and the Kullback–
Leibler (KL) divergence with a uniform measure. This perspective is also adopted in the space of sequences, replacing
the uniform measure with a reference measure, in reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano
et al., 2017) and in direct preference optimization (DPO)
(Rafailov et al., 2024). Recent works extended this perspective to general f -divergences (Go et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2024). However, these works naively compose an
f -divergence with the (classical) softargmax, which does
not result in a convex loss function.

The logistic loss (a.k.a. cross-entropy loss) is one
of the most popular loss functions used for multiclass classification. It is also the loss function
of choice for next-token prediction in language
modeling. It is associated with the Kullback–
Leibler (KL) divergence and the softargmax operator. In this work, we build upon Fenchel-Young
losses to construct convex loss functions generated from f -divergences. Our loss functions generalize the logistic loss in two directions: i) by
replacing the KL divergence with f -divergences
and ii) by allowing non-uniform reference measures. We instantiate our framework for numerous
f -divergences, recovering existing losses and creating new ones. By analogy with the logistic loss,
the loss function generated by an f -divergence
is associated with an operator, that we dub f softargmax. We derive a novel parallelizable bisection algorithm for computing the f -softargmax
associated with any f -divergence. On the empirical side, one of the goals of this paper is to determine the effectiveness of loss functions beyond
the classical cross-entropy in a language model
setting, including on pre-training, post-training
(SFT) and distillation. We show that the loss
function generated by the α-divergence (which is
equivalent to Tsallis α-negentropy in the case of
unit reference measures) with α = 1.5 performs
well across several tasks.

In this work, building upon Fenchel–Young losses (Blondel
et al., 2020), we propose to construct new convex losses
based on f -divergences. Our losses generalize the logistic
loss in two directions: i) by replacing the KL divergence
with f -divergences and ii) by allowing non-uniform reference measures (class prior probabilities). Our loss construction generalizes the sparsemax (Martins & Astudillo, 2016)
and entmax (Peters et al., 2019) losses, and allows us to
create entirely new losses; see Table 1. In addition, each
loss generated by an f -divergence is associated with a new
operator for turning logits into probabilities, that we dub
f -softargmax.
On the empirical side, one of the goals of this paper is to
determine the effectiveness of loss functions beyond the classical cross-entropy in a language model setting, including
on pre-training, post-training (SFT) and distillation.
To summarize, we make the following contributions.
• We propose to use f -divergence regularization to generate loss functions. Each loss function is associated
with a new operator, that we dub f -softargmax. We
instantiate this framework for numerous f -divergences,
recovering existing losses and creating new ones.

1. Introduction
The logistic loss, a.k.a. cross-entropy loss, is widely used
for multiclass classification. It is associated with the softargmax (a.k.a. softmax) operator, which turns logits into
class probabilities. The logistic loss and the softargmax
operators are also frequently used in the space of tokens for
language model pre-training, post-training and distillation.

• We derive a novel bisection algorithm for computing the
f -softargmax associated with any f -divergence. Our
algorithm parallelizes well on modern hardware.

1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Mathieu Blondel,
Vincent Roulet <mblondel@google.com, vroulet@google.com>.

• We demonstrate our loss functions on image classification, language model post-training and distillation.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Notation. Throughout this paper, k denotes the number of classes in a classification problem or the vocab1

