Position: We Can’t Understand AI Using our Existing Vocabulary

John Hewitt 1 Robert Geirhos 1 Been Kim 1

Abstract

Machine’s Concepts

Human’s Concepts

Mismatch

?
≈

This position paper argues that, in order to understand AI, we cannot rely on our existing vocabulary of human words. Instead, we should
strive to develop neologisms: new words that
represent precise human concepts that we want
to teach machines, or machine concepts that we
need to learn. We start from the premise that
humans and machines have differing concepts.
This means interpretability can be framed as a
communication problem: humans must be able to
reference and control machine concepts, and communicate human concepts to machines. Creating
a shared human-machine language through developing neologisms, we believe, could solve this
communication problem. Successful neologisms
achieve a useful amount of abstraction: not too
detailed, so they’re reusable in many contexts, and
not too high-level, so they convey precise information. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate how
a “length neologism” enables controlling LLM
response length, while a “diversity neologism” allows sampling more variable responses. Taken
together, we argue that we cannot understand AI
using our existing vocabulary, and expanding it
through neologisms creates opportunities for both
controlling and understanding machines better.

Differing concepts

inhibit communication

Human word

added

Machine word

added

Better Communication

Figure 1. Humans and machines conceptualize the world differently from each other. Mismatches in communication occur, which
lead to misunderstandings. To understand and control AI, we must
bridge this gap by developing new words corresponding to human
and machine concepts, and use these words to control machines.

2019; Hewitt & Manning, 2019), or notions of safety or truth
(Burns et al., 2023). Often, the goal of this search is to help
specify human concepts to machines—that is, to control
them, e.g., through supervised probes, or prompts, or RLHF
(Ouyang et al., 2022). Taken together, understanding and
control are a communication problem: communicating concepts between humans and machines. Within this communication problem, understanding and control are often two
sides of the same coin: the purpose of communicating with
machines is typically to make machines do what we want
them to do (control), while achieving a better understanding
should directly translate into better communication.

1. Introduction

This communication problem is hard because—and we take
this as a premise—humans and machines conceptualize the
world differently, at many levels of abstraction (as expressed
by Figure 1). The validity of this premise is supported by
extensive literature on human-machine differences across
language (Golan et al., 2023; Sühr et al., 2023; Stevenson et al., 2024; Palmarini & Mitchell, 2024) and vision
(Szegedy et al., 2013; Borji & Itti, 2014; Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Geirhos et al., 2019; 2020; Lonnqvist et al., 2019;
Firestone, 2020; Golan et al., 2020; Bowers et al., 2023;
Wichmann & Geirhos, 2023; Chollet et al., 2024; Motamed
et al., 2025; Ollikka et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025). In Kim
(2022) for example, reproduced in Figure 2, there is a space
M of machine concepts and a space H of human concepts,
and many things are either in H − M : concepts humans

“Die Grenzen meiner Sprache bedeuten die Grenzen meiner Welt”
(The limits of my language are the limits of my world)
— Ludwig Wittgenstein

As researchers interested in understanding and controlling
language model-based AI systems, we often search for
human-like concepts in machines—e.g., by analyzing a
machine’s activation patterns. Examples of such concepts
include human-like linguistic structure (e.g. Lakretz et al.,
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: John Hewitt <johnhew@google.com>, Been Kim <beenkim@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

