Fast Large Language Model Collaborative Decoding via Speculation

Jiale Fu * 1 2 Yuchu Jiang * 1 2 Junkai Chen 1 2 Jiaming Fan 1 2 Xin Geng 1 2 Xu Yang 1 2
(a) Vanilla Collaborative Decoding:

Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM) collaborative decoding techniques improve output quality by combining the outputs of multiple models at each generation step, but they incur high computational
costs. In this paper, we introduce Collaborative
decoding via Speculation (CoS), a novel framework that accelerates collaborative decoding without compromising performance. Inspired by Speculative Decoding—where a small proposal model
generates tokens sequentially, and a larger target model verifies them in parallel, our approach
builds on two key insights: (1) the verification
distribution can be the combined distribution of
both the proposal and target models, and (2) alternating each model as the proposer and verifier
can further enhance efficiency. We generalize this
method to collaboration among n models and theoretically prove that CoS is never slower than standard collaborative decoding, typically achieving
faster speed. Extensive experiments demonstrate
CoS is 1.11x–2.23x faster than standard collaborative decoding without compromising generation quality. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Kamichanw/CoS/.

Base Model
Combine

Token

Base Model

×4
(b) Speculative Decoding:
Proposal Model
Verify & Resample

Target Model

(c) Collaborative Decoding via Speculation:
Verify & Resample

Combine

Figure 1. Comparison of (a) vanilla collaborative decoding, (b)
speculative decoding, and (c) collaborative decoding via speculation. In (b) and (c), each discrete blue block represents a probability
calculated by one forward pass of Mq , while the continuous green
block indicates the joint distribution requires only one forward
pass of Mp .

to improve next-token prediction and capitalize on the complementary strengths of different models. For instance, ensembling methods (Yu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Yao
et al., 2024) average prediction distributions from multiple
models; contrastive decoding (Li et al., 2023; O’Brien &
Lewis, 2023) improves generation quality and reduces hallucinations by subtracting the outputs of a smaller model
from a larger one; and decoding-time realignment (Liu et al.,
2024; Shi et al., 2024) jointly uses an aligned and an unaligned model during decoding to enable flexible control
over alignment. In this paper, we refer to such approaches
collectively as collaborative decoding.

1. Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
impressive performance across a wide range of tasks. Beyond advances in individual models—such as architectural
innovations and training techniques—there is increasing interest in collaborative approaches involving multiple LLMs
(Lu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025). A key class of these
methods combines information from multiple models (e.g.,
probability distributions or logits) during token generation
*

Equal contribution 1 Southeast University 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and
Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Xu Yang
<xuyang palm@seu.edu.cn>.

Despite the significant progress in collaborative decoding,
a key challenge persists: combining outputs from multiple
models requires each model to perform a separate forward
pass, which substantially slows down inference compared
to using a single model. This raises a crucial question: can
we speed up collaborative decoding without compromising quality? To address this, we propose Collaborative

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

