Reward-Guided Prompt Evolving in Reinforcement Learning for LLMs

Ziyu Ye12 Rishabh Agarwal1 Tianqi Liu1 Rishabh Joshi1 Sarmishta Velury1 Quoc V. Le1 Qijun Tan1 Yuan Liu1

Abstract

The Prioritized Prompt Evolving Principle

Existing reinforcement learning (RL) methods
for large language models (LLMs) rely on static
prompt sets, where prompts are curated a priori,
and sampled in a fixed schedule for training, regardless of their usefulness to the RL process.

LLMs shall adaptively control training prompts by prioritizing and generating useful prompts during RL.
evolve prompts

We design eva, the first method that allows
LLMs to prioritize and adaptively create useful prompts during RL training by reward signals.

creator
"
𝜋!

In principle, eva (Evolving via Asymmetric SelfPlay) casts language model training as a game
between: (1) a creator, who samples and generates training prompts, and (2) a solver, who
generates responses to the prompts.

solver
$
𝜋!|#

propose responses

Figure 1: RL for LLMs as Asymmetric Self-Play. Conventional training methods are restricted to pre-curated prompt
sets with fixed training schedules. We show that it is crucial
to adaptively control the prompt distribution by creating
and prioritizing more useful prompts. This is implemented
through a simple self-play scheme ( Algorithm 1), where the
creator is the newly introduced prompt generation policy
πX and the solver is the response generation policy πY |X ;
both interact with objectives driven by reward signals (§ 3).

eva is simple, suits both offline and online RL for

LLMs, and sets a new state-of-the-art on challenging benchmarks without extra human prompts: it
improves gemma-2-9b-it’s win-rate on ArenaHard from 51.6% to 60.1% by DPO and 52.6%
to 62.4% by RLOO, surpassing claude-3-opus
and nearing gemini-1.5-pro, both are orders
of magnitude larger. Further ablation studies show
eva can induce meaningful learning curriculum,
and effectively scale RL for LLMs beyond static
human prompts.

in enhancing LLM capabilities (Team et al., 2023; 2024a;
2025). However, there is a fundamental issue in existing
practices: they restrict themselves within a pre-curated,
static prompt distribution during post-training.
This is sub-optimal and bottlenecks scaling properties w.r.t.:
(i) training efficiency: the existing paradigm treats all
prompts equally, despite their utility depending on the changing states of LLMs in training; as not all prompts contribute
equally, relying on a static set with a fixed training schedule
is inefficient. (ii) model generalizability: once the LLM
saturates on the static prompt set, learning stops, preventing
the model acquiring new skills or knowledge beyond the
predefined distribution.1

1. Introduction
Long-lived artificial intelligence must deal with an everevolving, open-ended world, however the current training
paradigm is restricted to being fairly short-lived and static.
This paper concerns the post-training paradigm of large
language models (LLMs), which is typically done in two
stages, imitation (i.e., supervised fine-tuning, SFT) and reinforcement learning (i.e., RL post-training). In particular,
we focus on the latter, which has led to remarkable success

We thereby investigate the two questions:
1. (Signal) Which prompts should be prioritized during
RL training?

1

Google DeepMind 2 University of Chicago. Correspondence
to: Ziyu Ye and Yuan Liu <{hazelye, yuanliu}@google.com>.
Approved for publication by Google DeepMind as of 2024-09-27.

2. (Algorithm) How can we generate more useful prompts,
and use them to keep LLMs self-improving in RL?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Literature has considered prompt evolving, but is restricted to
SFT (Xu et al., 2023), and/or evolves uniformly (Yuan et al., 2024).
We claim adaptive training w.r.t. reward signals are crucial.

1

