Position: AI’s growing due process problem

Sunayana Rane 1 2

Abstract

14th amendments to the Constitution. The 5th amendment
says no one shall be “deprived of life, liberty or property
without due process of law.” The Due Process Clause of the
14th amendment, adopted during post-Civil-War fears that
confederate states may find ways to deny newly-recognized
rights for African Americans, uses the the same words to
assert that states may not deprive any individual of these
rights. Due process does not apply to all decisions, but it
does apply to many important government actions.

AI systems are now ubiquitous in real-world
decision-making. However, their use is often
invisible and almost always difficult to understand for the ordinary people who now come into
contact with AI regularly. As these AI-driven
decision-making systems increasingly replace human counterparts, our ability to understand the
reasons behind a decision, and to contest that decision fairly, is quickly being eroded. In the United
States legal system due process includes the right
to understand the reasons for certain major decisions and the right to openly contest those decisions. Everyone is entitled to due process under
the law, and human decision-makers have been
required to adhere to due process when making
many important decisions that are now slowly being relegated to AI systems. Using two recent
court decisions as a foundation, this paper takes
the position that AI in its current form cannot
guarantee due process, and therefore cannot and
(should not) be used to make decisions that should
be subject to due process. The supporting legal
analysis investigates how the current lack of technical answers about the interpretability and causality of AI decisions, coupled with extreme trade
secret protections severely limiting any exercise
of the small amount of technical knowledge we do
have, serve as a fatal anti-due-process combination. Throughout the analysis, this paper explains
why technical researchers’ involvement is vital
to informing the legal process and restoring due
process protections.

Due process as interpreted in the American legal system,
even as far back 1868 when the 14th amendment was ratified, had come to mean “a certain core procedural fairness”
that people could expect of government actions in their lives.
In particular, due process involved the right to “notice,” “the
opportunity to be heard,” and “a determination by a neutral
decisionmaker according to some fair and settled course of
judicial proceeding” (Eberle, 1987). Due process is deeply
intertwined with the ideal of fundamental fairness of the legal system. Equal protection and due process have together
won substantial victories for civil rights (Brown v. Board
of Education, 1954), abortion rights (Roe v. Wade, 1973),
LGBTQ rights (Lawrence v. Texas, 2003; Obergefell v.
Hodges, 2015), and disability rights (Youngberg v. Romeo,
1982).
This type of fundamental tension between fairness and powerful interests is not new. However, the use of AI systems to
skirt due process requirements is new and unusually dangerous due to their invisibility and staggering spread (Citron &
Pasquale, 2014). Ordinary people are up against technically
opaque systems they cannot fight, nor understand, in areas
ranging from state disability aid to healthcare, from getting
a mortgage to staying out of prison. (The Guardian, 2021;
ProPublica, 2016). The IRS contracts out the creation of AI
systems that produce taxpayer profiles from social media
data, which they then use to choose targets for tax audits
(Houser & Sanders, 2016). The same contractors that market these tools to federal agencies also often sell tools to
private entities, such as credit scoring companies (Hurley
& Adebayo, 2016). While some legal scholars sounded the
due process alarm over a decade ago on automated scoring
tools replacing human decision-making (Citron, 2007), this
paper takes the position that today’s more sophisticated
and largely uninterpretable AI systems present a new
kind of danger: AI systems whose behavior cannot be

1. Introduction to Due Process
Due process is recognized as an important constitutional
right in the United States, formally described in the 5th and
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
University of Chicago Law School. Correspondence to: Sunayana
Rane <srane@princeton.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

