Disentangling Invariant Subgraph via Variance Contrastive Estimation
under Distribution Shifts
Haoyang Li 1 Xin Wang 1 Xueling Zhu 2 Weigao Wen 3 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph is ubiquitous in our daily life, which has been widely
used to represent the complex relationships between entities in many fields, including social network (Qiu et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2019), knowledge representation (Wang
et al., 2017), recommendation systems (Wu et al., 2022b;
Li et al., 2021a), multimedia (Hudson & Manning, 2019),
computer vision (Zellers et al., 2018), natural language processing (Marcheggiani & Titov, 2017), etc. Among these
popular applications, graph-level prediction tasks constitute
a major branch. Generally speaking, the label for a graph
depends on the information in its critical subgraph (i.e., the
part that has invariant and truly predictive relations to the
label in the task), rather than the whole graph (Luo et al.,
2020; Yu et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2022). For example, the solubility of one molecule can be determined by the predictive
functional group, rather than the molecular scaffold (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2020). The label of one graph
from the MNIST superpixel dataset (Dwivedi et al., 2023;
Fan et al., 2022) has deterministic and invariant relations
with the digit subgraph, rather than the background subgraph (Figure 1). Several representative works (Ying et al.,
2018; Luo et al., 2020) are developed to explore capturing
such critical subgraphs for learning graph representations effectively, which can largely improve graph-level prediction
performance.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved
remarkable success, yet most are developed under the in-distribution assumption and fail to
generalize to out-of-distribution (OOD) environments. To tackle this problem, some graph invariant learning methods aim to learn invariant
subgraph against distribution shifts, which heavily rely on predefined or automatically generated
environment labels. However, directly annotating
or estimating such environment labels from biased
graph data is typically impractical or inaccurate
for real-world graphs. Consequently, GNNs may
become biased toward variant patterns, resulting
in poor OOD generalization. In this paper, we
propose to learn disentangled invariant subgraph
via self-supervised contrastive variant subgraph
estimation for achieving satisfactory OOD generalization. Specifically, we first propose a GNNbased invariant subgraph generator to disentangle
the invariant and variant subgraphs. Then, we estimate the degree of the spurious correlations by
conducting self-supervised contrastive learning
on variant subgraphs. Thanks to the accurate identification and estimation of the variant subgraphs,
we can capture invariant subgraphs effectively
and further eliminate spurious correlations by inverse propensity score reweighting. We provide
theoretical analyses to show that our model can
disentangle the ground-truth invariant and variant subgraphs for OOD generalization. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
model over state-of-the-art baselines.

Despite their remarkable progress, the existing approaches
are generally built upon the in-distribution (I.D.) hypothesis, namely the testing and training graphs are sampled
from an identical distribution. Yet the graph data generation mechanism in real-world scenarios is uncontrollable
and unobservable (Bengio et al., 2019), so that the distribution shifts can widely exist, making the out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization become one of the most crucial issues
to be handled (Li et al., 2022b). The existing subgraphbased graph methods fail to capture critical subgraphs due
to lacking OOD generalization ability, whose performance
can degenerate significantly under distribution shifts. Although several pioneering works (Wu et al., 2022c;a; Li
et al., 2022d; Yang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b) have been
proposed to handle graph distribution shifts via learning environment invariant subgraphs (which are defined as critical

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Radiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China 3 Alibaba Group.
Correspondence
to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

