Mahalanobis++: Improving OOD Detection via Feature Normalization

Maximilian Müller 1 Matthias Hein 1

FPR Improvement of Mahalanobis++ over Mahalanobis

Abstract

FPR Difference

Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) examples
is an important task for deploying reliable machine learning models in safety-critial applications. While post-hoc methods based on the Mahalanobis distance applied to pre-logit features
are among the most effective for ImageNet-scale
OOD detection, their performance varies significantly across models. We connect this inconsistency to strong variations in feature norms,
indicating severe violations of the Gaussian assumption underlying the Mahalanobis distance estimation. We show that simple ℓ2 -normalization
of the features mitigates this problem effectively,
aligning better with the premise of normally distributed data with shared covariance matrix. Extensive experiments on 44 models across diverse
architectures and pretraining schemes show that
ℓ2 -normalization improves the conventional Mahalanobis distance-based approaches significantly
and consistently, and outperforms other recently
proposed OOD detection methods. Code is available at github.com/mueller-mp/maha-norm.

15
10
5
0

Models sorted by FPR difference
Figure 1. Normalizing features improves OOD detection with
the Mahalanobis distance consistently. Shown is the difference
in false-positive rate at true positive rate of 95% between unnormalized and normalized features for 44 ImageNet models, averaged
over five OOD datasets of the OpenOOD benchmark.

genuine ID samples to pass through normally. OOD detection methods are commonly divided into methods that
require modifications to the training process and so-called
post-hoc detection methods that can be applied to any pretrained network. For many downstream tasks (not only
OOD detection), the best results are achieved by models
that have been pretrained on large datasets, some of which
might not be publicly available. Since adjusting the training
scheme for these networks is usually not feasible, simple
post-hoc OOD detection is most often used in practice.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable performance across a variety of real-world tasks. However, when
faced with inputs that fall outside their training distribution, they can behave unpredictably and even result in highconfidence predictions (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Hein
et al., 2019). These so-called out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs are often misclassified with high confidence as belonging to the in-distribution (ID) classes, creating significant
risks for real-world deployments. OOD detectors aim to
identify and reject such anomalous inputs — potentially
prompting human intervention, transitioning to a safe state,
or declining to provide a prediction — while still allowing

Common post-hoc OOD detection methods are based on a
scoring function that typically inputs either the logit/softmax
outputs of a model (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Hendrycks
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2020), or the pre-logit features (Lee
et al., 2018b; Ren et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022), or both
(Sun et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). VisionTransformers
have shown particular success in this area (Koner et al.,
2021). For large-scale settings where, e.g., ImageNet is
the ID dataset, they perform particularly well (Galil et al.,
2023), especially when paired with feature-based methods
(Bitterwolf et al., 2023). Among those, the Mahalanobis
distance (Lee et al., 2018b; Ren et al., 2021) stands out as a
particularly effective and simple scoring function. However,
despite leading for some models to state-of-the-art OOD
performance, it fails for others and shows high performance
variation across different models and pretraining schemes,
and brittleness when confronted with supposedly easy noise
distributions as OOD data (Bitterwolf et al., 2023).

1

University of Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center. Correspondence to: Maximilian Müller <maximilian.mueller@wsii.unituebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

