Model Uncertainty Quantification by Conformal Prediction in Continual
Learning

Rui Gao 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

2022; Xu & Liu, 2022; Zou & Liu, 2023a). Continual learning (CL)—also referred to as lifelong learning (Chen & Liu,
2018; Gao & Liu, 2025b), sequential learning (Aljundi et al.,
2019), and incremental learning (Aljundi et al., 2018)—is
a paradigm that enables a model to learn a large number of
tasks sequentially, where data from previous tasks are no
longer accessible during the training of new tasks. A significant challenge in continual learning is catastrophic forgetting (Kumaran et al., 2016), where standard deep learning
methods tend to rapidly forget previously acquired knowledge when learning new tasks (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
Most works of continual learning have concentrated on mitigating this issue. For example, the regularization-based
methods such as EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) and MAS
(Aljundi et al., 2018) measure the parameter importance and
introduce a regularization term in the loss function to consolidate previous knowledge; replay-based methods such as
iCaRL (Rebuffi et al., 2017) and GEM (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017) try to replay the knowledge of previous tasks
by storing samples or generating pseudo-samples, and then
provide these replayed knowledge to the model while a new
task is being learned; parameter isolation methods such as
PackNet (Mallya & Lazebnik, 2018) and HAT (Serrà et al.,
2018) dedicate different model parameters to each task so
as to prevent any possible forgetting. Overall, these works
mitigate catastrophic forgetting of model in continual learning, which is often reflected as improved accuracy of model
on previous tasks.

Continual learning has attracted increasing research attention in recent years due to its promising experimental results in real-world applications. In this paper, we study the issue of calibration in continual learning which reliably quantifies
the uncertainty of model predictions. Conformal
prediction (CP) provides a general framework for
model calibration, which outputs prediction intervals or sets with a theoretical high coverage
guarantee as long as the samples are exchangeable. However, the tasks in continual learning are
learned in sequence, which violates the principle
that data should be exchangeable. Meanwhile,
the model learns the current task with limited or
no access to data from previous tasks, which is
not conducive to constructing the calibration set.
To address these issues, we propose a CP-based
method for model uncertainty quantification in
continual learning (CPCL), which also reveals the
connection between prediction interval length and
forgetting. We analyze the oracle prediction interval in continual learning and theoretically prove
the asymptotic coverage guarantee of CPCL. Finally, extensive experiments on simulated and
real data empirically verify the validity of our
proposed method.

However, existing works to date have ignored the issue
of calibration in continual learning. Calibration is often
deemed as important as the standard criterion of accuracy
in statistics and machine learning (Thelen et al., 2022; Park
et al., 2024). A well-calibrated model can reliably quantify
the uncertainty of its prediction (Guo et al., 2017; Hermans
et al., 2021). Model uncertainty quantification is crucial in
many applications of continual learning. For example, in
medical imaging, advancements in technology or changes
in diagnostic procedures result in continuous variations in
image appearance (Hofmanninger et al., 2020; Ghesu et al.,
2021). In this context, the model must provide critical
information to doctors, enabling them to understand the uncertainty in model predictions and make informed decisions
regarding patient care.

1. Introduction
As vast amounts of data are produced, the number of new
tasks is increasing overwhelmingly (Zou & Liu, 2023b; Liu
et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2023b; Chen & Liu, 2023). Consequently, learning systems are required to rapidly adapt to
the continuously emerging tasks (Gong et al., 2023a; 2021;
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

