Near-Optimal Sample Complexity for MDPs via Anchoring

Jongmin Lee 1 Mario Bravo 2 Roberto Cominetti 3

Abstract

memory requirements, specially when combined with function approximation techniques for large scale problems.

We study a new model-free algorithm to compute
ε-optimal policies for average reward Markov decision processes, in the weakly communicating
setting. Given a generative model, our procedure
combines a recursive sampling technique with
Halpern’s anchored iteration, and computes an
ε-optimal policy with sample and time complex∗ 2
e
ity O(|S||A|∥h
∥sp /ε2 ) both in high probability
and in expectation. To our knowledge, this is the
best complexity among model-free algorithms,
matching the known lower bound up to a factor
∥h∗ ∥sp . Although the complexity bound involves
the span seminorm ∥h∗ ∥sp of the unknown bias
vector, the algorithm requires no prior knowledge
and implements a stopping rule which guarantees
with probability 1 that the procedure terminates in
finite time. We also analyze how these techniques
can be adapted for discounted MDPs.

The sample complexity of model-free algorithms has been
studied both in the discounted and the average reward setups. While for discounted MDPs these procedures have
been shown to achieve optimal sample complexity, previous
results for average rewards are less satisfactory and exhibit
a substantial gap with respect to the known lower bound.
Furthermore, most prior model-free and model-based algorithms for average reward MDPs require for their implementation some a priori bound on the mixing times or on the
span seminorm of the bias vector.
1.1. Our contribution
We propose a new model-free algorithm to compute an εoptimal policy for weakly communicating average reward
MDPs. We show that, with probability at least 1 − δ, the
algorithm achieves the task with a sample and time complex∗ 2
e
ity of order O(L|S||A|∥h
∥sp /ε2 ). Here S and A are the
state and action spaces of the MDP and ∥h∗ ∥sp is the span
seminorm of the bias vector described later in Section 1.2,
e = ln(|S||A|∥h∗ ∥sp /(εδ)) ln4 (∥h∗ ∥sp /ε) is a logwhile L
arithmic multiplicative factor. This yields a near-optimal
algorithm since this complexity matches the known lower
bound up to a factor ∥h∗ ∥sp . More explicit estimates of the
algorithm’s complexity are discussed in Section 3.2.

1. Introduction
A main task in reinforcement learning is to compute an
ε-optimal policy for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
when the transition probabilities are unknown. If one has
access to a generative model that provides independent samples of the next state for any given initial state and action, a
standard approach in model-based algorithms is to approximate the transition probabilities by sampling to a sufficiently
high accuracy, and build a surrogate model which is then
solved by dynamic programming techniques. In contrast,
model-free methods recursively approximate a solution of
the Bellman equation for the value function, with lower

Our algorithm can be implemented without any prior knowledge about ∥h∗ ∥sp nor other characteristics of the optimal
policy. Also, it implements a stopping rule which guarantees
with probability 1 that the method finds an ε-optimal policy
in finite time, with the above complexity bound holding both
in high probability as well as in expectation. This compares
favorably to previous model-free and model-based methods
which usually require some prior estimates of the span seminorm ∥h∗ ∥sp , or an upper bound for the maximal mixing
time tmix (see Table 1 and Section 1.3). To our knowledge,
the only algorithm with explicit complexity guarantees and
which does not require prior knowledge is the model-based
method in the recent paper by Tuynman et al. (2024), which
however applies for communicating MDPs, achieving a
complexity bound of e
O(|S||A| D/ε2 + |S|2 |A|D2 ), where
D stands for the diameter of the MDP.

1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea 2 Facultad de Ingenierı́a y Ciencias, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile 3 Institute for Mathematical & Computational Engineering and Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica
de Chile, Santiago, Chile. Correspondence to: Jongmin Lee
<dlwhd2000@snu.ac.kr>, Mario Bravo <mario.bravo@uai.cl>,
Roberto Cominetti <roberto.cominetti@uc.cl>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The core of our analysis builds on the following key ideas.
1

