Neural Encoding and Decoding at Scale

Yizi Zhang∗1,4 Yanchen Wang∗1 Mehdi Azabou1 Alexandre Andre2 Zixuan Wang1 Hanrui Lyu3
The International Brain Laboratory4 Eva Dyer2 Liam Paninski1,4 Cole Hurwitz1,4
1

Columbia University 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Northwestern University
4
The International Brain Laboratory ∗ Equal Contribution

1. Introduction

Abstract

Systems neuroscience has experienced a revolution in data
acquisition, from brain-wide recordings using Neuropixels
probes (Jun et al., 2017; Steinmetz et al., 2019; 2021; IBL
et al., 2023; Khilkevich et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024), to
automated tracking of behavior from video data (Mathis
et al., 2018; Pereira et al., 2022; Biderman et al., 2024).
While these multi-animal, multimodal datasets open new
avenues for understanding the relationship between neural
activity and behavior, they also necessitate the development
of analysis approaches that can effectively leverage massive
volumes of data (Paninski & Cunningham, 2018; Stringer &
Pachitariu, 2024).

Recent work has demonstrated that large-scale,
multi-animal models are powerful tools for characterizing the relationship between neural activity and behavior. Current large-scale approaches,
however, focus exclusively on either predicting
neural activity from behavior (encoding) or predicting behavior from neural activity (decoding),
limiting their ability to capture the bidirectional
relationship between neural activity and behavior. To bridge this gap, we introduce a multimodal, multi-task model that enables simultaneous Neural Encoding and Decoding at Scale
(NEDS). Central to our approach is a novel multitask-masking strategy, which alternates between
neural, behavioral, within-modality, and crossmodality masking. We pretrain our method on the
International Brain Laboratory (IBL) repeated site
dataset, which includes recordings from 83 animals performing the same visual decision-making
task. In comparison to other large-scale models, we demonstrate that NEDS achieves stateof-the-art performance for both encoding and
decoding when pretrained on multi-animal data
and then fine-tuned on new animals. Surprisingly, NEDS’s learned embeddings exhibit emergent properties: even without explicit training,
they are highly predictive of the brain regions
in each recording. Altogether, our approach is
a step towards a foundation model of the brain
that enables seamless translation between neural activity and behavior. Project page and code:
https://ibl-neds.github.io/

Recent efforts to address this challenge have focused on
developing large-scale models that can be trained across
multiple sessions and animals (Azabou et al., 2024; Ye
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b;a; Posani et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2025). These works demonstrate that with increasing scale of neural data comes improved performance on
downstream tasks such as predicting neural activity from
behavior (encoding) or predicting behavior from neural activity (decoding). Despite their promise, most preexisting
large-scale modeling approaches are constrained by their
task-specific nature, focusing exclusively on either encoding
(Posani et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025) or decoding (Azabou et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). This
limits their ability to model the bidirectional relationship
between neural activity and behavior. Overcoming this limitation will require multimodal models capable of seamlessly
translating between different modalities.
To address this need, we propose a method for simultaneous Neural Encoding and Decoding at Scale (NEDS).
Our approach leverages recent advances in self-supervised
learning and multimodal masked modeling (He et al., 2022;
Mizrahi et al., 2023), training a transformer-based model
to jointly capture the relationship between neural activity
and behavior. We utilize a multi-task-masking strategy (Tay
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024b) that alternates between neu-

. Correspondence to: Yizi Zhang <yz4123@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

