Identification of Latent Confounders via Investigating the
Tensor Ranks of the Nonlinear Observations
Zhengming Chen 1 2 Yewei Xia 3 4 Feng Xie 5 Jie Qiao 2 Zhifeng Hao 1 Ruichu Cai 2 Kun Zhang 4 6

Abstract

1. Introduction

We study the problem of learning discrete latent
variable causal structures from mixed-type observational data. Traditional methods, such as those
based on the tensor rank condition, are designed
to identify discrete latent structure models and
provide robust identification bounds for discrete
causal models. However, when observed variables—specifically, those representing the children of latent variables—are collected at various
levels with continuous data types, the tensor rank
condition is not applicable, limiting further causal
structure learning for latent variables. In this
paper, we consider a more general case where
observed variables can be either continuous or
discrete, and further allow for scenarios where
multiple latent parents cause the same set of observed variables. We show that, under the completeness condition, it is possible to discretize
the data in a way that satisfies the full-rank assumption required by the tensor rank condition.
This enables the identifiability of discrete latent
structure models within mixed-type observational
data. Moreover, we introduce the two-sufficient
measurement condition, a more general structural
assumption under which the tensor rank condition
holds and the underlying latent causal structure
is identifiable by a proposed two-stage identification algorithm. Extensive experiments on both
simulated and real-world data validate the effectiveness of our method.

Latent confounders, typically referred to as unobserved variables that influence multiple observed variables, are frequently encountered in various disciplines such as statistics,
machine learning, and causal discovery. Ignoring latent
confounders may introduce spurious correlations among
observed variables, impeding the correctness and robustness
of models trained from observational data. Taking into account latent confounders in modeling procedures remains
a long-standing challenge and has attracted wide attention
in both theoretical and applied research (Zheng et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2024; Miao et al., 2018; Thaden & Kneib, 2018;
Wang & Blei, 2019; Bartolucci et al., 2023).
Much effort has been made to handle the latent confounding
problem in causal structure learning. One line of research
considers the causal structure over the measured variables,
including constraint-based methods (Spirtes et al., 2000;
Colombo et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2020), functional modelbased ones (Chen et al., 2021b; Hoyer et al., 2008; Salehkaleybar et al., 2020), and hybrid model approaches (Chen
et al., 2021c; Ogarrio et al., 2016). Another line of research
focuses on identifying the causal structure among latent variables by utilizing the pure measurement model assumption,
where each latent variable has certain measured variables
as its children. This includes linear model-based methods
(Silva et al., 2006; Cai et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022; Xie et al.,
2024) and discrete latent tree model-based approaches (Gu,
2022; Gu & Dunson, 2023; Choi et al., 2011; Zhou et al.,
2020). These methods either assume linear relationships
among all variables or constrain the latent structure to a
specific structure. Consequently, they are unable to handle a
general causal structure with non-linear relationships among
latent variables and observed variables.

1
College of Mathematics and Computer, Shantou University,
Shantou, China 2 School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 3 Department of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 4 Department
of Machine Learning, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 5 Department of Applied Statistics, Beijing Technology and Business University,
Beijing, China 6 Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Ruichu Cai
<cairuichu@gmail.com>, Kun Zhang <kunz1@cmu.edu>.

When observed variables are continuous and nonlinearly
depend on the discrete latent variables, one straightforward
way to learn the causal structure among latent variables is
to treat it as a mixture model (Teicher, 1967; Tahmasebi
et al., 2018; Allman et al., 2009; Ritchie et al., 2020), so
that the causal structure can be learned from the recovered
latent distribution (Kivva et al., 2021). However, such recovery requires an unbiased estimation of the parameters

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

