Graph Minimum Factorization Distance and Its Application to
Large-Scale Graph Data Clustering

Jicong Fan 1

Abstract

2006), social networks (Aggarwal, 2011), user-item interaction networks (Resnick & Varian, 1997), transportation
networks (Bell & Iida, 1997), knowledge graphs (Hogan
et al., 2021), and vision graphs (Riesen & Bunke, 2008).
In graph data analysis, quantifying the similarity or dissimilarity between graphs (or comparing graphs for short) is
probably the most fundamental and important problem and
has numerous applications such as graph search, classification, and clustering. However, due to the non-Euclidean
nature of graph data, comparing graphs remains a challenge
especially when the graphs are large, though many techniques have been proposed in the past decades.

Measuring the distance or similarity between
graphs is the foundation of many graph analysis tasks, such as graph classification and clustering, but remains a challenge on large datasets.
In this work, we treat the adjacency matrices of
two graphs as two kernel matrices given by some
unknown indefinite kernel function performed
on two discrete distributions and define the distance between the two distributions as a measure,
called MMFD, of the dissimilarity between two
graphs. We show that MMFD is a pseudo-metric.
Although the initial definition of MMFD seems
complex, we show that it has a closed-form solution with extremely simple computation. To
further improve the efficiency of large-scale clustering, we propose an MMFD-KM with linear
space and time complexity with respect to the
number of graphs. We also provide a generalization of MMFD, called MFD, which is more
effective in exploiting the information of factors
of adjacency matrices. The experiments on simulated graphs intuitively show that our methods
are effective in comparing graphs. The experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that,
compared to the competitors, our methods have
much better clustering performance in terms of
three evaluation metrics and time cost.

Numerous methods for comparing graphs are founded on the
principles of graph isomorphism (Kobler et al., 2012) and its
related concepts, including subgraph isomorphism and the
identification of the largest common subgraph. Although the
concept of examining graph isomorphism seems inherently
straightforward, no efficient algorithms have been developed for this task. Moreover, graph isomorphism-based
similarity measures and their derivatives require graphs to
be precisely identical or to encompass substantial identical
subgraphs to be considered similar, which is overly stringent
(Shervashidze et al., 2011). As a result, many researchers
attempted to develop more flexible measures of similarity.
Representative examples of these more flexible measures include graph edit distance (Bunke, 1997; Neuhaus & Bunke,
2007; Abu-Aisheh et al., 2015; Chang et al., 2022), chemical distance (Jochum et al., 1980; Bento & Ioannidis, 2018),
various graph kernels (Gärtner et al., 2003; Vishwanathan
et al., 2010; Shervashidze et al., 2011; Nikolentzos et al.,
2021), and Gromov-Wasserstein distance (Mémoli, 2011).

1. Introduction

Graph edit distance (GED) is calculated by finding the minimum cost of a sequence of edit operations (e.g., node and
edge insertion/deletion) that can transform one graph into
another. While the computation of GED is NP-hard (Zeng
et al., 2009), there are several approximation algorithms
(Neuhaus & Bunke, 2007; Riesen & Bunke, 2009; Serratosa,
2014; 2015; Santacruz & Serratosa, 2020). For instance,
Riesen & Bunke (2009) proposed a Bipartite algorithm that
considers only local edge structure during the optimization
process to address the high computational complexity of
exact GED computation, meaning that the obtained distance

A graph is a collection of nodes (or vertices) connected
by edges (or links). This structure is used to represent
complex relationships and interactions between objects or
entities. Common examples of graphs include chemical
molecules (Rong et al., 2020), biology networks (Agarwal,
1

School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Jicong Fan <fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

