Improving the Scaling Laws of Synthetic Data with Deliberate Practice

Reyhane Askari-Hemmat * 1 Mohammad Pezeshki * 1 Elvis Dohmatob 1 2 3 Florian Bordes 1 Pietro Astolfi 1
Melissa Hall 1 Jakob Verbeek 1 Michal Drozdzal 1 Adriana Romero-Soriano 1 3 4 5

Abstract

refining learning through feedback, leads to real progress.
This principle highlights that effective learning requires exposure to informative and difficult examples rather than
passive repetition.

Inspired by the principle of deliberate practice in human learning, we propose Deliberate
Practice for Synthetic Data Generation (DP), a
novel framework that improves sample efficiency
through dynamic synthetic data generation. Prior
work has shown that scaling synthetic data is inherently challenging, as naively adding new data
leads to diminishing returns. To address this, pruning has been identified as a key mechanism for
improving scaling, enabling models to focus on
the most informative synthetic samples. Rather
than generating a large dataset and pruning it afterward, DP efficiently approximates the direct generation of informative samples. We theoretically
show how training on challenging, informative
examples improves scaling laws and empirically
validate that DP achieves better scaling performance with significantly fewer training samples
and iterations. On ImageNet-100, DP generates
3.4× fewer samples and requires six times fewer
iterations, while on ImageNet-1k, it generates 8×
fewer samples with a 30% reduction in iterations,
all while achieving superior performance compared to prior work.

In contrast, most machine learning models are trained on precollected data that remain static throughout training, limiting
their ability to dynamically adapt to their own weaknesses.
One promising source of data for visual recognition tasks
is large-scale pre-trained text-to-image models (Rombach
et al., 2022). They provide an essentially infinite source
of synthetic training data, presenting an alternative to realworld datasets, which are often expensive or infeasible to
curate (Hemmat et al., 2023; Shin et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2024). With the great promise of text-to-image models, a
natural question arises: what is the potential of learning
using only synthetic data? Empirical studies show that
increasing the volume of synthetic training data often leads
to diminishing returns, with performance gains following a
power law stagnation (Fan et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2024a).
Instead, pruning to remove uninformative examples has
proven effective in improving the effectiveness of training
with real or synthetic data (Sorscher et al., 2022; Kolossov
et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2024).
Inspired by human learning principles and recent advances
in generative image models, we propose the Deliberate Practice (DP) for Synthetic Data Generation framework. Unlike
static approaches that generate all synthetic training data
upfront (Fan et al., 2024; Shin et al., 2023; Hemmat et al.,
2023), our framework incorporates a dynamic loop between
a diffusion model and a downstream learner throughout the
training. More concretely, rather than generating an entire
dataset at once and irrespective of the learner and then pruning it to remove uninformative samples, we propose DP to
efficiently generate data directly from the pruned distribution of informative samples. By leveraging the learner’s
prediction entropy to guide the generation process, our approach generates only the most challenging and informative
training examples.

1. Introduction
A key principle underlying learning in human is deliberate
practice (DP)—progress is made not by repeating what is
already known but by continuously engaging with tasks that
stretch the limits of one’s abilities (Ericsson et al., 1993).
For example, when learning to play the guitar, simply practicing songs that one has mastered does little to improve
skill. Instead, targeted practice on challenging tasks and
*

Equal contribution 1 FAIR at Meta - Montreal, Paris, and
New York City labs 2 Concordia University 3 Mila 4 McGill University 5 Canada CIFAR AI chair. Correspondence to: Reyhane Askari-Hemmat <reyhaneaskari@meta.com>, Mohammad
Pezeshki <mpezeshki@meta.com>.

Our framework operates dynamically: we begin with an
initial set of synthetic data and train a learner until performance on a real validation set plateaus. At this point, the
learner’s entropy is used to guide the diffusion model to gen-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

