Accelerating Large Language Model Reasoning via Speculative Search

Zhihai Wang 1 Jie Wang 1 Jilai Pan 1 Xilin Xia 1 Huiling Zhen 2 Mingxuan Yuan 2 Jianye Hao 2 3 Feng Wu 1
0.95

Abstract

MCTS

0.90

Beam Search

0.85

COT

Accuracy

0.80

300

0.75

93.5%

200

0.70
0.65

100

0.60
0.55

Thought Generator
Others

Total Time (s)

Tree-search-based reasoning methods have
significantly enhanced the reasoning capability of
large language models (LLMs) by facilitating the
exploration of multiple intermediate reasoning
steps, i.e., thoughts. However, these methods
suffer from substantial inference latency, as they
have to generate numerous reasoning thoughts,
severely limiting LLM applicability. To address
this challenge, we propose a novel Speculative
Search (SpecSearch) framework that significantly
accelerates LLM reasoning by optimizing thought
generation. Specifically, SpecSearch utilizes a
small model to strategically collaborate with a
large model at both thought and token levels,
efficiently generating high-quality reasoning
thoughts. The major pillar of SpecSearch is a
novel quality-preserving rejection mechanism,
which effectively filters out thoughts whose
quality falls below that of the large model’s
outputs. Moreover, we show that SpecSearch
preserves comparable reasoning quality to the
large model. Experiments on both the Qwen and
Llama models demonstrate that SpecSearch significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches,
achieving up to 2.12× speedup with comparable reasoning quality. Code is available at
https://github.com/MIRALab-USTC/
LLMReasoning-SpecSearch.

400

1

Direct Inference
2

4

8

16

32

64 128

Inference Time (× 10 s)

91.3%

0 Beam Search

MCTS

(a) Latency-Accuracy
(b) Bottleneck of Reasoning
Figure 1. (a) The inference latency increases by several orders of
magnitude with the introduction of tree-search-based reasoning
methods. (b) Thought generation acts as an efficiency bottleneck
of tree-search-based reasoning methods.

soning methods (Yao et al., 2023; Wan et al., 2024a; Jiang
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024). These TSB methods enhance reasoning by following the Chain-of-Thought (COT)
approach (Wei et al., 2022), which decomposes problemsolving into a sequence of intermediate reasoning steps,
termed thoughts. Building upon this, TSB frameworks
such as Tree-of-Thoughts (TOT) (Yao et al., 2023) integrate
thought generation and evaluation with search algorithms—
such as beam search (Kang et al., 2024) and Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) (Chen et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2024b)—to systematically explore diverse reasoning paths.
By incorporating these techniques, TSB methods provide
LLMs with a deliberate and structured reasoning framework,
significantly improving their capability to tackle complex
and multi-step reasoning tasks.
However, existing TSB reasoning methods often suffer from
substantial inference latency (Gao et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024e), with inference latency increasing by several orders of magnitude (see Figure 1a). The primary bottleneck
stems from the need to explore a vast number of reasoning thoughts (see Figure 1b). This substantial increase in
inference latency poses significant challenges for practical
deployment, particularly in real-time applications requiring low-latency performance (Zhou et al., 2024; Xia et al.,
2024). However, effective and efficient strategies to accelerate slow-thinking reasoning in LLMs without compromising
reasoning quality remain largely underexplored.

1. Introduction
The reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs)
have significantly advanced with the adoption of slowthinking processes based on tree-search-based (TSB) reaThis work was done when Zhihai Wang was an intern at Huawei.
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception
and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 3 College of Intelligence
and Computing, Tianjin University. Correspondence to: Jie Wang
<jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn>.

1

In this paper, we propose Speculative Search (SpecSearch),
a novel and efficient framework that significantly accelerates LLM reasoning while maintaining comparable quality. At its core, SpecSearch features a bi-level speculative

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

