OW-VAP: Visual Attribute Parsing for Open World Object Detection

Xing Xi 1 2 Xing Fu 2 Weiqiang Wang 2 Ronghua Luo 1

Abstract
17.5

Open World Object Detection (OWOD) requires
the detector to continuously identify and learn
new categories. Existing methods rely on the
large language model (LLM) to describe the visual attributes of known categories and use these
attributes to mark potential objects. The performance of such methods is influenced by the accuracy of LLM descriptions, and selecting appropriate attributes during incremental learning remains
a challenge. In this paper, we propose a novel
OWOD framework, termed OW-VAP, which operates independently of LLM and requires only
minimal object descriptions to detect unknown objects. Specifically, we propose a Visual Attribute
Parser (VAP) that parses the attributes of visual
regions and assesses object potential based on
the similarity between these attributes and the object descriptions. To enable the VAP to recognize
objects in unlabeled areas, we exploit potential objects within background regions. Finally, we propose Probabilistic Soft Label Assignment (PSLA)
to prevent optimization conflicts from misidentifying background as foreground. Comparative
results on the OWOD benchmark demonstrate
that our approach surpasses existing state-of-theart methods with a +13 improvement in U-Recall
and a +8 increase in U-AP for unknown detection
capabilities. Furthermore, OW-VAP approaches
the unknown recall upper limit of the detector.

15.0

U-AP

12.5

SGROD
SKDF
KTCN
ovow*
OW-VAP
OW-VAP*

10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
30

40

50

60

70

U-Recall (MOWODB)

80

Figure 1. Comparison Curves for U-AP and U-Recall. All metrics are evaluated on MOWODB benchmark. ⋆, △ and □ denote
the performance in Task 1, Task 2, and Task 3, respectively. ∗
indicates the performance after removing duplicate images. Our
OW-VAP significantly outperforms other models.

referred to as closed-set detectors, are trained on a fixed
set of categories and, therefore, are only capable of recognizing these predefined categories. However, in real-world
scenarios, annotating all possible categories is impractical.
To address this limitation, Open World Object Detection
(OWOD) has been proposed (Joseph et al., 2021). The detection of new categories in OWOD is divided into two steps.
Initially, the detector is trained on a dataset with a fixed
set of categories and is required to detect objects that were
not labeled in the training set during the inference phase.
Subsequently, these objects are selected and introduced in
subsequent incremental learning processes. The detector
is then fine-tuned based on existing knowledge, thereby
gaining the ability to detect these new categories.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in the field of computer vision, aiming to classify and localize objects within
an image (Tian et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2017b). Traditional
object detectors (Li et al., 2020b; Liu et al., 2016), often

Existing work can be broadly classified into two types. The
first assumes that potential objects share certain similarities
with known categories. Detectors demonstrate anomalies
when they label objects similar to known categories as negative samples. OW-DETR (Gupta et al., 2022) assesses
feature maps corresponding to negative sample regions, selecting the top K samples with the highest scores as potential
objects. The second utilizes the knowledge of visual foun-

1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 2 Ant Group, Hangzhou,
China. Correspondence to: Ronghua Luo <rhluo@scut.edu.cn>,
Xing Fu <zicai.fx@antgroup.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

