Mechanistic Unlearning:
Robust Knowledge Unlearning and Editing
via Mechanistic Localization
Phillip Guo * 1 Aaquib Syed * 2 Abhay Sheshadri 3 Aidan Ewart 4 Gintare Karolina Dziugaite 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) often learn to encode undesirable knowledge. The possibility of selectively editing or
unlearning this type of knowledge is viewed as paramount
for ensuring accuracy, fairness, and control of AI. Yet, editing and unlearning of knowledge from these models remains
challenging.

Methods for knowledge editing and unlearning
in large language models seek to edit or remove
undesirable knowledge or capabilities without
compromising general language modeling performance. This work investigates how mechanistic
interpretability—which, in part, aims to identify
model components (circuits) associated to specific interpretable mechanisms that make up a
model capability—can improve the precision and
effectiveness of editing and unlearning. We find
a stark difference in unlearning and edit robustness when training components localized by different methods. We highlight an important distinction between methods that localize components
based primarily on preserving outputs, and those
finding high level mechanisms with predictable
intermediate states. In particular, localizing edits/unlearning to components associated with the
lookup-table mechanism for factual recall 1) leads
to more robust edits/unlearning across different
input/output formats, and 2) resists attempts to relearn the unwanted information, while also reducing unintended side effects compared to baselines,
on both a sports facts dataset and the CounterFact
dataset across multiple models. We also find that
certain localized edits disrupt the latent knowledge in the model more than any other baselines,
making unlearning more robust to various attacks.

Common editing and unlearning methods often come at the
cost of affecting other general or tangential knowledge or
capabilities within the model. Moreover, the edits achieved
through these methods may not be robust – e.g., slight variations in the prompt formulation can often still elicit the
original fact or capability, or the original answers are still
present/extractable given white-box access.
Some recent work has explored editing or unlearning
techniques that rely on mechanistic interpretability methods attempting to trace which components of a network
store specific facts (Meng et al., 2023). These methods,
such as causal tracing or attribution patching, focus on
measuring how output or task accuracy is affected when
clean/corrupted input is patched into specific components.
We coin a new term to categorize localizations which
measure causal effects of components on only the output:
Output-Tracing localizations. The effectiveness of outputtracing (OT) techniques like Causal Tracing for editing has
been questioned by Hase et al. (2023). Our research confirms these doubts, finding that localized editing and unlearning of facts based on several existing OT methods often
perform equal to or worse than simply updating the entire
model. This is particularly evident when evaluating the robustness of edits against prompt variations and relearning,
and when probing for remaining latent knowledge.

*
Equal contribution 1 Work done while at University of Maryland, College Park 2 University of Maryland, College Park 3 Georgia
Institute of Technology 4 University of Bristol 5 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Aaquib Syed <asyed04@umd.edu>,
Phillip Guo <phguo@umd.edu>, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite
<gkdz@google.com>.

Another style of interpretability techniques first breaks down
computations into high-level mechanisms with predictable
intermediate states. Based on such work by Nanda et al.
(2023); Geva et al. (2023), we link certain MLP layers to a
fact lookup (FLU) mechanism for facts used in our analysis,
that enrich the latent stream with subject attributes but don’t
directly write to the output.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

