PolyConf: Unlocking Polymer Conformation Generation
through Hierarchical Generative Models

Fanmeng Wang 1 2 † Wentao Guo 3 Qi Ou 4 Hongshuai Wang 2
Haitao Lin 2 † Hongteng Xu 1 5 6 Zhifeng Gao 2

High

Abstract

five repeating units

Energy Landscape Complexity

Polymer conformation generation is a critical task
that enables atomic-level studies of diverse polymer materials. While significant advances have
been made in designing conformation generation
methods for small molecules and proteins, these
methods struggle to generate polymer conformations due to their unique structural characteristics.
Meanwhile, the scarcity of polymer conformation datasets further limits progress, making this
important area largely unexplored. In this work,
we propose PolyConf, a pioneering tailored polymer conformation generation method that leverages hierarchical generative models to unlock
new possibilities. Specifically, we decompose the
polymer conformation into a series of local conformations (i.e., the conformations of its repeating units), generating these local conformations
through an autoregressive model, and then generating their orientation transformations via a diffusion model to assemble them into the complete
polymer conformation. Moreover, we develop the
first benchmark with a high-quality polymer conformation dataset derived from molecular dynamics simulations to boost related research in this
area. The comprehensive evaluation demonstrates
that PolyConf consistently outperforms existing
conformation generation methods, thus facilitating advancements in polymer modeling and simulation. The whole work is available at https:
//polyconf-icml25.github.io.

polymer

protein

AFM Image

Low

small
molecule
Low

Structural Flexibility

High

Figure 1. The comparison of small molecule, protein, and polymer.
Here, the polymer chain comprises a series of repeating units, and
the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image (Roiter & Minko, 2005)
is used for direct 3D visualization of various polymer chains.

1. Introduction
Polymers, the macromolecules formed by covalent bonding
of numerous identical or similar monomers, have already become indispensable to modern life (Audus & de Pablo, 2017;
Kuenneth & Ramprasad, 2023). For example, polyethylene
and polypropylene are used as durable and lightweight packaging materials, while polystyrene and polycarbonate find
applications in electronics for their robustness and flexibility (Chen et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023). The vast chemical
space of polymers represents the art of molecular condensation that transforms simple building blocks into functional
materials. In this context, polymer conformation generation 1 , where various deep generative models can be used

†

Work done during an internship at DP Technology 1 Gaoling
School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 2 DP
Technology 3 California Institute of Technology 4 SINOPEC Research Institute of Petroleum Processing Co., Ltd. 5 Beijing Key
Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 6 Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE. Correspondence
to: Hongteng Xu <hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn>, Zhifeng Gao
<gaozf@dp.tech>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

This work mainly focuses on generating conformations of
linear homopolymers, as modeling copolymers and blends involves
complexities beyond data modeling.

1

