DiLQR: Differentiable Iterative Linear Quadratic Regulator via Implicit
Differentiation
Shuyuan Wang 1 Philip D. Loewen 1 Michael G. Forbes 2 R. Bhushan Gopaluni 1 Wei Pan 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Differentiable control has emerged as a powerful approach
in the fields of reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation
learning, enabling significant improvements in sample efficiency and performance. By integrating control policies
into a differentiable framework, researchers can leverage
gradient-based optimization techniques to directly optimize
policy parameters. This integration allows for end-to-end
training, where both the control strategy and the underlying model can be learned simultaneously, enhancing the
adaptability and precision of control systems.

While differentiable control has emerged as a
powerful paradigm combining model-free flexibility with model-based efficiency, the iterative
Linear Quadratic Regulator (iLQR) remains underexplored as a differentiable component. The
scalability of differentiating through extended iterations and horizons poses significant challenges,
hindering iLQR from being an effective differentiable controller. This paper introduces DiLQR, a
framework that facilitates differentiation through
iLQR, allowing it to serve as a trainable and differentiable module, either as or within a neural
network. A novel aspect of this framework is the
analytical solution that it provides for the gradient
of an iLQR controller through implicit differentiation, which ensures a constant backward cost regardless of iteration, while producing an accurate
gradient. We evaluate our framework on imitation
tasks on famous control benchmarks. Our analytical method demonstrates superior computational
performance, achieving up to 128x speedup and
a minimum of 21x speedup compared to automatic differentiation. Our method also demonstrates superior learning performance (106 x) compared to traditional neural network policies and
better model loss with differentiable controllers
that lack exact analytical gradients. Furthermore,
we integrate our module into a larger network
with visual inputs to demonstrate the capacity of
our method for high-dimensional, fully end-toend tasks. Codes can be found on the project
homepage https://sites.google.com/
view/dilqr/.

As a numerical controller, the iterative Linear Quadratic Regulator (iLQR) (Todorov et al., 2012) has been extensively
adopted for trajectory optimization (Spielberg et al., 2021;
Choi et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2020; Mastalli et al., 2020)
due to its computational efficiency (Tassa et al., 2014; Dean
et al., 2020; Collins et al., 2021) and excellent control performance (Dantec et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017). To make iLQR trainable as a neural network module,
naively differentiating through an iLQR controller may be
a reasonable choice, but the scalability of differentiating
through hundreds of iterations steps poses a significant challenge, as the forward and backward passes during training
are coupled. The forward pass involves iteratively solving
an LQR optimization problem to converge on the optimal
trajectory. The backward pass computes gradients through
backpropagation, and becomes increasingly complex as it
needs to traverse through all the layers of the forward pass,
which requires significant computational resources (time
and memory), especially for tasks requiring long iterations
and long horizons. This coupling not only increases memory usage, but also significantly slows down the training
process, making it difficult to scale to larger problems.
Efficient differentiable controllers are especially valuable
in systems involving neural networks, such as multi-modal
frameworks (Mao et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024b; Xiao et al.,
2022) and deep reinforcement learning (Ye et al., 2021; van
Hasselt et al., 2016), where an upstream neural network
module is required. Developing differentiable controllers
with efficient gradient propagation is crucial, as they greatly
enhance sample efficiency and reduce computational time
for online tuning.

1
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
Honeywell Process Solutions, Vancouver, Canada 3 The University of Manchester, Manchester, England. Correspondence
to: Wei Pan <wei.pan@manchester.ac.uk>, Bhushan Gopaluni
<bhushan.gopaluni@ubc.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

