Improving Memory Efficiency for Training KANs via Meta Learning

Zhangchi Zhao 1 Jun Shu 1 2 Deyu Meng 1 2 Zongben Xu 1

Abstract

ral network architectures, ranging from MLP (Cybenko,
1989) to CNN (LeCun et al., 1989), RNN (Elman, 1990),
LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), and Transformer
(Brown et al., 2020) architectures. While these architectures
generally use fixed activation functions, which limit their
interpretability and flexiblity.

Inspired by the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem, KANs offer a novel framework for
function approximation by replacing traditional
neural network weights with learnable univariate functions. This design demonstrates significant potential as an efficient and interpretable
alternative to traditional MLPs. However, KANs
are characterized by a substantially larger number of trainable parameters, leading to challenges
in memory efficiency and higher training costs
compared to MLPs. To address this limitation,
we propose to generate weights for KANs via a
smaller meta-learner, called MetaKANs. By training KANs and MetaKANs in an end-to-end differentiable manner, MetaKANs achieve comparable
or even superior performance while significantly
reducing the number of trainable parameters and
maintaining promising interpretability. Extensive
experiments on diverse benchmark tasks, including symbolic regression, partial differential equation solving, and image classification, demonstrate the effectiveness of MetaKANs in improving parameter efficiency and memory usage. The
proposed method provides an alternative technique for training KANs, that allows for greater
scalability and extensibility, and narrows the training cost gap with MLPs stated in the original
paper of KANs. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Murphyzc/MetaKAN.

Recently, Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs)(Liu et al.,
2024), inspired by the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation
theorem(Kolmogorov, 1957), introduced a novel neural architecture. Rather than employing traditional fixed activation functions, KANs utilize learnable, spline-parametrized
univariate functions on edges, enabling a more flexible and
interpretable framework for function approximation. Recent research on KANs has focused on modifying the Bspline functions to improve their performance. For instance,
Chebyshev KAN (SS et al., 2024), GramKAN, and KALN
used Chebyshev polynomials, Gram polynomials, and Legendre polynomials, respectively, to enhance the non-linear
function approximation capabilities. Similarly, (Bozorgasl
& Chen, 2024) used wavelet basis functions to improve the
model’s ability of capturing both high- and low-frequency
components of data. Additionally, (Yang & Wang, 2024)
and (Li, 2024) replaced B-splines with rational polynomials and radial basis functions to improve the computational
speed of KANs. To enhance KANs’ capability in image classification tasks, (Bodner et al., 2024) proposed ConvKAN,
while (Drokin, 2024) extended ConvKAN to more convolutional structures. Although these KAN variants improve
approximation and computational efficiency, the presence
of learnable activation functions leads to a large number
of trainable parameters. This design significantly impacts
memory efficiency and increases training costs, posing challenges for addressing larger datasets and complex tasks.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning, artificial intelligence (AI) has achieved remarkable progress in various fields (Brown et al., 2020; Jumper et al., 2021). This
progress is largely due to advancements of various neu-

To address these challenges, we propose MetaKANs, a
memory-efficient framework that improves training efficiency for KANs through meta learning. Our approach
builds on the key observation: KANs decompose highdimensional functions into dimension-wise univariate functions (learnable, spline-parametrized activation functions),
while these univariate functions follow a common functional
class F, in which they share the same trainable parameters
setting rule. Inspired by current meta learning (Kong et al.,
2020; Shu et al., 2023) and in-context learning (Brown
et al., 2020; Garg et al., 2022) techniques, we propose to

1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Ministry of Education
Key Lab of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an
Jiaotong University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory. Correspondence to:
Jun Shu <junshu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

