REINFORCE Adversarial Attacks on Large Language Models:
An Adaptive, Distributional, and Semantic Objective

Simon Geisler 1 2 Tom Wollschläger 1 M. H. I. Abdalla 1 Vincent Cohen-Addad 3
Johannes Gasteiger 3 4 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
To circumvent the alignment of large language
models (LLMs), current optimization-based adversarial attacks usually craft adversarial prompts
by maximizing the likelihood of a so-called affirmative response. An affirmative response is a
manually designed start of a harmful answer to
an inappropriate request. While it is often easy to
craft prompts that yield a substantial likelihood
for the affirmative response, the attacked model
frequently does not complete the response in a
harmful manner. Moreover, the affirmative objective is usually not adapted to model-specific
preferences and essentially ignores the fact that
LLMs output a distribution over responses. If low
attack success under such an objective is taken as
a measure of robustness, the true robustness might
be grossly overestimated. To alleviate these flaws,
we propose an adaptive and semantic optimization problem over the population of responses.
We derive a generally applicable objective via
the REINFORCE policy-gradient formalism and
demonstrate its efficacy with the state-of-the-art
jailbreak algorithms Greedy Coordinate Gradient
(GCG) and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD).
For example, our objective doubles the attack success rate (ASR) on Llama3 and increases the ASR
from 2% to 50% with circuit breaker defense.

Figure 1: Responses that our REINFORCE and the affirmative objective encourage. Due to the popularity of the
affirmative objective, it is likely that eliminating the hatched
region will be prioritized while developing future models.

absence of misbehavior on static benchmarks does not imply
the absence of misbehavior in general. For example, aligned
LLMs readily refuse to answer many inappropriate prompts
where the factual answer, e.g., could cause harm. However,
the jailbreaking literature (Zou et al., 2023; Perez et al.,
2022; Wen et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2023;
Geisler et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024) revealed that minor
tweaks usually suffice to circumvent alignment’s countermeasures. Yet, approaches that can automatically audit
LLMs via crafting such adversarial prompts typically rely
heavily on human-engineered objectives that do not adapt
to the evaluated/attacked model. Specifically, adversarial
prompts are usually chosen to maximize the likelihood of a
fixed affirmative response to an inappropriate prompt. Such
an objective has multiple defects. For example, even if the
attack crafts a prompt that makes the affirmative response
likely, the attacked model often continues in a non-harmful
manner (see Fig. 2a). Instead, jailbreak attacks should optimize for an arbitrary harmful response that is reasonable to
obtain with the attacked model. In Fig. 1, we illustrate which
responses our REINFORCE objective targets and how this
compares to the popular affirmative response objective.

1. Introduction
Identifying model misbehavior in large language models
(LLMs) can be tricky, especially since models advance and
the performance on benchmarks saturates. Nevertheless, the
1
Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich 2 Now at Google Research
3
Google Research 4 Now at Anthropic. Correspondence to: Simon
Geisler <s.geisler@tum.de>.

Since improving the affirmative optimization objective does
not necessarily lead to higher attack success, it is an inconsistent objective. Such inconsistency has been recognized as a
key obstacle to strong adaptive attacks (Tramer et al., 2020).
While adaptive attacks refine their strategy based on the
specifics of the target model, the affirmative objective is typ-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

