Enhancing Certified Robustness via
Block Reflector Orthogonal Layers and Logit Annealing Loss

Bo-Han Lai * Pin-Han Huang * Bo-Han Kung * Shang-Tse Chen 1

Abstract
Lipschitz neural networks are well-known for providing certified robustness in deep learning. In
this paper, we present a novel, efficient Block Reflector Orthogonal (BRO) layer that enhances the
capability of orthogonal layers on constructing
more expressive Lipschitz neural architectures. In
addition, by theoretically analyzing the nature of
Lipschitz neural networks, we introduce a new
loss function that employs an annealing mechanism to increase margin for most data points. This
enables Lipschitz models to provide better certified robustness. By employing our BRO layer and
loss function, we design BRONet — a simple yet
effective Lipschitz neural network that achieves
state-of-the-art certified robustness. Extensive
experiments and empirical analysis on CIFAR10/100, Tiny-ImageNet, and ImageNet validate
that our method outperforms existing baselines.
The implementation is available at GitHub Link.

Figure 1. Visualization of model performance on CIFAR-10. The
circle size denotes model size.

in practice, these approaches cannot provide robustness
guarantees and may fail against more sophisticated attacks.
Certified defenses, unlike empirical ones, provide provable
robustness by ensuring no adversarial examples exist within
an ℓp -norm ball of radius ε centered on the prediction point.

1. Introduction
Although deep learning has been widely adopted in various
fields (Wang et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020), it is shown to
be vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2014).
This kind of attack crafts an imperceptible perturbation on
images (Goodfellow et al., 2014) or voices (Carlini & Wagner, 2018) to make AI systems make incorrect predictions.
In light of this, many adversarial defense methods have been
proposed to improve the robustness, which can be categorized into empirical defenses and certified defenses. Common empirical defenses include adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018; Shafahi et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023) and
preprocessing-based methods (Samangouei et al., 2018; Das
et al., 2018; Lee & Kim, 2023). Although often effective

Certified defenses against adversarial attacks are broadly
categorized into probabilistic and deterministic (Li et al.,
2023) methods. Randomized smoothing (Cohen et al., 2019;
Lecuyer et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020) is a prominent probabilistic approach, known for its scalability in providing
certified robustness. However, its reliance on extensive sampling substantially increases computational overhead during
inference, limiting its practical deployment. Furthermore,
the certification provided is probabilistic in nature.
Conversely, deterministic methods, exemplified by interval bound propagation (Ehlers, 2017; Gowal et al., 2018;
Mueller et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2022) and CROWN (Wang
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022), efficiently provide deterministic certification. These methods aim to approximate
the lower bound of worst-case robust accuracy to ensure
deterministic robustness guarantees. Among various deterministic methods, neural networks with Lipschitz con-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan.
Correspondence to: Shang-Tse Chen <stchen@csie.ntu.edu.tw>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

