Generalization Bounds via Meta-Learned Model Representations:
PAC-Bayes and Sample Compression Hypernetworks

Benjamin Leblanc 1 Mathieu Bazinet 1 Nathaniel D’Amours 1 Alexandre Drouin 1 2 Pascal Germain 1

Abstract
Both PAC-Bayesian and Sample Compress learning frameworks have been shown instrumental
for deriving tight (non-vacuous) generalization
bounds for neural networks. We leverage these
results in a meta-learning scheme, relying on a
hypernetwork that outputs the parameters of a
downstream predictor from a dataset input. The
originality of our approach lies in the investigated
hypernetwork architectures that encode the
dataset before decoding the parameters: (1) a
PAC-Bayesian encoder that expresses a posterior
distribution over a latent space, (2) a Sample Compress encoder that selects a small sample of the
dataset input along with a message from a discrete
set, and (3) a hybrid between both approaches
motivated by a new Sample Compress theorem
handling continuous messages. The latter theorem
exploits the pivotal information transiting at the
encoder-decoder junction in order to compute
generalization guarantees for each downstream
predictor obtained by our meta-learning scheme.

Figure 1: Overview of our meta-learning framework.

probabilistic bounds on a model’s error rate. Applying these
techniques to deep neural networks is challenging because
classical approaches struggle to account for the true effective
complexity of such models (Zhang et al., 2017), which may
not be well captured by naive measures such as parameter
count (Belkin et al., 2019). However, prior work suggests
that if one can obtain a more compact yet expressive representation of a model’s complexity, tighter generalization
bounds are possible (Dziugaite et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2022; Kawaguchi et al., 2023), even when it comes to models
as big as Large Langage Models (Lotfi et al., 2024a;b).

1
Département d’informatique et de génie logiciel, Université Laval, Québec, Canada 2 ServiceNow Research,
Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Benjamin Leblanc
<benjamin.leblanc.2@ulaval.ca>.

In this work, we investigate a meta-learning framework for
obtaining such representations and leverage them to establish
tight generalization bounds. Our approach is based on a
hypernetwork architecture, trained by meta-learning, and
composed of two components: an encoder that projects a set
of training examples into an explicit information bottleneck
(Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015) and a decoder that generates
a downstream predictor based on this bottleneck. We demonstrate that the complexity of this information bottleneck
provides an effective measure of the downstream predictor
complexity by computing generalization guarantees based
on that complexity. Conceptually, our hypernetwork is
akin to a learning algorithm that explicitly exposes the
complexity of the models it produces. We then show how
our approach can be used to obtain generalization guarantees
in three theoretical frameworks: PAC-Bayesian analysis,
sample compression theory, and a new hybrid approach
that integrates both perspectives, each of which motivates
a specific architecture for the bottleneck.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We begin by introducing the theoretical frameworks used
to obtain generalization bounds (Section 2), including a new
PAC-Bayes Sample Compression framework, which we

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly shaping our daily lives, a
trend accelerated by rapid advancements in deep learning and
the widespread deployment of these models across various
applications (e.g., language models and AI agents). Ensuring
the reliability of machine learning models is therefore more
critical than ever. A fundamental aspect of reliability is
understanding how well a model generalizes beyond its
training data, particularly for modern neural networks, whose
complexity makes it challenging to obtain strong theoretical
guarantees. One way to assess generalization is through

1

