Retrieval Augmented Time Series Forecasting

Sungwon Han * 1 2 Seungeon Lee * 2 Meeyoung Cha 3 Sercan Ö. Arik 4 Jinsung Yoon 4

Abstract

Use retrieved results alongside the input

Time series forecasting uses historical data to
predict future trends, leveraging the relationships between past observations and available
features. In this paper, we propose RAFT, a
retrieval-augmented time series forecasting
method to provide sufficient inductive biases and
complement the model’s learning capacity. When
forecasting the subsequent time frames, we directly retrieve historical data candidates from the
training dataset with patterns most similar to the
input, and utilize the future values of these candidates alongside the inputs to obtain predictions.
This simple approach augments the model’s capacity by externally providing information about
past patterns via retrieval modules. Our empirical
evaluations on ten benchmark datasets show that
RAFT consistently outperforms contemporary
baselines with an average win ratio of 86%.

Forecast

Retrieve relevant historical patterns

Figure 1. Illustration of a motivating example of retrieval in timeseries forecasting.

effectiveness in capturing patterns of change in historical
observations, leading to the development of various deep
learning models tailored for time series forecasting. Especially, the advent of attention-based transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017) has made a significant impact on the time
series domain. The architecture has shown to be effective in
modeling dependencies between inputs, resulting in variants
like Informer (Zhou et al., 2021), AutoFormer (Wu et al.,
2021), and FedFormer (Zhou et al., 2022). Additionally,
recent methods utilize time series decomposition (Wang
et al., 2023), which isolates trends or seasonal patterns,
and multi-periodicity analysis which involves downsampling/upsampling of the series at various periods (Lin et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024). Furthermore, lightweight models
like multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) have demonstrated
strong performance along with these decomposition
techniques and multi-periodicity analysis (Chen et al., 2023;
Zeng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Accurately predicting future trends is crucial for making
informed decisions in various fields. Time series forecasting, which analyzes past data to anticipate future outcomes,
plays a vital role in diverse areas like climate modeling (Zhu & Shasha, 2002), energy (Martı́n et al., 2010),
economics (Granger & Newbold, 2014), traffic flow (Chen
et al., 2001), and user behavior (Benevenuto et al., 2009).
By providing reliable predictions, it empowers us to develop
effective strategies and policies across these domains.

However, real-world time series exhibit complex, nonstationary patterns with varying periods and shapes. These
patterns may lack inherent temporal correlation and arise
from non-deterministic processes, resulting in infrequent
repetitions and diverse distributions (Kim et al., 2021). This
raises concerns about the effectiveness of models in extrapolating from such infrequent patterns. Moreover, the advantages of indiscriminately memorizing all patterns, including
noisy and uncorrelated ones, are questionable in terms of
both generalizability and efficiency (Weigend et al., 1995).

Over the past decade, deep learning models such as
CNNs (Bai et al., 2018; Borovykh et al., 2017) and
RNNs (Hewamalage et al., 2021) have proven their
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of AI Convergence, GIST,
Gwangju, South Korea. This work is done while the author was
in KAIST. 2 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea 3 Data Science for Humanity Group, Max Planck Institute for
Security and Privacy, Bochum, Germany 4 Google Cloud AI, Sunnyvale, United States. Correspondence to: Jinsung Yoon <jinsungyoon@google.com>.

We show an advancement in time-series forecasting models by expanding the models’ capacity (implicitly via the
trained weights) to learn patterns. We directly provide information about historical patterns that are complex to learn,
as a way of bringing relevant information via the input
to reduce the burden on the forecasting model. Inspired

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

