Sum-of-Parts: Self-Attributing Neural Networks with
End-to-End Learning of Feature Groups

Weiqiu You 1 Helen Qu 2 Marco Gatti 2 Bhuvnesh Jain 2 Eric Wong 1

Abstract
Self-attributing neural networks (SANNs) present
a potential path towards interpretable models for
high-dimensional problems, but often face significant trade-offs in performance. In this work,
we formally prove a lower bound on errors of perfeature SANNs, whereas group-based SANNs can
achieve zero error and thus high performance. Motivated by these insights, we propose Sum-of-Parts
(SOP), a framework that transforms any differentiable model into a group-based SANN, where feature groups are learned end-to-end without group
supervision. SOP achieves state-of-the-art performance for SANNs on vision and language tasks,
and we validate that the groups are interpretable
on a range of quantitative and semantic metrics.
We further validate the utility of SOP explanations
in model debugging and cosmological scientific
discovery. 1

1

x

GroupGen Γ
(trained)
g1⊙x
Self
Attn

Γ

g2⊙x

h

GroupSelect θ
(trained)
Cross Attn
logits

y1

hidden
states
Model
Backbone
(frozen)

score

z1

c1

θ

h

Aggregated
Prediction
y= Σi ci ⋅ yi

y2
z2

c2

Figure 1. Sum-of-Parts (SOP) linearly aggregates outputs from
multiple feature groups. This maintains performance while ensuring interpretability. SOP first generates groups using a group
generator Γ, predicts with a pre-trained backbone h, and aggregates the group predictions with a group selector θ.

Self-explaining neural networks (SENNs) were proposed as
a way to create neural networks with guaranteed linear interpretations (Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola, 2018). Specifically,
SENNs express predictions as linear combinations of interpretable atoms scaled by learnable coefficients, a natural
generalization of the statistical interpretation of the classic
linear model. These interpretable atoms represent semantic
notions such as object segments in images or example image
prototypes (Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola, 2018).

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are powerful at complex
tasks, but also notoriously opaque. In high-stakes domains
such as science (Li et al., 2021; Zednik & Boelsen, 2022)
and medicine (Reyes et al., 2020; Tjoa & Guan, 2021),
experts need explanations to trust the models’ decisions. For
instance, physicists use interpretable coefficients to validate
an ML model’s rediscovery of Kepler’s first law (Li et al.,
2021), while physicians require explanations to trust MLdriven diagnostic decisions (Klauschen et al., 2024).

A common class of self-explaining neural networks, which
we refer to as Self-Attributing Neural Networks (SANNs),
use embedded feature subsets as interpretable atoms (Brendel & Bethge, 2019; Jain et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021).
SANNs have predictions faithfully decomposable as linear
combinations of feature subset contributions. On the other
hand, post-hoc feature attributions fail to pass the sanity
checks for faithfulness (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Adebayo
et al., 2018).

1
Department of Computer and Information Science,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
2
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Weiqiu You <weiqiuy@seas.upenn.edu>, Eric Wong <exwong@seas.upenn.edu>.

However, SANNs often exhibit performance trade-offs and
rely on specific components such as per-feature modules in
NAM (Agarwal et al., 2021), convolutional layers in BagNet (Brendel & Bethge, 2019), or attention mechanisms
in FRESH (Jain et al., 2020). This architecture require-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
BrachioLab/sop

1

