Right Now, Wrong Then:
Non-Stationary Direct Preference Optimization under Preference Drift

Seongho Son * 1 William Bankes * 1 Sayak Ray Chowdhury 2 Brooks Paige 1 Ilija Bogunovic 3

Abstract

has led to more precise control over the behavior they exhibit. This control is crucial when looking to safely deploy
models in the real world (Amodei et al., 2016; Hendrycks
& Mazeika, 2022). Human preference datasets enable the
training of proxy reward models (see, e.g., RewardBench
(Lambert et al., 2024)) that can evaluate complex human
behaviour. These reward models are used in conjunction
with RL to fine-tune the LLM. Recent works (Rafailov et al.,
2024; Azar et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024) seek to improve
the efficiency and stability of these approaches (Chaudhari
et al., 2024) by training the LLM straight from human preference data, avoiding the need to learn a proxy reward model.

Current Large Language Model (LLM) preference optimization algorithms do not account
for temporal preference drift, which can lead to
severe misalignment. To address this limitation,
we propose Non-Stationary Direct Preference Optimisation (NS-DPO) that models time-dependent
reward functions with a Dynamic Bradley-Terry
model. NS-DPO proposes a computationally
efficient solution by introducing only a single
discount parameter in the loss function, which is
used for exponential weighting that proportionally
focuses learning on more time-relevant datapoints.
We theoretically analyze the convergence of NSDPO in a general setting where the exact nature
of the preference drift is not known, providing
upper bounds on the estimation error and regret
caused by non-stationary preferences. Finally, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of NS-DPO for finetuning LLMs under drifting preferences. Using
scenarios where various levels of preference drift
is introduced, with popular LLM reward models
and datasets, we show that NS-DPO fine-tuned
LLMs remain robust under non-stationarity,
significantly outperforming baseline algorithms
that ignore temporal preference changes, without
sacrificing performance in stationary cases.

A key assumption made in these preference optimization
algorithms is that human preferences are stationary, i.e.,
they do not change over time. However, a shift in preferences can occur due to new information becoming available
(Zafari et al., 2019; Johnson & Mayorga, 2020), social
influences, and cultural trends. As more preference datasets
are gathered over long periods of time, the chance of the
data containing varying preferences increases. In such cases,
algorithms that do not account for these changes, view
them as noise and treat outdated data as equally important
as fresh data, often leading to deteriorated performance.
An increasing body of evidence (Zhou et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2024a) points to data quality as being a key factor
in fine-tuning performance, thus preference drift can greatly
affect the alignment of models (Carroll et al., 2024). The
development of preference optimization algorithms and
theory to handle preference drifts are therefore crucial.

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose Non-Stationary Direct Preference
Optimization (NS-DPO), a novel approach that uses a
probabilistic Dynamic Bradley-Terry model (Cattelan et al.,
2013; Bong et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2024) to account for
non-stationary drift in human preferences with just a single
additional parameter. As we only assume knowledge of
the total preference drift and not which specific preferences
change over time, NS-DPO re-weights each training
datapoint, down-weighting older data with potentially
stale preferences and up-weighting more recent ones.
We empirically show the effectiveness and robustness of
NS-DPO compared to stationary approaches. Our approach
is summarized in Figure 1.

The application of Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF) to fine-tune Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020;
Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022b)
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom 2 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
3
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence
to: Ilija Bogunovic <i.bogunovic@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

