From Pixels to Perception:
Interpretable Predictions via Instance-wise Grouped Feature Selection
Moritz Vandenhirtz 1 Julia E. Vogt 1

Abstract

The LASSO by Tibshirani (1996) pioneered the learned selection of features. While LASSO’s global selection is fixed
across the dataset, Chen et al. (2018) argue that the subset of
relevant features can differ for each data point and formally
introduce instance-wise feature selection. Since then, there
has been a growing interest in using instance-wise feature
selection for the image modality (Jethani et al., 2021; Bhalla
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025). As methods adapt from
tabular to image data, they need to define the feature space
over which to carry out the selection. An intuitive choice is
to directly sparsify on pixel-level, generally aiming to minimize the number of active pixels while retaining as much
predictive performance as possible. In this work, we question this choice and argue that for human-understandable
predictions, the sparsification of features must occur in the
space of perceptually meaningful regions.

Understanding the decision-making process of
machine learning models provides valuable insights into the task, the data, and the reasons behind a model’s failures. In this work, we propose
a method that performs inherently interpretable
predictions through the instance-wise sparsification of input images. To align the sparsification
with human perception, we learn the masking in
the space of semantically meaningful pixel regions rather than on pixel-level. Additionally, we
introduce an explicit way to dynamically determine the required level of sparsity for each instance. We show empirically on semi-synthetic
and natural image datasets that our inherently interpretable classifier produces more meaningful,
human-understandable predictions than state-ofthe-art benchmarks.

Humans perceive an object not as individual pixels, but as
a function of its parts: structural units that are perceptually meaningful atomic regions (Palmer, 1977; Biederman,
1987). As these parts differ for each instance, the selection should not rely on fixed pixels or patches, but rather on
instance-wise regions of semantic meaning. We show in Figure 1 that masking directly in pixel space allows for simple,
undesired solutions of high sparsity but low informativeness.
That is, an uninformative, evenly spaced mask can cover
most of the pixels while leaving the predictive performance
unaffected; a behavior that does not provide any insights
into the model behavior. Thus, we argue that, similar to
how Group Lasso (Yuan & Lin, 2006) jointly sparsifies all
components that make up a feature, one should jointly mask
all pixels that make up a perceptually meaningful region.
Similarly, we advocate for binary instead of continuousvalued masks such as those in COMET (Zhang et al., 2025),
as dimming pixels may obscure information to the human
eye, but it does not meaningfully affect classifiers.

1. Introduction
Knowledge is power (Bacon, 1597). Knowing how machine learning models make their predictions empowers
users to understand the underlying patterns in the data, identify potential biases, reason about their safety, and build
trust in the models’ decisions. In high-stakes domains,
where model decisions can have significant consequences,
the field of interpretability is crucial to provide this understanding (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). In this work, we focus
on providing inherent interpretability – a subfield where the
explanations are necessarily faithful to what the model computes (Rudin, 2019) – through the lens of sparsity in the
input features (Lipton, 2016; Marcinkevičs & Vogt, 2023).
This constraint makes it easier to understand which specific
inputs contribute to an output (Miller, 1956), leading to
more human-understandable predictions.

In this work, we propose P2P, a novel method that learns
a mask in the space of semantically meaningful regions2 .
This unit of interpretation is already prominent in the field
of explainability (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg, 2017),
but to the best of our knowledge, we are the first work to
consider this input-dependent definition of a feature within

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Moritz Vandenhirtz
<moritz.vandenhirtz@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2

1

The code is here: www.github.com/mvandenhi/P2P

