Learning to Route LLMs with Confidence Tokens

Yu-Neng Chuang * 1 Prathusha K. Sarma 2 Parikshit Gopalan 2
John Boccio 2 Sara Bolouki 2 Xia Hu 1 Helen Zhou 2

Abstract

2023; Xiao et al., 2023), and provide customer support (Kolasani, 2023). As LLMs are given more agency in settings
of increasing consequence, it becomes crucial to know when
an output is reliable. Given knowledge of the trustworthiness of an output, systems can proactively prevent faulty
behavior by seeking a second opinion (e.g. by routing to a
more costly LLM), or choosing to abstain from answering
(e.g. instead defaulting to a safe behavior).

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on several tasks
and are increasingly deployed in real-world applications. However, especially in high-stakes
settings, it becomes vital to know when the output of an LLM may be unreliable. Depending on
whether an answer is trustworthy, a system can
then choose to route the question to another expert,
or otherwise fall back on a safe default behavior.
In this work, we study the extent to which LLMs
can reliably indicate confidence in their answers,
and how this notion of confidence can translate
into downstream accuracy gains. We propose SelfReflection with Error-based Feedback (Self-REF),
a lightweight training strategy to teach LLMs to
express confidence in whether their answers are
correct in a reliable manner. Self-REF introduces
confidence tokens into the LLM, from which a
confidence score can be extracted. Compared
to conventional approaches such as verbalizing
confidence and examining token probabilities, we
demonstrate empirically that confidence tokens
show significant improvements in downstream
routing and rejection learning tasks.

However, state-of-the-art LLMs face challenges with providing an accurate estimate of confidence in whether a
prediction is correct. Several works identify that token
probabilities (derived from a softmax over logits) are not
well-aligned, or calibrated, with the actual probabilities of
correctness (Huang et al., 2023; Detommaso et al., 2024;
Wightman et al., 2023). Others have found that modifying
the prompt by asking the LLM to verbalize its confidence
yields slightly better results (Tian et al., 2023; Turpin et al.,
2024; Mahaut et al., 2024); however, these results may be
subject to the dataset and prompt engineering, often leading
to unstable or unreliable results. Since LLMs are typically
trained using a cross-entropy loss, they can overfit on accuracy rather than calibration, often leading to overconfidence
and misalignment with real-world distributions. Thus, a natural question arises: how can we train LLMs to accurately
estimate their own confidence levels, while preserving their
performance on tasks of interest?
To answer this question, we introduce Self-Reflection with
Error-based Feedback (Self-REF), a lightweight framework
for fine-tuning LLMs to accurately assess confidence in their
predictions while preserving their performance on relevant
downstream tasks. Self-REF integrates naturally with any
LLM backbone, allowing the model to condition its assessment of confidence on its generated outputs. It consists of
three steps: (i) Confidence token annotation: the training
dataset is generated by labeling each instance with confidence tokens based on the correctness of the base LLM.
When the base LLM provides correct responses to the input text, we augment the instances with confident (<CN>)
tokens. Conversely, if it responds incorrectly, we augment
the instances with unconfident (<UN>) tokens. (ii) Self-REF
fine-tuning: The base LLM is fine-tuned on the augmented
training data, so that one would expect a confidence token to
be generated following its predicted output. (iii) Confidence

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen an explosive growth in the deployment of large language models, in forms ranging from helpful conversational agents (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024), to frameworks for automating software workflows (Harrison, 2022; Wu et al., 2023),
to tools tailored to domain-specific tasks. LLMs have been
used to summarize doctor-patient interactions (Krishna et al.,
2021; Jeong et al., 2024), teach students (Schmucker et al.,
*
Work done during the internship at Apple. 1 Rice University,
Houston, TX, USA 2 Apple, Inc., Cupertino, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yu-Neng Chuang <ynchuang@rice.edu>, Helen Zhou
<helen_l_zhou@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

