Bifurcate then Alienate: Incomplete Multi-view Clustering via Coupled
Distribution Learning with Linear Overhead

Shengju Yu 1 Yiu-ming Cheung 1 Siwei Wang 2 Xinwang Liu 3 En Zhu 3

Abstract

need of any labels known in advance, is generally perceived
as an encouraging method to tackle these data, and has been
widely deployed in fraud detection, personalized medicine,
social network analysis, etc, (Zhang et al., 2021; Yu et al.,
2023; Zhang et al.; Liu et al., 2024). The prerequisite for
MVC algorithms’ proper execution is that all views are required to be complete (Yu et al., 2024d; Ma et al., 2024a; Gu
et al., 2024a; Wan et al., 2024). Due to equipment defects or
collector faults, however, in real-life it inevitably causes certain views having missing samples, inducing the incomplete
multi-view clustering (IMC) issue (Yu et al.; Wang et al.,
2021a; Liu et al., 2023a; Yu et al., 2024a; Gu & Feng).

Despite remarkable advances, existing incomplete
multi-view clustering (IMC) methods typically
leverage either perspective-shared or perspectivespecific determinants to encode cluster representations. To address this limitation, we introduce
a BACDL algorithm designed to explicitly capture both concurrently, thereby exploiting heterogeneous data more effectively. It chooses to bifurcate feature clusters and further alienate them
to enlarge the discrimination. With distribution
learning, it successfully couples view guidance
into feature clusters to alleviate dimension inconsistency. Then, building on the principle that samples in one common cluster own similar marginal
distribution and conditional distribution, it unifies the association between feature clusters and
sample clusters to bridge all views. Thereafter,
all incomplete sample clusters are reordered and
mapped to a common one to formulate clustering embedding. Last, the overall linear overhead
endows it with a resource-efficient characteristic.

To cope with IMC tasks, recently, a great deal of promising
methods have been carefully presented (Xu et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2021b; Yu et al., 2024c; Tang & Liu, 2022). For
instance, Wang et al. (2022) adopt consensus bipartite affinity to characterize arbitrary views and jointly construct anchors using an unified learning mechanism. Li et al. (2023b)
decrease the disturbance of superfluous properties through
projecting operations and employ low-rank tensor regularizers to leverage high-order representation inside samples. Gu
et al. (2024b) utilize dictionary learning strategy to recover
missing parts and integrate Gaussian error rank into Laplacian manifold optimization to explore local correlations.
Motivated by prototype advances, Li et al. (2024) build up
the conjunction between prototypes and observed instances
to avoid the generation of full-sized similarity and directly
formulate the overall graph structure without additional
hyper-parameter searching. These methods enhance the
clustering quality from various aspects, nevertheless, they
investigate either perspective-shared or perspective-specific
determinants to encode cluster representation. This single
paradigm could not sufficiently exploit the interrelations
among data features, restricting the model’s performance.

1. Introduction
In the era of information, heterogeneous data that are commonly gathered from various channels and modalities of
the same one object are growing more prevalent (Ma et al.,
2024b; Wang et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025).
Accordingly, how to effectively excavate out valuable potential patterns from this type of data is grasping increasing
attention (Li et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2024b; Liang et al., 2024).
Multi-view clustering (MVC) technology, in virtue of the
ability to seamlessly integrate multi-source information and
powerfully partition samples into distinct sets without the

To get rid of this limitation, in the manuscript we propose
an IMC algorithm named BACDL, and its overall pipeline
is described in Fig. 1. Concretely, inspired by non-negative
matrix factorization, we choose to bifurcate feature clusters and each bifurcation is explicitly interconnected to a
type of determinants. Through mutual exclusion learning,
we alienate them to strengthen their discrimination. Subsequently, in virtue of distribution learning, we couple view

1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University. 2 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab. 3 National University
of Defense Technology. yu-shengju@foxmail.com. Correspondence to: Yiu-ming Cheung <ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

