A Bayesian Model Selection Criterion for Selecting Pretraining Checkpoints

Michael Munn * 1 Susan Wei * 2

Abstract

progress across natural language processing and computer
vision with applications including text classification (Qiu
et al., 2020), text generation (Li et al., 2024), image classification (Liu et al., 2023b), object detection (Sanchez et al.,
2020), medical imaging (Mormont et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2019; Ke et al., 2021), autonomous driving (Kim & Park,
2017) and robotics (Jaquier et al., 2023).

Recent advances in artificial intelligence have
been fueled by the development of foundation
models such as BERT, GPT, T5, and Vision
Transformers. These models are first pretrained
on vast and diverse datasets and then adapted
to specific downstream tasks, often with significantly less data. However, the mechanisms behind
the success of this ubiquitous pretrain-then-adapt
paradigm remain underexplored, particularly the
characteristics of pretraining checkpoints that enhance downstream adaptation. We introduce a
Bayesian model selection criterion, called the
downstream free energy, which quantifies a checkpoint’s adaptability by measuring the concentration of nearby favorable parameters for the downstream task. We demonstrate that this Bayesian
model selection criterion can be effectively implemented without access to the downstream data or
prior knowledge of the downstream task. Furthermore, we provide empirical evidence that the criterion reliably correlates with improved fine-tuning
performance, offering a principled approach to
predicting model adaptability.

As a result, there is a growing body of research that aims to
better understand the theoretical reasons behind the success
of this pre-train-then-adapt paradigm (Galanti et al., 2022;
Munn et al., 2024). One of the key open questions is to
understand how to select pretraining checkpoints which are
optimal for adaptation. A number of practical heuristics
have emerged through experimental intuition and empirical
analysis (Liu et al., 2023a), but a principled theoretical
framework for effective checkpoint selection is still lacking.
To address this, we repurpose well-established concepts
from Bayesian statistics and propose downstream free energy as a pretraining model selection criterion. Downstream
free energy measures the negative log of the concentration of
well-performing network weights near a pretraining checkpoint when evaluated on downstream data. In statistical
lingo, this is nothing more than the (negative log) marginal
likelihood where the integral is restricted to a local neighborhood around the pretraining checkpoint. Intuitively, lower
downstream free energy indicates a higher concentration of
parameters in parameter space for which the model is more
adaptable and capable of generalizing well on downstream
tasks. In short, checkpoints with lower downstream free
energy are better suited for adaptation and thus should be
preferred during pretraining.

1. Introduction
The advent of foundation models has significantly reshaped
the landscape of modern machine learning (Bommasani
et al., 2021). Trained on expansive, diverse datasets using supervised or self-supervised learning methods, these models
learn generalized representations that can then be successfully adapted (or finetuned) to a wide array of downstream
tasks, often where there is significantly less data or limited
computational resources (Bengio, 2012; Brown et al., 2020).
This pretrain-then-adapt paradigm has emerged as a dominant and highly successful technique driving significant

Although the use of downstream free energy as a pretraining
model selection criterion has strong theoretical grounding in
Bayesian statistics, it comes with an unfortunate caveat: to
compute it requires access to the downstream dataset which
may not be available to the practitioner during pretraining. However, under certain distributional shift conditions
between the pretraining and downstream data, it is possible to overcome this limitation. Namely, we introduce the
pretraining free energy, which is computed solely on the
pretraining data, and show that minimizing it serves as a
reliable proxy for minimizing the downstream free energy
(see Proposition 5.1). Together, these insights provide a

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, New York, USA
Dept. of Econometrics and Business Statistics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Michael Munn
<munn@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

