Efficiently Access Diffusion Fisher: Within the Outer Product Span Space

Fangyikang Wang 1 * ‡ Hubery Yin 2 * Shaobin Zhuang 3 ‡ Huminhao Zhu 1 Yinan Li 1 Lei Qian 1
Chao Zhang 1 Hanbin Zhao 1 Hui Qian 1 Chen Li 2

Abstract

bution, especially in generating high-quality images (Nichol
et al., 2022; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021a; Saharia et al., 2022;
Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022).
The training process of DMs can be seen as employing
a neural network to match the first-order diffusion score
∇x log qt (x) at varying noise levels.

Recent Diffusion models (DMs) advancements
have explored incorporating the second-order diffusion Fisher information (DF), defined as the
negative Hessian of log density, into various downstream tasks and theoretical analysis. However,
current practices typically approximate the diffusion Fisher by applying auto-differentiation to the
learned score network. This black-box method,
though straightforward, lacks any accuracy guarantee and is time-consuming. In this paper, we
show that the diffusion Fisher actually resides
within a space spanned by the outer products of
score and initial data. Based on the outer-product
structure, we develop two efficient approximation
algorithms to access the trace and matrix-vector
multiplication of DF, respectively. These algorithms bypass the auto-differentiation operations
with time-efficient vector-product calculations.
Furthermore, we establish the approximation error
bounds for the proposed algorithms. Experiments
in likelihood evaluation and adjoint optimization
demonstrate the superior accuracy and reduced
computational cost of our proposed algorithms.
Additionally, based on the novel outer-product
formulation of DF, we design the first numerical
verification experiment for the optimal transport
property of the general PF-ODE deduced map.

There has been a growing trend to recognize the importance of the diffusion Fisher (DF) in DMs, defined as the
negative Hessian of the diffused distributions’ log density, −∇2x log qt (x). The DF provides valuable secondorder information on DMs and plays a crucial role in
downstream tasks, e.g., likelihood evaluation (Lu et al.,
2022a; Zheng et al., 2023), adjoint optimization (Pan et al.,
2023a;b; Blasingame & Liu, 2024), and the optimal transport analysis of DMs (Zhang et al., 2024a). It is straightforward to access DFs by applying auto-differentiation
to the learned first-order diffusion score. Nevertheless,
the repeated auto-differentiation operations would be timeconsuming for large-scale tasks, even when incorporating
the Vector-Jacobian-product (VJP) and Hutchinson’s estimation technique (Song & Lai, 2024). Recently, certain research efforts investigated the time-evolving property of DM
and demonstrated that the DF can be explicitly expressed in
terms of the score and its covariance matrix (Benton et al.,
2024; Lu et al., 2022a). However, these results predominantly concentrate on the theoretical aspects and fail to
enable efficient access to the DF.

1
Zhejiang University. 2 WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc. 3 Shanghai
Jiao Tong University. ∗ Equal contribution. ‡ Work done as interns
at WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc. Correspondence to: Chao Zhang
<zczju@zju.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we derive a novel form for the diffusion Fisher,
which is composed of weighted outer-product sums. This
innovative formulation uncovers that the diffusion Fisher invariably lies within the span of a set of outer-product bases.
Notably, these bases solely depend on the initial data and the
noise schedule. Leveraging this outer-product structure, we
devise two efficient approximation algorithms to access the
trace and matrix-vector multiplication of DF, respectively.
Moreover, we design the first numerical verification experiment to investigate the optimal transport property of the
diffusion-ODE deduced map under diverse types of initial
data and noise schedules. The main contributions of our
paper are listed as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We derive an analytical formulation of the diffusion
Fisher, which is the weighted summation of the outer

1. Introduction
The emerging diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al.,
2020), generating samples of data distribution from initial
noise by learning a reverse diffusion process, have been
proven to be an effective technique for modeling data distri-

1

