Auditing f -Differential Privacy in One Run

Saeed Mahloujifar 1 Luca Melis 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Empirical auditing has emerged as a means of catching some
of the flaws in the implementation of privacy-preserving
algorithms. Existing auditing mechanisms, however, are
either computationally inefficient – requiring multiple runs
of the machine learning algorithms —- or suboptimal in
calculating an empirical privacy. In this work, we present a
tight and efficient auditing procedure and analysis that can
effectively assess the privacy of mechanisms. Our approach
is efficient; similar to the recent work of Steinke, Nasr,
and Jagielski (2023), our auditing procedure leverages the
randomness of examples in the input dataset and requires
only a single (training) run of the target mechanism. And it
is more accurate; we provide a novel analysis that enables
us to achieve tight empirical privacy estimates by using the
hypothesized f -DP curve of the mechanism, which provides
a more accurate measure of privacy than the traditional ϵ, δ
differential privacy parameters. We use our auditing procure
and analysis to obtain empirical privacy, demonstrating that
our auditing procedure delivers tighter privacy estimates.

tation, or potentially providing stronger privacy guarantees
that are not evident through a loose analysis.
Empirical privacy auditing (Ding et al., 2018; Nasr et al.,
2023; Jagielski et al., 2020) has emerged as a critical tool to
bridge this gap. By experimentally assessing the privacy of
mechanisms, empirical auditing allows for the verification
of privacy parameters. Specifically, an audit procedure is
a randomized algorithm that takes an implementation of a
mechanism M , runs it in a black-box manner, and attempts
to test a privacy hypothesis (such as, a differential privacy
parameter). The procedure outputs 0 if there is sufficient evidence that the mechanism does not satisfy the hypothesized
guarantees and 1 otherwise. The audit mechanism must
possess two essential properties: 1) it must have a provably
small false-negative rate, ensuring that it would not erroneously reject a truly differentially private mechanism, with
high probability; 2) it needs to empirically exhibit a ”reasonable” false positive rate, meaning that when applied to a
non-differentially private mechanism, it would frequently
reject the privacy hypothesis. The theoretical proof of the
false positive rate is essentially equivalent to privacy accounting (Abadi et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2019; Mironov,
2017), which is generally thought to be impossible in a
black-box manner (Zhu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Differentially private machine learning (Chaudhuri et al.,
2011; Abadi et al., 2016) has emerged as a principled solution to learning models from private data while still preserving privacy. Differential privacy (Dwork, 2006) is a
cryptographically motivated definition, which requires an
algorithm to possess certain properties: specifically, a randomized mechanism is differentially private if it guarantees
that the participation of any single person in the dataset does
not impact the probability of any outcome by much.

The prior literature on empirical audits of privacy consists of
two lines of work, each with its own set of limitations. The
first line of work (Ding et al., 2018; Jagielski et al., 2020;
Tramer et al., 2022; Nasr et al., 2023) runs a differentially
private algorithm multiple times to determine if the privacy
guarantees are violated. This is highly computationally inefficient for most private machine learning use-cases, where
running the algorithm involves training a large model.

Enforcing this guarantee requires the algorithm to be carefully designed and analyzed. The process of designing and
analyzing such algorithms is prone to errors and imperfections as has been noted in the literature (Tramer et al., 2022).
A result of this is that differentially private mechanisms may
not perform as intended, either offering less privacy than
expected due to flaws in mathematical analysis or implemen1
Meta.
Correspondence to:
<saeedm@meta.com>.

Recent work (Steinke et al., 2023) remove this limitation
by proposing an elegant auditing method that runs a differentially private training algorithm a single time. In particular, they rely on the randomness of training data to obtain
bounds on the false negative rates of the audit procedure. A
key limitation of the approach in (Steinke et al., 2023) is that
their audit procedure is sub-optimal in the sense that there is
a relatively large gap between the true privacy parameters of
mainstream privacy-preserving algorithms (e.g., Gaussian
mechanism) and those reported by their auditing algorithm.

Saeed Mahloujifar

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we propose a novel auditing procedure that is
1

