Spurious Correlations in High Dimensional Regression:
The Roles of Regularization, Simplicity Bias and Over-Parameterization

Simone Bombari 1 Marco Mondelli 1

Abstract

has investigated the extent to which deep learning models
manifest this behavior (Geirhos et al., 2019; Xiao et al.,
2021) and has proposed different mitigation approaches
(Sagawa et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021), given its implications to robustness, bias, and fairness (Zliobaite, 2015; Zhou
et al., 2021). The phenomenon, also referred to as shortcut
learning, is often attributed to the relative “simplicity” of
spurious features (Geirhos et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2020;
Hermann & Lampinen, 2020) and to the implicit bias of
over-parameterized models toward learning simpler patterns
(Belkin et al., 2019; Rahaman et al., 2019; Kalimeris et al.,
2019). Consequently, the core features that are informative
about the task (e.g., the boat in the foreground) may be
neglected, as spurious features (e.g., the blue background)
provide an easier shortcut to minimize the loss function.

Learning models have been shown to rely on
spurious correlations between non-predictive features and the associated labels in the training data,
with negative implications on robustness, bias
and fairness. In this work, we provide a statistical characterization of this phenomenon for highdimensional regression, when the data contains a
predictive core feature x and a spurious feature
y. Specifically, we quantify the amount of spurious correlations C learned via linear regression,
in terms of the data covariance and the strength λ
of the ridge regularization. As a consequence, we
first capture the simplicity of y through the spectrum of its covariance, and its correlation with
x through the Schur complement of the full data
covariance. Next, we prove a trade-off between C
and the in-distribution test loss L, by showing that
the value of λ that minimizes L lies in an interval where C is increasing. Finally, we investigate
the effects of over-parameterization via the random features model, by showing its equivalence
to regularized linear regression. Our theoretical
results are supported by numerical experiments on
Gaussian, Color-MNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets.

Prior work has attempted to formalize the simplicity bias relying on boolean functions (Qiu et al., 2024), model-specific
biases (Morwani et al., 2023), one-dimensional features
(Shah et al., 2020) and their pairwise interactions (Pezeshki
et al., 2021). However, when considering high-dimensional
natural data (e.g., the boat and its background in Figure
1), it remains unclear, based on these notions, what exactly makes the features easy or difficult to learn, and to
what extent a trained model relies on spurious correlations.
Furthermore, while Sagawa et al. (2020b) show that overparameterization can exacerbate spurious correlations when
re-weighting the objective on minority groups (e.g., boats
with a green background), its effect on models trained via
empirical risk minimization (ERM) is less understood. This
is a critical point when additional group membership annotations are too expensive to obtain, and ERM is a key part
of training (Liu et al., 2021; Ahmed et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems have been shown to learn from
patterns that are statistically correlated with the intended
task, despite not being causally predictive (Geirhos et al.,
2020; Xiao et al., 2021). As a concrete example, a blue
background in a picture might be positively correlated with
the presence of a boat in the foreground, and while not
being a predictive feature per se, a trained deep learning
model could use this information to bias its prediction. In
the literature, this statistical (but non causal) connection is
referred to as a spurious correlation between a feature and
the learning task. A recent and extensive line of research

Our work tackles these issues: we provide a rigorous characterization of the statistical mechanisms behind learning
spurious correlations in high-dimensional data, focusing on
the solution obtained via ERM. Formally, we model the
input sample z as composed by two distinct features, i.e.,
z = [x, y], where x ∈ Rd is the core feature and y ∈ Rd
the spurious one. The first panel of Figure 1 provides an
illustration with a boat in the foreground (x) and its blue
background (y). Then, we quantify spurious correlations
via the covariance C (see (3)) between the label g (“boat”)
and the model output given z̃ = [x̃, y] as input. Here, x̃ (a

1
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria. Correspondence
to: Simone Bombari <simone.bombari@ista.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

