De-coupled NeuroGF for Shortest Path Distance Approximations on Large
Terrain Graphs

Samantha Chen 1 Pankaj K. Agarwal 2 Yusu Wang 3

Abstract

out availability of simple, scalable algorithms for various
terrain-analysis tasks. This has led to extensive work on
developing efficient algorithms for many terrain-analysis
tasks such as visibility computation, hydrology analysis,
mobility analysis, and answering proximity queries. In this
paper, we focus on answering shortest-path distance (SPD)
queries (also referred to as geodesic distance queries) on
terrains. Throughout this paper we assume that a terrain is
represented as a xy-monotone triangulated surface Σ in R3 .
Many applications call for answering many SPD queries on
the same terrain, so it is desirable to pre-process the input
terrain into a data structure so that SPD queries can be answered quickly. The key metrics associated with such an
approach are the trade-off between the size and the query
time of the data structure as well as the preprocessing time.

The ability to acquire high-resolution, large-scale
geospatial data at an unprecedented using LiDAR
and other related technologies has intensified the
need for scalable algorithms for terrain analysis,
including shortest-path-distance (SPD) queries
on large-scale terrain digital elevation models
(DEMs). In this paper, we present a neural data
structure for efficiently answering SPD queries
approximately on a large terrain DEM, which is
based on the recently proposed neural geodesic
field (NeuroGF) framework (Zhang et al., 2023)—
the state-of-the-art neural data structure for estimating geodesic distance. In particular, we propose a decoupled-NeuroGF data structure combined with an efficient two-stage mixed-training
strategy, which significantly reduces computational bottlenecks and enables efficient training
on terrain DEMs at a scale not feasible before. We
demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by performing detailed experiments on both synthetic
and real data sets. For instance, we can train a
small model with around 70000 parameters on a
terrain DEM with 16 million nodes in a matter
of hours that can answer SPD queries with 1%
relative error in at most 10ms per query.

Despite a rich body of literature on this topic, the SPD
query problem on terrains is far from being solved both
from theoretical and practical perspectives. For instance,
a state-of-the-art algorithmic approach in a recent paper
by (Wei et al., 2022) takes more than 200 hours to build
a data structure of size around 1000MB for a terrain with
180K nodes to support approximate SPD queries, between
pairs of vertices on the terrain, with relative error at most
0.1 in 10ms per query. Furthermore, it is hard to scale the
current approaches to terrain DEMs with millions of nodes.
In view of the remarkable success of deep learning methods
across various domains such as vision, graphics, robotics
and GIS, it is natural to ask whether one can develop an
effective neural data structure to answer SPD-queries efficiently on large-scale terrain DEMs. Precisely, given a terrain DEM Σ, we ask whether we can train a neural network
that can accurately and efficiently estimate the geodesic
distance between any two points on Σ. In this paper, we
explore the design space of neural data structures for answering SPD-queries and propose a method that is scalable
to large terrain DEMs.

1. Introduction
With rapid advances in LiDAR and related technologies,
high-resolution, large-scale digital elevation models of terrains are being generated and made publicly available at
an unprecedented rate. The tremendous opportunities provided by these data sets will, however, not be realized with*

Equal contribution 1 University of California - San Diego,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 2 Duke University, Department of Computer Science 3 University of California San Diego, Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute. Correspondence to:
Samantha Chen <sac003@ucsd.edu>.

Related work. Motivated by applications in robotics and
GIS, algorithms for computing shortest paths on polyhedral
surfaces in R3 have been studied extensively over the last
four decades. The best-known algorithm for computing
a shortest path between two given points on a terrain Σ
takes O(n2 ) time (Xin & Wang, 2009; Chen & Han, 1990;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

