Since Faithfulness Fails: The Performance Limits of Neural Causal Discovery

Mateusz Olko * 1 2 Mateusz Gajewski * 1 3 Joanna Wojciechowska 2
Mikołaj Morzy 3 Piotr Sankowski 2 4 5 Piotr Miłoś 2 1 6 7

Abstract

In response to this challenge, we introduce a unified benchmarking protocol for neural causal discovery methods.
Specifically, we use identical datasets, tune hyperparameters
consistently, and use a standardized functional approximation across all methods. Through this systematic evaluation,
we uncover a concerningly low level of performance. This
raises a fundamental question: Why do these methods struggle to recover the ground-though causal structure even when
the data is generated synthetically with all theoretical assumptions fulfilled and the dataset is large?

Neural causal discovery methods have recently
improved in terms of scalability and computational efficiency. However, our systematic
evaluation highlights significant room for
improvement in their accuracy when uncovering
causal structures. We identify a fundamental limitation: unavoidable likelihood score estimation
errors disallow distinguishing the true structure,
even for small graphs and relatively large sample
sizes. Furthermore, we identify the faithfulness
property as a critical bottleneck: (i) it is likely
to be violated across any reasonable dataset size
range, and (ii) its violation directly undermines
the performance of neural penalized-likelihood
discovery methods. These findings lead us to conclude that progress within the current paradigm
is fundamentally constrained, necessitating a
paradigm shift in this domain.

We identify a fundamental limitation: unavoidable likelihood estimation errors disallow distinguishing the true structure. This happens primarily due to finite size of the datasets.
However, we observe minimal improvements when scaling
either the data or the network size. At a technical level, we
pinpoint the faithfulness property as a critical bottleneck.
We formalize faithfulness violations in finite datasets using
the strong-faithfulness measure. Then, we show that any
strength of the faithfulness is easily violated when graph
size or density are increased. Even for moderate size graphs
it is likely to be violated across any reasonable dataset size
range. We believe these limitations highlight the need for
a paradigm shift rather than incremental improvements in
architecture or optimization techniques.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery is essential for scientific research, driving
a growing demand for machine learning methods to support
this process. Despite the development of several neural
causal discovery methods in recent years (Brouillard et al.,
2020; Lorch et al., 2021; Annadani et al., 2023; Nazaret
et al., 2024), their performance remains insufficient for realworld applications, particularly in fields such as medicine
and biology (de Castro et al., 2019; Peters et al., 2016).
Furthermore, these methods are usually evaluated using
datasets, which vary between studies, obscuring the overall
picture and making the assessment of advances difficult.

In more details, our contributions are as follows:
1. In a carefully controlled experiment, we demonstrate
that the likelihood loss, as used by causal discovery
approaches, faces estimation errors which disallow the
recovery of ground-truth causal graphs, even for small
graphs and relatively large sample sizes.
2. We propose practical method of approximation of
λ-strong faithfulness property for nonlinear datasets.
We experimentally demonstrate how proportion of λunfaithfull distributions scales with the size and density
of graphs from Erdos-Renyi class.

*
Equal contribution 1 IDEAS NCBR, Warsaw, Poland
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland 3 Poznan University
of Technology, Poznan, Poland 4 MIM Solutions, Warsaw,
Poland 5 Research Institute IDEAS, Warsaw, Poland 6 Institute
of Mathematics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
7
deepsense.ai, Warsaw, Poland. Correspondence to: Mateusz Olko <mateusz.olko@gmail.com>, Mateusz Gajewski
<mg96272@gmail.com>.
2

3. We provide results of unified benchmark for neural
causal discovery methods and show that their performance correlates with λ-strong faithfulness property
of the datasets.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

