Sharp Generalization for Nonparametric Regression by Over-Parameterized
Neural Networks: A Distribution-Free Analysis in Spherical Covariate

Yingzhen Yang 1

Abstract

results are built upon two significant technical
results which are of independent interest. First,
uniform convergence to the NTK is established
during the training process by GD, so that we can
have a nice decomposition of the neural network
function at any step of the GD into a function in
the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space associated
with the NTK and an error function with a small
L∞ -norm. Second, local Rademacher complexity is employed to tightly bound the Rademacher
complexity of the function class comprising all
the possible neural network functions obtained
by GD. Our result formally fills the gap between
training a classical kernel regression model and
training an over-parameterized but finite-width
neural network by GD for nonparametric regression without distributional assumptions about the
spherical covariate.

Sharp generalization bound for neural networks
trained by gradient descent (GD) is of central
interest in statistical learning theory and deep
learning. In this paper, we consider nonparametric regression by an over-parameterized twolayer NN trained by GD. We show that, if the
neural network is trained by GD with early
stopping, then the trained network renders a
sharp rate of the nonparametric regression risk
of O(ε2n ), which is the same rate as that for the
classical kernel regression trained by GD with
early stopping, where εn is the critical population rate of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
associated with the network and n is the size
of the training data. It is remarked that our result does not require distributional assumptions
on the covariate as long as the covariate lies on
the unit sphere, in a strong contrast with many
existing results which rely on specific distributions such as the spherical uniform data distribution or distributions satisfying certain restrictive
conditions. As a special case of our general result, when the eigenvalues of the associated NTK
d
decay at a rate of λj ≍ j − d−1 for j ≥ 1 which
happens under certain distributional assumption
such as the training features follow the spherical uniform distribution, we immediately obtain
d
the minimax optimal rate of O(n− 2d−1 ), which
is the major results of several existing works in
this direction. The neural network width in our
general result is lower bounded by a function of
only d and εn , and such width does not depend on
the minimum eigenvalue of the empirical NTK
matrix whose lower bound usually requires additional assumptions on the training data. Our

1. Introduction
With the stunning success of deep learning in various areas
of machine learning (LeCun et al., 2015), generalization
analysis for neural networks is of central interest for statistical learning learning and deep learning. Considerable
efforts have been made to analyze the optimization of deep
neural networks showing that gradient descent (GD) and
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) provably achieve vanishing training loss (Du et al., 2019b; Allen-Zhu et al.,
2019b; Du et al., 2019a; Arora et al., 2019; Zou & Gu,
2019; Su & Yang, 2019). There are also extensive efforts
devoted to generalization analysis of deep neural networks
(DNNs) with algorithmic guarantees, that is, the generalization bounds for neural networks trained by gradient descent or its variants. It has been shown that with sufficient
over-parameterization, that is, with enough number of neurons in hidden layers, the training dynamics of deep neural
networks (DNNs) can be approximated by that of a kernel
method with the kernel induced by the neural network architecture, termed the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), while
other studies such as (Yang & Hu, 2021) show that infinitewidth neural networks can still learn features. The key idea
of NTK based generalization analysis is that, for highly

1

School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA. Correspondence to:
Yingzhen Yang <yingzhen.yang@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

