Joint Localization and Activation Editing for Low-Resource Fine-Tuning

Wen Lai 1 2 Alexander Fraser 1 2 Ivan Titov 3 4

Abstract

only a few hundred examples. Inspired by advances in interpretability research (Vig et al., 2020; Zhang & Nanda, 2023),
activation editing techniques (Wu et al., 2024a; Yin et al.,
2024) have emerged as an alternative. These methods modify model activations to adapt LLMs to new tasks, leveraging
the intuition that LLMs encode many semantically meaningful properties in a coordinate-aligned (or even disentangled)
manner. The activations can then be adjusted with simple
operations such as pruning, rescaling or addition. Activation
editing method avoid more complex transformations, such
as the MLPs used in the original Adapters (Houlsby et al.,
2019). Editable components in activation editing include
bias terms (Ben Zaken et al., 2022), MLP layer outputs (Wu
et al., 2024a), hidden states within MLP layers (Wu et al.,
2024b), and attention head outputs (Yin et al., 2024).

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods,
such as LoRA, are commonly used to adapt LLMs.
However, the effectiveness of standard PEFT
methods is limited in low-resource scenarios with
only a few hundred examples. Recent advances
in interpretability research have inspired the emergence of activation editing (or steering) techniques, which modify the activations of specific
model components. Due to their extremely small
parameter counts, these methods show promise
for small datasets. However, their performance is
highly dependent on identifying the correct modules to edit and often lacks stability across different datasets. In this paper, we propose Joint Localization and Activation Editing (J O LA), a method
that jointly learns (1) which heads in the Transformer to edit (2) whether the intervention should
be additive, multiplicative, or both and (3) the
intervention parameters themselves - the vectors
applied as additive offsets or multiplicative scalings to the head output. Through evaluations on
three benchmarks spanning commonsense reasoning, natural language understanding, and natural
language generation, we demonstrate that J O LA
consistently outperforms existing methods.1

Compared to standard PEFT methods like LoRA (Hu et al.,
2021), activation editing modifies significantly fewer parameters. For example, in our experiments, the optimal LoRA
configuration altered 0.826% of LLaMA-3-8B’s (Dubey
et al., 2024) parameters, whereas LoFIT (Yin et al., 2024)
updated only 0.002%.2 This drastic reduction makes activation editing particularly appealing for low-resource scenarios, where only a few hundred training examples are
available.
However, activation editing’s effectiveness is highly sensitive to the choice of modules. This selection is typically
determined either by fixed hyperparameters – specifying
which layers and component types to modify (Ben Zaken
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024b) – or by additional methods
that estimate the importance of different model components
for a given task (Yin et al., 2024). Furthermore, existing approaches vary in their intervention strategies (e.g., additive
vs. multiplicative modifications), with no clear consensus
on which method is most effective across tasks and models. As a result, performance tends to be inconsistent across
different datasets and models (see Table 1 and Figure 4).

1. Introduction
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT; Han et al., 2024)
methods are widely used to adapt large language models
(LLMs). However, popular PEFT approaches like LoRA
(Hu et al., 2021) often struggle in low-resource settings with
*Work done during Wen Lai’s visit to The University of Edinburgh. 1 Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning 3 ILLC, University of Edinburgh 4 ILLC, University
of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Wen Lai <wen.lai@tum.de>,
Ivan Titov <ititov@inf.ed.ac.uk>, Alexander Fraser <alexander.fraser@tum.de>.

To address these limitations, we propose Joint Localization and Activation Editing (J O LA), a method that, for a
given task, jointly learns (1) which components to edit, (2)
whether to apply additive, multiplicative, or combined interventions, and (3) the optimal intervention parameters – the
vectors applied as additive offsets or multiplicative scalings

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The code for the method is released at https://github.
com/wenlai-lavine/jola.

2

1

Detailed comparisons are provided in Appendix A.

