Outlier Gradient Analysis:
Efficiently Identifying Detrimental Training Samples for Deep Learning Models

Anshuman Chhabra 1 Bo Li 2 Jian Chen 2 Prasant Mohapatra 1 Hongfu Liu 3

Abstract

or other processing for improving utility (Zha et al., 2023).
Data-centric learning holds significant potential in many
areas such as model interpretation, subset training set selection, data generation, noisy label detection, active learning,
and others (Chhabra et al., 2024; Kwon et al., 2024).

A core data-centric learning challenge is the identification of training samples that are detrimental
to model performance. Influence functions serve
as a prominent tool for this task and offer a robust
framework for assessing training data influence
on model predictions. Despite their widespread
use, their high computational cost associated with
calculating the inverse of the Hessian matrix pose
constraints, particularly when analyzing largesized deep models. In this paper, we establish
a bridge between identifying detrimental training samples via influence functions and outlier
gradient detection. This transformation not only
presents a straightforward and Hessian-free formulation but also provides insights into the role
of the gradient in sample impact. Through systematic empirical evaluations, we first validate
the hypothesis of our proposed outlier gradient
analysis approach on synthetic datasets. We then
demonstrate its effectiveness in detecting mislabeled samples in vision models and selecting data
samples for improving performance of natural language processing transformer models. We also
extend its use to influential sample identification
for fine-tuning Large Language Models.

The essence of data-centric learning lies in estimating data
influence, also known as data valuation in the context of
a learning task (Hammoudeh & Lowd, 2022). Intuitively,
the impact of an individual data sample can be measured
by assessing the change in learning utility when training
with and without that specific sample. This leave-one-out
influence (Cook & Weisberg, 1982) provides a rough gauge
of the relative data influence of the specific sample on the
otherwise full fixed training set. Shapley value (Ghorbani
& Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019), originating from cooperative
game theory, quantifies the increase in value when a group
of samples collaborates to achieve the learning goal. Unlike
leave-one-out influence, Shapley value represents the
weighted average utility change resulting from adding the
sample to different training subsets. Despite the absence
of assumptions on the learning model, the aforementioned
retraining-based methods incur significant computational
costs, especially for large-scale data analysis and deep
models (Schioppa et al., 2022).
A popular choice for data valuation applications, such as
identifying training samples detrimental to model performance, are influence functions (Koh & Liang, 2017). Essentially, influence functions assess data influence without
requiring model retraining. They measure the effect of
changing an infinitesimal weight of training samples based
on a utility-evaluating function. While influence functions
can be accurate or acceptable proxies for convex and certain shallow models, their applicability to deep models is
constrained by the strong convexity assumption and the
computational cost linked to calculating the inverse of the
Hessian matrix (Basu et al., 2020a).

1. Introduction
Data-centric learning focuses on enhancing algorithmic
performance from the perspective of the training data (Oala
et al., 2023). In contrast to model-centric learning, which
designs novel algorithms or optimization techniques for performance improvement with fixed training data, data-centric
learning operates with a fixed learning algorithm while
modifying the training data through trimming, augmenting,

Our Contributions. In this paper, we delve into the classical data-centric problem: identifying/trimming detrimental
samples. We tackle the computational challenge of the
inverse of the Hessian matrix in influence functions in the
context of detrimental sample identification and removal.
Our major contributions are as follows:

1

University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA 2 Tsinghua
University 3 Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Hongfu Liu <hongfuliu@brandeis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

