Agent Workflow Memory

Zora Zhiruo Wang 1 Jiayuan Mao 2 Daniel Fried 1 Graham Neubig 1

Abstract
Get driving time
from A to B

Despite the potential of language model-based
agents to solve real-world tasks such as web navigation, current methods still struggle with longhorizon tasks with complex action trajectories. In
contrast, humans can flexibly solve complex tasks
by learning reusable task workflows from past experiences and using them to guide future actions.
To build agents that can similarly benefit from this
process, we introduce Agent Workflow Memory
(AWM), a method for inducing commonly reused
routines, i.e., workflows, and selectively providing workflows to the agent to guide subsequent
generations. AWM flexibly applies to both offline
and online scenarios, where agents induce workflows from training examples beforehand or from
test queries on the fly. We experiment on two
major web navigation benchmarks — Mind2Web
and WebArena — that collectively cover 1000+
tasks from 200+ domains across travel, shopping,
and social media, among others. AWM substantially improves the baseline results by 24.6% and
51.1% relative success rate on Mind2Web and
WebArena while reducing the number of steps
taken to solve WebArena tasks successfully. Furthermore, online AWM robustly generalizes in
cross-task, website, and domain evaluations, surpassing baselines from 8.9 to 14.0 absolute points
as train-test task distribution gaps widen.1

Display the route
from place A to B

Decide if can
drive from A to B
in a given time
Get the zip
code of a place

Find a Hilton hotel
near this location,
then show me the
shortest walking
path to a nearby
supermarket …

Get the
coordinates
of a place
Find cafe
near a place

Gap widens to 22.5
after 40 examples

Find a place
by its name
AWM
baseline

Figure 1. AWM enables agents to continuously induce and apply
workflows to improve performance, compared to stagnant baselines. We show results by AWM on the WebArena map split as an
example.

(Fu et al., 2024; Murty et al., 2024) or in-context learning
(Zheng et al., 2024). This allows them to perform well on action sequences similar to those presented in these examples,
but results in a lack of robustness to changes in task contexts
or environments (Deng et al., 2023). Essentially, they fail to
grasp the key to disentangling increasingly complex tasks —
to extract and learn reusable task workflows shared across
similar tasks and environments (Yu et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2024a). Moreover, as agents solve each task separately,
they do not learn from past successes and failures, and are
therefore unable to adapt over time (Yoran et al., 2024).
Motivated by how humans abstract common task routines
from past experiences and apply such knowledge to guide
future activities (Chi et al., 1981; 2014), we propose agent
workflow memory (AWM) (§2) to realize a similar mechanism in agents. AWM induces workflows from agent
trajectories by extracting reusable routines, and then integrates these workflows into agent memory to guide future
task-solving processes. Each workflow represents a goal
with a common routine extracted from available action trajectories, which allows it to effectively capture the most
essential and reusable skills agents need to acquire to successfully solve increasingly complex tasks. As an example,
Figure 1 shows workflows induced by AWM on the WebArena map test split of the benchmark (Zhou et al., 2024).
AWM starts with a basic set of built-in actions and solves
new tasks in a streaming manner, continuously inducing
workflows from the task at hand, e.g., learning to “find a

1. Introduction
Language model (LM) based agents are rapidly improving,
and are now able to tackle digital tasks such as navigating
the web (Zhou et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2023) or operating
mobile apps (Rawles et al., 2023; 2024). Current agents
mostly integrate a fixed set of given examples via training
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
Correspondence to: Zora Zhiruo Wang
<zhiruow@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/zorazrw/agent-workflow-memory

1

