Synthetic Face Datasets Generation via Latent Space Exploration
from Brownian Identity Diffusion

David Geissbühler * 1 Hatef Otroshi Shahreza * 1 2 Sébastien Marcel 1 3

Abstract
Face recognition models are trained on large-scale
datasets, which have privacy and ethical concerns.
Lately, the use of synthetic data to complement or
replace genuine data for the training of face recognition models has been proposed. While promising results have been obtained, it still remains
unclear if generative models can yield diverse
enough data for such tasks. In this work, we introduce a new method, inspired by the physical motion of soft particles subjected to stochastic Brownian forces, allowing us to sample identities distributions in a latent space under various constraints.
We introduce three complementary algorithms,
called Langevin, Dispersion, and DisCo, aimed at
generating large synthetic face datasets. With this
in hands, we generate several face datasets and
benchmark them by training face recognition models, showing that data generated with our method
exceeds the performance of previously GANbased datasets and achieves competitive performance with state-of-the-art diffusion-based synthetic datasets. While diffusion models are shown
to memorize training data, we prevent leakage in
our new synthetic datasets, paving the way for
more responsible synthetic datasets. Project page:
https://www.idiap.ch/paper/synthetics-disco

Figure 1: Example of synthetic faces generated using StyleGAN2. The three rows are three different classes generated
with the Langevin algorithm while the columns show intraclass variations generated using the Dispersion algorithm.

large biometric datasets that have been collected in the wild,
for instance by scraping images from the internet. Moreover,
in addition to privacy concerns, biometric data might give
a biased representation of the population depending on the
data collection procedure (Drozdowski et al., 2020). Recently, MS-Celeb (Guo et al., 2016), a very popular dataset
commonly used to train face recognition (FR) models, was
withdrawn after exposure in the media of its privacy, fairness
and demographic biases problems. While data collection
campaigns performed in laboratories can be made representative of the general demographics and performed with
subjects consents, they are typically quite limited due to the
large amount of effort they require.

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose another step towards the tackling
of some of theses issues by developing physics-inspired
algorithms that allows precise control on the sampling of
synthetic identities and variations thereof. More precisely,
our method treats samples as soft spherical particles, living
in the multi-dimensional latent or embedding spaces, subjected to repulsive inter-particles contact forces, a random
brownian force as well as a global attractive potential. Due
to the similarity of this kind of dynamics to the Langevin
equation, a stochastic differential equation (SDE) that describes the Brownian motion of small particles in a solvent
and its generalization, we call our first algorithm Langevin.
This algorithm allows us to approach a dense packing of
the spherical identities while keeping latent space spread

Real-world data, in particular biometric ones, can possibly
contain sensitive information which raises privacy concerns
from both legal and ethical specialists (Prabhakar et al.,
2003; Nat, 2022). This is particularly true for a number of
*

Equal contribution 1 Idiap Research Institute, Martigny,
Switzerland 2 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland 3 Université de Lausanne (UNIL), Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: David Geissbühler
<david.geissbuhler@idiap.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

