SITCOM: Step-wise Triple-Consistent Diffusion Sampling
For Inverse Problems

Cheng-Han Huang

2

Ismail R. Alkhouri * 1 2 Shijun Liang * 3
Jimmy Dai 1 Qing Qu 1 Saiprasad Ravishankar 2 3 Rongrong Wang 2 4

1. Introduction

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) are a class of generative
models that allow sampling from a distribution
learned over a training set. When applied to solving inverse problems, the reverse sampling steps
are modified to approximately sample from a
measurement-conditioned distribution. However,
these modifications may be unsuitable for certain
settings (e.g., presence of measurement noise) and
non-linear tasks, as they often struggle to correct
errors from earlier steps and generally require
a large number of optimization and/or sampling
steps. To address these challenges, we state three
conditions for achieving measurement-consistent
diffusion trajectories. Building on these conditions, we propose a new optimization-based sampling method that not only enforces standard data
manifold measurement consistency and forward
diffusion consistency, as seen in previous studies, but also incorporates our proposed step-wise
and network-regularized backward diffusion consistency that maintains a diffusion trajectory by
optimizing over the input of the pre-trained model
at every sampling step. By enforcing these conditions (implicitly or explicitly), our sampler requires significantly fewer reverse steps. Therefore, we refer to our method as Step-wise TripleConsistent Sampling (SITCOM). Compared to
SOTA baselines, our experiments across several
linear and non-linear tasks (with natural and medical images) demonstrate that SITCOM achieves
competitive or superior results in terms of standard similarity metrics and run-time.

Inverse problems (IPs) arise in a wide range of science
and engineering applications, including computer vision
(Li et al., 2024), signal processing (Byrne, 2003), medical
imaging (Alkhouri et al., 2024b), remote sensing (Levis
et al., 2022), and geophysics (BniLam & Al-Khoury, 2020).
In these applications, the primary goal is to recover an unknown image or signal x ∈ Rn from its measurements or
a degraded image y ∈ Rm , which are often corrupted by
noise. Mathematically, the unknown signal and the measurements are related as
y = A(x) + n ,
n

where A(·) : R → Rm (with m ≤ n) represents the linear
or non-linear forward operator that models the measurement
process, and n ∈ Rm denotes the noise in the measurement
domain, e.g., assumed sampled from a Gaussian distribution
N (0, σy2 I), where σy > 0 denotes the noise level. Exactly
solving these inverse problems is challenging due to their illposedness in many settings, requiring advanced techniques
to achieve accurate solutions.
Deep learning techniques have recently been utilized to form
priors to aid in solving these problems (Ravishankar et al.,
2019; Lempitsky et al., 2018). One framework that has
shown significant potential is the use of generative models,
particularly diffusion models (DMs) (Ho et al., 2020). Given
a training dataset, DMs are trained to learn the underlying
distribution p(x).
During inference, DMs enable sampling from this learned
distribution through an iterative procedure (Song et al.,
2021b). When employed to solving inverse problems, DMbased IP solvers often modify the reverse sampling steps to
allow sampling from the measurements-conditioned distribution p(x|y) (Chung et al., 2023b; 2022; Cardoso et al.,
2024). These modifications typically rely on approximations that may not be suitable for all tasks and settings, and
in addition to generally requiring many sampling iterations,
often suffer from errors accumulated during early diffusion
sampling steps (Zhang et al., 2025).

*
Equal contribution 1 Electrical Engineering & Computer Science at University of Michigan–Ann Arbor 2 Computational Mathematics, Science, & Engineering at Michigan State University
(MSU) 3 Biomedical Engineering at MSU 4 Mathematical Sciences at MSU. Correspondence to: Ismail R. Alkhouri <ismailal@umich.edu; alkhour3@msu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In most DM-based IP solvers, these approximations are
designed to enforce standard measurement consistency on
1

