Model-Based Exploration in Monitored Markov Decision Processes

Alireza Kazemipour 1 2 Matthew E. Taylor 1 2 3 Michael Bowling 1 2 3

Abstract

alistic because feedback often comes from an exogenous
entity, such as humans (Shao et al., 2020; Hejna & Sadigh,
2024) or monitoring instruments (Vu et al., 2021). Assuming the reward is available at all times is not reasonable
in such settings, e.g., due to human time constraints (Pilarski et al., 2011), hardware failure (Bossev et al., 2016;
Dixit et al., 2021), or inaccessible rewards during deployment (Andrychowicz et al., 2020). Hence, relaxing the
assumption that rewards are always observable would mark
a significant step toward agents continually operating in
the real world. As an extension of Markov decision processes (MDPs), monitored Markov decision processes (MonMDPs) (Parisi et al., 2024b) have been proposed to model
such situations, although algorithms for Mon-MDPs remain
in their infancy (Parisi et al., 2024a). Existing algorithms
do not leverage the structure of Mon-MDPs, focusing exploration uniformly across the entire state-action space, and
only have asymptotic guarantees without providing sample
complexity bounds. Furthermore, they have focused on solvable Mon-MDPs, where observing every reward under some
circumstances is possible. The original introduction of MonMDPs also considered unsolvable Mon-MDPs, proposing a
minimax formulation as the optimal behavior, but no algorithms have explored this setting.

A tenet of reinforcement learning is that the agent
always observes rewards. However, this is not
true in many realistic settings, e.g., a human observer may not always be available to provide
rewards, sensors may be limited or malfunctioning, or rewards may be inaccessible during deployment. Monitored Markov decision processes
(Mon-MDPs) have recently been proposed to
model such settings. However, existing MonMDP algorithms have several limitations: they
do not fully exploit the problem structure, cannot leverage a known monitor, lack worst-case
guarantees for “unsolvable” Mon-MDPs without
specific initialization, and offer only asymptotic
convergence proofs. This paper makes three contributions. First, we introduce a model-based algorithm for Mon-MDPs that addresses these shortcomings. The algorithm employs two instances
of model-based interval estimation: one to ensure
that observable rewards are reliably captured, and
another to learn a minimax-optimal policy. Second, we empirically demonstrate the advantages.
We show faster convergence than prior algorithms
in more than four dozen benchmarks, and even
more dramatic improvements when the monitoring process is known. Third, we present the first
finite sample-bound on performance. We show
convergence to a minimax-optimal policy even
when some rewards are never observable.

In this paper, we introduce Monitored Model-Based Interval Estimation with Exploration Bonus (Monitored MBIEEB), a model-based algorithm for Mon-MDPs that offers
several advantages over previous algorithms. Monitored
MBIE-EB exploits the Mon-MDP structure to consider the
uncertainty on each unknown component separately. This
approach also makes it the first algorithm that can take advantage of situations where the agent knows the monitoring
process in advance. Furthermore, Monitored MBIE-EB
balances optimism in uncertain quantities with pessimism
for rewards that have never been observed, reaching the
minimax-optimal behavior in unsolvable Mon-MDPs. The
trade-off between optimism and pessimism is challenging
because pessimism may dissuade agents from exploring sufficiently in solvable Mon-MDPs. We address this by having
a second instance of MBIE-EB to force the agent to efficiently observe all rewards that can be observed. Building
off of MBIE-EB (Strehl & Littman, 2008), we prove the
first polynomial sample complexity bounds (Kakade, 2003;
Lattimore & Hutter, 2012) as the measure of Monitored

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is based on trial-and-error: instead of being directly shown what to do, an agent receives
consistent numerical feedback in the form of rewards for
its decisions. However, this assumption is not always re1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii) 3 Canada CIFAR
AI Chair, Amii. Correspondence to: Alireza Kazemipour
<kazemipo@ualberta.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

