The Underlying Universal Statistical Structure of Natural Datasets

Noam Levi 1 Yaron Oz 2

Abstract

regarding the distribution. The second moment, however,
cannot be set to 0, and holds valuable information. This
observation motivates the study of the empirical covariance
1
XX T .
(Gram) matrix, ΣM = M

We study universal properties in real-world complex and synthetically generated datasets. Our
approach is to analogize data to a physical system and employ tools from statistical physics and
Random Matrix Theory (RMT) to reveal their
underlying structure. Examining the local and
global eigenvalue statistics of feature-feature covariance matrices, we find: (i) bulk eigenvalue
power-law scaling vastly differs between uncorrelated Gaussian and real-world data, (ii) this power
law behavior is reproducible using Gaussian data
with long-range correlations, (iii) all dataset types
exhibit chaotic RMT universality, (iv) RMT statistics emerge at smaller dataset sizes than typical
training sets, correlating with power-law convergence, (v) Shannon entropy correlates with RMT
structure and requires fewer samples in strongly
correlated datasets. These results suggest natural image Gram matrices can be approximated by
Wishart random matrices with simple covariance
structure, enabling rigorous analysis of neural network behavior.

The properties of ΣM in real world data are entirely unknown a priori, as we do not know how to parameterize the
process which generated natural images. Nevertheless, interesting observations have been made. Empirical evidence
shows that the spectrum of ΣM for various datasets can be
separated into a set of large eigenvalues (O(10)), a bulk
of eigenvalues which decay as a power law λi ∼ i−1−α
(Ruderman, 1997; Caponnetto and De Vito, 2007) and a
large tail of small eigenvalues which terminates at some finite index n. Since the top eigenvalues represent the largest
overlapping properties across different samples, these are
not simply interpreted without more information on the underlying distribution. The bulk of the eigenvalues, however,
can be understood as representing the correlation structure
of different features amongst themselves, and has been key
to understanding the emergence of neural scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Maloney et al., 2022).
In this work, we study both the power law behaviors present
in natural datasets, and their spectral statistics, with the goal
of obtaining a universal, analytically tractable model for real
world Gram matrices, regardless of their origins. While this
may not be feasible for any ΣM , fortunately, the standard
datasets used today are high dimensional and contain many
samples, a ubiquitous regime found in complex systems,
and typically studied using Random Matrix Theory (RMT).

1. Introduction
Natural, or real-world, images are expected to follow some
underlying distribution, which can be arbitrarily complex,
and to which we have no direct access to. This distribution
could have infinitely many nonzero moments, with varying
relative importance compared to one another. In practice,
we only have access to a very small subset of samples from
the underlying distribution, which can be parameterized
as X ∈ Rd×M , where d is the dimension of each image
vector and M is the number of samples. The first moment
of the data can always be set to 0, since we can remove
the mean from each sample, without losing information

RMT is a powerful tool for describing the spectral statistics
of complex systems. It is particularly useful for systems
that are chaotic but also have certain coherent structures.
The theory predicts universal statistical properties, provided
that the underlying matrix ensemble is large enough to sufficiently fill the space of all matrices with a given symmetry,
a property known as ergodicity (Guhr et al., 1998). Ergodicity has been observed in a variety of systems, including
chaotic quantum systems (Bohigas et al., 1984; Mehta, 1991;
Pandey, 1983), financial markets, nuclear physics and many
others (Plerou et al., 1999; Brody, 1981; Efetov, 1997). To
demonstrate that a similar universal structure is also observed for correlation matrices resulting from datasets, we
will employ several diagnostic tools widely used in the field

1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne,
Switzerland 2 Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics
and Astronomy, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel. Correspondence to: Noam Levi <noam.levi@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

