Procurement Auctions via Approximately Optimal Submodular Optimization

Yuan Deng 1 Amin Karbasi 2 Vahab Mirrokni 1 Renato Paes Leme 1 Grigoris Velegkas 2 * Song Zuo 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider procurement auctions (Dimitri et al., 2006) in which strategic service sellers with
private costs submit bids to an auctioneer, who then decides the set of winners based on an objective function
and purchases their services. Procurement auctions have
been adopted in multitude of application domains, including industrial procurement (Bichler et al., 2006), data sharing (Roth & Schoenebeck, 2012; Rasouli & Jordan, 2021;
Sim et al., 2022; Fallah et al., 2023), and crowdsourcing
markets (Singer & Mittal, 2013). Additionally, Amazon
Business provides government procurement solutions for
products ranging from office supplies to first responder
equipment (AmazonBusiness, 2024), while the U.S. Government Publishing Office conducts nationwide procurement
for items used in publishing (USGPO, 2024). Each of these
markets involve thousands of vendors for ensuring supplier
diversity and competitive prices. There is also a large body
of literature on procurement auction for the sale of data, including Bayesian mechanism design for one-sided markets,
two-sided markets, and their online learning variants (Ghosh
& Roth, 2011; Roth & Schoenebeck, 2012; Abernethy et al.,
2015; Agarwal et al., 2019; Sim et al., 2022; Fallah et al.,
2023; Agarwal et al., 2024).

We study procurement auctions where an auctioneer must acquire services from strategic sellers
with private costs. The quality of these services
is represented by a known submodular function.
Our goal is to design computationally efficient
auctions that approximately maximize the difference between service quality and total seller costs,
while remaining incentive compatible (IC), individually rational (IR), and yielding non-negative
surplus (NAS) for the auctioneer. Our contribution is twofold: (i) we provide an improved
analysis of existing algorithms for non-positive
submodular function maximization; (ii) we develop frameworks that transform submodular optimization algorithms into mechanisms that are
IC, IR, NAS, and preserve approximation guarantees. These frameworks apply both in an offline
setting—where all bids are simultaneously observable—and an online setting—where sellers arrive
adversarially and decisions must be made irrevocably. We further investigate whether state-of-theart submodular algorithms can be converted into
descending auctions under adversarially chosen
price schedules. We show that any algorithm satisfying a bi-criteria ( 12 , 1)-approximation in welfare
can be adapted into such a descending auction.
Finally, we demonstrate the practicality of our
frameworks by instantiating them with various
submodular optimization algorithms and evaluating their performance on datasets containing
thousands of sellers.

Since procurement auctions were introduced to the algorithmic game theory community in the seminal paper of Nisan
& Ronen (1999), many aspects of these auctions have been
studied, including frugality in procurement auctions for minimizing purchasing costs (Archer & Tardos, 2007; Karlin
& Kempe, 2005; Talwar, 2003), budget-feasible procurement auctions in which the purchasing cost is constrained
by a budget (Singer, 2010; Kempe et al., 2010; Chen et al.,
2011; Bei et al., 2012; Balkanski et al., 2022), and profit
maximization for optimizing the auctioneer’s surplus (Cary
et al., 2008). In this paper, we consider the classic setting
of procurement auctions with one auctioneer and a group of
sellers, N . Each seller has a private cost ci for providing
the service, and for each S ⊆ N , the auctioneer has a value
function f (S) for purchasing services from sellers in S. The
social welfare obtained from the procurement auction when
the auctioneer purchases from sellers in S is given by the
difference between the value obtained by the
P auctioneer and
the total cost of sellers in S, i.e., f (S) − i∈S ci .

*

Part of the work was done while the author was a student
researcher at Google Research. 1 Google Research 2 Yale University. Correspondence to: Yuan Deng <dengyuan@google.com>,
Grigoris Velegkas <grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu>, Song Zuo
<szuo@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

