Everything Everywhere All at Once:
LLMs can In-Context Learn Multiple Tasks in Superposition

Zheyang Xiong 1 Ziyang Cai 1 John Cooper 1 Albert Ge 1 Vasilis Papageorgiou 1 Zack Sifakis 1
Angeliki Giannou 1 Ziqian Lin 1 Liu Yang 1 Saurabh Agarwal 2 Grigorios G Chrysos 1 Samet Oymak 3
Kangwook Lee 1 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 1 4

Abstract

interest in the research community, as it suggests that LLMs
can adapt to novel tasks on-the-fly, using the capabilities that
they acquired during pretraining, and the context provided.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capabilities. In this study, we explore a surprising
phenomenon related to ICL: LLMs can perform
multiple, computationally distinct ICL tasks simultaneously, during a single inference call, a capability we term “task superposition”. We provide
empirical evidence of this phenomenon across various LLM families and scales and show that this
phenomenon emerges even if we train the model
to in-context learn one task at a time. We offer theoretical explanations that this capability is
well within the expressive power of transformers.
We also explore how LLMs internally compose
task vectors during superposition. Furthermore,
we show that larger models can solve more ICL
tasks in parallel, and better calibrate their output
distribution. Our findings offer insights into the latent capabilities of LLMs, further substantiate the
perspective of “LLMs as superposition of simulators”, and raise questions about the mechanisms
enabling simultaneous task execution.

While ICL has been extensively studied from both theoretical and empirical perspectives (Xie et al., 2022a; Agarwal
et al., 2024), many aspects of its underlying mechanisms
remain elusive. In this work, we study a surprising phenomenon related to ICL that, to the best of our knowledge,
has not been thoroughly studied before: LLMs can perform
multiple distinct ICL tasks simultaneously, in a single inference call, a capability we refer to as “task superposition”.
Our study suggests that pretrained autoregressive LLMs
such as Llama (Touvron et al., 2023) or GPT-3.51 (Brown
et al., 2020) display superposition of tasks purely incontext2 . When presented with multiple in-context examples
from different tasks, in the same prompt, the models can
generate outputs that correspond to solutions for all these
individual tasks. For instance, given examples of addition
and translation, the model can concurrently produce correct answers for both tasks, as well as the composition of
these tasks (e.g., the result of addition translated into another
language).
Figure 1 illustrates this phenomenon. In Figure 1a (left),
given in-context examples of addition in different languages
and the query “91 + 83 →”, the model generates probabilities for the correct sum in various languages, demonstrating
its ability to perform addition and translation concurrently.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various domains, with one of the
most intriguing being in-context learning (ICL) (Brown
et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2022a). ICL enables LLMs to perform tasks during inference without the need to fine-tune
for that particular task, simply by providing a few examples
within the input prompt. This ability has sparked significant

This discovery aligns and lends further support to the view
of LLMs as superposition of simulators (Janus, 2022; Shanahan et al., 2023; Nardo, 2023) and the Bayesian perspective
of ICL proposed by Xie et al. (2022a). While not a mathematically rigorous formulation, we can conceptualize the
output of an LLM as a weighted sum of conditional probabilities across possible tasks:

1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of Texas at
Austin 3 University of Michigan 4 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Zheyang Xiong <zheyang@cs.wisc.edu>, Dimitris Papailiopoulos <dimitris@papail.io>.

P(output|prompt) ≈

X

P(output|task, prompt)P(task|prompt).

task

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
2

1

In particular, gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct.
For other definitions of superposition, please see Section 2.

