The Energy Loss Phenomenon in RLHF:
A New Perspective on Mitigating Reward Hacking

Yuchun Miao 1 Sen Zhang 2 Liang Ding 3 Yuqi Zhang 1 Lefei Zhang 1 Dacheng Tao 4

Abstract

User Question

Why is Kobe beef so incredibly expensive compared to other types of beef?

User
Energy Loss of
LLM’s Final Layer

SFT Model Response

The reason for the high price of Kobe beef is
the time-consuming process involved in raising
and processing the cattle and the high
standards for grading and certification.

😊

LLM

RLHF Model Response (Normal)

There are several reasons why Kobe beef is
so expensive:
1. Limited supply: ...
2. Careful selection and breeding: ...
3. Time-consuming production process: ...
...
Overall, ...

Energy Loss of
LLM’s Final Layer

LLM

😇
Energy Loss of
LLM’s Final Layer

RLHF Model Response (Hacking)

I'm sorry, I cannot provide information or
advice on how to harm others. There are
many healthy and effective ways to manage
stress and anxiety …
Overly Cautious Responses

😢

LLM

Low

Energy Loss of LLM’s Final Layer

This work identifies the Energy Loss Phenomenon
in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and its connection to reward hacking. Specifically, energy loss2 in the final layer
of a Large Language Model (LLM) gradually
increases during the RL process, with an excessive increase in energy loss characterizing reward
hacking. Beyond empirical analysis, we further
provide a theoretical foundation by proving that,
under mild conditions, the increased energy loss
reduces the upper bound of contextual relevance
in LLMs, which is a critical aspect of reward hacking as the reduced contextual relevance typically
indicates overfitting to reward model-favored patterns in RL. To address this issue, we propose an
Energy loss-aware PPO algorithm (EPPO) which
penalizes the increase in energy loss in the LLM’s
final layer during reward calculation to prevent
excessive energy loss, thereby mitigating reward
hacking. We theoretically show that EPPO can be
conceptually interpreted as an entropy-regularized
RL algorithm, which provides deeper insights into
its effectiveness. Extensive experiments across
various LLMs and tasks demonstrate the commonality of the energy loss phenomenon, as well
as the effectiveness of EPPO in mitigating reward
hacking and improving RLHF performance. Code
will be available at Energy-Loss-Phenomenon.

High

Figure 1. Illustration of the energy loss phenomenon. During
response generation, ¶ the energy loss2 in RLHF model’s final
layer tends to be higher than that in SFT models; · hacking RLHF
responses exhibit excessive energy loss compared to normal ones.

and harmless responses (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2023b).
This process involves Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) on
human-annotated data, followed by Reinforcement Learning
(RL) that maximizes rewards from a learned proxy Reward
Model (RM) based on human preference rankings. Such
approaches have greatly improved LLM alignment with
human expectations, driving advanced AI applications (Touvron et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
is a key technique for aligning Large Language Models
(LLM) with human preferences, enabling helpful, honest,

Despite the success, RLHF faces a challenge known as reward hacking, where the policy model optimization under
the proxy RM diverges from true human preference (Gao
et al., 2023). The issue arises because the RM is an imperfect proxy for human preferences (Miao et al., 2024). LLMs
can exploit these imperfections by generating well-formed
but less relevant responses that overfit to reward modelfavored patterns, such as excessive redundancy or caution,

1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
430072, P. R. China 2 TikTok, ByteDance 3 The University of Sydney 4 Nanyang Technological University. Correspondence to: Lefei
Zhang <zhanglefei@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2
The energy loss of a given layer is defined as the difference
between the L1 norms of its input and output hidden states.

1

