A DA S PLASH: Adaptive Sparse Flash Attention

Nuno Gonçalves 1 Marcos Treviso 2 André F. T. Martins 1 2 3

Relative Speed (vs. FlashAttention-2)

Abstract
The computational cost of softmax-based attention in transformers limits their applicability to
long-context tasks. Adaptive sparsity, of which
α-entmax attention is an example, offers a flexible data-dependent alternative, but existing implementations are inefficient and do not leverage the
sparsity to obtain runtime and memory gains. In
this work, we propose A DA S PLASH, which combines the efficiency of GPU-optimized algorithms
with the sparsity benefits of α-entmax. We first
introduce a hybrid Halley-bisection algorithm, resulting in a 7-fold reduction in the number of iterations needed to compute the α-entmax transformation. Then, we implement custom Triton kernels
to efficiently handle adaptive sparsity. Experiments with RoBERTa and ModernBERT for text
classification and single-vector retrieval, along
with GPT-2 for language modeling, show that
our method achieves substantial improvements in
runtime and memory efficiency compared to existing α-entmax implementations. It approaches—
and in some cases surpasses—the efficiency of
highly optimized softmax implementations like
FlashAttention-2, enabling long-context training
while maintaining strong task performance.1

FlashAttention-2 (CUDA)
FlashAttention-2 (Triton)
AdaSplash (Triton)

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
50

60

70
80
16x16 Block Sparsity (%)

90

100

Figure 1. Runtime (Fwd+Bwd) as a function of input sparsity for
non-causal attention. While the highly-optimized FlashAttention2 maintains a constant runtime across varying levels of sparsity,
A DA S PLASH effectively leverages sparsity to obtain speed-ups,
eventually outperforming FlashAttention-2 as sparsity grows.

In fact, previous research shows that attention probabilities
tend to peak around a small number of tokens (Voita et al.,
2019; Treviso et al., 2022), which suggests that model performance and computational efficiency can be increased by
leveraging attention sparsity. This has motivated methods
that predefine sparse masks (Beltagy et al., 2020; Zaheer
et al., 2020b), rely on clustering-based strategies (Kitaev
et al., 2020), or low-rank approximate attention (Choromanski et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2021). Some of these techniques show the potential of
sparsity to mitigate memory and computation bottlenecks,
but they often require architectural modifications or crude
approximations, limiting their flexibility and generality.

1. Introduction
Central to the success of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
lies the attention mechanism, where each token in a sequence attends directly to every other token. Attention probabilities are computed through the softmax transformation,
which always assigns a nonzero probability to every token.
However, for long context inputs, the accumulation of small
probabilities can lead to dispersion (Veličković et al., 2025).

A related line of research explores adaptive and differentiable sparse activations as surrogates of softmax, such as
sparsemax (Martins & Astudillo, 2016) and, more broadly,
the α-entmax family (Peters et al., 2019; Correia et al.,
2019). By assigning zero probability to irrelevant tokens,
these activations eliminate their residual influence, reducing the dilution of attention scores and potentially improving both performance and interpretability. Unfortunately,
existing algorithms and implementations for these adaptive sparse activations do not exploit the sparsity, being
slower than softmax-based attention and struggling to scale

1

Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal 2 Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisbon, Portugal 3 Unbabel,
Lisbon, Portugal.
Correspondence to: Nuno Gonçalves
<nuno.m.goncalves@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code: https://github.com/deep-spin/adasplash

1

