Preference Learning for AI Alignment: a Causal Perspective

Katarzyna Kobalczyk 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

2022). Sole reliance on statistical associations observed in
the training data is prone to learning rewards that pick up on
spurious correlations rather than the true factors influencing
user preferences (Singhal et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024).
Latent features of texts often exhibit strong correlations,
making it difficult to generalise to examples where such
correlations no longer hold. Moreover, pairwise preference
datasets are often collected opportunistically, with LLM
users both evaluating model responses and generating the
prompts eliciting them. As a result, recorded preferences are
shaped by the interplay of the LLM’s sampling distribution,
latent features of the generated responses, and user-specific
contexts that vary across the population. These factors raise
fundamental concerns about the robustness and reliability
of current approaches.

Reward modelling from preference data is a
crucial step in aligning large language models
(LLMs) with human values, requiring robust generalisation to novel prompt-response pairs. In
this work, we propose to frame this problem in
a causal paradigm, providing the rich toolbox
of causality to identify the persistent challenges,
such as causal misidentification, preference heterogeneity, and confounding due to user-specific
factors. Inheriting from the literature of causal
inference, we identify key assumptions necessary for reliable generalisation and contrast them
with common data collection practices. We illustrate failure modes of naive reward models and
demonstrate how causally-inspired approaches
can improve model robustness. Finally, we outline desiderata for future research and practices,
advocating targeted interventions to address inherent limitations of observational data.

In this work, we argue that building robust reward models
requires addressing what if type of questions: What would
happen if we intervened on specific response characteristics,
such as conciseness or creativity? How might preferences
change if a different objective were pursued? Current methods are poorly equipped to answer such questions, motivating the need to reframe preference learning through a causal
perspective. A causal framework enables the disentangling
of the effects of different causes on outcomes, facilitating robust predictions under interventions and distribution shifts.
Adopting this lens not only offers new insights but also
raises pivotal questions: What assumptions are required to
generalise across diverse prompts and user groups? How do
these assumptions influence data collection practices? How
can we address violations of causal assumptions, such as
confounding due to user-specific objectives?

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of LLMs lies partially in their ability to align with human values, producing responses that
are helpful, harmless, and honest. A central method for
achieving this alignment is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), with the LLM’s behaviour shaped
by reward models derived from datasets of human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). The reward
modelling, aka preference learning stage seeks to address a
seemingly straightforward question: Given two responses
to the same prompt, which one aligns better with human
objectives? However, the challenges of this stage are often underestimated, assuming that simple regression-based
models fitted to observational datasets can generalise effectively to unseen texts. Meanwhile, evidence suggests this
optimism may be misplaced (Tien et al., 2023; Skalse et al.,

Contributions. We introduce a causal framework of preference learning for AI alignment, defining the key challenges
and identifying critical assumptions for generalising reward
models to unseen texts and contexts. Through examples
and real-world experiments, we highlight failure modes of
naı̈ve models when causal assumptions are violated, including confounding due to user-specific objectives–an issue we
are first to identify and address explicitly. We demonstrate
how causal representation learning approaches can improve
model robustness and propose desiderata for future preference data collection, advocating for targeted interventions
to mitigate the inherent limitations of observational data.

1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Katarzyna Kobalczyk <knk25@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

