Privacy-Shielded Image Compression: Defending Against Exploitation from
Vision-Language Pretrained Models

Xuelin Shen * 2 Jiayin Xu * 2 3 Kangsheng Yin 2 3 Wenhan Yang 1 †

Abstract
The improved semantic understanding of visionlanguage pretrained (VLP) models has made it
increasingly difficult to protect publicly posted
images from being exploited by search engines
and other similar tools. In this context, this paper seeks to protect users’ privacy by implementing defenses at the image compression stage to
prevent exploitation. Specifically, we propose a
flexible coding method, termed Privacy-Shielded
Image Compression (PSIC), that can produce bitstreams with multiple decoding options. By default, the bitstream is decoded to preserve satisfactory perceptual quality while preventing interpretation by VLP models. Our method also retains the original image compression functionality.
With a customizable input condition, the proposed
scheme can reconstruct the image that preserves
its full semantic information. A Conditional Latent Trigger Generation (CLTG) module is proposed to produce bias information based on customizable conditions to guide the decoding process into different reconstructed versions, and an
Uncertainty-Aware Encryption-Oriented (UAEO)
optimization function is designed to leverage the
soft labels inferred from the target VLP model’s
uncertainty on the training data. This paper further incorporates an adaptive multi-objective optimization strategy to obtain improved encrypting performance and perceptual quality simultaneously within a unified training process. The
proposed scheme is plug-and-play and can be
seamlessly integrated into most existing Learned
Image Compression (LIC) models. Extensive experiments across multiple downstream tasks have
demonstrated the effectiveness of our design.

Figure 1. In the default protected coding mode, our compression
model protects images by preserving content similar to the original,
while concealing machine-perceived semantics. Additionally, the
model can encode images in a way that maintains both critical
pixel fidelity and semantics.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid advancement of large-scale VisionLanguage Pretrained (VLP) models has transformed traditional task-specific approaches, significantly improving
the performance across a range of vision tasks. State-ofthe-art VLP models, such as Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021), A Large-scale
ImaGe and Noisy-Text Embedding (ALIGN) (Jia et al.,
2021), and InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023), demonstrate
excellent performance in a general sense for visual information understanding. They perform well in tasks including
not only image–text retrieval (Fang et al., 2021; Ma et al.,
2022; Luo et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2023), image captioning
(Chen et al., 2015), visual question answering (Antol et al.,
2015), cross-modality grounding (Peng et al., 2023b), but
also conventional vision tasks including image classification
(Fu et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2023a; Abdelfattah et al., 2023),
facial attribute analysis (Yang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024),
and image segmentation (Xu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023).

*
Equal contribution 1 Pengcheng Laboratory 2 Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
3
Shenzhen University. Correspondence to: Wenhan Yang
<yangwh@pcl.ac.cn>.

VLP models are highly effective at capturing semantic information, but this strength also comes with risks. Their
powerful ability to analyze semantics raises concerns about
privacy and data security. Images shared on community
platforms can be easily understood by these models, making

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

