Synthetic Text Generation for Training Large Language Models
via Gradient Matching

Dang Nguyen * 1 2 Zeman Li * 2 3 Mohammadhossein Bateni 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Meisam Razaviyayn 2 3
Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1 2

Abstract

training data (Hartmann et al., 2023), ensuring the privacy of
training examples hinders training the model directly on the
training data. Thus, generating small subsets of synthetic
data that can train an LLM to superior performance on the
target task becomes handy. To do so, synthetic text should be
generated in a way that ensures similar dynamics to that of
training on the real data. However, text is discrete in nature
and optimization in the discrete space is very challenging.

Synthetic data has the potential to improve the
performance, training efficiency, and privacy of
real training examples. Nevertheless, existing approaches for synthetic text generation are mostly
heuristics and cannot generate human-readable
text without compromising the privacy of real
data, or provide performance guarantees for training Large Language Models (LLMs). In this
work, we propose the first theoretically rigorous
approach for generating synthetic human-readable
text that provides convergence, performance, and
privacy guarantees for fine-tuning LLMs on a
target task. To do so, we leverage Alternating
Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) that
iteratively optimizes the embeddings of synthetic
examples to match the noisy gradient of the target
training or validation data, and maps them to a
sequence of text tokens with low perplexity. In
doing so, the generated synthetic text guarantees
convergence of the model to a close neighborhood
of the solution obtained by fine-tuning on real data
and preserves their privacy. Experiments on various classification tasks confirm the effectiveness
of our proposed approach. Our code is available
at https://github.com/BigML-CS-UCLA/GRADMM.

Existing approaches for synthetic text generation mostly
rely on advanced LLMs such as GPT-4 to generate synthetic
text for the target categories (Ye et al., 2022; Meng et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2023b; Gupta et al., 2023; Tao et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2024; Dekoninck et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024).
LLM-generated text either suffers from lack of diversity
and faithfulness to real data (Ye et al., 2022; Meng et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2023b), or requires meticulous prompt engineering and highly complex pipelines, such as multi-agent
frameworks, iterative sampling, and processing mechanisms
(Gupta et al., 2023; Dekoninck et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024).
The complexity of the pipelines, efforts for manual prompt
engineering, and the cost of querying advanced models
limits the applicability of such approaches. A few recent
studies explored the use of VAEs and diffusion for controllable text generation (Li et al., 2022; Gong et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2024). But, training diffusion models is computationally heavy and difficult in practice. Importantly, none
of the above approaches guarantees performance of LLMs
trained on the synthetic text or preserve privacy of real data.

1. Introduction

The above limitations raise a key question: Can we generate
a small subset of synthetic text that can train an LLM with
similar dynamics to that of real data? For vision models,
Dataset Distillation (DD) addresses the above question by
generating a small number of synthetic images that minimize the training loss (Wang et al., 2018; Loo et al., 2022;
Nguyen et al., 2020), match the training gradient (Zhao et al.,
2020; Zhao & Bilen, 2021) or model’s weight trajectory during training (Cazenavette et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022).
For images, gradient-based methods can easily operate in
the pixel-wise continuous space. However, for LLMs, the
discrete nature of text and the very large number of LLM’s
parameters make DD much more challenging. The few ex-

High-quality data is crucial for training Large Language
Models (LLMs) to superior performance (Yang et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2023b). However, collecting and curating highquality data is often very expensive and hard to obtain in
many domains. In addition, as LLMs can memorize their
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles 2 Google Research 3 Department of
Industrial & Systems Engineering, University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Dang Nguyen <dangnth@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

