DocKS-RAG: Optimizing Document-Level Relation Extraction through
LLM-Enhanced Hybrid Prompt Tuning

Xiaolong Xu 1 Yibo Zhou 1 Haolong Xiang 1 Xiaoyong Li 2 Xuyun Zhang 3 Lianyong Qi 4 Wanchun Dou 5

1. Introduction

Abstract
Document-level relation extraction (RE) aims to
extract comprehensive correlations between entities and relations from documents. Most of
existing works conduct transfer learning on pretrained language models (PLMs), which allows
for richer contextual representation to improve the
performance. However, such PLMs-based methods suffer from incorporating structural knowledge, such as entity-entity interactions. Moreover,
current works struggle to infer the implicit relations between entities across different sentences,
which results in poor prediction. To deal with
the above issues, we propose a novel and effective framework, named DocKS-RAG, which introduces extra structural knowledge and semantic
information to further enhance the performance
of document-level RE. Specifically, we construct
a Document-level Knowledge Graph from the observable documentation data to better capture the
structural information between entities and relations. Then, a Sentence-level Semantic RetrievalAugmented Generation mechanism is designed to
consider the similarity in different sentences by
retrieving the relevant contextual semantic information. Furthermore, we present a hybrid-prompt
tuning method on large language models (LLMs)
for specific document-level RE tasks. Finally, extensive experiments conducted on two benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our proposed framework
enhances all the metrics compared with state-ofthe-art methods.

Relation extraction (RE) is a critical task in natural language
processing (NLP) domain, with substantial applications in
real-world scenarios, such as knowledge graph construction,
information retrieval, and automated question answering
(He et al., 2022; Xiong et al., 2017; Nayak & Ng, 2019).
The goal of RE is to extract structured and semantic triplets
in the form of subject − relation − object from the raw
texts. With the rapid development of deep learning, substantial efforts have been dedicated to extracting the triplets
within individual sentences, which is known as sentencelevel RE. Although researchers have achieved remarkable
advancements in sentence-level RE (Zeng et al., 2021; Lee
et al., 2020; Baldini Soares et al., 2019), conversely, the
domain of document-level RE remains under-explored.
Document-level RE poses greater challenges than sentencelevel RE counterpart, primarily due to the presence of numerous implicit relations that require relational reasoning
for identification. Moreover, entities may be related across
texts, paragraphs, or even chapters within a document, rather
than relying solely on extracting relations from isolated
sentences, which requires comprehensive document-level
understanding and precise extraction. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, the subjects “Wisconsin” and “the
United States House of Representatives”, along with the
object “US”, appear in disparate sentences, complicating
the identification of relations between them.
Existing document-level RE methods mainly conduct
transfer learning on pre-trained language models (PLMs)
(Huguet Cabot & Navigli, 2021; Xu et al., 2021b; Jiang
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2025a), which
focus on the representation of entities to better capture the
contextual information within the documents. However,
such PLMs-based methods suffer from modeling the interactions between entities and relations, which are known as
the structural knowledge. For example, from the semantic
meaning of the relation “country”, we can infer that the
entities within the extracted triplet are related to locations.
Ignoring such interactions hinders such PLMs-based methods from capturing the inner correlations between entities
and relations, and leads to poor performance of extraction,
especially in the complex document-level RE tasks.

1
School of software, Nanjing University of Information Science
and Technology, China 2 College of Meteorology and Oceanography, National University of Defense Technology, China 3 School
of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia 4 College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum
(East China), China 5 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Haolong Xiang <hlxiang@nuist.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

