Weak-to-Strong Generalization Even in Random Feature Networks, Provably

Marko Medvedev * 1 Kaifeng Lyu * 2 Dingli Yu 3 Sanjeev Arora 4 Zhiyuan Li 5 Nathan Srebro 5

Abstract

1. Introduction

Weak-to-Strong Generalization (Burns et al.,
2024) is the phenomenon whereby a strong student, say GPT-4, learns a task from a weak
teacher, say GPT-2, and ends up significantly
outperforming the teacher. We show that this
phenomenon does not require a complex and pretrained learner like GPT-4, can arise even in simple non-pretrained models, simply due to the size
advantage of the student. But, we also show that
there are inherint limits to the extent of such weak
to strong generalization. We consider students
and teachers that are random feature models, described by two-layer networks with a random and
fixed bottom layer and trained top layer. A ‘weak’
teacher, with a small number of units (i.e. random features), is trained on the population, and
a ‘strong’ student, with a much larger number
of units (i.e. random features), is trained only
on labels generated by the weak teacher. We
demonstrate, prove, and understand how the student can outperform the teacher, even though
trained only on data labeled by the teacher. We
also explain how such weak-to-strong generalization is enabled by early stopping. We then show
the quantitative limits of weak-to-strong generalization in this model, and in fact in a much
broader class of models, for arbitrary teacher and
student feature spaces and a broad class of learning rules, including when the student features are
pre-trained or otherwise more informative. In particular, we show that in such models the student’s
error can only approach zero if the teacher’s error approaches zero, and a strong student cannot
“boost” a slightly-better-then-chance teacher to
obtain a small error.

(Samuel, 1959), in the first ever paper introducing the term
“machine learning”, emphasized how his learned system
outperformed its human teacher. More broadly, the idea of
a good student outperforming their teacher is much older,
as epitomized by the quote “Poor is the pupil who does
not surpass his master”, widely attributed to Leonardo de
Vinci.* Recently, Burns et al. (2024) discussed the concept in the context of “superalignment” (weak humans controlling strong machines), and suggested studying (strong)
student machines outperforming their (weaker) machine
teachers as a surrogate model. Burns et al. demonstrated the
phenomenon by fine-tuning a “weak” teacher model, namely
a pre-trained GPT-2, on task-specific data with true labels,
and then using this “weak” teacher model to annotate data
for the same task, and fine-tuning a “strong” student model,
namely a pre-trained GPT-4, only using labels generated by
the “weak” teacher (see Figure 1). In these experiments, the
“strong” students indeed outperformed their “weak” teachers, and Burns et al. asked for an understanding of this
weak-to-strong generalization phenomenon.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, US 2 Simons Institute, University
of California, Berkeley, San Francisco, CA, US 3 Microsoft Research, Seattle, WA, US 4 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, US
5
TTIC, Chicago, IL, US. Correspondence to: Marko Medvedev
<medvedev@uchicago.edu>.

But can a student outperform their teacher simply by being
“bigger”, having more units and a larger representation, without more specialized or specific inductive bias, nor more
or better pre-training? Does this require sophisticated models with emergent capabilities, such as GPT-4 scale deep
transformers, or can it also arise in much simpler models?

There are several mechanisms by which a student can outperform their teacher. A student can do a more thorough
test-time search, e.g. looking ahead more moves or thinking
of more ways to solve a problem. Taking a step further, on
problems where such a search can be helpful, a student can
also learn to internalize the search, learning a better value
function or next-action (or token) predictor through self-play
or training-time search (as in Samuel’s checker learner, and
modern RL-based training methods for LLMs). A student
might also be able to correct a teacher by having better inductive bias, perhaps obtained through pre-training on similar
or related tasks. For example, a Chinese-speaking student
can outperform their non-Chinese-speaking teacher when
being taught to pronounce names of Chinese colleagues.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

* The quote does not appear in de Vinci’s surviving writing and
its source is unclear to us

1

