FrameBridge: Improving Image-to-Video Generation with Bridge Models

Yuji Wang * 1 Zehua Chen * 1 2 Xiaoyu Chen 1 Yixiang Wei 1 Jun Zhu 1 2 Jianfei Chen 1

Abstract

to-frames generation task where maintaining appearance
consistency and ensuring temporal coherence of generated
video frames are the key evaluation criteria (Xing et al.,
2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). With the recent progress in video
synthesis (Brooks et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b; Blattmann
et al., 2023; Bao et al., 2024), several diffusion-based I2V
frameworks have been proposed, with novel designs on network architecture (Xing et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a;
Chen et al., 2023b; Ren et al.; Lu et al.), cascaded framework (Jain et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023), and motion
representation (Zhang et al., 2024b; Ni et al., 2023). However, although these methods have demonstrated the strong
capability of diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.)
for I2V synthesis, their noise-to-data generation process
is inherently mismatched with the frame-to-frames synthesis of I2V task, making them suffer from the difficulty of
generating high-quality video samples from uninformative
Gaussian noise rather than the given image.

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable
progress on image-to-video (I2V) generation,
while their noise-to-data generation process is inherently mismatched with this task, which may
lead to suboptimal synthesis quality. In this work,
we present FrameBridge. By modeling the frameto-frames generation process with a bridge model
based data-to-data generative process, we are
able to fully exploit the information contained in
the given image and improve the consistency between the generation process and I2V task. Moreover, we propose two novel techniques toward
the two popular settings of training I2V models,
respectively. Firstly, we propose SNR-Aligned
Fine-tuning (SAF), making the first attempt to
fine-tune a diffusion model to a bridge model and,
therefore, allowing us to utilize the pre-trained
diffusion-based text-to-video (T2V) models. Secondly, we propose neural prior, further improving the synthesis quality of FrameBridge when
training from scratch. Experiments conducted
on WebVid-2M and UCF-101 demonstrate the
superior quality of FrameBridge in comparison
with the diffusion counterpart (zero-shot FVD 95
vs. 192 on MSR-VTT and non-zero-shot FVD
122 vs. 171 on UCF-101), and the advantages
of our proposed SAF and neural prior for bridgebased I2V models. The project page: https:
//framebridge-icml.github.io/.

1

In this work, inspired by recently proposed bridge models (Chen et al.; Liu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023c), we
present FrameBridge, a novel I2V framework to model the
frame-to-frames synthesis process with a data-to-data generative framework instead of the noise-to-data one in diffusion
models. Specifically, given the input image and video target,
we first leverage variational auto-encoder (VAE) based compression network to transform them into continuous latent
representations, and then take their latent representations as
boundary distributions, i.e., prior and target, to establish our
data-to-data generative framework. Considering the static
image has already been an informative prior for each of the
consecutive frames in video target, we naturally replicate
it to obtain the prior of the whole video clip, constructing
the frames-to-frames training data pairs for the prior-totarget generative framework in FrameBridge. Standing on
constructed pairs, we establish bridge models (Tong et al.,
2024; Zhou et al.; Chen et al., 2023c) between them to
learn the I2V synthesis with Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) based generation process. In comparison with
previous diffusion-based I2V methods, our FrameBridge utilizes given static image as the prior of video target, which is
advantageous on preserving the appearance details of input
image than conditionally generating video samples from random noise. Moreover, our frames-to-frames bridge model
learns image animation in model training rather than learn-

Introduction

Image-to-video (I2V) generation, commonly referred as image animation, aims at generating consecutive video frames
from a static image (Xing et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024a; Guo et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2022), i.e., a frame*
Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML
Center, Tsinghua University 2 ShengShu, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jianfei Chen <jianfeic@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

