Differentially Private Federated k-Means Clustering with Server-Side Data

Jonathan Scott 1 Christoph H. Lampert 1 David Saulpic 2

Abstract

generated in a decentralized manner. Moreover, the nature
of these devices means that the generated data are often
highly sensitive to users and should remain private. While
public data of the same kind usually exists, typically there
is much less of it, and it does not follow the same data distribution as the private client data, meaning that it cannot be
used to solve the clustering task directly.

Clustering is a cornerstone of data analysis that
is particularly suited to identifying coherent subgroups or substructures in unlabeled data, as are
generated continuously in large amounts these
days. However, in many cases traditional clustering methods are not applicable, because data
are increasingly being produced and stored in a
distributed way, e.g. on edge devices, and privacy concerns prevent it from being transferred
to a central server. To address this challenge, we
present FedDP-KMeans, a new algorithm for kmeans clustering that is fully-federated as well as
differentially private. Our approach leverages (potentially small and out-of-distribution) server-side
data to overcome the primary challenge of differentially private clustering methods: the need for a
good initialization. Combining our initialization
with a simple federated DP-Lloyds algorithm we
obtain an algorithm that achieves excellent results
on synthetic and real-world benchmark tasks. Our
code can be found at https://github.com/
jonnyascott/fed-dp-kmeans. We also
provide a theoretical analysis of our method that
provides bounds on the convergence speed and
cluster identification success.

These observations have triggered the development of techniques for learning from decentralized data, most popularly
federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017). Originally proposed as an efficient means of training supervised
models on data distributed over a large number of mobile
devices (Hard et al., 2019), FL has become the de facto
standard approach to distributed learning in a wide range
of privacy-sensitive applications (Brisimi et al., 2018; Ramaswamy et al., 2019; Rieke et al., 2020; Kairouz et al.,
2021). However, it has been observed that, on its own, FL
is not sufficient to maintain the privacy of client data (Wang
et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020; Boenisch et al., 2023). The
reason is that information about the client data, or even some
data items themselves, might be extractable from the learned
model weights. This is obvious in the case of clustering:
imagine a cluster emerges that consists of a single data point.
Then, this data could be read off from the corresponding
cluster center, even if FL was used for training. Therefore,
in privacy-sensitive applications, it is essential to combine
FL with other privacy preserving techniques. The most
common among these is differential privacy (DP) (Dwork,
2006), which we introduce in Section 2. DP masks information about individual data points with carefully crafted
noise. This can, however, lead to a reduction in the quality
of results, called the privacy-utility trade-off.

1. Introduction
Clustering has long been the technique of choice for understanding and identifying groups and structures in unlabeled
data. Effective algorithms to cluster non-private centralized
data have been around for decades (Lloyd, 1982; Shi & Malik, 2000; Ng et al., 2001). However, the major paradigm
shift in how data are generated nowadays presents new challenges that often prevent the use of traditional methods.
For instance, the proliferation of smart phones and other
wearable devices, has led to large amounts of data being

Several methods have been proposed for clustering private
data that are either federated, but not DP compatible, or
which are DP but don’t work in FL settings, see Section 6. In
this paper we close this gap by introducing FedDP-KMeans,
a fully federated and differentially private k-means clustering algorithm. Our main innovation is a new initialization method, FedDP-Init, that leverages server-side data
to find good initial centers. Crucially, we do not require
the server data to follow the same distribution as the client
data, making FedDP-Init applicable to a wide range of practical FL scenarios. The initial centers serve as input to
FedDP-Lloyds, a simple federated and differentially private

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA) 2 CNRS & Université Paris Cité, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Jonathan Scott <jscott@ist.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

