C RADLE: Empowering Foundation Agents
Towards General Computer Control
Weihao Tan 1 * Wentao Zhang 1 * Xinrun Xu 2 * Haochong Xia 1 † Ziluo Ding 3 † Boyu Li 3 † Bohan Zhou 4 †
Junpeng Yue 4 † Jiechuan Jiang 4 † Yewen Li 1 † Ruyi An 1 † Molei Qin 1 † Chuqiao Zong 1 † Longtao Zheng 1 †
Yujie Wu 5 † Xiaoqiang Chai 5 † Yifei Bi 3 Tianbao Xie 6 Pengjie Gu 1 Xiyun Li 3 Ceyao Zhang 7 Long Tian 5
Chaojie Wang 5 Xinrun Wang 1 ‡ Börje F. Karlsson 3 ‡ † Bo An 1 5 Shuicheng Yan 8 5 Zongqing Lu 4 3
Everyday
Software
Self-Reflection

Task Inference

Professional
Software

Digital
Games

Information
Gathering

Memory

Skill Curation

Action
Planning

Figure 1: The C RADLE framework empowers nascent foundation models to perform complex computer tasks via the same unified
interface humans use, i.e., screenshots as input and keyboard & mouse operations as output.

Abstract

Curation, Action Planning, and Memory, C RA DLE is able to understand input screenshots and
output executable code for low-level keyboard and
mouse control after high-level planning, so that
C RADLE can interact with any software and complete long-horizon complex tasks without relying
on any built-in APIs. Experimental results show
that C RADLE exhibits remarkable generalizability and impressive performance across four previously unexplored commercial video games (Red
Dead Redemption 2, Cities: Skylines, Stardew
Valley and Dealer’s Life 2), five software applications (Chrome, Outlook, Feishu, Meitu and CapCut), and a comprehensive benchmark, OSWorld.
With a unified interface to interact with any software, C RADLE greatly extends the reach of foundation agents thus paving the way for generalist
agents. Video demos and code can be found at
https://baai-agents.github.io/Cradle.

Despite the success in specific scenarios, existing foundation agents still struggle to generalize
across various virtual scenarios, mainly due to the
dramatically different encapsulations of environments with manually designed observation and
action spaces. To handle this issue, we propose
the General Computer Control (GCC) setting to
restrict foundation agents to interact with software
through the most unified and standardized interface, i.e., using screenshots as input and keyboard
and mouse actions as output. Then we introduce
C RADLE, a modular and flexible LMM-powered
framework, as a preliminary attempt towards
GCC. Enhanced by six key modules: Information
Gathering, Self-Reflection, Task Inference, Skill
*

Equal contribution 1 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 4 Peking University
5
Skywork AI 6 The University of Hong Kong 7 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 8 National University of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Weihao Tan <weihao001@ntu.edu.sg>, Bo
An <boan@ntu.edu.sg>, Shuicheng Yan <yansc@nus.edu.sg>,
Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.

1. Introduction
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) has long been a northstar goal for the AI community (Morris et al., 2023). The
recent success of foundation agents, i.e., agents empowered by large multimodal models (LMMs) and advanced
tools, in various environments, e.g., web browsing (Zhou

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

