Scaling Large Motion Models with Million-Level Human Motions

Ye Wang * 1 Sipeng Zheng * 2 Bin Cao 2 3 Qianshan Wei 4 Weishuai Zeng 5 Qin Jin 1 Zongqing Lu † 5 6

Abstract

Inspired by the recent success of LLMs, the field
of human motion understanding has increasingly
shifted toward developing large motion models.
Despite some progress, current efforts remain far
from achieving truly generalist models, primarily
due to the lack of massive high-quality data. To
address this gap, we present MotionLib, the first
million-level dataset for motion generation, which
is at least 15× larger than existing counterparts
and enriched with hierarchical text descriptions.
Using MotionLib, we train a large motion model
named Being-M0, demonstrating robust performance across a wide range of human activities,
including unseen ones. Through systematic investigation, for the first time, we highlight the
importance of scaling both data and model size
for advancing motion generation, along with key
insights to achieve this goal. To better integrate
the motion modality, we propose Motionbook, an
innovative motion encoding approach including
(1) a compact yet lossless feature to represent
motions; (2) a novel 2D lookup-free motion tokenizer that preserves fine-grained motion details
while expanding codebook capacity, significantly
enhancing the representational power of motion
tokens. We believe this work lays the groundwork for developing more versatile and powerful motion generation models in the future. For
further details, visit https://beingbeyond.
github.io/Being-M0/.

A man kicks something or someone with his left leg.

Someone is standing and playing the piano.

(a) Motion-X
The left arm is not bent.

(b) HumanML3D

The right arm is not
hanging down.

The fingers are not
pointing outward.

The person is standing still, looking forward. Upper body: The
person's right arm hangs relaxed by their side, while the left
arm is bent at the elbow, with the hand placed on their stomach
or lower chest area. The shoulders are squared and the torso is
upright. Lower body: Both feet are planted firmly on the
ground, with legs slightly apart. The person's weight appears to
be evenly distributed between both legs.

The person is gesturing with their right hand. Upper body:
The right arm is extended forward with the hand open and
fingers pointing outward. The left arm hangs by their side.
The torso is slightly twisted to the left. Lower body: The left
leg is slightly forward with the foot flat on the ground. The
right leg is back, with the heel slightly raised, suggesting a
shift in weight to the left leg.

(c) MotionLib

(d) MotionLib

FID

the scale of datasets

MotionLib-1.2M Distribution

MotionLib

Motion-X

HumanML3D

MotionLib-0.5M

HumanML3D, 5%

ImageNet

3e2
Motion-X, 7%

2e2
1e2
new collected, 93%

5e1
0.36B

8B
13B
7B
the scale of model parameters

new collected

Motion-X

HumanML3D

Figure 1: TOP: While existing models perform well on
small-scale datasets like Motion-X and HumanML3D, they
struggle with out-of-domain concepts on MotionLib, exhibiting limited generalization. DOWN: Curves showing
the effects of scaling up large motion models. MotionLib
is the first large T2M dataset comparable in scale to visual
benchmarks like ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Motion generation is an emerging field with a wide range
of applications in video games, filmmaking, and robotics.
At the forefront of this area is text-to-motion generation
(T2M) (Ahn et al., 2018; Ahuja & Morency, 2019), which
plays a crucial role in translating natural language into human motions. State-of-the-art (SoTA) T2M models typically
rely on a combination of the motion tokenizer (e.g., vector
quantization VQ (Van Den Oord et al., 2017)), along with a
text encoder (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) and decoder
(e.g., GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)) to generate motion sequences from text commands. Despite the availability of

*

Equal contribution 1 Renmin University of China 2 Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence 3 Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Southeast University 5 Peking
University 6 BeingBeyond. Correspondence to: Zongqing Lu
<zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

