S HADOW KV: KV Cache in Shadows
for High-Throughput Long-Context LLM Inference

Hanshi Sun 1 2 Li-Wen Chang 1 Wenlei Bao 1 Size Zheng 1 Ningxin Zheng 1 Xin Liu 1 Harry Dong 2
Yuejie Chi 2 Beidi Chen 2

Abstract

Theoretical Equivalent Bandwidth for ShadowKV
31.5 GB/s (PCIe)

With the widespread deployment of long-context
large language models (LLMs), there has been
a growing demand for efficient support of highthroughput inference. However, as the key-value
(KV) cache expands with the sequence length, the
increasing memory footprint and the need to access it for decoding both result in low throughput
when serving long-context LLMs. While various dynamic sparse attention methods have been
proposed to accelerate inference while maintaining generation quality, they either fail to sufficiently reduce GPU memory usage or introduce
significant decoding latency by offloading the KV
cache to the CPU. We present S HADOW KV, a
high-throughput long-context LLM inference system that stores the low-rank key cache and offloads the value cache to reduce the memory footprint for larger batch sizes and longer sequences.
To minimize decoding latency, S HADOW KV employs an accurate KV selection strategy that reconstructs minimal sparse KV pairs on-the-fly.
By evaluating S HADOW KV on benchmarks like
RULER, LongBench, and models such as Llama3.1-8B and GLM-4-9B-1M, we demonstrate that
it achieves up to 6× larger batch sizes and 3.04×
higher throughput on an A100 GPU without sacrificing accuracy, even surpassing the performance
achievable with infinite batch size under the assumption of infinite GPU memory.

2 TB/s (A100)

7 TB/s

Figure 1. S HADOW KV effectively utilizes a limited KV budget to
achieve high accuracy, theoretically reaching over 7 TB/s equivalent bandwidth on an A100 GPU.

(Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Microsoft, 2024;
Liu et al., 2024a), enabling them to tackle complex tasks
like multi-document question answering and information retrieval from extensive contexts of up to 1M tokens (Achiam
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b). However, efficiently serving these long-context LLMs presents challenges related
to the key-value (KV) cache (Ge et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2024b), which stores previous key-value activations to avoid
re-computation. As KV cache scales with sequence length,
its growing memory footprint and the need to access it for
each token generation lead to low throughput during longcontext LLM inference. To address these, KV eviction or
sparse attention methods have been widely explored.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have increasingly demonstrated their ability to scale and handle long contexts

However, existing methods face three primary limitations:
accuracy degradation, inadequate memory reduction, and
significant decoding latency overhead. KV cache eviction
strategies (Zhang et al., 2024d;c) aim to reduce the memory
footprint by discarding KV pairs based on specific policies, but they often result in information loss and accuracy
degradation in tasks such as multi-turn conversations (Yang

1

ByteDance Seed 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Hanshi Sun <hanshi.s@bytedance.com>, Beidi Chen
<beidic@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

