Quantifying Prediction Consistency Under Fine-Tuning Multiplicity
in Tabular LLMs
Faisal Hamman 1 Pasan Dissanayake 1 Saumitra Mishra 2 Freddy Lecue 2 Sanghamitra Dutta 1

Abstract

many of these sectors rely on tabular data, Tabular LLMs
(TabLLMs) is emerging as a research priority (van Breugel
& van der Schaar, 2024). Recent studies have shown that
TabLLMs perform commendably in scenarios with limited
training data due to their transfer learning abilities (Hegselmann et al., 2023; Dinh et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2020; Yan
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023). However, these models are
often fine-tuned from large pre-trained models with millions
or billions of parameters on small, proprietary datasets (Hu
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022). This paucity of training data
and large parameter space introduces arbitrariness and inconsistency across fine-tuned model variants, raising concerns
about their trustworthy adoption in high-stakes applications.

Fine-tuning LLMs on tabular classification tasks
can lead to the phenomenon of fine-tuning multiplicity where equally well-performing models
make conflicting predictions on the same input.
Fine-tuning multiplicity can arise due to variations in the training process, e.g., seed, weight
initialization, minor changes to training data, etc.,
raising concerns about the reliability of Tabular
LLMs in high-stakes applications such as finance,
hiring, education, healthcare. Our work formalizes this unique challenge of fine-tuning multiplicity in Tabular LLMs and proposes a novel measure
to quantify the consistency of individual predictions without expensive model retraining. Our
measure quantifies a prediction’s consistency by
analyzing (sampling) the model’s local behavior
around that input in the embedding space. Interestingly, we show that sampling in the local
neighborhood can be leveraged to provide probabilistic guarantees on prediction consistency under a broad class of fine-tuned models, i.e., inputs
with sufficiently high local stability (as defined
by our measure) also remain consistent across
several fine-tuned models with high probability.
We perform experiments on multiple real-world
datasets to show that our local stability measure
preemptively captures consistency under actual
multiplicity across several fine-tuned models, outperforming competing measures.

One imminent challenge for TabLLMs is fine-tuning multiplicity where multiple well-performing models fine-tuned
from the same pre-trained LLM under slightly varying conditions (e.g., different seed, hyperparameters, or minor
changes in training data) produce conflicting predictions
for the same inputs. This concept is closely related to predictive multiplicity, often referred to as the Rashomon effect
in the context of decision trees and neural networks (Marx
et al., 2020; Breiman, 2003; Hsu & Calmon, 2022). While
multiplicity has also been observed in LLMs for text classification (Gomez et al., 2024), we are particularly interested
in fine-tuning multiplicity in TabLLMs (essentially minor
model variations) due to their relevance in high-stakes classification tasks. E.g., in areas like finance (Yin et al., 2023)
and healthcare (Wang et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2023b; Kim
et al., 2024), arbitrary and conflicting predictions on the
same input under minor model variations can lead to confusion, reputational risk, and distrust among stakeholders.
Aside from the inherent need for predictions to be consistent
to minor model variations (due to seed or hyperparameters),
TabLLMs deployed by institutions may also need to be updated for various reasons, e.g., to retrain on a few additional
data points (Wu et al., 2024), or even remove few data points
for privacy. Regulatory frameworks like the GDPR (Voigt,
2017) introduce the right to be forgotten which allows unlearning an individual’s data upon request, potentially leading to model updates. These model updates could, in turn,
impact previously issued predictions. Fine-tuning multiplicity also paves the way for fairwashing and explanation
bias (Black et al., 2022; Sokol et al., 2023; Rudin et al.,

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are generating significant
interest in high-stakes applications, e.g., finance, healthcare,
etc., particularly in few-shot classification scenarios. Since
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park 2 JPMorgan Chase AI Research.
Correspondence to: Faisal Hamman <fhamman@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

