Fast Video Generation with S LIDING T ILE ATTENTION
Peiyuan Zhang 1 Yongqi Chen * 2 Runlong Su * 1 Hangliang Ding 3
Ion Stoica 4 Zhengzhong Liu 5 Hao Zhang 1

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) with 3D full attention power state-of-the-art video generation, but
suffer from prohibitive compute cost – when generating just a 5-second 720P video, attention alone
takes 800 out of 945 seconds of total inference
time. This paper introduces sliding tile attention
(STA) to address this challenge. STA leverages
the observation that attention scores in pretrained
video diffusion models predominantly concentrate within localized 3D windows. By sliding and
attending over the local spatial-temporal region,
STA eliminates redundancy from full attention.
Unlike traditional token-wise sliding window attention (SWA), STA operates tile-by-tile with
a novel hardware-aware sliding window design,
preserving expressiveness while being hardwareefficient. With careful kernel-level optimizations, STA offers the first efficient 2D/3D slidingwindow-like attention implementation, achieving
58.79% MFU. Precisely, STA accelerates attention by 2.8–17× over FlashAttention-2 (FA2) and
1.6–10× over FlashAttention-3 (FA3). On the
leading video DiT, HunyuanVideo, STA reduces
end-to-end latency from 945s (FA3) to 501s without quality degradation, requiring no training. Enabling finetuning further lowers latency to 268s
with only a 0.09% drop on VBench. We make
our codebase public at https://github.com/hao-ailab/FastVideo.

(a) FLOPS distribution

(b) Attention kernel latency(ms)

Figure 1. (a) Generating a 5s 720P clip in Hunyuan involves processing 115K tokens, making attention the dominant cost. (b)
Attention latency comparison: existing methods fail to translate FLOP reduction into wall-clock speedup; STA is hardwareefficient and achieves proportional speedup with sparsity.

synthesizing long-duration, visually coherent outputs (Peebles & Xie, 2023; OpenAI, 2024). Central to their success
is 3D attention mechanism, which models spatial and temporal dependencies by flatterning video frames as a unified
sequence of visual tokens (Yang et al., 2024b; Genmo-Team,
2024; HunyuanVideo-Team, 2025). However, this design
introduces significant computational overhead due to the
quadratic complexity of attention, making training and inference prohibitively slow as video resolutions and durations
increase. As illustrated in Figure 1, attention computation
dominates the overall inference cost. Even with FlashAttention 3 (FA3) (Shah et al., 2024) and a high-end H100
GPU, HunyuanVideo (HunyuanVideo-Team, 2025) still requires 16 minutes to generate a 5-seconds 720p video. This
bottleneck severely limits the practical deployment of DiTs.
Video data inherently exhibit high redundancy – adjacent
frames exhibit minimal differences, and spatially close pixels tend to have stronger correlations. This redundancy suggests that treating every token independently in 3D attention
may be unnecessarily expensive. In this paper, we hypothesize that such redundancies are carried by 3D full attention
in pretrained video diffusion models, which, if properly
exploited, can drastically accelerate inference. To verify
this, we visualize the attention scores of HunyuanVideo in
Figure 2. The results reveal an intriguing 3D locality pattern: queries assign significantly higher attention scores to
spatially and temporally nearby keys. To quantify this effect,
we compute attention recall, measuring the fraction of total

1. Introduction
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) have emerged as the leading
architecture for high-resolution video generation, capable of
*

Co-second authorship 1 University of California, San Diego
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 3 Tsinghua University
4
University of California, Berkeley 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Hao Zhang
<haozhang@ucsd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

