Provable Policy Gradient for Robust Average-Reward MDPs
Beyond Rectangularity

Qiuhao Wang * 1 Yuqi Zha * 2 Chin Pang Ho 2 Marek Petrik 3

Abstract

2011). However, applying MDPs to real-world problems
often faces the challenge of model uncertainty, particularly
in transition dynamics, which are rarely known precisely.
To mitigate the impact of model errors, robust MDPs (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005) offer a compelling
solution by assuming that uncertain parameters lie within a
predefined ambiguity set. These robust MDPs aim to identify policies that optimize performance under the worst-case
scenario within the ambiguity set.

Robust Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) offer a promising framework for computing reliable
policies under model uncertainty. While policy
gradient methods have gained increasing popularity in robust discounted MDPs, their application
to the average-reward criterion remains largely
unexplored. This paper proposes a Robust Projected Policy Gradient (RP2G), the first generic
policy gradient method for robust average-reward
MDPs (RAMDPs) that is applicable beyond the
typical rectangularity assumption on transition
ambiguity. In contrast to existing robust policy
gradient algorithms, RP2G incorporates an adaptive decreasing tolerance mechanism for efficient
policy updates at each iteration. We also present a
comprehensive convergence analysis of RP2G for
solving ergodic tabular RAMDPs. Furthermore,
we establish the first study of the inner worstcase transition evaluation problem in RAMDPs,
proposing two gradient-based algorithms tailored
for rectangular and general ambiguity sets, each
with provable convergence guarantees. Numerical
experiments confirm the global convergence of
our new algorithm and demonstrate its superior
performance.

The majority of existing research on robust MDPs focuses
on the discounted setting, where future costs are discounted
by a factor γ ∈ (0, 1). Under this setting, robust MDPs become computationally tractable by imposing certain rectangularity assumptions, such as (s, a)-rectangularity (Iyengar,
2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005), s-rectangularity (Le Tallec, 2007; Wiesemann et al., 2013), k-rectangular (Mannor
et al., 2016), and r-rectangular (Goyal & Grand-Clement,
2023). Significant progress has been made in both valuebased methods that rely on the Bellman equation (Iyengar,
2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005; Kaufman & Schaefer, 2013;
Ho et al., 2021; Panaganti & Kalathil, 2021) and gradientbased methods that directly optimize the policy (Wang &
Zou, 2022; Li et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Kumar
et al., 2024a; Lin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). Despite these advances, research on robust discounted MDPs
beyond structured rectangular ambiguity sets is still scarce,
with only a few notable exceptions (Li et al., 2023), as solving robust discounted MDPs with general ambiguity sets is
NP-hard (Wiesemann et al., 2013).

1. Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014) provide a powerful framework for sequential decision-making,
with applications such as game solving (Mnih, 2013), healthcare (Shechter et al., 2008), and finance (Bäuerle & Rieder,

While much of the existing work focuses on robust discounted MDPs, many real-world systems that primarily
focus on the steady-state behavior, such as queueing control and scheduling automatic guided vehicles (Kober et al.,
2013), may still yield policies that perform poorly over the
long term (Wang et al., 2024b). Meanwhile, as discounted
factor γ approaches one, solution methods tend to converge more slowly, increasing computational costs (GrandClement et al., 2023). We refer interested reader to Appendix E.5 for more detailed numerical illustration. As
such, optimizing the long-term average cost is preferable to
the total discounted cost for these applications.

*

Equal contribution 1 Fintech Innovation Center, Research Institute for Digital Economy and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics 2 Department of
Data Science, City University of Hong Kong 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of New Hampshire. Correspondence to: Chin Pang Ho <clint.ho@cityu.edu.hk>, Marek Petrik
<mpetrik@cs.unh.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To overcome the limitations of the discounted setting, recent
1

