Cross-City Latent Space Alignment for Consistency Region Embedding

Meng Chen 1 Hongwei Jia 1 Zechen Li 1 Wenzhen Jia 2 Kai Zhao 3 Hongjun Dai 1 Weiming Huang 4

Abstract

(Chen et al., 2025a; Li et al., 2022; Ning et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2023).

Learning urban region embeddings has substantially advanced urban analysis, but their typical
focus on individual cities leads to disparate embedding spaces, hindering cross-city knowledge
transfer and the reuse of downstream task predictors. To tackle this issue, we present Consistency
Region Embedding (CoRE), a unified framework
integrating region embedding learning with crosscity latent space alignment. CoRE first embeds
regions from two cities into separate latent spaces,
followed by the alignment of latent space manifolds and fine-grained individual regions from
both cities. This ensures compatible and comparable embeddings within aligned latent spaces,
enabling predictions of various socioeconomic indicators without ground truth labels by migrating
knowledge from label-rich cities. Extensive experiments show CoRE outperforms competitive
baselines, confirming its effectiveness for crosscity knowledge transfer via aligned latent spaces.

From a holistic perspective, as illustrated in Figure 1(a),
learning region representations typically involves two stages:
1) regions from city X are projected into a latent space to
generate representations (ZX ), and 2) these representations
are fed into downstream task predictors (decX ) to produce
analytical results. However, the second stage requires sufficient ground truth data to train decX , which is often difficult
to acquire in practice. Many studies focus on cities like New
York City, where ground truth labels are readily available
with open data projects, while other cities remain understudied (Zhang et al., 2022).
To address this issue, we aim to answer the following question in the paper: can we align the latent spaces between
different cities so that we can leverage the knowledge
from one city to facilitate the analysis in other cities?
Technically, this hinges on whether the latent embedding
spaces learned from urban sensory data in different cities are
comparable. The straightforward answer is that the latent
spaces learned separately for different cities are typically
incomparable and unaligned, making it difficult to transfer knowledge through them. This incomparability issue
is shown in Figure 2(a), where latent spaces learned by
MVURE (Zhang et al., 2021) are projected onto the same
2D plane using t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) (Maaten & Hinton, 2008). The triangles and
dots represent regions in two cities (Chengdu and Xi’an),
with yellow, green, and red indicating low, medium, and
high GDP levels, respectively. The two spaces are clearly
different, indicating a meaningless direct comparison of two
cities.

1. Introduction
Learning vector representations (embeddings) for small urban units (regions) using various urban sensory data sources,
including points of interest and human trajectories, has become a common practice in urban computing and analytics
(Chen et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Jia
et al., 2024; Mai et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2025b). These representations have been proven to
be valuable for various urban downstream tasks, including
regional land use analysis, crime rate prediction, and house
price forecasting, demonstrating significant potential for
real-world applications in urban planning and management

In this paper, we aim to achieve the knowledge transfer
between cities by reusing task predictors (decX ). These
predictors, trained in a label-rich city, can be reused in another city without ground truth labels, enabling cross-city
predictions. Recent studies have realized this through unsupervised translation (Yabe et al., 2019; 2020; Haikal et al.,
2022), where they transform region representations learned
in one city to the other, similar to translating words across
languages, as shown in Figure 1(b). Specifically, they follow
a two-stage paradigm: intra-city region embedding learning
and cross-city translation. First, region embedding meth-

1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
Business School, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China
3
Walmart AI Lab, California, USA 4 Department of Physical Geography and Ecosystem Science, Lund University, Sweden. Correspondence to: Hongjun Dai <dahogn@sdu.edu.cn>, Weiming
Huang <W.Huang@leeds.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

