TimeStep Master: Asymmetrical Mixture of Timestep LoRA Experts for
Versatile and Efficient Diffusion Models in Vision
Shaobin Zhuang * 1 † Yiwei Guo * 2 Yanbo Ding * 2 Kunchang Li 2 Xinyuan Chen ‡ 3 Yaohui Wang ‡ 3
Fangyikang Wang 4 Ying Zhang 5 Chen Li 5 Yali Wang ‡ 2 3

Abstract

tensive experiments on three typical and popular
LoRA-related tasks of diffusion models, including
domain adaptation, post-pretraining, and model
distillation. Our TSM achieves the state-of-theart results on all these tasks, throughout various
model structures (UNet, DiT and MM-DiT) and
visual data modalities (Image and Video), showing its remarkable generalization capacity.

Diffusion models have driven the advancement of
vision generation over the past years. However,
it is often difficult to apply these large models
in downstream tasks, due to massive fine-tuning
cost. Recently, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
has been applied for efficient tuning of diffusion
models. Unfortunately, the capabilities of LoRAtuned diffusion models are limited, since the same
LoRA is used for different timesteps of the diffusion process. To tackle this problem, we introduce a general and concise TimeStep Master
(TSM) paradigm with two key fine-tuning stages.
In the fostering stage (1-stage), we apply different
LoRAs to fine-tune the diffusion model at different timestep intervals. This results in different
TimeStep LoRA experts that can effectively capture different noise levels. In the assembling stage
(2-stage), we design a novel asymmetrical mixture of TimeStep LoRA experts, via core-context
collaboration of experts at multi-scale intervals.
For each timestep, we leverage TimeStep LoRA
expert within the smallest interval as the core expert without gating, and use experts within the
bigger intervals as the context experts with timedependent gating. Consequently, our TSM can
effectively model the noise level via the expert in
the finest interval, and adaptively integrate contexts from the experts of other scales, boosting the
versatility of diffusion models. To show the effectiveness of our TSM paradigm, we conduct ex-

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have shown remarkable success in vision generation (Rombach et al., 2022b; Podell et al., 2023;
Singer et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2024d;
Esser et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2024a). Especially with the
guidance of scaling law, they demonstrate the great power
in generating images and videos from user prompts (Esser
et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2024a;c; Bao et al., 2024) owing to
billions of model parameters. However, it is often difficult
to deploy these diffusion models efficiently in various downstream tasks, since fine-tuning such huge models is resourceconsuming. To fill this gap, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
(Hu et al., 2021), initially developed in NLP (Chowdhary &
Chowdhary, 2020), has been applied to diffusion models for
rapid adaptation and efficient visual generation (Luo et al.,
2023a; Li et al., 2024b; Peng et al., 2024; Yin et al., 2024b).
However, we observe that the generative capability of LoRAtuned diffusion models is limited. For illustration, we take
the well-known PixArt-α (Chen et al., 2024d) as an example,
which is pre-trained on SAM-LLaVA-Captions10M (Chen
et al., 2024d) for image generation. As shown in Fig. 1 (b)
and (c), we perform LoRA on two typical fine-tuning settings. On one hand, we fine-tune this model with LoRA on
new image data (e.g., T2I-CompBench (Huang et al., 2023)).
In this setting of downstream adaptation, the LoRA-tuned
model makes similar errors as the pre-trained model, i.e.,
they both fail to fit the target data distribution. On the other
hand, we fine-tune this model with LoRA on the pretraining
image data. In this setting of post-pretraining, LoRA-tuned
model results in prompt misalignment, which deteriorates
the generative capacity of the pre-trained model. Based on
these observations, there is a natural question: why does

Equal contribution , ‡ Equal corresponding ,† Work done as
intern at WeChat, Tencent Inc. 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2 Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Shanghai Artificial intelli4
gence Laboratory. Zhejiang University. 5 WeChat, Tencent Inc..
Correspondence to: Yali Wang <yl.wang@siat.ac.cn>, Xinyuan
Chen <chenxinyuan@pjlab.org.cn>, Yaohui Wang <wangyaohui@pjlab.org.cn>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

