Thermalizer: Stable autoregressive neural emulation of spatiotemporal chaos

Christian Pedersen 1 2 Laure Zanna 1 2 Joan Bruna 1 2

Abstract

cost of numerical methods becomes extremely large. Turbulent fluid flows, for example, involve dynamical coupling
across length scales spanning orders of magnitude, and accurately modelling the full dynamical range is often intractable
for many important applications.

Autoregressive surrogate models (or emulators)
of spatiotemporal systems provide an avenue for
fast, approximate predictions, with broad applications across science and engineering. At inference
time, however, these models are generally unable
to provide predictions over long time rollouts due
to accumulation of errors leading to diverging trajectories. In essence, emulators operate out of
distribution, and controlling the online distribution quickly becomes intractable in large-scale
settings. To address this fundamental issue, and
focusing on time-stationary systems admitting an
invariant measure, we leverage diffusion models
to obtain an implicit estimator of the score of this
invariant measure. We show that this model of
the score function can be used to stabilize autoregressive emulator rollouts by applying on-the-fly
denoising during inference, a process we call thermalization. Thermalizing an emulator rollout is
shown to extend the time horizon of stable predictions by two orders of magnitude in complex
systems exhibiting turbulent and chaotic behavior, opening up a novel application of diffusion
models in the context of neural emulation.

Deep learning (DL) methods have been applied in various ways to mitigate the cost of obtaining PDE solutions.
One approach is to couple a coarse-resolution numerical
solver with a DL component, either as a learned correction
(Kochkov et al., 2021) or as an additional forcing term in the
PDE, formulated using the large-eddy simulation framework
(Duraisamy et al., 2019). DL models have also been applied
as surrogate models, or emulators, replacing the numerical
scheme entirely, and leveraging the speed of graphical processing units (GPUs) to provide fast approximate solutions
(Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Stachenfeld et al., 2021).
Such emulators are being applied in the context of weather
(Pathak et al., 2022; Lam et al., 2023; Bi et al., 2023) and
climate modelling (Kochkov et al., 2024; Watt-Meyer et al.,
2023; Subel & Zanna, 2024), with computational speedups
of up to five orders of magnitude (Kurth et al., 2023).
The standard approach to constructing a neural emulator
is to predict the state of the system at some future time
as a function of the current timestep. Simulated trajectories are then generated by a rollout of many autoregressive
passes, where the predicted state is fed back into the emulator. This framework suffers from instabilities over long
timescales, as accumulation of errors leads to a drift of the
emulator trajectory away from the truth (Chattopadhyay
et al., 2023; Bonavita, 2024; Parthipan et al., 2024; Bach
et al., 2024). Eventually, the drift becomes large enough that
the state is out of distribution, and trajectories exponentially
diverge. Some proposed modifications to improving the
stability of rollouts include the addition of noise to training data (Stachenfeld et al., 2021), training over multiple
consecutive timesteps (Vlachas et al., 2020; Keisler, 2022),
predicting multiple timesteps at once (Brandstetter et al.,
2022), including additional input channels representing external forcings(Watt-Meyer et al., 2023; Subel & Zanna,
2024), and adding iterative refinement steps focusing on
different frequency components (Lippe et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
The modeling of dynamical systems is a cornerstone task
in the physical sciences and engineering, with applications
across weather (Pathak et al., 2022; Watt-Meyer et al., 2023;
Lam et al., 2023; Lang et al., 2024) and climate modeling
(Kochkov et al., 2024; Subel & Zanna, 2024; Lupin-Jimenez
et al., 2025). The standard approach to modeling these systems is to solve the underlying partial differential equation
(PDE) describing the system using numerical methods. In
the case of high-dimensional systems, the computational
1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, USA 2 Center for Data Science, New York University, USA.
Correspondence to: Joan Bruna <bruna@cims.nyu.edu>.

The situation is further complicated by the fact that the systems that are being modelled are generally chaotic. Indeed,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

