OR-Bench: An Over-Refusal Benchmark for Large Language Models

Justin Cui 1 Wei-Lin Chiang 2 Ion Stoica 2 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1

Abstract

safety alignment for LLMs, employing techniques such as
safe reinforcement learning from human feedback (Safe
RLHF) (Bai et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2023; Ouyang et al.,
2022), multi-round automatic red-teaming (MART) (Ganguli et al., 2022; Ge et al., 2023) and instruction finetuning (Qi et al., 2023). Additionally, various benchmarks
have been established to assess LLMs’ ability to reject questions with harmful intents, including ToxicChat (Lin et al.,
2023), PromptBench (Zhu et al., 2023), AdvBench (Zou
et al., 2023) and SorryBench (Xie et al., 2024a). However,
enhanced safety alignment often comes with the side effect of over-refusal, where LLMs may refuse to answer a
prompt, even if they are expected to answer it. Despite specific instances of over-refusal have been reported (Claude,
2023; less, 2024; Röttger et al., 2023), the absence of a
large-scale benchmark hinders deeper studies of this issue
in LLMs. The main challenge in creating such benchmark
lies in the lack of a systematical way to find prompts that
should be answered but are likely to be refused by LLMs.
Randomly sampling natural prompts from standard datasets
yields very few refusal cases, as the over-refusal problem
typically arises from borderline prompts that are near the
decision boundary that a well-calibrated model should handle (Dubey et al., 2024). Currently, the only available test
suite is XSTest (Röttger et al., 2023), which consists of 250
hand-crafted prompts based on certain rules. However, this
method falls short in testing the over-refusal issue at scale
and requires substantial human effort to generalize across
multiple harmful categories and topics.

Large Language Models (LLMs) require careful safety alignment to prevent malicious outputs.
While significant research focuses on mitigating
harmful content generation, the enhanced safety
often come with the side effect of over-refusal,
where LLMs may reject innocuous prompts and
become less helpful. Although the issue of overrefusal has been empirically observed, a systematic measurement is challenging due to the difficulty of crafting prompts that can elicit the
over-refusal behaviors of LLMs. This study proposes a novel method for automatically generating large-scale over-refusal datasets. Leveraging this technique, we introduce OR-Bench,
the first large-scale over-refusal benchmark. ORBench comprises 80,000 over-refusal prompts
across 10 common rejection categories, a subset
of around 1,000 hard prompts that are challenging even for state-of-the-art LLMs, and an additional 600 toxic prompts to prevent indiscriminate responses. We then conduct a comprehensive
study to measure the over-refusal of 32 popular
LLMs across 8 model families. Our datasets are
publicly available at https://huggingface.co/benchllms and our codebase is open-sourced at
https://github.com/justincui03/or-bench. We hope
this benchmark can help the community develop
better safety aligned models. Warning: Some
contents may include toxic or undesired contents.

In this work, we present the first large-scale benchmark for
testing the over-refusal issue in LLMs. We design a framework to automatically generate over-refusal prompts, where
the main idea involves re-writing an original harmful prompt
to render it benign and then checking the non-harmfulness
of the resulting prompt using LLM moderators. As a result, we construct the Over-Refusal Benchmark (OR-Bench)
which consists of a total of 80,000 safe prompts that may
get rejected by LLMs across 10 harmful categories such
as violence, privacy, hate, sexual, etc. We then conduct a
comprehensive study to evaluate 32 existing open-source
and black-box LLMs on our benchmark, as summarized
in Figure 1 and detailed in Tables 2, 6 and 7. The results
reveal a crucial trade-off: most models achieve safety (toxic
prompt rejection) at the expense of over-refusal, rarely ex-

1. Introduction
As Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely used in practice, it becomes increasingly important to prevent LLMs
from following malicious instructions or generating toxic
content (Anwar et al., 2024; Ganguli et al., 2022). Therefore, numerous algorithms have been developed to ensure
1
UCLA 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Justin Cui <justincui@ucla.edu>, Cho-Jui Hsieh <chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

