AutoAdvExBench: Benchmarking autonomous exploitation
of adversarial example defenses

Nicholas Carlini 1 Edoardo Debenedetti 2 Javier Rando 2 Milad Nasr 1 Florian Tramèr 2

Abstract

Zhou et al., 2023). Most relevant towards this paper, language models can now be used as agents that interact with
an environment, plan their actions, test their own outputs
and refine their responses independently (Jimenez et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023).

We introduce AutoAdvExBench, a benchmark
to evaluate if large language models (LLMs) can
autonomously exploit defenses to adversarial
examples. Unlike existing security benchmarks
that often serve as proxies for real-world tasks,
AutoAdvExBench directly measures LLMs’
success on tasks regularly performed by machine
learning security experts. This approach offers
a significant advantage: if a LLM could solve
the challenges presented in AutoAdvExBench,
it would immediately present practical utility
for adversarial machine learning researchers.
While our strongest ensemble of agents can
break 87% of CTF-like (“homework exercise”)
adversarial example defenses, they break just
37% of real-world defenses, indicating a large
gap between difficulty in attacking “real” code,
and CTF-like code. Moreover, LLMs that are
good at CTFs are not always good at real-world
defenses; for example, Claude Sonnet 3.5 has a
nearly identical attack success rate to Opus 4 on
the CTF-like defenses (75% vs 79%), but the on
the real-world defenses Sonnet 3.5 breaks just
13% of defenses compared to Opus 4’s 30%. We
make this benchmark available at
https://github.com/ethz-spylab/AutoAdvExBench.

These advanced capabilities drive the need for more challenging evaluations, and increasingly often, for potential
applications of these models, such as their ability to solve
security-critical tasks independently (e.g. penetration testing (Happe & Cito, 2023)). Towards this end, we introduce
AutoAdvExBench, a proxy-free, challenging, but tractable
benchmark for both AI security and AI agents. AutoAdvExBench evaluates the ability of large language models to
autonomously generate exploits on 75 adversarial example
defenses. To solve this benchmark, an LLM agent must be
able to receive as input (1) a paper detailing a defense and
(2) its implementation, and then output adversarial examples
that attack the defense.
We believe that AutoAdvExBench is interesting for many
reasons, but most importantly because it is not a proxy
metric for security tasks, but is the complete and exact task
that real machine learning security researchers write papers
on (Athalye et al., 2018; Tramer et al., 2020). This means
that if an agent could achieve superhuman performance, it
would have by definition produced novel research results.
This is possible in large part because AutoAdvExBench
is entirely mechanistically verifiable: the only metric that
matters for security is robustness against the strongest attack,
regardless of the methods used.

1. Introduction

We also design a strong agent that can automatically exploit some of the defenses in AutoAdvExBench. On a 24defense subset of our dataset containing “homework-like”
implementations (i.e., defenses that were designed to be
“pedagogically useful” (Carlini & Kurakin, 2020) and thus
easy-to-analyze), Claude 3.5 Sonnet reaches a 75% attack
success rate. But on the “real world” defenses, this agent
succeeds only 13% of the time. In contrast, Claude 3.7
Sonnet succeeds on the “real world” subset 21% of the time,
but on the CTF subset succeeds just 54% of the time.

Language models have been traditionally evaluated
on language reasoning and understanding tasks like
MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020) and GPQA (Rein et al.,
2023). However, state-of-the-art models have outgrown
the usefulness of many of these benchmarks, as they now
exhibit capabilities beyond text understanding that require
novel benchmarks (Jimenez et al., 2023; Wijk et al., 2024;
1
Google DeepMind 2 ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Nicholas
Carlini <nicholas@carlini.com>.

This stark contrast highlights the the need for more security evaluations that work with real-world code. Especially

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

