Advancing Personalized Learning with Neural Collapse for Long-Tail Challenge

Hanglei Hu * 1 Yingying Guo * 1 Zhikang Chen 2 Sen Cui 2 Fei Wu 3 Kun Kuang 3 Min Zhang † ‡ 1 Bo Jiang † 1

Abstract

Anderson et al., 1995; Raj & Renumol, 2019; Pukkhem
& Vatanawood, 2011) rely on predefined rules and expert
knowledge to guide personalization, while data-based methods (Ayeni et al., 2024; Tapalova & Zhiyenbayeva, 2022;
Conati et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024b; Han et al., 2024)
leverage large-scale data and advanced machine learning
techniques to dynamically adapt and optimize the learning
experience. Due to their flexibility and efficiency in meeting individual needs, data-driven methods have gradually
become the mainstream approach. Therefore, in this paper,
we focus on data-based personalized learning.

Personalized learning, especially data-based methods, has garnered widespread attention in recent
years, aiming to meet individual student needs.
However, many works rely on the implicit assumption that benchmarks are high-quality and
well-annotated, which limits their practical applicability. In real-world scenarios, these benchmarks often exhibit long-tail distributions, significantly impacting model performance. To address this challenge, we propose a novel method
called Neural-Collapse-Advanced personalized
Learning (NCAL), designed to learn features that
conform to the same simplex equiangular tight
frame (ETF) structure. NCAL introduces textmodality collapse (TC) regularization to optimize
the distribution of text embeddings within the
large language model (LLM) representation space.
Notably, NCAL is model-agnostic, making it compatible with various architectures and approaches,
thereby ensuring broad applicability. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that NCAL effectively
enhances existing works, achieving new state-ofthe-art performance. Additionally, NCAL mitigates class imbalance, significantly improving
the model’s generalization ability. Code is available at https://github.com/llm4edu/
NCAL_ICML2025.git.

Data-based personalized learning is widely applied in important educational scenarios such as knowledge tracing (Ghosh
et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2025), cognitive diagnosis (Wang
et al., 2020; 2024b), computer adaptive testing (Zhuang
et al., 2023; Mousavinasab et al., 2021) and so on. In recent years, researchers have progressively advanced toward
deeper exploration, not only leveraging more complex architectures to enhance the expressive power of models (Lu
et al., 2021; Grawemeyer et al., 2016) but also focusing on
constructing larger-scale and more diverse datasets (Choi
et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2016) to improve
the generalization ability of models across different contexts.
For example, in cognitive diagnosis tasks, by thoroughly
analyzing students’ learning behaviors and cognitive characteristics, personalized diagnostic reports can be generated to
help teachers monitor students’ progress and identify learning bottlenecks in real time, thus providing technical support
for student-centered teaching models (Wang et al., 2020;
Lu et al., 2021). However, these methods are often based
on an implicit assumption that the data used in data-driven
approaches is of high quality and well-annotated.

1. Introduction
Personalized learning is an important downstream task in
intelligent education, aiming to address the unique needs,
preferences, and abilities of individual learners (Shemshack
& Spector, 2020; Bernacki et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024a).
It primarily encompasses two paradigms: rule-based and
data-based methods. Rule-based methods (Skinner, 1961;

In real-world scenarios, the collection of high-quality and
standardized educational data is both challenging and impractical due to concerns over protecting the personal privacy of minors and the reliance on annotations from educational experts (Dominguez et al., 2010; Enders et al.,
2008). As a result, benchmarks for data-based personalized
learning naturally exhibit imbalance (or long-tail) distributions (Menon et al., 2020; Kanchon et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2024). However, existing research has largely overlooked
this problem. Experiments shown in Figure 1 (a) and (d)
demonstrate that the performance of the Qwen2.5 varies
with changes in data balance. When the τ = 0.25 value is

*
Equal contribution† Corresponding author‡ Project leader 1 East
China Normal University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Min Zhang <mzhang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>,
Bo Jiang <bjiang@deit.ecnu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

