PRIME: Deep Imbalanced Regression with Proxies

Jongin Lim 1 Sucheol Lee 1 Daeho Um 1 Sung-Un Park 1 Jinwoo Shin 2
Feature Space (ℝ𝐹 )

Proxy loss (𝓛proxy)

Abstract

Alignment loss (𝓛align)

𝒛

𝛾4

𝛾1

Data imbalance remains a fundamental challenge
in real-world machine learning. However, most existing work has focused on classification, leaving
imbalanced regression underexplored despite its
importance in many applications. To address this
gap, we propose PRIME, a framework that leverages learnable proxies to construct a balanced and
well-ordered feature space for imbalanced regression. At its core, PRIME arranges proxies to be
uniformly distributed in the feature space while
preserving the ordinal structure of regression targets, and then aligns each sample feature to its
corresponding proxy. By using proxies as reference points, PRIME induces the desired structure of learned representations, promoting better
generalization, especially in underrepresented target regions. Moreover, since proxy-based alignment resembles classification, PRIME enables
the seamless application of class imbalance techniques to regression, facilitating more balanced
feature learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and broad applicability of
PRIME, achieving state-of-the-art performance
on four real-world regression benchmark datasets
across diverse target domains.

𝛾2

𝛾3

𝒛
𝑝

𝒛1

𝑓

𝑝

𝑝

𝑝

𝒛3

𝒛2

𝒛4

𝒙:

𝒚:

4
Sample
(Minority)

1

21

41

61

𝑝

𝒚2

𝑝

𝒚3

𝑝

𝒚4

𝒚1

Age

𝑝

Proxies

Figure 1. An overview of PRIME. Given a sample, PRIME leverages synthetic reference points, termed proxies, to facilitate feature
learning. These proxies provide global guidance for effective positioning in the feature space, even for minority samples, enabling
the model f to learn balanced and well-ordered representations.

primarily focused on classification setups, leaving deep imbalanced regression (DIR) underexplored (Yang et al., 2021),
despite its significance in various applications.
Unlike classification, regression deals with continuous targets, making it challenging to apply the notion of class
imbalance directly. Early works on DIR adapted techniques
from imbalanced classification, such as re-weighting (Yang
et al., 2021; Steininger et al., 2021) or logit adjustment (Ren
et al., 2022), with minor modifications to handle continuous
targets. Although intuitive, these methods mainly focus on
adjusting loss functions for the final predictions without considering the underlying feature representations. As a result,
the learned representations are often fragmented (Zha et al.,
2023) and fail to reflect the ordinal relationships of target
values (Gong et al., 2022), limiting their effectiveness in
real-world applications (Zhang et al., 2023a).

1. Introduction
Data imbalance is a prominent, yet long-standing challenge
in most real-world machine learning scenarios (Buda et al.,
2018), where certain target values are significantly underrepresented. This imbalance hinders deep models from effectively generalizing to minority groups with limited training
samples, driving extensive research efforts to address this
challenge (Liu et al., 2019b; Tang et al., 2020; Menon et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2023b). However, most studies have

To tackle these issues, recent studies (Gong et al., 2022;
Keramati et al., 2024) have explored representation learning approaches for DIR. Specifically, to better reflect the
continuous nature of regression targets, these methods impose additional feature regularization terms that encourage
samples closer in target space to be positioned closer in feature space. While demonstrating promising results, previous
representation learning methods suffer from inherent limitations, as they rely solely on sample relationships within

1

AI Center, Samsung Electronics 2 Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology (KAIST). Correspondence to: Jongin
Lim <jonny.lim@samsung.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

