Stray Intrusive Outliers-Based Feature Selection on Intra-Class Asymmetric
Instance Distribution or Multiple High-Density Clusters

Lixin Yuan 1 2 Yirui Wu 1 Wenxiao Zhang 1 Minglei Yuan 3 Jun Liu 4

Abstract
For data with intra-class Asymmetric instance
Distribution or Multiple High-density Clusters
(ADMHC), outliers are real and have specific patterns for data classification, where the class body
is necessary and difficult to identify. Previous Feature Selection (FS) methods score features based
on all training instances or rarely target intra-class
ADMHC. In this paper, we propose a supervised
FS method, Stray Intrusive Outliers-based FS
(SIOFS), for data classification with intra-class
ADMHC. By focusing on Stray Intrusive Outliers (SIOs), SIOFS modifies the skewness coefficient and fuses the threshold in the 3σ principle
to identify the class body, scoring features based
on the intrusion degree of SIOs. In addition, the
refined density-mean center is proposed to represent the general characteristics of the class body
reasonably. Mathematical formulations, proofs,
and logical exposition ensure the rationality and
universality of the settings in the proposed SIOFS
method. Extensive experiments on 16 diverse
benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority
of SIOFS over 12 state-of-the-art FS methods in
terms of classification accuracy, normalized mutual information, and confusion matrix. SIOFS
source codes is available at https://github.
com/XXXly/2025-ICML-SIOFS

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. (a) Similar scene images of “Resort” and “School” on
AID. (b) 2D visualization of classes “1” and “3” from CLL via
T-SNE (2012). (c) Similar digits “4” and “9” on GISETTE. (d)
Distance histogram of instances to center for class “3” on CLL. (e)
Distance histogram of instances to center for class “1” on TOX.

generated (Li et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). Feature Selection (FS), the selection of a discriminative feature subset,
is an essential part of data processing (Cohen et al., 2023).
FS makes the representations of instances interpretable and
enables fast and compact models to be learned.
High-dimensional data classification with intra-class Asymmetric instance Distribution or Multiple High-density Clusters (ADMHC) is challenging in machine learning, especially for small-sized datasets. In such tasks, misclassified
outliers inevitably exist. Moreover, some outliers intrude
into other class bodies. As shown in Fig. 1a, some instances
of “Resort” share very similar structural and textural characteristics with instances of “School”. Similarly, Fig. 1c
shows that some instances of “4” and “9” are very similar.
(1)
(1)
In Fig. 1b, x1 , x2 are three different types of outliers
(1)
from class “1”, where x1 intrudes into the body of class
(1)
“3”, and x2 is near the body of class “3”. Compared to
(1)
(1)
x2 , the class label of x1 is easily mispredicted as “3” by
(1)
the predictive model. Focusing on x1 can reasonably iden-

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement of data acquisition technologies, an increasing amount of high-dimensional data is being
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University, Jiangsu, China 2 State Key Lab. for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University, P.R. China 3 Hefei Institute for
Advanced Research, Anhui University of Finance and Economics,
Anhui, China 4 School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Yirui Wu <wuyirui@hhu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

