Text-to-LoRA: Instant Transformer Adaption

Rujikorn Charakorn 1 Edoardo Cetin 1 Yujin Tang 1 Robert T. Lange 1

Abstract

they remain rigid when adding task-specific capabilities. In
such cases, practitioners often resort to re-training parts
of the model (Gururangan et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021;
Dettmers et al., 2022; Tay et al., 2021) using parameterefficient fine-tuning techniques, e.g., Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA, Hu et al., 2022). Typically, a LoRA adapter has to
be optimized for each downstream task and requires taskspecific dataset and hyperparameter setting. This fine-tuning
scheme for adaptation significantly limits the possibility of
transferring knowledge between tasks and induces engineering overhead. Recently, it has been observed that by inducing structural constraints, the low-rank matrices learned by
LoRA adapters can be further compressed. For example,
one can train lossy versions of the original adapter while
maintaining downstream performance (Brüel-Gabrielsson
et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024; Kopiczko et al., 2024). Furthermore, multiple LoRAs can be combined for new tasks
at inference time (Ostapenko et al., 2024). At the core of
these approaches lies the explicit use of decomposition or
dimensionality reduction techniques (e.g., SVD or routing)
for better compression and online composition of existing
LoRAs. This raises the following questions:

While Foundation Models provide a general tool
for rapid content creation, they regularly require
task-specific adaptation. Traditionally, this exercise involves careful curation of datasets and repeated fine-tuning of the underlying model. Finetuning techniques enable practitioners to adapt
foundation models for many new applications but
require expensive and lengthy training while being notably sensitive to hyperparameter choices.
To overcome these limitations, we introduce Textto-LoRA (T2L), a model capable of adapting
Large Language Models on the fly solely based on
a natural language description of the target task.
T2L is a hypernetwork trained to construct LoRAs in a single inexpensive forward pass. After
training T2L on a suite of 9 pre-trained LoRA
adapters (GSM8K, Arc, etc.), we show that the
ad-hoc reconstructed LoRA instances match the
performance of task-specific adapters across the
corresponding test sets. Furthermore, T2L can
compress hundreds of LoRA instances and zeroshot generalize to entirely unseen tasks. This
approach provides a significant step towards democratizing the specialization of foundation models and enables language-based adaptation with
minimal compute requirements. Our code is available at https://github.com/SakanaAI/
text-to-lora.

1. Can we end-to-end train a neural network to
compress many pre-trained LoRAs?
2. Can we decode new task-specific LoRA
adapters solely based on natural-language instructions for an unseen task at test time?
We hypothesize that different LoRA adapters share the same
underlying adaptation mechanism and can be optimized simultaneously without any explicit structure or recipe for
combining them. To explicitly test this hypothesis, we propose T2L, a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2016) that compresses
task-specific LoRAs and generates new LoRA adapters zeroshot at inference time. T2L is trained to compress LoRAs
on a diverse task distribution from the Super Natural Instructions (SNI) dataset (Wang et al., 2022). Importantly, T2L
takes a natural language description of the target task as an
input, allowing zero-shot LoRA generation to unseen tasks.
Empirically, we show that T2L can effectively be trained
either to reconstruct pre-trained adapters or via supervised
fine-tuning on a distribution of downstream tasks (see Figure 1, top right). After training, T2L outperforms a multi-

1. Introduction
Biological systems are capable of rapid adaptation, given
limited sensory cues. For example, the human visual system
can tune its light sensitivity and focus through neuromodulation of the fovea and rod cells (Wurtz et al., 2011; Digre
& Brennan, 2012). While recent large language models
(LLMs) exhibit a wide variety of capabilities and knowledge,
1
Sakana AI. Correspondence to: Rujikorn Charakorn <rujikorn@sakana.ai>, Robert T. Lange <robert@sakana.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

