Latent Thought Models with Variational Bayes Inference-Time Computation

Deqian Kong 1 2 † Minglu Zhao 1 † Dehong Xu 1 † Bo Pang 3 Shu Wang 1 Edouardo Honig 1 Zhangzhang Si 4
Chuan Li 2 Jianwen Xie 2 ‡ Sirui Xie 1 ‡ Ying Nian Wu 1 ‡

Abstract
We propose a novel class of language models, Latent Thought Models (LTMs), which incorporate
explicit latent thought vectors that follow an explicit prior model in latent space. These latent
thought vectors guide the autoregressive generation of ground tokens through a Transformer
decoder. Training employs a dual-rate optimization process within the classical variational Bayes
framework: fast learning of local variational parameters for the posterior distribution of latent
vectors (inference-time computation), and slow
learning of global decoder parameters. Empirical studies reveal that LTMs possess additional
scaling dimensions beyond traditional Large Language Models (LLMs), such as the number of
iterations in inference-time computation and number of latent thought vectors. Higher sample
efficiency can be achieved by increasing training compute per token, with further gains possible by trading model size for more inference
steps. Designed based on these scaling properties, LTMs demonstrate superior sample and
parameter efficiency compared to autoregressive
models and discrete diffusion models. They significantly outperform these counterparts in validation perplexity and zero-shot language modeling tasks. Additionally, LTMs exhibit emergent few-shot in-context reasoning capabilities
that scale with model size, and achieve competitive performance in conditional and unconditional
text generation. The project page is available at
https://deqiankong.github.io/blogs/ltm.

Figure 1: Analysis of model scaling behavior of validation perplexity across model size, inference steps, and the
number of latent thought vectors Nz . Autoregressive and
diffusion baselines are plotted as dashed lines.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advancements in
the field of natural language processing, primarily driven by
the development of large language models (LLMs). These
models, exemplified by GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), PaLM
(Chowdhery et al., 2022), and their successors, have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a wide range of language tasks, from text generation and translation to question
answering and complex reasoning. Their performance has
often approached, and in some cases even surpassed, humanlevel competence in specific domains.
The remarkable success of LLMs is underpinned by wellestablished scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022), which predict performance improvements with
increased model and data size. The induced equations reveal that larger models achieve significantly higher sample
efficiency (evaluated by the number of training tokens for
achieving certain performance), making it computationally
optimal to train very large models and stop before convergence. However, as model sizes grow rapidly, data availability has emerged as a critical bottleneck for continued scaling.
This limitation motivates our exploration of a novel class of
language models that introduces new scaling dimensions to
unlock further improvements in sample efficiency.

†
Equal contribution ‡ Equal advising 1 UCLA 2 Lambda, Inc.
Salesforce Research 4 KUNGFU.AI. This work was partially conducted while D. K. was an intern at Lambda, Inc. Correspondence
to: Deqian Kong <deqiankong@ucla.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We propose Latent Thought Models (LTMs), which incor1

