H I R EMATE: Hierarchical Approach for Efficient Re-materialization of
Neural Networks
Julia Gusak * 1 Xunyi Zhao * 1 Théotime Le Hellard * 2 Zhe Li 1 Lionel Eyraud-Dubois 1 Olivier Beaumont 1

Abstract
Training deep neural networks (DNNs) on
memory-limited GPUs is challenging, as storing
intermediate activations often exceeds available
memory. Re-materialization, a technique that preserves exact computations, addresses this by selectively recomputing activations instead of storing them. However, existing methods either fail
to scale, lack generality, or introduce excessive
execution overhead. We introduce H I R EMATE,
a hierarchical re-materialization framework that
recursively partitions large computation graphs,
applies optimized solvers at multiple levels, and
merges solutions into a global efficient training schedule. This enables scalability to significantly larger graphs than prior ILP-based methods while keeping runtime overhead low. Designed for single-GPU models and activation rematerialization, HiRemate extends the feasibility of training networks with thousands of graph
nodes, surpassing prior methods in both efficiency
and scalability. Experiments on various types
of networks yield up to 50-70% memory reduction with only 10-15% overhead, closely matching optimal solutions while significantly reducing solver time. Seamlessly integrating with PyTorch Autograd, HiRemate requires almost no
code change to use, enabling broad adoption in
memory-constrained deep learning.

time

direct solvers
memory

3. Solving bottom-level subgraphs
with different solvers & budgets
hierarchical solvers

4. Recursively solving
higher-level subgraphs
2. Partitioned graph

1. Original graph

5. Merging schedules
into final solution

Figure 1. H I R EMATE takes a PyTorch nn.Module and creates a
nn.Module, which provides same outputs while satisfying peak
memory budget constraints B during training. (1) Obtain data-flow
graph G from the PyTorch module. (2) Recursively partition G
with H-Partition (Section 3.1) into small-size subgraphs. (3)-(5)
Obtain a re-materialization schedule from G with budget B using
H-Solver (Section 3.2). (6) Produce a new nn.Module whose
execution follows the schedule (Appendix).

like ResNet-50 (Wu et al., 2019) to Natural Language Processing transformer-based models (Vaswani et al., 2017)
like GPT. On the one hand, the size of the models and the
resolution of the data are increasing, which raises problems
for the storage of both weights and activations. On the
other hand, the first models had chain-like structures (sequence of convolution layers) and then moved to chains of
complex blocks (chains of Transformer blocks for GPT-like
models). Finally, recent NN exhibit arbitrarily complex
dependency graph structures between layers of the neural
network: for example, UNO (Wen et al., 2022) is structured as a U-Net of complex blocks, and encoder-decoder
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) feature very long skip
connections.

1. Introduction
Modern Neural Networks (NN) undergo several important
evolutions which have consequences on the computation
and memory requirements, from the first vision networks
*
Equal contribution 1 Inria Center at the University of Bordeaux
École Normale Supérieure, PSL University, Paris. Correspondence to: Julia Gusak <yulia.gusak@inria.fr>, Lionel EyraudDubois <lionel.eyraud-dubois@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

