RLTHF: Targeted Human Feedback for LLM Alignment

Yifei Xu 1 2 * Tusher Chakraborty 1 Emre Kıcıman 1 Bibek Aryal 1 Srinagesh Sharma 1 Songwu Lu 2
Ranveer Chandra 1

Abstract

preferences, including intent, style, grounding, and compliance requirements (Atreya, 2024; Microsoft, 2024; Sharma,
2024; AI, 2024). A key approach to achieving this alignment is Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF), which has emerged as a widely adopted technique
in the literature for refining model behavior based on human
feedback (Bai et al., 2022a; Stiennon et al., 2020; Rafailov
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Ouyang et al., 2022).

Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) to
align with user preferences is challenging due
to the high cost of quality human annotations in
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) and the generalizability limitations of AI
Feedback. To address these challenges, we propose RLTHF, a human-AI hybrid framework that
combines LLM-based initial alignment with selective human annotations to achieve full-human annotation alignment with minimal effort. RLTHF
identifies hard-to-annotate samples mislabeled by
LLMs using a reward model’s reward distribution
and iteratively enhances alignment by integrating strategic human corrections while leveraging
LLM’s correctly labeled samples. Evaluations on
HH-RLHF and TL;DR datasets show that RLTHF
reaches full-human annotation-level alignment
with only 6-7% of the human annotation effort.
Furthermore, models trained on RLTHF’s curated
datasets for downstream tasks outperform those
trained on fully human-annotated datasets, underscoring the effectiveness of RLTHF.

The effectiveness of RLHF techniques heavily depends on
high-quality human annotations, which are both costly and
time-consuming to obtain (Pang et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2024a). To mitigate this challenge, Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF) has been introduced, leveraging LLMs to replace human annotators in the
feedback loop (Lee et al., 2023; Lee et al.; Bai et al., 2022b).
While RLAIF can approximate human judgment to some
extent, it is sensitive to factors such as prompt optimization,
task complexity, model bias, generator-discriminator gap,
and the capability of the judge model, limiting its ability
to fully replicate human annotations (Huang et al., 2024;
Sharma et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2024;
Huang et al., 2023). Our evaluation also provides evidence
of these limitations. Furthermore, the samples that challenge a judge model are often the ones most critical for
adapting base models to specialized fine-tuning tasks (Ethayarajh et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023).
The cost of human annotation is further exacerbated by privacy and security constraints that restrict fine-tuning service
providers’ access to an entire customer data corpus. In such
cases, only subject matter experts (SMEs) within the customer organization have full visibility into the data, making
it particularly difficult to optimize prompts effectively across
the entire corpus, especially for hard-to-annotate samples.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable advancements, unlocking new possibilities across a wide range of applications (Touvron et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al.,
2023). As these models become more powerful, the focus has shifted toward customization, i.e., fine-tuning base
models to better serve specific tasks and user needs (Wei
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023a). Companies are increasingly
investing in solutions built upon fine-tuned models, recognizing the value of adapting LLMs to align with end-user

To address these challenges, we propose Reinforcement
Learning from Targeted Human Feedback (RLTHF), a
human-AI hybrid solution that combines coarse initial alignment using general-purpose LLMs with the progressive
integration of strategically selected human annotations to
achieve annotation quality comparable to fully humansupervised approaches. RLTHF begins with an initial alignment stage, where a general-purpose LLM labels unlabeled
data based on high-level instructions. While this approach
effectively captures broader human alignment for easier data

*
Work done during an internship at Microsoft. 1 Microsoft
University of California, Los Angeles.
Correspondence
to: Yifei Xu <yxu@cs.ucla.edu>, Tusher Chakraborty
<tusher.chakraborty@microsoft.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

