Average Certified Radius is a Poor Metric for Randomized Smoothing

Chenhao Sun * 1 Yuhao Mao * 1 Mark Niklas Müller 1 2 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

Density
Gaussian
RS Training

Randomized smoothing (RS) is popular for providing certified robustness guarantees against adversarial attacks. The average certified radius
(ACR) has emerged as a widely used metric for
tracking progress in RS. However, in this work,
for the first time we show that ACR is a poor
metric for evaluating robustness guarantees provided by RS. We theoretically prove not only that
a trivial classifier can have arbitrarily large ACR,
but also that ACR is extremely sensitive to improvements on easy samples. In addition, the
comparison using ACR has a strong dependence
on the certification budget. Empirically, we confirm that existing training strategies, though improving ACR, reduce the model’s robustness on
hard samples consistently. To strengthen our
findings, we propose strategies, including explicitly discarding hard samples, reweighing the
dataset with approximate certified radius, and extreme optimization for easy samples, to replicate the progress in RS training and even achieve
the state-of-the-art ACR on CIFAR-10, without
training for robustness on the full data distribution. Overall, our results suggest that ACR has
introduced a strong undesired bias to the field,
and its application should be discontinued in RS.
Finally, we suggest using the empirical distribution of pA , the accuracy of the base model on
noisy data, as an alternative metric for RS.

0

0.5
pA

1

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of the effect of RS training.

of adversarial attacks which try to construct a perturbation
that manipulates the model (Athalye et al., 2018), certified
defenses have been proposed to provide robustness guarantees. While deterministic certified defenses (Gowal et al.,
2018; Mirman et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2021; Müller et al.,
2023; Mao et al., 2023; 2024a; De Palma et al.; Balauca
et al., 2024) incur no additional cost at inference-time, randomized certified defenses scale better with probabilistic
guarantees at the cost of multiplied inference-time complexity. The most popular randomized certified defense is
Randomized Smoothing (RS) (Lécuyer et al., 2019; Cohen
et al., 2019), which certifies a smoothed classifier given the
accuracy of a base model on noisy data, pA .
To train better models with larger certified radius under RS,
many training strategies have been proposed (Cohen et al.,
2019; Salman et al., 2019; Jeong & Shin, 2020; Zhai et al.,
2020; Jeong et al., 2023). Average Certified Radius (ACR),
defined to be the average of the certified radii over each
sample in the dataset, has been a common metric to evaluate the effectiveness of these methods. Although some
studies refrained from using ACR in their evaluation unintentionally (Carlini et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2022), the inherent limitation of ACR remains unknown. As a result, the
community remains largely unaware of these issues, resulting in subsequent research relying on ACR continuously
(Zhang et al., 2023; Jeong & Shin, 2024). However, in this
work, we show that ACR is a poor metric for evaluating the
true robustness of a given model under RS.

1. Introduction
Adversarial robustness, namely the ability of a model to
resist arbitrary small perturbations to its input, is a critical property for deploying machine learning models in
security-sensitive applications. Due to the incompleteness
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Switzerland 2 LogicStar.ai. Correspondence to: <chensun@student.ethz.ch, {yuhao.mao, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch,
mark@logicstar.ai>.

Main Contributions
• We theoretically prove that with a large enough certification budget, ACR of a trivial classifier can be arbitrarily large, and that with the certification budget com-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

