ELEMENTAL: Interactive Learning from Demonstrations and Vision-Language
Models for Reward Design in Robotics

Letian Chen 1 Nina Moorman 1 Matthew Gombolay 1

Abstract

Zhu et al., 2017). However, the effectiveness of RL hinges
on the availability of a carefully designed reward function
that accurately encapsulates the desired behavior. Without
sophisticated reward functions, RL agents often struggle to
learn competent policies (Matignon et al., 2006); worse yet,
poorly designed reward functions can lead RL agents to undesirable outcomes (Gupta et al., 2024). Booth et al. (2023)
shows reward specification is non-trivial even for experts,
and designing reward functions that align with end-users’
expectations is particularly challenging due to the varied
and latent user preferences (Abouelazm et al., 2024).

Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated
compelling performance in robotic tasks, but its
success often hinges on the design of complex, ad
hoc reward functions. Researchers have explored
how Large Language Models (LLMs) could enable non-expert users to specify reward functions
more easily. However, LLMs struggle to balance
the importance of different features, generalize
poorly to out-of-distribution robotic tasks, and
cannot represent the problem properly with only
text-based descriptions. To address these challenges, we propose ELEMENTAL (intEractive
LEarning froM dEmoNstraTion And Language),
a novel framework that combines natural language
guidance with visual user demonstrations to align
robot behavior with user intentions better. By
incorporating visual inputs, ELEMENTAL overcomes the limitations of text-only task specifications, while leveraging inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL) to balance feature weights and
match the demonstrated behaviors optimally. ELEMENTAL also introduces an iterative feedbackloop through self-reflection to improve feature,
reward, and policy learning. Our experiment results demonstrate that ELEMENTAL outperforms
prior work by 42.3% on task success, and achieves
41.3% better generalization in out-of-distribution
tasks, highlighting its robustness in LfD.

Considering recent advancements in language models (e.g.,
large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models
(VLMs)) on text understanding (Bommasani et al., 2021;
Touvron et al., 2023) and emergent abilities (Kojima et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2022), researchers have explored utilizing LLMs for reward engineering. For instance, the EUREKA framework takes as input a text description of the
task, queries language models for a draft of the reward
function, and trains a policy with the reward function (Ma
et al., 2023b). This paradigm, while promising, presents
several limitations. First, describing complex robotic tasks
purely through language is imprecise: humans often have
latent, unspoken preferences that are difficult to articulate
fully, leading to incomplete or ambiguous descriptions of
their objectives (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Ericsson & Simon,
1980; Hoffman et al., 1995; Feldon, 2007). Second, even if
all objective function components are accurately conveyed,
determining the relative importance or weights of these components poses another significant challenge: assigning these
weights involves subtle mathematical trade-offs, something
that LLMs are not particularly equipped to handle. As a
result of these limitations, methods like EUREKA struggle
to generalize well to out-of-distribution tasks.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been shown to be a powerful tool for enabling robots to perform complex tasks across
a wide range of domains, from manipulation (Kober et al.,
2013; Levine et al., 2016) to navigation (Tai et al., 2017;

Given these limitations, a more natural and effective approach is for users to provide demonstrations of the desired
behavior to supplement a general task description. Demonstrations offer rich, illustrative information that can capture
not only the task objectives but also the nuanced, latent
preferences that may be difficult to express verbally. Learning from Demonstration (LfD) approaches seek to leverage
human-provided demonstrations to reverse-engineer the un-

1

School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, United States. Correspondence to: Letian Chen
<letian.chen@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

