Pfeife: Automatic Pipeline Parallelism for PyTorch

Ho Young Jhoo 1 Chung-Kil Hur 1 Nuno P. Lopes 2 3

Abstract

device. The maximum memory capacity of the top NVIDIA
GPU released this year (GB200) is only 384 GiB, still unable
to fit Llama 3.1.

The memory requirements of machine learning
(ML) models has been growing quickly. However, the memory capacity of GPUs has not kept
pace. Despite significant research on reducing the
memory usage of ML models, the larger models
do not fit in a single device. A popular solution
to the memory capacity issue is to use multiple
devices in parallel. In this paper, we focus on
a particular form of parallelism called pipelining, as it offers a good balance between cost and
performance for many ML models. We present
Pfeife, the first tool that integrates with PyTorch
to provide automatic pipelining of ML models.
Pfeife intercepts the execution of models and parallelizes them transparently, requiring no manual
work. We show that Pfeife can execute large models that would otherwise not run due to not fitting
in a single device. Moreover, Pfeife can pipeline
non-sequential models such as Stable Diffusion,
which are not supported by existing pipelining parallelism tools. Pfeife outperforms state-of-the-art
tools by up to 22%.

Several techniques have been developed to circumvent the
hardware memory capacity limitations, especially using
multiple devices on the same server and across servers. This
encompasses multiple orthogonal techniques that can be
combined, including data parallelism, which replicates the
model across devices and splits each input batch between
devices; weight sharding, which splits parameters across
devices; and model and tensor parallelism that partition the
execution of one instance of the model.
These approaches face two main challenges: scalability and
usability. Data parallelism and weight sharding, for instance,
eventually require full synchronization of the weights across
all devices, thus require heavy communication. For model
and tensor parallelism, most tools are notoriously hard to
use. They often require writing models in a particular way
or to annotate models in a non-trivial way. Or even to pick
the partitions or identify the parallelism manually. None of
these tasks are easy for humans, especially for ML practitioners, who are usually not experts in distributed systems,
parallel computing, or HPC.
In this paper, we focus on pipeline parallelism, which is
a particular form of model parallelism. We built Pfeife, a
tool that integrates with PyTorch and that pipelines models
automatically with no user intervention. PyTorch’s tracing
JIT compiler constructs, at run time, a data-flow graph that
represents the model being executed, and it is capable of
looking through a lot of Python’s dynamism. This enables
tools like Pfeife to grab the data-flow graph of ML models.
Moreover, it allows us to intercept the execution of models
and parallelize the execution in a transparent way to users.

1. Introduction
ML models have been growing in terms of memory requirements very quickly. The memory needed just for the
weight matrices has gone from 0.4 GiB in 2018 (ELMo (Peters et al., 2018)) to 754 GiB in 2024 (Llama 3.1 405B
FP16 (Grattafiori et al., 2024)).
While memory requirements of ML models have increased
by several orders of magnitude in just a few years, hardware
has not kept up the pace. For example, NVIDIA’s high-end
GPUs, the most used platform for training and deploying
ML models, cannot fit state-of-the-art ML models in a single

Pfeife also allows selectively parallelizing a model in a
training loop, so that it can ensemble multiple models like
pre-trained frozen models. This functionality helps users to
train complex models like Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022) which are traditionally not supported by automatic
model parallelism tools.

1
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea 2 INESC-ID
/ Instituto Superior Técnico - University of Lisbon, Portugal
3
FuriosaAI, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Ho Young
Jhoo <hoyoung.jhoo@sf.snu.ac.kr>.

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. A specification language for describing synchronous
1

