VerbalTS: Generating Time Series from Texts

Shuqi Gu 1 Chuyue Li 1 Baoyu Jing 2 Kan Ren 1

Abstract
Time series synthesis has become a foundational
task in modern society, underpinning decisionmaking across various scenes. Recent approaches
primarily generate time series from structured conditions, such as attribute-based metadata. However, these methods struggle to capture the full
complexity of time series, as the predefined structures often fail to reflect intricate temporal dynamics or other nuanced characteristics. Moreover, constructing structured metadata requires
expert knowledge, making large-scale data labeling costly and impractical. In this paper, we introduce V ERBALTS, a novel framework for generating time series from unstructured textual descriptions, offering a more expressive and flexible solution to time series synthesis. To bridge the gap
between unstructured text and time series data,
V ERBALTS employs a multi-focal alignment and
generation framework, effectively modeling their
complex relationships. Experiments on two synthetic and four real-world datasets demonstrate
that V ERBALTS outperforms existing methods in
both generation quality and semantic alignment
with textual conditions. The project page is at
https://seqml.github.io/VerbalTS/.

Sample-specific information

Sequence of events

Unstructured:
The time series has a linear and up trend.
The season cycle is 4.
The beginning part has double peaks.

Unstructured:
It‘s the morning of a day in June. The current
weather is showing light rain. The weather overall
is expected to be partly broken clouds with
moderate rain later on.

Structured:
Trend type: linear
Trend direction: up
Season cycle: 4
Local shapelet: ???

Structured:
Weather:
Light rain ?
Cloud ?
Moderate rain ?

Figure 1. Illustration of the different control conditions. Compared to structured conditions, unstructured conditions are better at
capturing unique, sample-specific information, e.g., special local
shapelets that are not present in all samples (left figure). Additionally, structured conditions fail to effectively describe the sequence
of events, a common characteristic of time series (right figure).

scratch (Narasimhan et al., 2024) or modifying existing
ones (Jing et al., 2024a), enabling richer datasets and advancing time series modeling.
Current time series generation tasks can be broadly classified into unconditional (Desai et al., 2021; Yuan & Qiao,
2024; Pei et al., 2021; Yoon et al., 2019) and conditional
generation (Wang et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Coletta
et al., 2024). Unconditional generation involves randomly
sampling from the learned time series distribution, offering
minimal control over the properties of the generated samples.
In contrast, conditional time series generation usually leverages structured conditions such as metadata (Narasimhan
et al., 2024), time series attributes (Jing et al., 2024a) or
class labels (Li et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

Generating time series from structured conditions is straightforward but comes with notable limitations. First, much of
the real-world information about time series is unstructured,
making the extraction of structured features from large, unorganized datasets both time-consuming and labor-intensive.
Second, as illustrated in Fig. 1, this process often leads to
significant information loss. For instance, sample-specific
details that cannot be encapsulated within a uniform structure are frequently omitted. Similarly, sequential conditions
that govern the chronological characteristics of time series
may be inadequately captured by structured representations.

Time series modeling plays a crucial role in modern society, with applications spanning finance (Gao et al., 2024),
medicine (He et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024b; Jarrett et al.,
2021), climate (Jing et al., 2021; 2022; 2024b;c), and energy (Lai et al., 2018). However, challenges like complex
data collection and the rarity of extreme conditions limit
access to large-scale, high-quality time series data. To address this, research has explored generating time series from
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech
University, Shanghai, China 2 University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Illinois, United States. Correspondence to: Kan Ren
<renkan@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose to generate time series using text
descriptions as control conditions. Text, as a prevalent form
of unstructured information, inherently conveys rich semantic content that allows for more nuanced and detailed ex-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

