Function-Space Learning Rates

Edward Milsom 1 Ben Anson 1 Laurence Aitchison 1

Abstract

an important question: can we meaningfully quantify and
control learning in function space?

We consider layerwise function-space learning
rates, which measure the magnitude of the change
in a neural network’s output function in response
to an update to a parameter tensor. This contrasts with traditional learning rates, which describe the magnitude of changes in parameter
space. We develop efficient methods to measure
and set function-space learning rates in arbitrary
neural networks, requiring only minimal computational overhead through a few additional backward passes that can be performed at the start
of, or periodically during, training. We demonstrate two key applications: (1) analysing the dynamics of standard neural network optimisers in
function space, rather than parameter space, and
(2) introducing FLeRM (Function-space Learning Rate Matching), a novel approach to hyperparameter transfer across model scales. FLeRM
records function-space learning rates while training a small, cheap base model, then automatically
adjusts parameter-space layerwise learning rates
when training larger models to maintain consistent
function-space updates. FLeRM gives hyperparameter transfer across model width, depth, initialisation scale, and LoRA rank in various architectures including MLPs with residual connections
and transformers with different layer normalisation schemes.

We consider the concept of layerwise function-space learning rates which measure the magnitude of change in network
output induced by updates to individual parameter tensors.
Unfortunately, naive approaches to measuring functionspace learning rates would be computationally prohibitive.
We solve this problem by developing a Monte-Carlo estimate to measure function-space learning rates using only a
single additional backward pass, which can be performed a
handful of times at the start of training (e.g. 40), or periodically during training (e.g., once every 100 steps), resulting
in negligible computational overhead. We then consider two
immediate applications of function-space learning rates.
First, function-space learning rates provide a novel lens
for analysing the behavior of standard neural network optimisers (e.g. Adam, Kingma, 2014), giving important insights into how different parts of the network contribute to
functional changes during training. Second, function-space
learning rates enable a new approach to hyperparameter
transfer (for previous work see e.g. Yang & Hu, 2022; Bordelon et al., 2023; Large et al., 2024). As large language model
pre-training can cost millions of dollars in compute (Cottier
et al., 2024), running extensive hyperparameter sweeps at
full scale is impractical. Instead, one might hope to optimise hyperparameters on smaller models and transfer them
to larger ones. However, this is complicated by the fact that
optimal learning rates change with model width and depth
(Yang & Hu, 2022; Noci et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023; Bordelon et al., 2023). We address this challenge with FLeRM
(Function-space Learning Rate Matching), which maintains
consistent function-space learning rates as models are scaled
up by automatically adjusting the parameter-space learning
rates, thereby keeping the optimal value of the user-defined
learning rate hyperparameter stable.

1. Introduction
The fundamental purpose of neural network training is to
learn a function that maps inputs to desired outputs. However, we typically understand optimisation methods as acting in parameter space, e.g. traditional learning rates tell us
how much the parameters change during each step rather
than the functional impact of those changes. This raises

A key advantage of our approach is its flexibility: our methods for measuring and controlling function-space learning
rates work with any network architecture and at any point
during training. This contrasts with traditional approaches to
hyperparameter transfer that often make restrictive assumptions about architectures or initialisation schemes (Everett
et al., 2024; Yang & Hu, 2022; Bordelon et al., 2023; Large
et al., 2024). We demonstrate FLeRM’s utility across a

1

University of Bristol. Correspondence to: Edward Milsom <edward.milsom@bristol.ac.uk>, Laurence Aitchison <laurence.aitchison@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

