MAS-GPT: Training LLMs to Build LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems

Rui Ye 1 2 * @ Shuo Tang 1 * Rui Ge 1 Yaxin Du 1 Zhenfei Yin 3 4 Siheng Chen 1 Jing Shao 2

Abstract

Query

LLM-based multi-agent systems (MAS) have
shown significant potential in tackling diverse
tasks. However, to design effective MAS, existing approaches heavily rely on manual configurations or multiple calls of advanced LLMs, resulting in inadaptability and high inference costs.
In this paper, we simplify the process of building an MAS by reframing it as a generative language task, where the input is a user query and the
output is a corresponding MAS. To address this
novel task, we unify the representation of MAS
as executable code and propose a consistencyoriented data construction pipeline to create a
high-quality dataset comprising coherent and consistent query-MAS pairs. Using this dataset, we
train MAS-GPT, an open-source medium-sized
LLM that is capable of generating query-adaptive
MAS within a single LLM inference. The generated MAS can be seamlessly applied to process
user queries and deliver high-quality responses.
Extensive experiments on 9 benchmarks and 5
LLMs show that the proposed MAS-GPT consistently outperforms 10+ baseline MAS methods
on diverse settings, indicating MAS-GPT’s high
effectiveness, efficiency and strong generalization ability. The codes are released at https:
//github.com/rui-ye/MAS-GPT.

Manually Design MAS

Query

MAS
Answer

MAS-GPT: Generating MAS

Inadaptability! High Effort!

Adaptability!

32B

One Inference!

Figure 1: Introduction of our proposed new paradigm for
building MAS. During inference, MAS-GPT adaptively generates a query-specific MAS with one LLM inference.
Such limitation has driven recent research towards building
LLM-based multi-agent systems (MAS) (Ye et al., 2025a;
Qian et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024), where multiple
LLMs (agents) with specialized capabilities work collaboratively to achieve more effective solutions. For example,
MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2024) and ChatDev (Qian et al.,
2024a) build multi-LLM teams with expertise roles (e.g.,
programmer, tester, and product manager) to solve complex coding tasks in a predefined pipeline; while AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2024) involves recruiters, executors, and
evaluators for iterative task solving. These methods have
shown superior performance over single LLM inference.
Despite achieving promising task performance, there are
two fundamental issues that hinder the broad applications
of MAS: inadaptability and high costs. (i) Inadaptability &
high human effort: MAS in MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2024),
ChatDev (Qian et al., 2024a), and AgentVerse (Chen et al.,
2024) are all manually crafted (e.g., for coding tasks). That
is, the collaboration structure and agents’ prompts are predetermined and static, lacking in the generality to adapt
towards any given tasks. (ii) High inference costs: Although there have been efforts to design adaptive MAS,
they essentially shift the human cost onto the computational
cost. For example, both GPTSwarm (Zhuge et al., 2024),
AFlow (Zhang et al., 2024), and DyLAN (Liu et al., 2024b)
rely on LLMs to replace human involvement, iteratively
adjusting the collaboration structure or agents’ prompts in
the MAS for each specific task. However, this process often requires multiple LLM inferences and a corresponding
validation set in advance (Zhuge et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT (Ouyang
et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023) have achieved significant success on a wide range of tasks. However, a single LLM
often struggles to handle the diverse and complex range of
tasks (e.g., varying difficulties and domains) encountered in
practice (Hong et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024).
*
Primary contributor @ Work done during Internship 1 Shanghai
Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 University of Oxford 4 The University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Siheng Chen
<sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn>, Jing Shao <shaojing@pjlab.org.cn>.

Focusing on these key issues, this paper explores how to
adaptively build a query-specific MAS at a minimal cost.
Our core idea is to reframe the process of building an executable MAS for each query as a generative language task,
making building MAS as simple and efficient as querying

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

