On the Similarities of Embeddings in Contrastive Learning

Chungpa Lee 1 Sehee Lim 1 Kibok Lee 1 Jy-yong Sohn 1

Abstract

ing negative pairs, achieve remarkable performance across
various downstream tasks (Wang & Isola, 2020).

Contrastive learning operates on a simple yet effective principle: Embeddings of positive pairs
are pulled together, while those of negative pairs
are pushed apart. In this paper, we propose a
unified framework for understanding contrastive
learning through the lens of cosine similarity, and
present two key theoretical insights derived from
this framework. First, in full-batch settings, we
show that perfect alignment of positive pairs is
unattainable when negative-pair similarities fall
below a threshold, and this misalignment can be
mitigated by incorporating within-view negative
pairs into the objective. Second, in mini-batch
settings, smaller batch sizes induce stronger separation among negative pairs in the embedding
space, i.e., higher variance in their similarities,
which in turn degrades the quality of learned representations compared to full-batch settings. To
address this, we propose an auxiliary loss that reduces the variance of negative-pair similarities in
mini-batch settings. Empirical results show that
incorporating the proposed loss improves performance in small-batch settings.

In parallel, several theoretical studies have analyzed the
embeddings obtained by CL in full-batch settings. Lu &
Steinerberger (2022) showed that the widely used InfoNCE
loss (Oord et al., 2018) achieves its minimum value when
positive pairs are perfectly aligned, and negative pairs are
1
uniformly separated with the cosine similarity of − n−1
,
where n is the size of the training dataset. Lee et al. (2024)
further extended this optimality analysis to other contrastive
losses, including the SigLIP loss (Zhai et al., 2023).
Due to computational constraints, CL methods are typically
implemented using mini-batches rather than full batches
in practical scenarios. This has motivated recent studies
on understanding whether the property of the optimal state
observed in full-batch settings, i.e., perfect alignment of
positive pairs and uniform separation of negative pairs with
1
the similarity of − n−1
, also holds under mini-batch settings.
Cho et al. (2024) partially addressed this by showing that, for
the InfoNCE loss, the optimal embeddings of mini-batch settings are identical to those of full-batch settings, only when
the sum of all possible mini-batch losses is minimized. Koromilas et al. (2024) explored embeddings learned through
kernel-based contrastive losses (Li et al., 2021; Waida et al.,
2023) in mini-batch settings. While these studies provide
valuable insights into understanding CL, their analyses are
limited to specific forms of contrastive losses.

1. Introduction

To address this limitation, we propose a unified framework
for analyzing the embeddings obtained by both full-batch
and mini-batch settings. Our analysis centers on the cosine
similarity of embeddings of both positive and negative pairs.
By characterizing the statistical properties of similarities of
these embeddings, we reveal how different contrastive losses
influence the structure of the learned embedding space under
various training conditions.

Contrastive learning (CL) has emerged as a powerful approach to representation learning (Chen & He, 2021; Chen
et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021; Zhai et al.,
2023; Khosla et al., 2020). In CL, an embedding model is
trained to produce similar representations for two different
views of the same data instance—referred to as a positive
pair—and dissimilar representations for views from different data instances—referred to as negative pairs. Recent
empirical studies have shown that representations learned by
these objectives, i.e., aligning positive pairs while separat-

Our key contributions are summarized as follows:

1

• In full-batch settings, we identify a fundamental trade-off
between the alignment of positive pairs and the separation
of negative pairs. Specifically, we show that the perfect
alignment of positive pairs is not feasible when the average similarity of negative pairs falls below the certain
1
threshold − n−1
. We demonstrate that such misalignment

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Jy-yong Sohn
<jysohn1108@yonsei.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

