Speeding Up Policy Simulation in Supply Chain RL

Vivek Farias 1 Joren Gijsbrechts 2 Aryan Khojandi 3 Tianyi Peng 4 Andrew Zheng 5

Abstract

as dynamic optimization problems, albeit with intractable
state-spaces that must track inventory and other resource
levels across a large number of products and nodes. The
development of detailed simulators (‘digital twins’) of supply chains in recent years has made SCO problems a ripe
target for reinforcement learning. A prime example of such
a target with immense economic significance is the so-called
Fulfillment Optimization (FO) problem (Amazon.com, Inc.,
2023; Acimovic & Graves, 2015; Acimovic & Farias, 2019;
Zhao et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), which will be a main
focus of this paper.

Simulating a single trajectory of a dynamical system under some state-dependent policy is a core
bottleneck in policy optimization (PO) algorithms.
The many inherently serial policy evaluations that
must be performed in a single simulation constitute the bulk of this bottleneck. In applying PO to
supply chain optimization (SCO) problems, simulating a single sample path corresponding to one
month of a supply chain can take several hours.
We present an iterative algorithm to accelerate
policy simulation, dubbed Picard Iteration. This
scheme carefully assigns policy evaluation tasks
to independent processes. Within an iteration, any
given process evaluates the policy only on its assigned tasks while assuming a certain ‘cached’
evaluation for other tasks; the cache is updated at
the end of the iteration. Implemented on GPUs,
this scheme admits batched evaluation of the policy across a single trajectory. We prove that the
structure afforded by many SCO problems allows
convergence in a small number of iterations independent of the horizon. We demonstrate practical
speedups of 400x on large-scale SCO problems
even with a single GPU, and also demonstrate
practical efficacy in other RL environments.

A time-step in an SCO problem typically corresponds to
either a demand or supply event; there are hundreds of millions of such events in a month for a large supply chain
(Shopping, 2024). As such, the task of simulating a fixed
control policy is onerous, requiring the serial evaluation of
the policy over a horizon, T , of tens or hundreds of millions
of time-steps. For a policy parameterized by a non-trivial
deep neural network (DNN), the task of simply simulating
a single sample path under the policy can thus take several
hours (or more) in the context of an SCO problem. This is
an impediment to the application of PO methods to SCO
problems which require simulating multiple sample paths
of the system at each policy update iteration, and conservatively require hundreds of PO iterations to converge to a
good policy. The key expensive step in any policy simulation is the task of evaluating a policy at a system state. This
cannot be batched since the states encountered on a sample
path are themselves computed serially. Still, one may hope
that a clever scheme for parallel discrete event simulation
(Fujimoto, 1990; Fujimoto et al., 2017) might help:

1. Introduction
The core problems in supply chain optimization (SCO) all relate to managing inventory over time across some potentially
large network of nodes, so as to match costly supply with
uncertain demand. These problems are naturally viewed

1.1. Time Warp Falls Short
Time Warp is the mainstay approach to parallel discrete
event simulation (Jefferson, 1985; Jefferson et al., 1987;
Ghosh et al., 1993; Barnes Jr et al., 2013; Fujimoto, 2024).
Time Warp is at its core a message passing framework: a
processor processes ‘events’ and then sends the outcome
of this processing to other processors that are potentially
impacted by these events. Upon receiving a processed event
from a neighboring processor, a processor may need to ‘roll
back’ its computations, if the received event invalidates
them. If the set of processors potentially impacted by a
given processor is small (so called ‘local causality’), Time

*

Equal contribution 1 Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 2 Esade
Business School, Ramon Llull University, Barcelona, Spain
3
Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 4 Columbia Business School, New
York, NY 10027 5 Sauder School of Business, The University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to: Vivek
Farias <vivekf@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

