Rhomboid Tiling for Geometric Graph Deep Learning

Yipeng Zhang * 1 Longlong Li * 2 Kelin Xia 1

Abstract

within the graph, extracting deep structural features for various graph-related tasks, such as node classification, link
prediction, and graph classification. The versatility of GNNs
enables them to address a range of real-world challenges,
including identifying user roles or group memberships in
social networks (Hamilton et al., 2017), predicting molecular interactions or protein-protein interactions (Huang et al.,
2020; Réau et al., 2023), and predicting molecular properties (Wieder et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2023; Cai et al.,
2022).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have proven effective for learning from graph-structured data
through their neighborhood-based message passing framework. Many hierarchical graph clustering pooling methods modify this framework by
introducing clustering-based strategies, enabling
the construction of more expressive and powerful
models. However, all of these message passing
framework heavily rely on the connectivity structure of graphs, limiting their ability to capture
the rich geometric features inherent in geometric
graphs. To address this, we propose Rhomboid
Tiling (RT) clustering, a novel clustering method
based on the rhomboid tiling structure, which performs clustering by leveraging the complex geometric information of the data and effectively extracts its higher-order geometric structures. Moreover, we design RTPool, a hierarchical graph clustering pooling model based on RT clustering for
graph classification tasks. The proposed model
demonstrates superior performance, outperforming 21 state-of-the-art competitors on all the 7
benchmark datasets.

The message aggregation process is a fundamental component of GNNs, and the development of novel message
aggregation mechanisms constitutes a critical direction for
advancing GNN architectures. Traditional models such as
GCN and GAT aggregate messages from a node’s neighbors
and update the node’s representation based on the aggregated information. An alternative approach involves clustering nodes in the original graph into clusters, followed
by aggregating messages within each cluster. A coarser
graph is naturally generated through this process, with each
cluster represented as a new node, enabling a hierarchical
representation of the graph. This paradigm has led to the
development of models referred to as hierarchical graph
clustering pooling, such as DiffPool (Ying et al., 2018) and
MinCutPool (Bianchi et al., 2020). These models have
shown considerable improvements in performance over traditional GNNs models. However, these clustering-based
pooling methods primarily depend on the graph’s connectivity structure and often utilize learnable matrices to determine
node assignments to clusters, instead of leveraging predefined clusters derived from prior knowledge. In the case
of geometric graphs, such as molecular graphs, the connectivity information alone may be insufficient to capture the
rich geometric features inherent in the data. As a result,
these methods face challenges in effectively incorporating
geometric properties, limiting their ability to fully exploit
the underlying structure of geometric graphs.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful framework for learning from graph-structured data,
which is pervasive in diverse domains such as social networks (Guo & Wang, 2020; Min et al., 2021), cheminformatics (Jiang et al., 2021; Kojima et al., 2020), and computational biology (Li et al., 2021). The foundation of GNNs lies
in message passing, where nodes and edges exchange and
aggregate message from their neighbors. This mechanism
enables GNNs to capture both local and global relationships
*

Equal contribution 1 Division of Mathematical Sciences,
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 637371, Singapore 2 School of
Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, China. Correspondence to: Kelin Xia <xiakelin@ntu.edu.sg>.

We propose a novel clustering method based on the rhomboid tiling structure for geometric graph deep learning. This
method is inspired by the concept of Alpha shape, which is
widely used in reconstructing 3D shapes from data, such as
molecular surface reconstruction (Edelsbrunner & Mücke,
1994; Liang et al., 1998). The core idea of Alpha shapes
is to partition data using spheres, naturally enabling the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

