Graph4MM: Weaving Multimodal Learning with Structural Information

Xuying Ning * 1 Dongqi Fu * 2 Tianxin Wei 1 Wujiang Xu 3 Jingrui He 1

Abstract

Section I
(pure text)

Real-world multimodal data usually exhibit complex structural relationships beyond traditional
one-to-one mappings like image-caption pairs.
Entities across modalities interact in intricate
ways, with images and text forming diverse interconnections through contextual dependencies and
co-references. Graphs provide powerful structural
information for modeling intra-modal and intermodal relationships. However, previous works
fail to distinguish multi-hop neighbors and treat
the graph as a standalone modality, which fragments the overall understanding. This limitation presents two key challenges in multimodal
learning: (1) integrating structural information
from multi-hop neighbors into foundational models, and (2) fusing modality-specific information
in a principled manner. To address these challenges, we revisit the role of graphs in multimodal learning within the era of foundation models and propose Graph4MM, a graph-based multimodal learning framework. To be specific, we
introduce Hop-Diffused Attention, which integrates multi-hop structural information into selfattention through causal masking and hop diffusion. Furthermore, we design MM-QFormer, a
multi-mapping querying transformer for crossmodal fusion. Through theoretical and empirical analysis, we show that leveraging structures
to integrate both intra- and inter-modal interactions improves multimodal understanding beyond
treating them as a standalone modality. Experiments on both generative and discriminative tasks
show that Graph4MM outperforms larger VLMs,
LLMs, and multimodal graph baselines, achieving
a 6.93% average improvement.

include

Page
Description
(pure text)

include

next

Text-Text

previous

Section II
(pure text)
next

include

previous

include

Caption
(pure text)
pair

Text-Image

include

Image I
previous

Section III
(?)

Image-Image
include

Image II

Given the contents and relations,
can we generate the Section III?

Figure 1. Multimodal relationships in a document, where sections,
images, captions, and page descriptions form a structured graph.
The task aims to generate Section III using the neighboring context.

1. Introduction
Data modalities, in general, refer to different types of the
data, like text, image, and audio (Ngiam et al., 2011). Jointly
considering cross-modality data has great research and application potential, and it has been widely applied in image
generation, question answering, and many more (Gao et al.,
2020; Summaira et al., 2021; Stahlschmidt et al., 2022;
Jabeen et al., 2023). Recently, a pioneering study (Yoon
et al., 2023) discovered that the relationship of data modalities is complex and far beyond the one-to-one modeling,
like the image-caption pair, in real-world scenarios. For
example, in an academic paper, the image and text data
have different semantic and non-linear correlations, i.e., the
image and its caption have a direct pairing relation to each
other, but the relation between the image and its following
section contents and the page summarization is intricate, as
shown in Figure 1. However, most Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) (Alayrac et al., 2022a; Li et al., 2023c; Koh et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024a) are still limited to modeling oneto-one relationships between images and text, making them
inadequate for capturing complex multimodal interactions.
Graphs, as a relational data structure, have the inherent
advantage of modeling complex modality relationships together. To the best of our knowledge, MMGL (Yoon et al.,
2023) is the state-of-the-art work that models modalities
into graphs and obtains promising performance in the generation task, as compared to single-modal pre-trained language models and vision-language models. In particular, it

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Meta AI 3 Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Jingrui He
<jingrui@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

