Tensor Product Neural Networks for Functional ANOVA Model
Seokhun Park 1 Insung Kong 2 Yongchan Choi 3 Chanmoo Park 1 4 Yongdai Kim 1

Abstract

(Ribeiro et al., 2016) and SHAP (Lundberg, 2017) have
been suggested to interpret complex black-box AI models.
However, these methods explain a given black-box model
through a locally approximated interpretable models and
thus often fail to provide a faithful global view of the model
(Slack et al., 2020).

Interpretability for machine learning models is
becoming more and more important as machine
learning models become more complex. The functional ANOVA model, which decomposes a highdimensional function into a sum of lower dimensional functions (commonly referred to as components), is one of the most popular tools for interpretable AI, and recently, various neural networks
have been developed for estimating each component in the functional ANOVA model. However,
such neural networks are highly unstable when
estimating each component since the components
themselves are not uniquely defined. That is, there
are multiple functional ANOVA decompositions
for a given function. In this paper, we propose a
novel neural network which guarantees a unique
functional ANOVA decomposition and thus is
able to estimate each component stably. We call
our proposed neural network ANOVA Tensor Product Neural Network (ANOVA-TPNN) since it is
motivated by the tensor product basis expansion.
Theoretically, we prove that ANOVA-TPNN can
approximate any smooth function well. Empirically, we show that ANOVA-TPNN provide much
more stable estimation of each component and
thus much more stable interpretation when training data and initial values of the model parameters
vary than existing neural networks do. Our source
code is released at https://github.com/
ParkSeokhun/ANOVA-TPNN

The functional ANOVA model, which approximates a given
complex high-dimensional function by the sum of lowdimensional (e.g., one or two dimensional) functions, is
a well known transparent-box AI model. One of the most
representative examples of the functional ANOVA model
is the generalized additive model (GAM, Hastie & Tibshirani (1987)), which consists of the sum of one-dimensional
functions, each corresponding to each input feature. Lowdimensional functions are easier to understand, and thus the
functional ANOVA model is popularly used for interpretable
AI (Lengerich et al., 2020; Märtens & Yau, 2020).
Recently, several specially designed neural networks for the
functional ANOVA model have been proposed, including
NAM (Agarwal et al., 2021) and NBM (Radenovic et al.,
2022). These neural networks can be learned by standard
stochastic gradient descent algorithms and thus can be applied to large sized data compared to traditional learning
algorithms based on basis expansions (Wood, 2006) and
regularizations (Gu & Wahba, 1993). However, existing
neural networks are not good at estimating each component
(each low-dimensional function in the functional ANOVA
model) mainly due to unidentifiability. Here, ‘unidentifiability’ means that there exist multiple different functional
ANOVA decompositions of a given function and we do not
know which decomposition a gradient descent algorithm
converges on. Note that poor estimation of the components
would result in poor interpretation.

1. Introduction
Interpretability has become more important as artificial intelligence (AI) models have become more sophisticated and
complicated in recent years. Various methods such as LIME

In this paper, we develop new neural networks for the functional ANOVA model such that each component is identifiable but they are learnable by standard stochastic gradient
descent algorithms. Identifiability makes our proposed neural networks be good at estimating the components and thus
provide reliable interpretation. In addition, it is robust to
outliers and easy to reflect monotone constraints.

1

Department of Statistics, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, University
of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands 3 Toss Bank, Seoul, Republic of
Korea 4 Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Yongdai Kim <ydkim0903@gmail.com>.

To develop the proposed neural networks, we begin with the
tensor product basis expansion (Wood, 2006) and replace
each basis function by specially designed neural networks so

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

