Revisiting Unbiased Implicit Variational Inference

Tobias Pielok 1 2 Bernd Bischl 1 2 David Rügamer 1 2

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed growing interest in
semi-implicit variational inference (SIVI) methods due to their ability to rapidly generate samples from complex distributions. However, since
the likelihood of these samples is non-trivial to
estimate in high dimensions, current research
focuses on finding effective SIVI training routines. Although unbiased implicit variational inference (UIVI) has largely been dismissed as
imprecise and computationally prohibitive because of its inner MCMC loop, we revisit this
method and show that UIVI’s MCMC loop can
be effectively replaced via importance sampling
and the optimal proposal distribution can be
learned stably by minimizing an expected forward
Kullback–Leibler divergence without bias. Our
refined approach demonstrates superior performance or parity with state-of-the-art methods on
established SIVI benchmarks.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We sample from a semi-implicit distribution q(z) by
sampling from the latent distribution p(ϵ) and subsequently from
the conditional distribution q(z|ϵ). The simple distributions p(ϵ)
and q(z|ϵ) can induce a complicated distribution q(z) and consequently a potentially even more complicated reverse conditional
distribution q(ϵ|z). AISIVI learns a mass-covering representation
τ (ϵ|z) of q(ϵ|z) to estimate ∇z log q(z) in high dimensions.

Bayesian inference, such as sampling-based or variational
inference, is an important foundation for constructing uncertainty quantification measures for machine learning models.
In variational inference (VI), samples are generated from a
target distribution function pz with the associated random
variable z, which can only be evaluated but not directly
sampled from and is possibly unnormalized. This could be,
e.g., a Bayesian posterior distribution or the canonical distribution w.r.t. a physical system. For this, a family Qz over
distributions with a tractable sampling procedure is chosen,
and a divergence measure D where D quantifies the dissimilarity between two distributions. The target distribution
pz can then be approximated by finding qz∗ ∈ Qz which is
closest to pz w.r.t. D, i.e., qz∗ ∈ arg minqz ∈Qz D(qz , pz ).

1.1. Implicit Variational Inference
In contrast to VI, where we assume that qz ∈ Qz is an
explicit distribution, i.e., we can evaluate qz , for implicit VI
(IVI) we have no direct access to qz and can only produce
samples from qz , i.e., qz is an implicit distribution. Representative examples of explicit and implicit distributions
are normalizing flows (NFs) and neural samplers, which
transform a random variable via an arbitrary neural network
(NN), respectively. While NFs can be trained stably, they
are known to smooth out sharp target distributions. In contrast, neural samplers can model highly complex and sharp
distributions but are notoriously hard to train. This naturally
suggests combining them.

1
Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Tobias Pielok <tobias.pielok@stat.unimuenchen.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

