Data-Juicer Sandbox: A Feedback-Driven Suite for
Multimodal Data-Model Co-development

Daoyuan Chen * 1 Haibin Wang * 1 Yilun Huang * 1 Ce Ge 1 Yaliang Li 1 Bolin Ding 1 Jingren Zhou 1

Abstract

shaping model performance, there are fast-growing efforts
to curate datasets of larger scales and higher quality (Jakubik
et al., 2024; Gadre et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024a).

The emergence of multimodal large models has
advanced artificial intelligence, introducing unprecedented levels of performance and functionality. However, optimizing these models remains challenging due to historically isolated
paths of model-centric and data-centric developments, leading to suboptimal outcomes and inefficient resource utilization. In response, we
present a new sandbox suite tailored for integrated data-model co-development. This sandbox provides a feedback-driven experimental platform, enabling cost-effective iteration and guided
refinement of both data and models. Our proposed “Probe-Analyze-Refine” workflow, validated through practical use cases on multimodal
tasks such as image-text pre-training with CLIP,
image-to-text generation with LLaVA-like models, and text-to-video generation with DiT-based
models, yields transferable and notable performance boosts, such as topping the VBench leaderboard. A comprehensive set of over 100 experiments demonstrated the suite’s usability and extensibility, while also uncovering insights into the
interplay between data quality, diversity, model
behavior, and computational costs. All codes,
datasets, and models are open-sourced to foster
future research and applications that would otherwise be infeasible due to the lack of a dedicated
co-development infrastructure.

However, the development trajectories of these models and
datasets have historically diverged, guided more by intuition
than by systematic co-development methodologies. Recent
advances in enhancing multimodal large models tend to be
either model-centric or data-centric, rarely bridging these
two aspects closely. For example, model-centric methods
focus on algorithmic enhancements and architectural innovations under fixed data priors, while data-centric strategies
usually focus on processing datasets independently of specific model training contexts (Qin et al., 2025). Both approaches usually suffer from a lack of systematic principles
and cooperative synergy, relying heavily on heuristic exploration and single-perspective expertise. This fragmented
landscape presents a notable barrier to achieving optimal
performance, as the interplay between data characteristics
and model capabilities remains largely under-exploited.
Moreover, putting multimodal large models into practice is
further complicated by infrastructure limitations, increasing computational costs, and the faster pace of the project
development (Xu et al., 2024c). In the age of large models
with rapidly growing model parameters and dataset sizes,
the processes of data processing and model training become increasingly resource-intensive, demanding substantial time and computations. Due to the absence of costeffective platforms that simplify and speed up data-model
co-development, researchers and developers often face the
dilemma of prioritizing result-driven development at the expense of thorough, insight-led exploration. This deficiency
hinders the iterative refinement for both domains, leading to
sub-optimal outcomes as improvements in one domain are
hard to inform, apply and enhance each other directly.

1. Introduction
The advent of multimodal large models has revolutionized
artificial intelligence, pushing the boundaries of functionality and creativity across various domains (OpenAI, 2024a;
Wang et al., 2024a). Recognizing the key role of data in

To fill this gap, we introduce the Data-Juicer Sandbox, a
feedback-driven suite for facilitating the co-development of
multimodal data and models. Building upon an open-source
data processing system tailored for multimodal large models,
Data-Juicer (Chen et al., 2024a;b), our sandbox suite integrates a wealth of off-the-shelf components optimized for
usability and compatibility with open-source model-centric
infrastructures. Collectively, it offers customizable orches-

*
Equal contribution 1 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to:
Yaliang Li <yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

