Online Linear Classification with Massart Noise
Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Vasilis Kontonis 2 Christos Tzamos 3 Nikos Zarifis 1

Abstract

In the online scenario, the learner’s objective is to tackle
a prediction task by acquiring a hypothesis from a series
of examples presented one at a time. The aim is to minimize the overall count of incorrect predictions, known as
the mistake bound, considering the knowledge of correct
answers to previously encountered examples (Littlestone,
1988; 1989; Blum, 1990; Littlestone & Warmuth, 1994;
Maass & Turan, 1994). In the context of online linear classification, i.e., when the presented labels can be realized
by a linear threshold function, the seminal perceptron algorithm (Rosenblatt, 1958; Novikoff, 1962), was the first
online learning algorithm.

We study the task of online learning in the presence of Massart noise. Specifically, instead of
assuming that the online adversary chooses an
arbitrary sequence of labels, we assume that the
context x is selected adversarially but the label y
presented to the learner disagrees with the groundtruth label of x with unknown probability at most
η. We focus on the fundamental class of γ-margin
linear classifiers and present the first computationally efficient algorithm that achieves mistake
bound ηT + o(T ). We point out that the mistake
bound achieved by our algorithm is qualitatively
tight for computationally efficient algorithms; this
follows from the fact that, even in the offline setting, achieving 0-1 error better than η requires
super-polynomial time under standard complexity
assumptions.

Realizable and Agnostic Online Learning In (Littlestone, 1988) the realizable online classification setting was
defined, where the adversary is allowed to select an arbitrary datapoint x(t) at every round but the label y (t) must
be consistent with an underlying ground hypothesis f from
a class H. The number of mistakes in the realizable setting
was shown to be characterized by the Littlestone dimension
LD(H) of the class H. Similarly to the agnostic PAC learning of (Haussler, 1992), in (Ben-David et al., 2009), motivated by the fact that often the observed labels are noisy, the
setting of online learning with label noise was introduced. In
the most extreme case of agnostic (adversarial) label noise
where no assumptions are placed on theplabels, it was shown
that the regret over T rounds is e
O( T LD(H)). Even
though the regret in the agnostic setting was shown to be
sublinear in T , the corresponding computational task is far
from being well-understood. In particular, even for simple
classes such as linear classifiers efficient online algorithms
with sublinear regret would imply efficient algorithms in the
offline setting – a well known computationally intractable
problem (Guruswami & Raghavendra, 2006).

We extend our online learning model to a karm contextual bandit setting where the rewards—
instead of satisfying commonly used realizability assumptions—are consistent, in expectation,
with some linear ranking function with weight
vector w∗ . Given a list of contexts x1 , . . . xk , if
w∗ · xi > w∗ · xj , the expected reward of action i
must be larger than that of j by at least ∆. We use
our Massart online learner to design an efficient
bandit algorithm that obtains expected reward at
least (1 − 1/k) ∆T − o(T ) bigger than choosing
a random action at every round.

1. Introduction
Online prediction has a rich history dating back to the works
of (Robbins, 1951; Hannan, 1957; Blackwell et al., 1954).

Online Learning with Massart Noise Investigating
regimes beyond the above, worst-case, agnostic setting has
been an important area of research with the goal to get improved regret (and mistake) bounds but also to allow the
design of efficient algorithms. Similar to the definition of
Massart or Bounded noise (Massart & Nedelec, 2006) for
offline (PAC) learning, in (Ben-David et al., 2009) a semirandom online classification setting was introduced with
a focus on improving over the agnostic regret bounds. In
this model, while the online adversary is allowed to pick

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Texas-Austin, Austin,
USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Athens,
Athens, Greece.
Correspondence to: Vasilis Kontonis
<vasilis@cs.utexas.edu>, Nikos Zarifis <zarifis@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

