Advancing Constrained Monotonic Neural Networks:
Achieving Universal Approximation Beyond Bounded Activations

Davide Sartor * 1 Alberto Sinigaglia * 2 Gian Antonio Susto 1 2

Abstract
Conventional techniques for imposing monotonicity in MLPs by construction involve the use of
non-negative weight constraints and bounded activation functions, which pose well-known optimization challenges. In this work, we generalize
previous theoretical results, showing that MLPs
with non-negative weight constraint and activations that saturate on alternating sides are universal approximators for monotonic functions. Additionally, we show an equivalence between the
saturation side in the activations and the sign of
the weight constraint. This connection allows us
to prove that MLPs with convex monotone activations and non-positive constrained weights also
qualify as universal approximators, in contrast to
their non-negative constrained counterparts. Our
results provide theoretical grounding to the empirical effectiveness observed in previous works
while leading to possible architectural simplification. Moreover, to further alleviate the optimization difficulties, we propose an alternative formulation that allows the network to adjust its activations according to the sign of the weights. This
eliminates the requirement for weight reparameterization, easing initialization and improving
training stability. Experimental evaluation reinforces the validity of the theoretical results, showing that our novel approach compares favourably
to traditional monotonic architectures.

Figure 1. Monotone MLPs with weight-constraint and bounded
activations (pink) and our proposed approach based on ReLU
(blue). The former can only represent bounded functions and,
thus, cannot extrapolate the data trend, which is important in many
domains, such as time-series analysis and predictive maintenance.

1. Introduction
Monotonic neural networks represent a pivotal shift in deep
learning. They bridge the gap between high-capacity nonlinear models and the need for interpretable, consistent outputs in various applications. Monotonic MLPs preserve
monotonic input-output relationships, making them particularly suitable for domains that require justified and transparent decisions (Gupta et al., 2016; Nguyen & Martı́nez, 2019).
Furthermore, monotonic MLPs have been exploited to build
novel architectures for density estimators (Chilinski & Silva,
2020; Omi et al., 2019; Tagasovska & Lopez-Paz, 2019),
survival analysis (Jeanselme et al., 2023), and remaining
useful life (Sánchez et al., 2023). In general, the enforcement of constraints on the model architecture guarantees
certain desired properties, such as fairness or robustness.
Furthermore, explicitly designing the model with inductive
biases that exploit prior knowledge has been shown to be
fundamental for efficient generalization (Dugas et al., 2000;
Milani Fard et al., 2016; You et al., 2017). For this reason,
the use of monotonic networks can help both in improving performance (Mitchell, 1980) and in data efficiency
(Veličković, 2019).

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova (PD), Italy 2 Human Inspired Technology Research Centre, University of Padova,
Padova (PD), Italy.
Correspondence to: Davide Sartor <davide.sartor.4@phd.unipd.it>, Alberto Sinigaglia <alberto.sinigaglia@phd.unipd.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

