Teaching Transformers Causal Reasoning Through Axiomatic Training

Aniket Vashishtha 1 Abhinav Kumar 2 Atharva Pandey 3 Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy 4 Kabir Ahuja 5
Vineeth N Balasubramanian 6 Amit Sharma 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Causal reasoning can be defined as a set of reasoning procedures consistent with pre-defined axioms or rules that are
specific to causality (Galles & Pearl, 1997). For instance,
under stable causal models, the transitivity axiom (“if A
causes B and B causes C, then A causes C”) helps answer
questions of cause and effect between pairs of variables
in a system. Similarly, the d-separation rule (Pearl, 2009)
connects independence of variables and their causal graph
structure, and forms the basis of many graph discovery and
effect identification algorithms. Given a causal task and data
observations from a system, axioms or rules are typically
incorporated as inductive biases in a machine learning (ML)
algorithm, through regularization, model architecture, or
the choice of variables. Depending on the kind of available data—observational, interventional, or counterfactual—
Pearl’s ladder of causation (Bareinboim et al., 2022) defines
the kinds of causal reasoning that is possible.

For text-based AI systems to interact in the
real world, causal reasoning is an essential skill.
Since active interventions are costly, we study
to what extent a system can learn causal reasoning from symbolic demonstrations of causal axioms. Specifically, we present an axiomatic training method where the system learns from multiple demonstrations of a causal axiom (or rule),
rather than incorporating the axiom as an inductive bias or inferring it from data values. A key
question is whether the system would learn to generalize from the axiom demonstrations to more
complex scenarios. Our results, based on applying
axiomatic training to learn the transitivity axiom
and d-separation rule, indicate that such generalization is possible. To avoid data contamination
issues, we start with a 67 million parameter transformer model and train it from scratch. On both
tasks, we find that a model trained on linear causal
chains (along with some noisy variations) can generalize well to complex graphs, including longer
causal chains, causal chains with reversed order,
and graphs with branching. To handle diverse
text inputs, the same method is extended to finetune language models. Finetuning Llama-3.1 8B
model on our axiomatic data leads to significant
gains on causal benchmarks such as Corr2Cause
and CLEAR, in some cases providing state-of-theart performance surpassing GPT-4.

As axioms are the building blocks of causality, we study
whether it is possible to directly learn the axioms or rules
using ML models. That is, rather than learning from a
dataset sampled from a data-generating process that obeys
causal axioms, what if a model can learn an axiom (and thus
causal reasoning) directly from symbolic demonstrations
of the axiom? This question gains relevance as language
models make it possible to learn over symbolic data expressed in natural language. In fact, recent studies have
evaluated causal reasoning capabilities of large language
models (LLMs) by encoding causal reasoning problems
in natural language (Kıcıman et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2023;
2024a). We study whether directly teaching the axioms can
be a viable way to improve causal reasoning of language
models.

1

Work primarily done as a Research Fellow at Microsoft Research India, with additional contributions made at UIUC, USA
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 3 Microsoft Research,
India 4 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany. Part of the work done at IIT Hyderabad 5 University of
Washington, USA 6 Work primarily done at IIT Hyderabad, with
additional contributions made at MSR India. Correspondence
to: Aniket Vashishtha <aniketv2@illinois.edu>, Amit Sharma
<amshar@microsoft.com>.

Specifically, we propose a new way to learn causal reasoning through axiomatic training. We posit that causal
axioms or rules can be expressed as the following symbolic
tuple, ⟨premise, hypothesis, conclusion⟩ where hypothesis
refers to a causal claim and premise refers to any relevant
information to decide whether the claim is true or not (conclusion). The conclusion could simply be Yes or No. For
example, consider the task of inferring causal relationships
from correlational statements in the Corr2Cause dataset (Jin

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

