VistaDPO : Video Hierarchical Spatial-Temporal Direct
Preference Optimization for Large Video Models

Haojian Huang * 1 Haodong Chen * 2 Shengqiong Wu 3 Meng Luo 3
Jinlan Fu 3 Xinya Du 4 Hanwang Zhang 5 Hao Fei 3

Abstract
Large Video Models (LVMs) built upon Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in video
understanding but often suffer from misalignment
with human intuition and video hallucination issues.
To address these challenges, we introduce VistaDPO,
a novel framework for Video Hierarchical SpatialTemporal Direct Preference Optimization. VistaDPO
enhances text-video preference alignment across three
hierarchical levels: i) Instance Level, aligning overall video content with responses; ii) Temporal Level,
aligning video temporal semantics with event descriptions; and iii) Perceptive Level, aligning spatial objects with language tokens. Given the lack of
datasets for fine-grained video-language preference
alignment, we construct VistaDPO-7k, a dataset of
7.2K QA pairs annotated with chosen and rejected responses, along with spatial-temporal grounding information such as timestamps, keyframes, and bounding
boxes. Extensive experiments on benchmarks such
as Video Hallucination, Video QA, and Captioning
performance tasks demonstrate that VistaDPO significantly improves the performance of existing LVMs,
effectively mitigating video-language misalignment
and hallucination. The code and data are available at
VistaDPO Repository.

(a) Textual DPO

(b) Previous Multimodal DPO

(c) VistaDPO
: "What object did the person put down in the video?"
: "The person put down the shoe in the video."
: "... placed some clothes on the ground."
: "... a musical note instead."

Perceptive Level

Temporal Level

Instance Level

(d) VistaDPO Overview

Figure 1. (a) Traditional textual DPO overlooks multimodal information, limiting video-language tasks. (b) Existing multimodal
DPO methods rely on coarse alignment, missing rich temporal and
perceptual details. (c&d) VistaDPO overcomes these limitations
with a hierarchical spatiotemporal preference optimization framework, enabling fine-grained video-language alignment and precise
reasoning over video dynamics. Here, yw is the preferred response
over yl , and vw the visual input more likely to produce it than vl .

1. Introduction

cant research attention. Built upon Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Peng et al.,
2023; Dubey et al., 2024), LVMs leverage the powerful intelligence of LLMs in language, achieving unprecedented
understanding of video content. However, increasing studies reveal that LVMs encounter critical issues, such as video
understanding that deviates from human intuition (Zhou
et al., 2024a; Fei et al., 2024a; Cheng et al., 2024a; Hu et al.,
2024) or the phenomenon of video hallucination (Wang
et al., 2024; Sahoo et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024), where the
model outputs content that does not align with the input, e.g.,
user instructions, video content. The root of these issues lies
in the inherent nature of current LVM architectures (Yan
et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2023), where
most LVMs integrate a video encoder (e.g., ViT) into text-

Achieving human-like reasoning capabilities for videos is
a critical research topic in the field of AI. In recent years,
Large Video Models (LVMs) (Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023a; Lin et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024c; Wu et al., 2024a;
Cheng et al., 2024b; Fei et al., 2024b; Jin et al., 2024;
Qian et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025) have garnered signifi*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Hong Kong 2 The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 National University of Singapore 4 University of Texas at Dallas 5 Nanyang
Technological University.
Correspondence to: Hao Fei
<haofei37@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

