Modiﬁed K-means Algorithm with Local Optimality Guarantees

Mingyi Li 1 Michael R. Metel 2 Akiko Takeda 1 3

Abstract

keting, and education (Csurka et al., 2004; Steinbach et al.,
2000; Han et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2024; Liu & Shih, 2005;
Bharara et al., 2018; Moubayed et al., 2020).

The K-means algorithm is one of the most widely
studied clustering algorithms in machine learning. While extensive research has focused on
its ability to achieve a globally optimal solution,
there still lacks a rigorous analysis of its local optimality guarantees. In this paper, we ﬁrst present
conditions under which the K-means algorithm
converges to a locally optimal solution. Based on
this, we propose simple modiﬁcations to the Kmeans algorithm which ensure local optimality in
both the continuous and discrete sense, with the
same computational complexity as the original
K-means algorithm. As the dissimilarity measure, we consider a general Bregman divergence,
which is an extension of the squared Euclidean
distance often used in the K-means algorithm.
Numerical experiments conﬁrm that the K-means
algorithm does not always ﬁnd a locally optimal
solution in practice, while our proposed methods
provide improved locally optimal solutions with
reduced clustering loss. Our code is available at
https://github.com/lmingyi/LO-K-means.

It is well known that the solution generated by the K-means
algorithm is highly sensitive to the algorithm’s initialization. To mitigate this issue, various strategies have been introduced. These include methods for improving the initial
cluster centers, such as K-means++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii,
2006), and approaches that involve running the algorithm
multiple times with different initializations (Jain, 2010).
Nevertheless, it still seems to be largely accepted from at
least the 1980s that the K-means algorithm converges to
a locally optimal solution: the scikit-learn documentation
states that “in practice, the K-means algorithm is very fast...
but it falls in local minima” (scikit-learn developers, 2025),
while Grunau & Rozhoň (2022) conﬁrm that “Lloyd’s
algorithm converges only to a local optimum”. Similarly,
Balcan et al. (2018) describe that “Lloyd’s method is used
to converge to a local minimum”. For the local optimality
guarantee, (Selim & Ismail, 1984) is often cited, which attempted to prove that the K-means algorithm converges to a
locally optimal solution, but their proof only demonstrated
that the K-means algorithm converges within a ﬁnite number of iterations, and indeed, we show by counterexample
that the K-means algorithm does not always converge to a
locally optimal solution in Section 3.1.

1. Introduction

This prevalent assumption about local optimality has also
shaped research on improving the K-means algorithm.
Variants such as K-means--, which is robust to outliers,
and K-means clustering using Bregman divergences, are
also claimed to converge to a locally optimal solution
(Chawla & Gionis, 2013, Theorem 4.1, Banerjee et al.,
2005, Proposition 3). In these studies, the convergence to
a locally optimal solution is justiﬁed by the fact that the
loss function monotonically decreases after each iteration.
However, there still appears to be a gap between these
proofs and a guarantee of local optimality. Based on this,
the following question naturally arises:

K-means clustering is one of the most widely recognized methods for partitioning datasets into homogeneous
groups. The K-means clustering problem, formulated as
a nonconvex optimization problem in (P1), is NP-hard
(Aloise et al., 2009). The K-means algorithm, also known
as Lloyd’s algorithm, was ﬁrst proposed by Lloyd (1982) as
a quantization method for pulse-code modulation and has
since been widely applied and extensively studied across
various domains, including image recognition, text mining,
deep learning model weight quantization, healthcare, mar1

Department of Mathematical Informatics, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montréal, Canada
3
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan.
Correspondence to: Michael R. Metel <michael.metel@hpartners.com>.

Can we modify the K-means algorithm to guarantee local
optimality while maintaining the same order of
computational complexity?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The answer is
1

yes

for the K-means algorithm using

