Efficient Heterogeneity-Aware Federated Active Data Selection

Ying-Peng Tang 1 Chao Ren 2 1 Xiaoli Tang 1 Sheng-Jun Huang 3 Lizhen Cui 4 Han Yu 1

Abstract
Federated Active Learning (FAL) aims to learn
an effective global model, while minimizing label
queries. Owing to privacy requirements, it is challenging to design effective active data selection
schemes due to the lack of cross-client query information. In this paper, we bridge this important
gap by proposing the Federated Active data selection by LEverage score sampling (FALE) method.
It is designed for regression tasks in the presence
of non-i.i.d. client data to enable the server to
select data globally in a privacy-preserving manner. Based on FedSVD, FALE aims to estimate
the utility of unlabeled data and perform data selection via leverage score sampling. Besides, a
secure model learning framework is designed for
federated regression tasks to exploit supervision.
FALE can operate without requiring an initial
labeled set and select the instances in a single
pass, significantly reducing communication overhead. Theoretical analyze establishes the query
complexity for FALE to achieve constant factor
approximation and relative error approximation.
Extensive experiments on 11 benchmark datasets
demonstrate significant improvements of FALE
over existing state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. The overall framework of the proposed method. First,
the server aggregates data information from each client to facilitate
data selection. Next, it selects the most informative data points
and returns their corresponding indexes to the respective clients.
The clients then label the selected data locally. Finally, the global
model is trained on the server using the masked features and labels
of the queried data.

performance from an oracle for labeling, thereby reducing
the labeling cost while maintaining high model performance.
Traditional AL approaches usually focus on the centralized
learning setting, where all the data is readily accessible.
However, in many real-world applications, data is stored
in a distributed manner, raising the need to consider communication costs, or across multiple parties, in which the
data cannot be directly accessed due to privacy concerns and
data governance regulations (Regulation, 2016). In these
challenging settings, existing methods often do not sufficiently address data privacy, computational constraints, and
communication overhead. Consequently, their performance
can be limited.

1. Introduction
Training effective machine learning models typically relies
on large-scale labeled datasets, which are often expensive
and time-consuming to obtain. Active Learning (AL) (Settles, 2009) addresses this issue by selectively querying the
most useful unlabeled data points for improving the model
1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 School of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China 4 School of
Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China. Correspondence to:
Han Yu <han.yu@ntu.edu.sg>.

Federated Learning (FL) (Yang et al., 2019; 2020) emerges
as an effective learning paradigm to address these challenges
by enabling collaborative model training across multiple
decentralized devices or institutions. It tries to learn an
accurate global model by aggregating local model updates
from multiple clients, without sharing raw data. Due to
the high demand for data privacy and security, each client
usually needs to label their own data locally and only share
the model updates during the learning process (Yang, 2021;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

