Reinforcement Learning Control of a Physical Robot Device for
Assisted Human Walking without a Simulator

Junmin Zhong 1 Emiliano Quinones Yumbla 2 Seyed Yousef Soltanian 2 Ruofan Wu 1 Wenlong Zhang 2 3
Jennie Si 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract
This study presents an innovative reinforcement
learning (RL) control approach to facilitate soft
exosuit-assisted human walking. Our goal is to
address the ongoing challenges in developing reliable RL-based methods for controlling physical devices. To overcome key obstacles—such
as limited data, the absence of a simulator for
human-robot interaction during walking, the need
for low computational overhead in real-time deployment, and the demand for rapid adaptation
to achieve personalized control while ensuring
human safety—we propose an online Adaptation
from an offline Imitating Expert Policy (AIP) approach. Our offline learning mimics human expert
actions through real human walking demonstrations without robot assistance. The resulted policy is then used to initialize online actor-critic
learning, the goal of which is to optimally personalize robot assistance. In addition to being fast
and robust, our online RL method also posses important properties such as learning convergence,
dynamic stability, and solution optimality. We
have successfully demonstrated our simple and
robust framework for safe robot control on all
five tested human participants, without selectively
presenting results. The qualitative performance
guarantees provided by our online RL, along with
the consistent experimental validation of AIP control, represent the first demonstration of online
adaptation for softsuit control personalization and
serve as important evidence for the use of online
RL in controlling a physical device to solve a
real-life problem.

Goal of this study. Wearable robots such as rigid exoskeletons and soft exosuits have been extensively researched and
have shown great promise for gait rehabilitation (Rodrı́guezFernández et al., 2021) and for assisting human walking to
reduce physical efforts (Collins et al., 2015). Unlike rigid exoskeletons, soft, garment-like devices made from materials
like silicone elastomers and fabrics provide a more comfortable, safer, and adaptable user experience (Granberry
et al., 2017; Save et al., 2025; Yumbla et al., 2021). Yet,
effectively controlling the wearable robots to seamlessly
work with human users in locomotion tasks remain a major
challenge. This may be why deployment of the promising
wearable technology still have limited success in real-world
deployment. Reinforcement learning points to two potential
solutions: sim-to-real approach or direct design in the real
physical environment. However, devising a near-perfect
simulator for human-soft exosuit walking is exceptionally
costly if at all possible given the unpredictable human behavior while wearing a foreign robotic device, and the ubiquitous presence of noise, delay, and other uncertainty in the
environment. Challenges of controlling a soft wearable
exosuit. First off, soft inflatable exosuits lack a robust model
of their dynamics (Polygerinos et al., 2015), not to mention
modeling the interaction dynamics between the user and the
robot, a necessary step in building a high fidelity simulator.
These unique challenges stem from that the pneumatic dynamics of the soft inflatable actuators (Joshi & Paik, 2021)
are complicated in part by the nonlinear nature of soft actuators due to material properties and design geometry. The
fabric-based actuators result in highly compliant behavior
that enables high levels of deformations (Hasan et al., 2022).
The manufacturing process of the actuators also introduces
significant variations and uncertainties (Joshi & Paik, 2021).
Further wear and tear of the fabric only makes problem more
complicated. Lacking a reliable model or simulator of the
soft robot has made controlling a soft inflatable exosuit more
complex than a traditional rigid exoskeleton (Polygerinos
et al., 2015). Unlike rigid exoskeletons where the assistive
torque is determined by motor actuators and can be directly
used as a control parameter, for soft inflatables, the torque
is generated from two collaborative sources: the human and

1

School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona. 2 School of Manufacturing Systems and Networks, Arizona State University, Mesa, Arizona. 3 Corresponding Authors. Correspondence to: Jennie Si
<si@asu.edu>, Wenlong Zhang <wenlong.zhang@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

