An in depth look at the Procrustes-Wasserstein distance: properties and
barycenters

Davide Adamo 1 2 Marco Corneli 1 2 Manon Vuillien 1 Emmanuelle Vila 3

Abstract
Due to its invariance to rigid transformations
such as rotations and reflections, ProcrustesWasserstein (PW) was introduced in the literature
as an optimal transport (OT) distance, alternative
to Wasserstein and more suited to tasks such as the
alignment and comparison of point clouds. Having that application in mind, we carefully build a
space of discrete probability measures and show
that over that space PW actually is a distance. Algorithms to solve the PW problems already exist,
however we extend the PW framework by discussing and testing several initialization strategies.
We then introduce the notion of PW barycenter
and detail an algorithm to estimate it from the
data. The result is a new method to compute
representative shapes from a collection of point
clouds. We benchmark our method against existing OT approaches, demonstrating superior performance in scenarios requiring precise alignment
and shape preservation. We finally show the usefulness of the PW barycenters in an archaeological context. Our results highlight the potential of
PW in boosting 2D and 3D point cloud analysis
for machine learning and computational geometry
applications.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

1. Introduction
In force of its capability to find correspondences between
sets of objects, in the last decade computational optimal
transport (OT, Peyré et al., 2019) has become more and
more ubiquitous in machine learning. Notable examples
relate to learning tasks from (almost) any data type including images (Solomon et al., 2015; Feydy et al., 2017),

Figure 1. (Top) Two point clouds representing a bird shape in different position. OT barycenters using (a) Exact Free Wasserstein
(Cuturi & Doucet, 2014) (b) Gromov-Wasserstein (Peyré et al.,
2016) with MDS (Borg & Groenen, 2007) (c) Gromov-Wasserstein
with TSNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) (d) ProcrustesWasserstein (our).

1

Université Côte d’Azur, UMR 7264 CEPAM, CNRS, Nice,
France 2 Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, Laboratoire J.A.
Dieudonné, Maasai team, Nice, France 3 Université Lumiére Lyon
II, UMR 5133 Archéorient CNRS, Lyon, France. Correspondence
to: Davide Adamo <davide.adamo@univ-cotedazur.fr>.

graphs (Vayer et al., 2019a; Vincent-Cuaz et al., 2021),
shapes (Eisenberger et al., 2020) or text (Zhang et al., 2017;
Grave et al., 2019). More generally and possibly more
importantly OT allows one to assess the distance between

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

