Learning from others’ mistakes:
Finetuning machine translation models with span-level error annotations

Lily H. Zhang 1 2 Hamid Dadkhahi 2 Mara Finkelstein 2 Firas Trabelsi 2 Jiaming Luo 2 Markus Freitag 2

Abstract

Most efforts, however, consider only sequence-level labels,
usually in the form of a scalar score assigned to the entire output. In contrast, this work investigates the potential of using fine-grained span-level annotations from offline datasets to enhance language model training. Unlike
sequence-level annotations, span-level annotations provide
information about specific segments within a sequence, offering more detailed information for model learning. Moreover, in many situations, collecting fine-grained information
is similar effort to collecting sequence-level labels (Wu et al.,
2023), making the former a practical form of data for improving model performance given a method that can take
advantage of the information.

Despite growing interest in incorporating feedback to improve language models, most efforts
focus only on sequence-level annotations. In
this work, we explore the potential of utilizing
fine-grained span-level annotations from offline
datasets to improve model quality. We develop
a simple finetuning algorithm, called Training
with Annotations (TWA), to directly train machine translation models on this annotated data.
TWA utilizes targeted span-level error information while also flexibly learning what to penalize within a span. Moreover, TWA considers
the overall trajectory of a sequence when deciding which non-error spans to utilize as positive
signals. Experiments on English-German and
Chinese-English machine translation show that
TWA outperforms baselines such as supervised
finetuning on sequences filtered for quality and Direct Preference Optimization on pairs constructed
from the same data.

To explore the potential of fine-grained annotations, we focus on the setting of machine translation, an application
where substantial amounts of fine-grained information is
already readily available, namely Multidimensional Quality
Metrics (MQM) data from previous Workshop on Machine
Translation (WMT) Shared Tasks (Freitag et al., 2021a).
This data, used to evaluate the quality of machine translation systems, contains span-level annotations of the errors present in a given translation as well as their category
(e.g., fluency, accuracy) and severity (e.g., major and minor). While MQM data has previously been used to develop
auxiliary reward or metrics models (Juraska et al., 2023; Rei
et al., 2022), it has not been directly employed for training
machine translation (MT) models. Positive results in this setting can motivate the collection of fine-grained annotations
to improve text generation tasks in other settings.

1. Introduction
Language models have advanced to the point where it
is often difficult to improve them substantially via supervised finetuning on high-quality human-written examples
alone; instead, recent efforts to improve language model or
sequence-to-sequence model performance have largely relied on annotations of model generations, from preferences
to per-sequence scores (Bai et al., 2022; Ethayarajh et al.,
2022; Lambert et al., 2023; Kopf et al., 2023). Such data,
coupled with techniques to learn from it (Christiano et al.,
2017; Rafailov et al., 2023; Gulcehre et al., 2023; Dong
et al., 2023), have yielded impressive results for many top
language models.

To directly utilize these translations and their span-level
annotations to finetune an MT model, we introduce a new
algorithm called Training with Annotations (TWA). TWA
utilizes span-level information from the annotations to treat
error and non-error spans differently. For error spans, the
TWA loss seeks to decrease the probability of the span given
the context while allowing the model to learn which tokens
in the span to penalize to do so. For non-error tokens, TWA
takes into account the overall sequence trajectory when
deciding which spans should be treated as positive signals.
A high-level summary of TWA can be found in Figure 1.

1
Center for Data Science, New York University 2 Google. Correspondence to: Lily H. Zhang <lily.h.zhang@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Experiments on English-German and Chinese-English machine translation demonstrate that TWA yields significant
1

