LETS Forecast: Learning Embedology for Time Series Forecasting

Abrar Majeedi 1 Viswanatha Reddy Gajjala 1 2 Satya Sai Srinath Namburi GNVV 2 Nada Magdi Elkordi 2
Yin Li 1 2

Abstract

treat time series data as abstract patterns, and fall short in
considering the underlying processes that generate them.
Addressing this blind spot of deep models is important, because at its core, time series data is not merely sequences of
numbers; rather, these data represent the dynamic behavior
of complex systems, encoding the interplay of various factors over time. Indeed, many real-world time series data can
be treated as manifestations of time-variant dynamics (Brunton et al., 2022). Therefore, understanding the underlying
systems can unlock more effective forecasting strategies.

Real-world time series are often governed by complex nonlinear dynamics. Understanding these underlying dynamics is crucial for precise future
prediction. While deep learning has achieved
major success in time series forecasting, many
existing approaches do not explicitly model the
dynamics. To bridge this gap, we introduce
DeepEDM, a framework that integrates nonlinear dynamical systems modeling with deep neural networks. Inspired by empirical dynamic
modeling (EDM) and rooted in Takens’ theorem,
DeepEDM presents a novel deep model that learns
a latent space from time-delayed embeddings,
and employs kernel regression to approximate
the underlying dynamics, while leveraging efficient implementation of softmax attention and
allowing for accurate prediction of future time
steps. To evaluate our method, we conduct comprehensive experiments on synthetic data of nonlinear dynamical systems as well as real-world
time series across domains. Our results show
that DeepEDM is robust to input noise, and outperforms state-of-the-art methods in forecasting
accuracy. Our code is available at: https://
abrarmajeedi.github.io/deep_edm.

Dynamical systems modeling characterizes the evolution
of deterministic or stochastic processes governed by underlying dynamics, thereby offering an appealing solution for
time series forecasting. However, if a system is not specified, forecasting requires solving the challenging problem
of inferring the underlying dynamics from observations. To
address this, Empirical Dynamical Modeling (EDM) (Sugihara & May, 1990), a data-driven approach built on Takens’
theorem (Takens, 1981b; Sauer et al., 1991), was developed
to recover nonlinear system dynamics from partial observations of states. EDM leverages time-delayed embeddings
to topologically reconstruct the system’s state space from
observed time series, which can then be used for forecasting.
While EDM has demonstrated success in real-world applications (Ye et al., 2015; Sugihara et al., 2012), it assumes
noise-free data, requires separate modeling for individual
sequences, and imposes constraints over its forecasting horizon, significantly limiting its broader practical applicability.

1. Introduction

To bridge the gap, we propose a novel framework—
DeepEDM that integrates EDM and deep learning, addressing EDM’s key limitations and introducing a new family
of deep models for time series forecasting. Specifically,
DeepEDM constructs time-delayed version of the input
sequence, and projects them into a learned latent space
that is more robust to noise. It further employs kernel regression implemented using highly efficient softmax attention (Vaswani et al., 2017), followed by a learned decoder,
to model the latent dynamics and predict future values. Importantly, DeepEDM is fully differentiable, and thus can be
learned end-to-end from large-scale data.

Time series forecasting is fundamental across multiple domains including economics, energy, transportation, and
meteorology, where accurate predictions of future events
guide critical decision-making. Deep learning has recently
emerged as the dominant approach, driven by its ability to
leverage large datasets and capture intricate nonlinearity.
While deep models excel in prediction accuracy, they often
1
Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Department of Computer Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Yin Li
<yin.li@wisc.edu>.

DeepEDM connects traditional EDM and modern deep
learning. On one hand, it significantly extends EDM by im-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

