SafeAuto: Knowledge-Enhanced Safe Autonomous Driving
with Multimodal Foundation Models
Jiawei Zhang 1 † Xuan Yang 2 ‡ Taiqi Wang 3 § Yu Yao 3 § Aleksandr Petiushko 3 § Bo Li 1 2 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Autonomous Driving (AD) systems (Kim et al., 2018; Jin
et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2024b) have made significant strides in recent years, yet
they often rely on separate modules for high-level decisionmaking (e.g., “the car should slow to a stop”) and lowlevel control signal prediction (e.g., providing the specific
speed or steering angle for the next few moments). However, these two aspects are inherently correlated, as highlevel actions directly guide low-level control signals. This
modular design often overlooks this correlation, leading
to inefficiencies and less cohesive driving behaviors. Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) (Liu et al., 2023b;a; Lin et al., 2023) offer a
promising avenue to bridge high-level reasoning and lowlevel control in autonomous driving (AD), which provide
a unified framework capable of processing and reasoning
over multiple data modalities, such as images, videos, and
text. Some recent works (Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024) have begun to leverage MLLMs to generate both high-level action descriptions and low-level control
signals in an end-to-end manner. However, they are predominantly data-driven and often fail to perform at human levels
due to several limitations.

Traditional autonomous driving systems often
struggle to connect high-level reasoning with lowlevel control, leading to suboptimal and sometimes unsafe behaviors. Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs), which
process both visual and textual data, offer an
opportunity to unify perception and reasoning.
However, effectively embedding precise safety
knowledge into MLLMs for autonomous driving
remains a significant challenge. To address this,
we propose SafeAuto, a framework that enhances
MLLM-based autonomous driving by incorporating both unstructured and structured knowledge.
First, we introduce a Position-Dependent CrossEntropy (PDCE) loss to improve low-level control
signal predictions when values are represented as
text. Second, to explicitly integrate safety knowledge, we develop a reasoning component that
translates traffic rules into first-order logic (e.g.,
“red light =⇒ stop”) and embeds them into a
probabilistic graphical model (e.g., Markov Logic
Network) to verify predicted actions using recognized environmental attributes. Additionally,
our Multimodal Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) model leverages video, control signals,
and environmental attributes to learn from past
driving experiences. Integrating PDCE, MLN,
and Multimodal RAG, SafeAuto outperforms existing baselines across multiple datasets, enabling
more accurate, reliable, and safer autonomous
driving. The code is available at https://
github.com/AI-secure/SafeAuto.

Firstly, for low-level action prediction, current approaches
in adapting MLLMs generally follow two fashions. The
first fashion treats the prediction of float numbers as text
generation (Gruver et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024), directly
training the MLLM using cross-entropy (CE) loss for token prediction. Some variations (Brohan et al., 2023; Sima
et al., 2023) of this method involve tokenizing the prediction
range into several bins and adding new tokens for each bin
into the LLM’s vocabulary, allowing the model to predict
the corresponding bin token ID. However, these methods
remain somewhat coarse compared to traditional regression techniques (Hu et al., 2023) using Mean Squared Error
(MSE) loss. Alternatively, another fashion (Jin et al., 2024b)
employs a linear layer to decode the float number from
the output hidden embeddings of the MLLM, enabling the
use of MSE loss to train the model. While this approach
may improve numerical accuracy, it compromises the autoregressive capability of the LLM, as the model can then
only be purely used for numerical prediction and cannot

†

Work done during an internship at Nuro,‡ Work done during
an internship at UIUC,§ This work was done while the author was
at Nuro 1 University of Chicago 2 University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign 3 Nuro 4 Virtue AI. Correspondence to: Jiawei Zhang
<jwz@uchicago.edu>, Bo Li <bol@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

