CSTrack: Enhancing RGB-X Tracking via Compact Spatiotemporal Features

Xiaokun Feng * 1 2 Dailing Zhang * 1 2 Shiyu Hu 3 Xuchen Li 1 2
Meiqi Wu 4 Jing Zhang 2 Xiaotang Chen 2 Kaiqi Huang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
As a fundamental visual task, object tracking (Yilmaz et al.,
2006) aims to localize a target object within a video sequence based on its initial position. To achieve robust tracking in complex and corner cases, such as occlusions (Stadler
& Beyerer, 2021), low visibility (Zhang et al., 2022a), and
fast-moving objects (Tang et al., 2022), leveraging the complementary advantages of RGB and other modalities (e.g.,
depth, thermal, and event data, collectively denoted as X)
has emerged as a promising approach. Recently, several
specialized benchmarks (Yan et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2023) have been introduced, along with a growing body of outstanding RGB-X trackers (Zhu et al., 2023a;
Hong et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025).

Effectively modeling and utilizing spatiotemporal features from RGB and other modalities (e.g.,
depth, thermal, and event data, denoted as X)
is the core of RGB-X tracker design. Existing
methods often employ two parallel branches to
separately process the RGB and X input streams,
requiring the model to simultaneously handle
two dispersed feature spaces, which complicates
both the model structure and computation process. More critically, intra-modality spatial modeling within each dispersed space incurs substantial computational overhead, limiting resources
for inter-modality spatial modeling and temporal
modeling. To address this, we propose a novel
tracker, CSTrack, which focuses on modeling
Compact Spatiotemporal features to achieve simple yet effective tracking. Specifically, we first
introduce an innovative Spatial Compact Module that integrates the RGB-X dual input streams
into a compact spatial feature, enabling thorough
intra- and inter-modality spatial modeling. Additionally, we design an efficient Temporal Compact Module that compactly represents temporal
features by constructing the refined target distribution heatmap. Extensive experiments validate
the effectiveness of our compact spatiotemporal modeling method, with CSTrack achieving
new SOTA results on mainstream RGB-X benchmarks. The code and models will be released at:
https://github.com/XiaokunFeng/CSTrack.

Auxiliary modality X enhances the potential for robust tracking but requires the tracker to handle RGB-X dual input
streams simultaneously. Effective modeling and utilization
of RGB-X spatiotemporal features are central to tracker design (Zhang et al., 2024b). Existing trackers typically adopt
two parallel branches to process the RGB and X modalities separately, each retaining its own feature space (Hou
et al., 2024). Specifically, they often initialize the RGB
branch using the backbone of a pre-trained RGB tracker (Ye
et al., 2022) and design dedicated architectures for the X
branch. For example, ViPT (Zhu et al., 2023a) and OneTracker (Hong et al., 2024) leverage the paradigm of prompt
learning (Lester et al., 2021) to design the X branch, where
the X modality is processed as prompts for utilization. In
contrast, SDSTrack (Hou et al., 2024) and BAT (Cao et al.,
2024) employ symmetrical architectures, using the similar
RGB-tracker backbone to process the X modality.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 The Key
Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex
Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China 3 School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 4 School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Kaiqi Huang
<kaiqi.huang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

Although achieving certain effectiveness, these methods
require handling two modality-specific dispersed feature
spaces simultaneously. This necessitates performing intramodality spatial modeling between search images and template cues within each modality while also considering feature interactions across modalities, which complicates both
the model structure and computation process. More critically, intra-modality modeling within each dispersed space
incurs significant computational overhead, leaving insufficient room for other spatiotemporal feature modeling, result-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

