FOCoOp: Enhancing Out-of-Distribution Robustness in Federated Prompt
Learning for Vision-Language Models

Xinting Liao * 1 Weiming Liu * 1 Jiaming Qian 1 Pengyang Zhou 1 Jiahe Xu 1 Wenjie Wang 2 Chaochao Chen 1
Xiaolin Zheng 1 Tat-Seng Chua 3

Abstract

downstream tasks (Liu et al., 2024). To meet the necessity
of privacy preservation, federated prompt learning (FPL)
methods are recently emerging, which utilize transferable
knowledge of VLMs by collaboratively tuning prompt contexts with decentralized data (Guo et al., 2023b; Li et al.,
2024). It reduces the overwhelming computation and communication burdens, while bringing effective personalized
transferring under privacy regularization. However, the
existing FPL methods mainly suffer from a significant tradeoff between performance and out-of-distribution (OOD)
robustness, i.e., enhancing the accuracy comes at the cost of
failing to generalize covariate-shift data or detect semanticshift data (Lafon et al., 2025; Kumar et al., 2022). As shown
in Fig. 1, though the classification accuracies of existing
FPL methods (e.g., FedOTP (Li et al., 2024), and PromptFolio (Pan et al., 2024)) benefit from maintaining global
generalization and local personalization, they almost fail to
harness OOD robustness, e.g., detecting OOD samples in
downstream tasks. Because OOD samples are completely
unseen to the pretraining distribution of the CLIP or the
fine-tuning distribution of clients in FPL (Liao et al., 2024b;
Yu et al., 2023).

Federated prompt learning (FPL) for visionlanguage models is a powerful approach to collaboratively adapt models across distributed clients
while preserving data privacy. However, existing FPL approaches suffer from a trade-off between performance and robustness, particularly
in out-of-distribution (OOD) shifts, limiting their
reliability in real-world scenarios. The inherent
in-distribution (ID) data heterogeneity among different clients makes it more challenging to maintain this trade-off. To fill this gap, we introduce
a Federated OOD-aware Context Optimization
(FOCoOp) framework, which captures diverse distributions among clients using ID global prompts,
local prompts, and OOD prompts. Specifically,
FOCoOp leverages three sets of prompts to create
both class-level and distribution-level separations,
which adapt to OOD shifts through bi-level distributionally robust optimization. Additionally,
FOCoOp improves the discrimination consistency
among clients, i.e., calibrating global prompts,
seemly OOD prompts, and OOD prompts by
Semi-unbalanced optimal transport. The extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that FOCoOp effectively captures decentralized heterogeneous distributions and enhances
robustness of different OOD shifts. The project is
available at GitHub.

This brings the problem of enhancing OOD robustness for
federated prompt learning on pretrained VLMs.
Applying federated OOD-aware prompt learning on VLMs
suffers from two aspects of challenges, i.e., CH1: How to
maintain the class-level and distribution-level separations
for distinguishing client data samples? and CH2: How
to enhance the consistency of OOD robustness among all
clients? The first challenge arises when applying prompt
learning in federated scenarios, leading to inferior class
discrimination and reduced distinction between different
distributions. Because each client is not only limited to exploit the whole in-distribution (ID) data distribution, but also
unavailable for modeling the OOD shifts of data distribution (Liao et al., 2024b). On one thing, it is inevitable for the
client model to be overfitting for prompt learning with local
data, degrading generalization for unseen ID data in other
clients, and covariate-shift data (Cui et al., 2024). On another thing, it brings a mismatch between OOD prompts and
real-world OOD distributions, impacting client detection

1. Introduction
In recent days, pretrained vision-language models (VLMs),
e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al.,
2021), are widely studied for their benefits of unifying multimodal data and learning transferrable representation across
*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University 2 University of Science and Technology of China 3 National University of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Xiaolin Zheng <xlzheng@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

