GRU: Mitigating the Trade-off between Unlearning and Retention for LLMs

Yue Wang 1 Qizhou Wang 1 Feng Liu 2 Wei Huang 3 Yali Du 4 Xiaojiang Du 5 Bo Han 1

Abstract

bayev et al., 2023; Roziere et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023;
Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023).

Large language model (LLM) unlearning has
demonstrated its essential role in removing privacy and copyright-related responses, crucial for
their legal and safe applications. However, the
pursuit of complete unlearning often comes with
substantial costs due to its compromises in their
general functionality, leading to a notorious tradeoff between unlearning and retention. It motivates this paper to explore enhanced unlearning
schemes that can mitigate this trade-off. Specifically, we propose Gradient Rectified Unlearning
(GRU), an improved framework that regulates
the directions of gradient updates during the unlearning procedure such that their side impacts
on other, unrelated responses can be minimized.
GRU is easy and general to implement, demonstrating practical effectiveness across a variety
of well-established unlearning benchmarks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
tmlr-group/GRU.

While scaling offers remarkable benefits, it also introduces
substantial drawbacks. A primary concern is the propensity
of LLMs to memorize data (Petroni et al., 2019; Belrose
et al., 2023), potentially reproducing sensitive messages
encountered during its pre-training. It encompasses copyright and privacy-related issues (Yao et al., 2023a; Liu et al.,
2024b), highlighting concerns about the potential misuse
of LLMs for illicit activities as well as challenges in safeguarding individual rights (Zhang et al., 2023). To remove
these undesirable behaviors, it is essential to conduct regular
audits to identify sensitive content and subsequently adjust
the embedded knowledge within LLMs by removing them.
This process is crucial for ensuring that the usage of LLMs
complies with ethical and legal standards.
As the key technique to achieve this goal, LLM unlearning (Yao et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024b)
explores strategies to directly remove parameterized knowledge targeted to be unlearned. One of the foundational methods is gradient ascent (GA) (Yao et al., 2023b), which directly minimizes the log-likelihood for targeted data, thereby
reducing their probabilities of being generated to nearly zero.
However, GA has notably negative impacts on model responses for other, non-targeted data, spurring subsequent
works that regularize unlearning procedures to retain overall
model behaviors (Maini et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024a). Nevertheless, there remains an inherent trade-off between unlearning and retention, in which
preserving the common performance comes at the cost of
reducing the effectiveness of unlearning (Zhang et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024b; Wuerkaixi et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025).
It motivates us to raise a pivotal research question:

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023a; Bai
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Han et al., 2025) have revolutionized the learning paradigms towards general-purpose
language generation and understanding. These models employ architectures based on multi-head attention decoders
with billions of learnable parameters and are trained autoregressively on web-derived datasets containing trillions of tokens (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021; Achiam et al.,
2023). Such substantial scaling equips LLMs to tackle a
wide array of complex linguistic tasks, showing remarkable
capabilities across a diverse range of language tasks (Azer-

How can we mitigate the trade-off between the process of
unlearning and the goal of retaining overall performance?

1

TMLR Group, Department of Computer Science, Hong
Kong Baptist University 2 The University of Melbourne 3 RIKEN
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project 4 King’s College London 5 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Stevens Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Bo Han
<bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.

We first conduct observational experiments to better understand the model update dynamics during the unlearning
process. Specifically, we delve into the fundamental component—model gradients. To do so, we separately compute
the gradients of the current model on retain (non-targeted)
and unlearning (targeted) data, and measure their directional

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

