Optimization over Sparse Support-Preserving Sets: Two-Step Projection with
Global Optimality Guarantees

William de Vazelhes 1 Xiao-Tong Yuan 2 Bin Gu 3

Abstract

niques. In the zeroth-order case, such technique
also improves upon the state-of-the-art result from
(de Vazelhes et al., 2022), even in the case without
additional constraints, by allowing us to remove a
non-vanishing system error present in their work.

In sparse optimization, enforcing hard constraints
using the ℓ0 pseudo-norm offers advantages like
controlled sparsity compared to convex relaxations. However, many real-world applications
demand not only sparsity constraints but also
some extra constraints. While prior algorithms
have been developed to address this complex scenario with mixed combinatorial and convex constraints, they typically require the closed form projection onto the mixed constraints which might
not exist, and/or only provide local guarantees of
convergence which is different from the global
guarantees commonly sought in sparse optimization. To fill this gap, in this paper, we study
the problem of sparse optimization with extra
support-preserving constraints commonly encountered in the literature. We present a new variant
of iterative hard-thresholding algorithm equipped
with a two-step consecutive projection operator
customized for these mixed constraints, serving
as a simple alternative to the Euclidean projection onto the mixed constraint. By introducing a
novel trade-off between sparsity relaxation and
sub-optimality, we provide global guarantees in
objective value for the output of our algorithm,
in the deterministic, stochastic, and zeroth-order
settings, under the conventional restricted strongconvexity/smoothness assumptions. As a fundamental contribution in proof techniques, we develop a novel extension of the classic three-point
lemma to the considered two-step non-convex
projection operator, which allows us to analyze
the convergence in objective value in an elegant
way that has not been possible with existing tech-

1. Introduction
In sparse optimization, directly enforcing sparsity with the
ℓ0 pseudo-norm has several advantages over its convex relaxation counterpart. In compressive sensing for instance
(Foucart & Rauhut, 2013), one may seek to recover an unknown vector, which sparsity level is known to be at most k.
Similarly, in portfolio optimization, due to transaction costs,
one may seek to ensure hard constraints on the maximum
number of assets invested in (Brodie et al., 2009; DeMiguel
et al., 2009). However, in several use cases, one may also
seek to enforce additional constraints, such as, for instance,
a budget constraint in the case of portfolio optimization,
which can be enforced through an extra ℓ1 constraint, as in
Takeda et al. (2013). As another example, in sparse nonnegative matrix factorization, when estimating the hidden
components, one seeks to enforce at the same time a norm
constraint and a sparsity constraint (Hoyer, 2002). The
problem of ℓ0 empirical risk minimization (ERM) with additional constraints can be formulated as follows, where R
is an empirical risk function, Γ ⊆ Rd denotes a convex constraint set, and ∥ · ∥0 denotes the ℓ0 pseudo-norm (number
of non-zero components of a vector):
min R(w), s.t. ∥w∥0 ≤ k and w ∈ Γ.

w∈Rp

(1)

We assume throughout this paper that Problem (1) is wellposed, with R being bounded from below and the set of
minimizers being non-empty. In the literature, several algorithms have been developed to address such a problem with
mixed constraints, but they typically require the existence of
a closed form for the projection onto the mixed constraint,
and/or their convergence guarantees are only local, which
makes it difficult to estimate the sub-optimality of the output
of the algorithm. More precisely, on one hand, some works
provide convergence analyses for variants of a (non-convex)
projected gradient descent, explicitly for mixed sparse constraints (Metel, 2023; Pan et al., 2017; Lu, 2015; Beck &

1

GenBio AI, work done while at MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi,
UAE 2 School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing
University, Suzhou, China 3 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Jilin University, China. Correspondence to: Xiao-Tong Yuan
<xtyuan@nju.edu.cn >, Bin Gu <jsgubin@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

