Rethinking the Stability-Plasticity Trade-off in Continual Learning from an
Architectural Perspective

Aojun Lu 1 Hangjie Yuan 2 Tao Feng 3 Yanan Sun 1

Abstract

challenge in CL is catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Goodfellow et al., 2013), i.e., directly updating
neural networks to learn new data causes rapid forgetting of
previously acquired knowledge. To learn continually without forgetting, a neural network must balance plasticity, to
learn new concepts, and stability, to retain acquired knowledge. However, emphasizing stability can limit the neural
network’s ability to acquire new knowledge, while excessive
plasticity can lead to severe forgetting, a challenge known
as the stability-plasticity dilemma (Grossberg, 2013).

The quest for Continual Learning (CL) seeks to
empower neural networks with the ability to learn
and adapt incrementally. Central to this pursuit is
addressing the stability-plasticity dilemma, which
involves striking a balance between two conflicting objectives: preserving previously learned
knowledge and acquiring new knowledge. While
numerous CL methods aim to achieve this tradeoff, they often overlook the impact of network
architecture on stability and plasticity, restricting the trade-off to the parameter level. In this
paper, we delve into the conflict between stability and plasticity at the architectural level. We
reveal that under an equal parameter constraint,
deeper networks exhibit better plasticity, while
wider networks are characterized by superior stability. To address this architectural-level dilemma,
we introduce a novel framework denoted DualArch, which serves as a plug-in component for
CL. This framework leverages the complementary strengths of two distinct and independent networks: one dedicated to plasticity and the other
to stability. Each network is designed with a specialized and lightweight architecture, tailored to
its respective objective. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that Dual-Arch enhances the performance of existing CL methods while being up to
87% more compact in terms of parameters.

To enhance CL, most of the research efforts (Li & Hoiem,
2017; Henning et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2022) are centered
on developing novel learning methods that achieve a better
trade-off between stability and plasticity. These methods
involve adding loss terms that prevent the model from changing, replaying past data, or explicitly using distinct parts of
the network for different tasks, etc (Wang et al., 2024a). In
particular, architecture-based methods have achieved great
success across various CL scenarios (Rusu et al., 2016;
Rosenfeld & Tsotsos, 2018; Wang et al., 2023). Characteristically, this type of method introduces an extra part of the
network that is solely trained on the current data, which is
then integrated with other parts that have been continuously
trained on the previous data (Yan et al., 2021; Zhou et al.,
2023b). Since a new independent parameter space is used
to learn the current data, these methods avoid rewriting the
original parameters, thus preserving the old knowledge. In
this way, the conflict between stability and plasticity at the
parameter level can be significantly mitigated.
While studies that focus on expanding and allocating architecture have achieved notable success, research on the basic
architectures for CL is still in its infancy. This gap is crucial
because, despite the ability of advanced learning methods
to optimize parameters effectively, the overall CL performance remains constrained by suboptimal architectures (Lu
et al., 2024). In this regard, certain pioneer works have concluded that wider and shallower networks exhibit superior
overall CL performance, mainly contributing to enhanced
stability (Mirzadeh et al., 2022a;b). However, theoretical
analyses and practices (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He
et al., 2016; Liang & Srikant, 2017; Raghu et al., 2017; Zhao
et al., 2024) have demonstrated that deeper networks pos-

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) seeks to enable neural networks to
continuously acquire and update knowledge. The primary
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China 2 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China 3 Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Tao Feng <fengtao.hi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

