L ENS LLM: Unveiling Fine-Tuning Dynamics for LLM Selection

Xinyue Zeng 1 Haohui Wang 1 Junhong Lin 2 Jun Wu 3 Tyler Cody 4 Dawei Zhou 1

Abstract
The proliferation of open-sourced Large Language Models (LLMs) and diverse downstream
tasks necessitates efficient model selection, given
the impracticality of fine-tuning all candidates due
to computational constraints. Despite the recent
advances in LLM selection, a fundamental research question largely remains nascent: how can
we model the dynamic behaviors of LLMs during
fine-tuning, thereby enhancing our understanding of their generalization performance across
diverse downstream tasks? In this work, we propose a novel theoretical framework that provides
a proper lens to assess the generalization capabilities of LLMs, thereby enabling accurate and efficient LLM selection for downstream applications.
In particular, we first derive a PAC-Bayesian Generalization Bound that unveils fine-tuning dynamics of LLMs and then introduce L ENS LLM, a
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)-based Rectified
Scaling Model that enables accurate performance
predictions across diverse tasks while maintaining computational efficiency. Extensive empirical
results on 3 large-scale benchmarks demonstrate
that our model achieves up to 91.1% accuracy and
reduces up to 88.5% computational cost in LLM
selection, outperforming 5 state-of-the-art methods. We open-source our proposed L ENS LLM
model and corresponding results at LensLLM.io.

Figure 1. Our model demonstrates superior performance on Gigaword (See et al., 2017), achieving a Pearson Correlation Coefficient
of up to 85.8% and a Relative Accuracy of up to 91.1%, surpassing 5 state-of-the-art methods for LLM selection. (Higher values
indicate better performance)

progress in applications such as machine translation (Liu
et al., 2020; Team et al., 2022), text summarization (Zhang
et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2019), question answering
(Khashabi et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022c), and dialogue
systems (Bommasani et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022).
However, the recent explosion of open-source LLMs (e.g.,
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), Falcon (Almazrouei et al.,
2023), Mistral (Mistral AI, 2024), DeepSeek (DeepSeekAI, 2024)) has heightened interest in model selection. This
selection aims to identify the optimal model from a set of
candidates by balancing model complexity with the ability
to explain the observed data. The tremendous variety of
downstream tasks (Wei et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2023; Wang
& Duan, 2024; Jiao et al., 2023) and the exponential growth
in model sizes (Zhao et al., 2024; Minaee et al., 2024), as
well as the associated computational costs, have led to the
need to select the optimal LLM efficiently. Moreover, the
models selected through fine-tuning historical data or specific tasks may fail in novel scenarios or out-of-distribution
cases (Wei et al., 2022b; Schaeffer et al., 2023), which also
raises the urgent need for a generalized model selection
framework for LLMs.

1. Introduction
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has revolutionized natural language processing, driving remarkable
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
VA, USA. 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA. 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA. 4 Department of Intelligent Systems Division, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA..
Correspondence to: Xinyue Zeng <xyzeng@vt.edu>.

Model selection is a long-standing research problem in the
machine-learning community. Traditional model selection
approaches (Yang et al., 2023), designed for small-scale machine learning models, are inadequate for LLMs due to poor
generalization and prohibitive computational costs. More
recently, the machine learning community has observed in-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

