Noisy SIGNSGD Is More Differentially Private Than You (Might) Think

Richeng Jin 1 Huaiyu Dai 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Nowadays, deep learning has been playing a vital role in
various applications, which is fundamentally reshaping the
development of our modern society. With the tremendous
growth of neural network size, it is unlikely, if not impossible, to store all the training data on a single machine and
perform centralized training. Therefore, distributed learning
has become the most prevalent training paradigm. In the
typical parameter server framework, a set of workers (or
equivalently clients) collaboratively train a global model under the coordination of a server. In the celebrated distributed
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm (Bertsekas &
Tsitsiklis, 2015), the server maintains a model that is updated iteratively by aggregating the stochastic gradients
derived on the local datasets from the workers.

The prevalent distributed machine learning
paradigm faces two critical challenges: communication efficiency and data privacy. SIGNSGD
provides a simple-to-implement approach with
improved communication efficiency by requiring
workers to share only the signs of the gradients.
However, it fails to converge in the presence of
data heterogeneity, and a simple fix is to add Gaussian noise before taking the signs, which leads to
the Noisy SIGNSGD algorithm that enjoys competitive performance while significantly reducing the
communication overhead. Existing results suggest that Noisy SIGNSGD with additive Gaussian
noise has the same privacy guarantee as classic
DP-SGD due to the post-processing property of
differential privacy, and logistic noise may be a
good alternative to Gaussian noise when combined with the sign-based compressor. Nonetheless, discarding the magnitudes in Noisy SIGNSGD
leads to information loss, which may intuitively
amplify privacy. In this paper, we make this intuition rigorous and quantify the privacy amplification effect of the sign-based compressor. Particularly, we analytically show that Gaussian noise
leads to a smaller estimation error than logistic
noise when combined with the sign-based compressor and may be more suitable for distributed
learning with heterogeneous data. Then, we further establish the convergence of Noisy SIGNSGD.
Finally, extensive experiments are conducted to
validate the theoretical results.

Distributed SGD faces two critical challenges. As the sizes
of neural networks grow, the communication overhead incurred for the transmission of gradients becomes the major
bottleneck. For instance, modern large language models
may have billions of model parameters, and sharing the
gradients leads to prohibitive communication overhead. In
the meantime, in applications like federated learning, the
local training data may contain sensitive information about
the workers, which renders them unwilling to participate in
training. Particularly, it has been shown that training data
can be effectively reconstructed from the gradients (Wang
et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019; Yue et al., 2023), resulting in
privacy concerns.
To address communication efficiency concern, SIGNSGD,
which allows the workers to transmit the signs of gradients
and enables an improvement of 32× in communication efficiency, is proposed (Bernstein et al., 2018; 2019). One
major concern that prevents the application of the vanilla
SIGNSGD is the non-convergence issue in the presence of
data heterogeneity across workers. Therefore, various methods, including error compensation (Karimireddy et al., 2019;
Zheng et al., 2019), stochastic sign compressor (Chen et al.,
2020b; Safaryan & Richtárik, 2021; Jin et al., 2024; Tang
et al., 2024), variance reduction (Chzhen & Schechtman,
2023), local momentum (Sun et al., 2023), and adaptive
methods (Crawshaw et al., 2022), have been proposed to
address the non-convergence issue.

1

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.. Correspondence to: Richeng Jin
<richengjin@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Among these approaches, a simple and elegant fix is adding
1

