Improving the Variance of Differentially Private Randomized Experiments
through Clustering

Adel Javanmard 1 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Jean Pouget-Abadie 2

Abstract

regulations for protecting individuals’ online data. Many
participants and regulatory guidelines agree with sharing
some degree of information, as long as there is plausible
deniability, meaning no response can be tracked to any individual. While this can be achieved by sharing only aggregated data, this is often not sufficient to entirely prevent
the risk of de-anonymization (Sweeney, 2000; Narayanan
& Shmatikov, 2008). Differential privacy is one possible
data-sharing framework which diminishes this risk.

Estimating causal effects from randomized experiments is only possible if participants are willing
to disclose their potentially sensitive responses.
Differential privacy, a widely used framework for
ensuring an algorithm’s privacy guarantees, can
encourage participants to share their responses
without the risk of de-anonymization. However,
many mechanisms achieve differential privacy by
adding noise to the original dataset, which reduces
the precision of causal effect estimation. This
introduces a fundamental trade-off between privacy and variance when performing causal analyses on differentially private data. In this work,
we propose a new differentially private mechanism, C LUSTER -DP, which leverages a given
cluster structure in the data to improve the privacyvariance trade-off. While our results apply to any
clustering, we demonstrate that selecting higherquality clusters—according to a quality metric
we introduce—can decrease the variance penalty
without compromising privacy guarantees. Finally, we evaluate the theoretical and empirical
performance of our C LUSTER -DP algorithm on
both real and simulated data, comparing it to common baselines, including two special cases of our
algorithm: its unclustered version and a uniformprior version.

Ensuring a differential privacy guarantee often comes at
the cost of adding additional noise to the original dataset,
which increases the variance of statistical estimators. This
poses a challenge for many causal inference applications
that aim to obtain the most precise measurements possible
of a causal effect. However, not all attributes are sensitive.
If non-sensitive attributes can be used to cluster users, we
may be able to improve this privacy-variance trade-off.
Motivating application. We are specifically motivated by
the following real-world scenario: suppose we own an advertising platform, and an advertiser wants to analyze the effect
of their advertising on custom user segments (e.g., users
who have already signed up for their service versus those
who have not). This segmentation is proprietary information
that the advertiser does not wish to share with the platform.
Meanwhile, the platform mandates that user responses (e.g.,
whether a user has seen or clicked on an advertisement) can
only be shared with the advertiser in a differentially private
manner. By obtaining privatized user-level data, the advertiser can analyze the effect along this proprietary dimension.
Notably, the platform can share non-private information,
such as the user’s country or, more granularly, their DMA
(designated marketing area), and use this non-private cluster
information to improve the privacy-variance trade-off of
their differentially-private mechanism. Motivated by this
application, we focus on the problem of releasing privatized
user-level data rather than solely protecting the privacy
of the final causal effect estimation. Leveraging the postprocessing property of differential privacy (Dwork et al.,
2014), this approach provides advertisers with flexibility to
conduct further analysis on privatized data without compromising user privacy.

1. Introduction
Measuring causal effects from randomized experiments assumes that participants are willing to share potentially sensitive or private responses to treatment. This assumption is
constantly challenged by the rise of privacy concerns and
1
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA 2 Google Research, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Adel Javanmard <ajavanma@usc.edu>, Jean
Pouget-Abadie <jeanpa@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our paper introduces a novel causal and differentially pri1

