Lightweight Online Adaption for Time Series Foundation Model Forecasts

Thomas L. Lee * 1 2 William Toner * 3 Rajkarn Singh 3 Artjom Joosen 3 Martin Asenov 3
Standard approach

Abstract
Foundation models (FMs) have emerged as a
promising approach for time series forecasting.
While effective, FMs typically remain fixed during deployment due to the high computational
costs of learning them online. Consequently, deployed FMs fail to adapt their forecasts to current data characteristics, despite the availability
of online feedback from newly arriving data. This
raises the question of whether FM performance
can be enhanced by the efficient usage of this feedback. We propose ELF to answer this question.
ELF is a lightweight mechanism for the online
adaption of FM forecasts in response to online
feedback. ELF consists of two parts: a) the ELFForecaster which is used to learn the current data
distribution; and b) the ELF-Weighter which is
used to combine the forecasts of the FM and the
ELF-Forecaster. We evaluate the performance
of ELF in conjunction with several recent FMs
across a suite of standard time series datasets. In
all of our experiments we find that using ELF improves performance. This work demonstrates how
efficient usage of online feedback can be used to
improve FM forecasts.

Foundation model

+ELF

Efficient online
training
ELF
Forecaster

ELF
Weighter

Figure 1. Exploitation of online information for forecast adaption in deployment: Time series foundation models (FMs) are
typically seen as fixed when deployed. We propose a method,
ELF, to efficiently improve their forecasts online by leveraging the
feedback available in realistic deployment scenarios. ELF consists
of two components: the ELF-Forecaster, a lightweight forecaster,
learnt online; and the ELF-Weighter a dynamic method to adapt the
FM forecasts by combining it with the ELF-Forecaster’s forecasts.

computational resources, machine learning expertise, and
ample data (Mercier et al., 2021). These practical hurdles
have spurred interest in foundation models (FMs) for time
series forecasting (Miller et al., 2024; Ansari et al., 2024),
which diverge from the standard paradigm of training on a
specific dataset. Instead, FMs are trained across multiple
large datasets (Woo et al., 2024), enabling them to generalise to new, unseen time series and deliver strong zero-shot
forecasting performance (Ansari et al., 2024; Rasul et al.,
2023). This avoids retraining a new model for each task, allowing FMs to be used out-of-the-box even with no available
training data, ML expertise, or computational resources.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade there has been rapid development in
machine learning models for time series forecasting (Darlow
et al., 2023; Lim & Zohren, 2021; Nie et al., 2022). This has
prompted practitioners in fields requiring accurate forecasting to adopt and deploy increasingly advanced models to
remain competitive. Although these deep models perform
well, training them can be prohibitive, requiring substantial

While effective, time series FMs remain fixed during deployment, making them non-adaptive to shifts in the underlying
distribution. In time series deployment scenarios however,
new data arrives continuously, providing feedback on forecast accuracy and changes in the underlying behaviour of
the time series (Zhang et al., 2024). This raises the possibility of using online feedback to enhance FM performance.
However, this can be challenging as any online adaptation
mechanism must be computational efficient to be practical
in real-world time series settings (Joosen et al., 2024). Potential naive approaches to online adaption, such as regular
retraining or continual finetuning on available data, are at
present prohibitively expensive—as demonstrated in Section 5.3 and Verwimp et al. (2023). Currently, there is no

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK 2 Work done while an intern at Huawei 3 Huawei
SIR Lab, Edinburgh Research Centre, UK. Correspondence to:
Thomas L. Lee <T.L.Lee-1@sms.ed.ac.uk>, William Toner
<william.toner2@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

