Efficient First-Order Optimization on the Pareto Set
for Multi-Objective Learning under Preference Guidance

Lisha Chen 1 Quan Xiao 1 Ellen Hidemi Fukuda 2 Xinyi Chen 3 Kun Yuan 3 Tianyi Chen 1

Abstract
Multi-objective learning under user-specified preference is common in real-world problems such
as multi-lingual speech recognition under fairness. In this work, we frame such a problem
as a semivectorial bilevel optimization problem,
whose goal is to optimize a pre-defined preference
function, subject to the constraint that the model
parameters are weakly Pareto optimal. To solve
this problem, we convert the multi-objective constraints to a single-objective constraint through
a merit function with an easy-to-evaluate gradient, and then, we use a penalty-based reformulation of the bilevel optimization problem. We
theoretically establish the properties of the merit
function, and the relations of solutions for the
penalty reformulation and the constrained formulation. Then we propose algorithms to solve the
reformulated single-level problem, and establish
its convergence guarantees. We test the method on
various synthetic and real-world problems. The
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in finding preference-guided optimal solutions to the multi-objective problem.

Figure 1. Example on multi-lingual speech or language processing
problem under user-specified preference guidance. The red curve
represents the Pareto front, which is, informally, the set of objective
values that achieve the best trade-offs among multiple objectives.

significant benefits – most notably, it reduces model size and
inference time, making it more efficient and scalable. Multiobjective optimization facilitates this by enabling the learning of models that minimize vector-valued objectives (Miettinen, 1998; Ehrgott, 2005). In practical scenarios, it is
often desirable to obtain solutions that provide controlled
trade-offs or reflect specific preferences among competing
objectives, rather than treating all objectives equally.
To further illustrate, we use one example on multi-lingual
speech or language processing problem in Figure 1. The
goal of this problem is to minimize multiple losses from
different languages, while satisfying the user-specified preferences. Preferences can control trade-offs among multiple losses and enhance steerability, enabling the solver
to return diverse solutions on the Pareto front. Analytically, the preferences can be defined as constraints or objectives, see, e.g., (Lin et al., 2019; Curtis et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024a). To prioritize finding the optimal solutions of the multi-lingual losses over satisfying the preferences, we model the preference as a secondary scalarvalued objective. We first optimize the vector-valued objective formed by concatenating the multi-lingual losses,
and then optimize the scalar-valued preference objective.
More formally, let f1 , . . . , fM : X → R be the objective functions, and f0 : X → R be the preference function, e.g., the discrepancy between different objectives,
with X ⊆ Rq being nonempty, closed and convex. Depending on the problem, X can be compact or Rq . Let
F = (f1 , . . . , fM ) : X → RM be a vector-valued function.
Then the optimization problem is

1. Introduction
Many machine learning tasks naturally involve multiple
objectives, which may include diverse performance metrics such as accuracy, fairness, and privacy, or even the
same metrics evaluated across different datasets (Sener &
Koltun, 2018). A common approach to tackling such multiobjective problems is to learn a shared model that performs
well across all objectives simultaneously. Compared to training separate models for each objective, this approach offers
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, United States 2 Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan 3 Peking University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Lisha Chen <lishachen9577@gmail.com>,
Tianyi Chen <chentianyi19@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

minx∈X f0 (x) s.t. x ∈ arg minx∈X F (x)
1

(OPS)

