Core Context Aware Transformers for Long Context Language Modeling

Yaofo Chen * 1 Zeng You * 1 2 Shuhai Zhang * 1 3 Haokun Li 1 2 Yirui Li 1 Yaowei Wang 2 4 Mingkui Tan 1 3 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2024a) have
demonstrated exceptional proficiency across various applications by effectively modeling extended contexts, particularly in tasks involving natural language understanding and
generation (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2024). The
remarkable success of Transformer-based LLMs is predominantly credited to the self-attention mechanism (Vaswani
et al., 2017), which requires each token to incorporate all
preceding tokens as its context for attention calculation. In
this mechanism, the context of a token refers to the sequence
of tokens that precede it. By leveraging self-attention, LLMs
are able to capture long-range dependencies and generate
coherent and contextually relevant outputs.

Transformer-based Large Language Models
(LLMs) have exhibited remarkable success in
extensive tasks primarily attributed to the selfattention mechanism, which requires a token to
consider all preceding tokens as its context to compute attention. However, when the context length
L becomes very large (e.g., 128K), the amount
of potentially redundant information in the context tends to increase. The redundant context not
only hampers the modeling representation performance but also incurs unnecessary computational
and storage overhead. In this paper, we propose a
plug-and-play Core Context Aware (CCA) Attention for efficient long-context modeling, comprising two complementary modules: 1) Globalityaware pooling module groups input tokens and
dynamically compresses each group into one core
token based on their significance. In this way,
our method automatically focuses and strengthens core context while diminishing redundancy
during the learning process, leading to effective
long-term dependency modeling. 2) Localitypreserving module incorporates neighboring tokens to preserve local context for detailed representation. Notably, our CCA-Attention is able
to replace the self-attention module in existing
LLMs with minimal fine-tuning cost. Extensive
experimental results show the superiority of our
method in both long-context modeling and computational efficiency over state-of-the-art methods.

The ability to process longer contexts has been a key factor in improving the performance of LLMs across a wide
range of tasks, particularly beneficial for tasks requiring
document-level understanding, such as summarization of
extended texts, and multi-turn dialogue (Kitaev et al., 2019;
Wei et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2024). More importantly, recent
advancements in LLMs, such as OpenAI-o1 (OpenAI, 2023)
and DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025), have demonstrated
that extended contexts significantly enhance reasoning capabilities, enabling models to solve intricate problems that
require multi-step inference and contextual understanding.
This trend underscores the importance of extending the context length in LLMs to enhance modeling capabilities.
However, as the context length L scales to extremely large
magnitudes (e.g., 128K), it becomes impractical for a token to maintain significant semantic connections with all
tokens within such an extensive context. From this perspective, it is natural to consider that not all parts of the
context contribute equally to a token’s representation. Instead, the context can be viewed as comprising two primary
aspects: core context, which captures essential semantic
connections, and redundant context, which contains less
critical or repetitive information. The redundant context
may hamper LLMs from capturing dependencies among
crucial tokens, degrading representation performance. In
self-attention, this redundancy manifests as a highly sparse
distribution of attention scores, with a substantial proportion
disproportionately assigned to a limited number of tokens.

*
Equal contribution 1 South China University of Technology 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Pazhou Laboratory 4 Harbin
Institute of Technology 5 Key Laboratory of Big Data and
Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education. Correspondence
to: Mingkui Tan <mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>, Yaowei Wang
<wangyw@pcl.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

