Simplifying DINO via Coding Rate Regularization

Ziyang Wu 1 Jingyuan Zhang 2 Druv Pai 1 Xudong Wang 1
Chandan Singh 3 Jianwei Yang 3 Jianfeng Gao 3 Yi Ma 1 2 4

Abstract

(Hadsell et al., 2006; Oord et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018;
Grill et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Bardes et al., 2021; Chen
& He, 2021; Caron et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021; He et al.,
2022; Assran et al., 2023; Oquab et al., 2023), captioned
images (Radford et al., 2021), videos (Feichtenhofer et al.,
2022), and text (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin, 2018; Radford
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), among other modalities. In
the context of image SSL, there are two main approaches:
reconstructive (He et al., 2022), where the goal is to reconstruct some function of the true image data from a “view”,
i.e., corruption or augmentation, and contrastive (Hadsell
et al., 2006), where the goal is, for each image, to have the
features of different views of the image all be close, and
features of views of different images be far.

DINO and DINOv2 are two model families being widely used to learn representations from
unlabeled imagery data at large scales. Their
learned representations often enable state-of-theart performance for downstream tasks, such as
image classification and segmentation. However,
they employ many empirically motivated design
choices and their training pipelines are highly
complex and unstable — many hyperparameters
need to be carefully tuned to ensure that the representations do not collapse — which poses considerable difficulty to improving them or adapting
them to new domains. In this work, we posit
that we can remove most such-motivated idiosyncrasies in the pre-training pipelines, and only need
to add an explicit coding rate term in the loss function to avoid collapse of the representations. As
a result, we obtain highly simplified variants of
the DINO and DINOv2 which we call SimDINO
and SimDINOv2, respectively. Remarkably, these
simplified models are more robust to different design choices, such as network architecture and
hyperparameters, and they learn even higherquality representations, measured by performance
on downstream tasks, offering a Pareto improvement over the corresponding DINO and DINOv2
models. This work highlights the potential of
using simplifying design principles to improve
the empirical practice of deep learning. Code
and model checkpoints are available at https:
//github.com/RobinWu218/SimDINO.

Within contrastive SSL, a key challenge lies in preventing
representation collapse, where models learn trivial solutions that map all inputs to the same output. One common
approach to address this is through the use of negative samples, which explicitly encourages representations of different images to be dissimilar. Thus far, the success of using
negative samples depends on having a large batch size (Wu
et al., 2018; He et al., 2020), which poses computational
challenges at scale. Methods which attempt to avoid this
bottleneck by using negative samples in more implicit and
indirect ways to avoid collapse (Caron et al., 2021) can cope
with smaller batch sizes, but often require training pipelines
with many components and hyperparameters carefully tuned
to avoid collapse, making them difficult to train.
The state-of-the-art for image SSL is generally considered
to be the DINOv2 model family (Oquab et al., 2023). It is
built on the DINO model family (Caron et al., 2021). Both
classes of models are trained using contrastive SSL and thus
run into the representation collapse issue. While DINOv2
explicitly and directly uses negative samples to avoid collapse, it inherits much of its training pipeline from DINO,
which uses negative samples more indirectly. As such, both
model families’ training pipelines are highly complex and
unstable, requiring many tweaks and careful hyperparameter selection in order for the training to converge for a given
architecture. Despite this capriciousness, the trained models’
representations are highly useful for downstream tasks, and
are widely used (Baharoon et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is the toolkit of choice to
learn representations for large datasets of unlabeled images
1
UC Berkeley 2 TranscEngram 3 Microsoft Research 4 HKU.
Correspondence to: Ziyang Wu <zywu@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

