Sample-Optimal Agnostic Boosting with Unlabeled Data

Udaya Ghai 1 Karan Singh 2

Abstract

theory of machine learning. In practice, combining classifiers trained on adaptively weighted data points to highlight
past mistakes has proven to be a powerful idea. In theory,
boosting provides a highly general and provably efficient
framework to convert learning algorithms that are ever so
slightly better than random into accurate learners. The historical origins of boosting began with the realization that
although Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), that is, the
act of choosing the hypothesis that best fits the observed
data, provides a general scheme for statistical learning, for
many hypothesis classes it may not be approachable in terms
of computational efficiency. Often instead, in theory and
practice, it is possible to quickly construct weakly accurate rules-of-thumb (or weak learners). Can one use such
weak learners to construct an accurate learning algorithm?
Boosting provides an affirmative answer to this question
by giving a principled way of combining many weak learners, each incrementally focusing on regions of the sample
space where others have failed. Part of the original motivation here, as laid out by Kearns & Valiant (1994), was
that such an aggregation of hypotheses would no longer be
in-class (in modern parlance, improper) and hence could
potentially circumvent the computational hardness of direct
ERM. Interestingly, Kearns & Valiant (1994) were interested
in the representation-independent hardness of learning, that
is, the hardness that persists independently of algorithmic
parameterization. However, the main impact of the boosting methodology has been as a positive theory, that is, in
constructing powerful new learning algorithms, a view that
the present work also takes. A natural follow-up question
is: Does the computational reprieve that boosting provides
come at a cost?

Boosting provides a practical and provably effective framework for constructing accurate learning
algorithms from inaccurate rules of thumb. It extends the promise of sample-efficient learning to
settings where direct Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) may not be implementable efficiently.
In the realizable setting, boosting is known to
offer this computational reprieve without compromising on sample efficiency. However, in the
agnostic case, existing boosting algorithms fall
short of achieving the optimal sample complexity.
We highlight a previously unexplored avenue of
improvement: unlabeled samples. We design
a computationally efficient agnostic boosting algorithm that matches the sample complexity of
ERM, given polynomially many additional unlabeled samples. In fact, we show that the total
number of samples needed, unlabeled and labeled
inclusive, is never more than that for the best
known agnostic boosting algorithm – so this result
is never worse – while only a vanishing fraction of
these need to be labeled for the algorithm to succeed. This is particularly fortuitous for learningtheoretic applications of agnostic boosting, which
often take place in the distribution-specific setting,
where unlabeled samples can be availed for free.
We also prove that the resultant guarantee is resilient against mismatch between the distributions
governing the labeled and unlabeled samples. Finally, we detail an application of this result in
reinforcement learning.

Here, we are primarily concerned with sample efficiency. In
the realizable case, that is, when a perfect classifier exists,
the general answer is no. This serves to reaffirm our faith in
the realizable boosting framework. The celebrated Adaboost
algorithm (Freund & Schapire, 1997), for instance, achieves
the same (near-optimal) sample complexity as ERM for VC
classes 1 . In fact, Green Larsen & Ritzert (2022) recently
showed that for a carefully designed variant the equivalence
holds even up to logarithmic terms.

1. Introduction
The methodology of boosting, starting with the work of
Schapire (1990), has deep roots both in the practice and
*

Equal contribution 1 Amazon, NYC 2 Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Karan
Singh <karansingh@cmu.edu>.

1
But also see the note in Section 2.1 in Blanc et al. (2024) for
potentially a gap given arbitrary weak learners.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

