Position: Theory of Mind Benchmarks are Broken for Large Language Models

Matthew Riemer 1 2 3 Zahra Ashktorab 1 Djallel Bouneffouf 1 Payel Das 1 Miao Liu 1 Justin D. Weisz 1
Murray Campbell 1
of mind (Bubeck et al., 2023; Kosinski, 2023; Ma et al.,
2023; Street et al., 2024; Strachan et al., 2024). Although
this course of action seems logical, it is important to recognize that AI has a tendency to over optimize for its training
objectives in a manner that is quite alien to the way the human brain works. For example, Bubeck et al. (2023) tout the
performance of LLMs on human theory of mind tests, but
they note a noticeable lack of “process consistency” in LLM
explanations: LLMs can come up with compelling explanations for what they do that have very little to do with their
actual reasoning process. We must therefore proceed with
caution about our conclusions when we evaluate LLMs in
ways that do not directly align with our objectives. When we
evaluate humans, we typically focus on what we call in this
paper literal theory of mind, which is their ability to predict
the behavior of other agents. As noted by Ma et al. (2023),
this concept encompasses various abstractions including actions, intentions, beliefs, percepts, desires, knowledge, and
emotions. However, with humans we take for granted that
the ability to predict the behavior of other agents will be consistently applied within their own reasoning process when
determining their own behavior. The main insight of our
paper is that this form of process consistency cannot be taken
for granted when evaluating LLMs.

Abstract
Our paper argues that the majority of theory of
mind benchmarks are broken because of their inability to directly test how large language models (LLMs) adapt to new partners. This problem
stems from the fact that theory of mind benchmarks for LLMs are overwhelmingly inspired by
the methods used to test theory of mind in humans and fall victim to a fallacy of attributing
human-like qualities to AI agents. We expect that
humans will engage in a consistent reasoning process across various questions about a situation, but
this is known to not be the case for current LLMs.
Most theory of mind benchmarks only measure
what we call literal theory of mind: the ability
to predict the behavior of others. However, this
type of metric is only informative when agents
exhibit self-consistent reasoning. Thus, we introduce the concept of functional theory of mind: the
ability to adapt to agents in-context following a
rational response to their behavior. We find that
many open source LLMs are capable of displaying
strong literal theory of mind capabilities, but seem
to struggle with functional theory of mind – even
with exceedingly simple partner policies. Simply put, strong literal theory of mind performance
does not necessarily imply strong functional theory of mind performance or vice versa. Achieving
functional theory of mind, particularly over long
interaction horizons with a partner, is a significant challenge deserving a prominent role in any
meaningful LLM theory of mind evaluation.

Our position is: Current LLM theory of mind benchmarks are broken because they only measure literal theory of mind (Definition 2.1) rather than functional theory
of mind (Definition 2.2), which misses a key aspect of evaluating an agent’s ability to choose appropriate actions
based on the behavior of another agent. In Section 4 we
demonstrate simple, concrete cases where prominent open
source LLMs display strong literal theory of mind performance that is illusory in nature because it does not also lead
to strong functional theory of mind performance. Our results
serve as a case study to highlight the misleading nature of
most LLM theory of mind benchmarks even when we do
find that agents achieve impressive performance.

1. Introduction
Many recent papers that evaluate theory of mind in LLMs
have been inspired by how humans are evaluated for theory
1

2

Recently, generative AI, particularly in the form of LLM
assistants, has been deployed as a tool for a growing variety
of real-world use cases where the LLM must interact with a
diverse set of people performing a diverse set of tasks. As
typically deployed today, these LLMs are only interacting
with users at inference time due to the significant computa-

3

IBM Research Mila Université de Montréal. Correspondence
to: Matthew Riemer <mdriemer@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

