Understanding Overadaptation in Supervised Fine-Tuning:
The Role of Ensemble Methods
Yifan Hao * 1 Xingyuan Pan * 1 Hanning Zhang * 1 Chenlu Ye 1 Rui Pan 1 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the remarkable success of large language models
(LLMs) such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), Gemini (Team
et al., 2023), and Claude (Anthropic, 2023), the pretrainfinetune paradigm has gained significant attention for its
outstanding performance. Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is
a widely adopted approach for adapting foundation models
to specific downstream tasks. However, a well-known challenge with SFT models is the tendency to forget information
acquired during pre-training (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989;
Goodfellow et al., 2013). Model ensembling, also known as
model averaging, has emerged as one of the most effective
strategies to address this issue. Its benefits have been empirically demonstrated in vision models (Wortsman et al.,
2022b) and in reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Lin et al., 2024). By simply interpolating the
weights of pre-trained and fine-tuned models, ensembling
has shown competitive performance in mitigating forgetting
compared to other approaches. In this work, we observe
that the same advantage extends to supervised fine-tuning
of LLMs. Moreover, beyond its effectiveness in mitigating
forgetting on upstream tasks, we also observe a surprising
phenomenon of overadaptation, which reveals that model
ensembling can outperform the fine-tuned model even on
downstream tasks, where the fine-tuned model is expected to
excel, which also aligns with previous results in Wortsman
et al. (2022b); Lin et al. (2024).

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on domain-specific
data is the dominant approach for adapting foundation models to specialized tasks. However, it
has been observed that SFT models tend to forget
knowledge acquired during pretraining. In vision
models, ensembling a pretrained model with its
fine-tuned counterpart has been shown to mitigate
this issue (Wortsman et al., 2022b). In this work,
we demonstrate that the same holds for language
models, and, more strikingly, we observe an overadaptation phenomenon: the ensemble model not
only retains general knowledge from the foundation model but also outperforms the fine-tuned
model even on the fine-tuning domain itself. Despite the empirical success of ensembling, a theoretical understanding of its benefits remains underexplored. We develop a formal theoretical
analysis of the overadaptation phenomenon. Ensembling mitigates this by balancing two primary
sources of error: bias, caused by insufficient finetuning, and variance, introduced by overfitting to
fine-tuning data. While regularization techniques
aim to address this trade-off, we show that ensembling provides a more effective solution. We
analyze this phenomenon in over-parameterized
linear settings and demonstrate that interpolating
between pretrained and fine-tuned weights significantly improves performance. These findings
offer theoretical justification for the observed advantages of model ensembling, supported by empirical experiments consistent with our analysis.

However, despite the impressive empirical effectiveness of
ensemble methods, the corresponding theoretical insights
are still limited, especially in the context of modern overparameterized model. Most theoretical studies on ensembling have focused on traditional under-parameterized settings (Brown et al., 2005; Lin et al., 2023; 2024), which
do not align with the current use of over-parameterized
large neural networks. While some works (Allen-Zhu & Li,
2020; Hao et al., 2024) have demonstrated the benefits of ensembling independently trained models, these only address
improvements in out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness. To
the best of our knowledge, no existing work has addressed
the central question:

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Illinois. Correspondence to: Tong Zhang <tongzhang@tongzhangml.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Why does ensembling achieve such remarkable efficiency,
enhancing both generalization on downstream tasks and
1

