Automatic Reward Shaping from Confounded Offline Data

Mingxuan Li 1 Junzhe Zhang 2 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract

set of optimal policies after reward shaping is guaranteed to
be unchanged compared with the one without shaping. It
has been followed in many practical applications since then.

Reward shaping has been demonstrated to be an
effective technique for accelerating the learning
process of reinforcement learning (RL) agents.
While successful in empirical applications, the
design of a good shaping function is less well
understood in principle and thus often relies on
domain expertise and manual design. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel automated approach for designing reward functions
from offline data, possibly contaminated with the
unobserved confounding bias. We propose to use
causal state value upper bounds calculated from
offline datasets as a conservative optimistic estimation of the optimal state value, which is then
used as state potentials in Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS). When applying our shaping function to a model-free learner based on UCB
principles, we show that it enjoys a better gapdependent regret bound than the learner without
shaping. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first gap-dependent regret bound for PBRS
in model-free learning with online exploration.
Simulations support the theoretical findings.

The core of PBRS is the design of potential functions, which
denote the potential of a state or how good a state is. First,
people generally rely on domain expertise to compose such
potential functions. This dependence on experts’ knowledge could make designing potential functions expensive
and time-consuming. One may even argue these extensive
human efforts are against the promise of AI that domain experts should be free from handcrafting solutions. Moreover,
this designing process endures risks of misspecification due
to human biases, which in turn could slow down the training
substantially or lead to erroneous agents (Ng et al., 1999;
Randløv & Alstrøm, 1998; Pan et al., 2022). An ongoing
line of research exists to simultaneously automate the process of learning the shaping function and training the online
agent (Pathak et al., 2017; Yuan et al., 2023; Raileanu &
Rocktäschel, 2020; Devidze et al., 2022; Zou et al., 2019;
Ma et al., 2024). However, these methods involve nontrivial optimization procedures relying on prior parametric
knowledge over the potential function. The risks of misspecification persist. In other words, designing potential
functions is still a significant obstacle when applying PBRS.
An alternative strategy is to learn the shaping function from
previous offline data, possibly collected by different behavior policies or observing human operators interacting
with the environment (Brys et al., 2015; Mezghani et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2024). In their seminal work, Ng et al.
(1999) noted that the optimal state value is a good candidate
for potential functions, characterizing the “state potentials”
in the underlying environment. In the field of reinforcement learning, the problem of evaluating optimal state value
functions from past offline data has been studied under
the rubrics of off-policy learning or batch learning (Sutton,
2018; Levine et al., 2020). Several algorithms and methods
have been proposed, including Q-learning (Watkins, 1989;
Watkins & Dayan, 1992), importance sampling (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015; Jiang & Li, 2016), and temporal
difference (Precup et al., 2000; Munos et al., 2016). These
algorithms rely on the critical assumption that there is no
unobserved confounding (NUC) in the offline data (Murphy,
2003; 2005). One might be able to enforce this assumption
by deliberately controlling the behavior policies generat-

1. Introduction
Reward shaping is an effective technique for improving
sample efficiency in reinforcement learning. It augments
the original environment reward with extra learning signals such that the learner is guided towards high-rewarding
states in the environment. Though if not designed properly,
there is a risk of misleading the agent towards suboptimal
policies (Saksida et al., 1997; Randløv & Alstrøm, 1998).
Potential Based Reward Shaping (PBRS, Ng et al. (1999))
solves this problem by constructing the shaping functions
as the difference between state potentials. In this way, the
1
Causal AI Lab, Columbia University, New York, USA
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Syracuse University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Mingxuan Li <ml@cs.columbia.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

