Scaling Trends in Language Model Robustness

Nikolaus Howe * 1 2 3 Ian McKenzie * 1 Oskar Hollinsworth 1 Michał Zajac 1 Tom Tseng 1
Aaron Tucker 1 Pierre-Luc Bacon 2 Adam Gleave 1

Pythia, GCG, Spam
Target Attack Success Rate 2%

Abstract

Attack Compute (per example)
(Proportion of Pretraining)

Increasing model size has unlocked a dazzling
array of capabilities in language models. At
the same time, even frontier models remain
vulnerable to jailbreaks and prompt injections,
despite concerted efforts to make them robust.
As both attackers and defenders gain access to
more compute, and as models become larger,
what will the effect on robustness be? We argue
that to answer this question requires a scaling
lens, which we use to perform an extensive
study of language model robustness across
several classification tasks, model families, and
adversarial attacks. We find that in the absence
of explicit safety training, larger models are not
consistently more robust; however, scale improves sample efficiency in adversarial training,
though it worsens compute efficiency. Further,
we find that increasing attack compute smoothly
improves attack success rate against both undefended and adversarially trained models. Finally,
after exploring robustness transfer across attacks
and threat models, we combine attack and defense scaling rates to study the offense-defense
balance. We find that while attack scaling
outpaces adversarial training across all models
studied, larger adversarially trained models
might give defense the advantage in the long run.
These results underscore the utility of the scaling
lens, and provide a paradigm for evaluating
future attacks and defenses on frontier models.
Code for this project is available at https:
//github.com/AlignmentResearch/
scaling-llm-robustness-paper.

10 6
# params
7.6M
17.6M
44.7M
123.7M
353.8M
908.8M
1.3B
2.6B
6.7B

10 7

10 8
10 4

10 3

10 2

Adversarial Training Compute
(Proportion of Pretraining)

Figure 1: Attack compute needed to achieve 2% attack success rate vs. defense compute used for adversarial training
of Pythia on the Spam task. A slope of 1 (dashed grey
lines) corresponds to maintaining the attack success rate if
offense and defense both double compute. Offense has the
advantage for all model sizes studied (slope < 1), but if
increasing model size and adversarial training continues to
push scaling curves up and to the left, defense will have the
advantage in the long run; see Section 6.

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) have demonstrated a range of impressive capabilities in tasks, from general language understanding (Hendrycks et al., 2021), to graduate-level
Q&A (Rein et al., 2023), to code generation (Chen et al.,
2021). This growth in capabilities has fueled rapid deployment, with ChatGPT becoming one of the fastest-growing
consumer applications in history (Hu, 2023). Further, language models are increasingly integrated into larger systems, enabling them to take actions in the real world using
external tools (OpenAI, 2023; Anthropic, 2024; Google,
2024) and to pursue long-term open-ended goals (Richards,
2024; Kinniment et al., 2024).

*
Equal contribution 1 FAR.AI, Berkeley, California, USA
Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
3
Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Correspondence to: Nikolaus Howe <niki.howe@mila.quebec>.
2

While the advent of language models enables many new
tasks to be solved by AI, it also introduces novel classes of
security vulnerabilities. A variety of adversarial prompts
can bypass safety finetuning (Wei et al., 2023; Zou et al.,

nd

Proceedings of the 42
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

