LLaVA-ReID: Selective Multi-image Questioner
for Interactive Person Re-Identification

Yiding Lu 1 Mouxing Yang 1 Dezhong Peng 1 Peng Hu 1 Yijie Lin* 1 Xi Peng* 1 2
https://github.com/XLearning-SCU/LLaVA-ReID

Abstract

The man who took my jewelry was tall,
perhaps 6 feet, wearing a plaid shirt
and carrying a black bag.

Traditional text-based person ReID assumes that
person descriptions from witnesses are complete
and provided at once. However, in real-world
scenarios, such descriptions are often partial or
vague. To address this limitation, we introduce a
new task called interactive person re-identification
(Inter-ReID). Inter-ReID is a dialogue-based retrieval task that iteratively refines initial descriptions through ongoing interactions with the witnesses. To facilitate the study of this new task,
we construct a dialogue dataset that incorporates
multiple types of questions by decomposing finegrained attributes of individuals. We further propose LLaVA-ReID, a question model that generates targeted questions based on visual and textual
contexts to elicit additional details about the target
person. Leveraging a looking-forward strategy,
we prioritize the most informative questions as supervision during training. Experimental results on
both Inter-ReID and text-based ReID benchmarks
demonstrate that LLaVA-ReID significantly outperforms baselines.

Witness

What color of pants was
he wearing?
He was wearing a
dark pants.

Witness

LLaVA-ReID

...

Was he carrying anything
besides a black bag?

Oh! Yes, he is carrying
a purple cloth bag!

Witness

...

LLaVA-ReID

...

Got it!

LLaVA-ReID

Figure 1. An illustrated example of interactive person reidentification. The red circles highlight the distinctive details
in the candidate images that the inquiry process needs to focus on.

the suspect: “The man was tall, perhaps 6 feet, wearing a
plaid shirt and carrying a black bag”, as depicted in Figure 1.
For Holmes, ever the skeptic, vague impressions are never
enough and every detail matters. He investigates further:
“What color of pants was he wearing? Was he carrying
anything besides a black bag? Did he limp or walk with a
peculiar gait?” Much like an artist refining a blurry sketch,
Holmes sharpens the picture of the suspect through targeted
inquiries about details, gradually uncovering the full truth.

1. Introduction
Never trust to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details.
Sherlock Holmes

Imagine Sherlock Holmes standing in a dimly lit room, questioning a witness to a recent crime. The witness, nervous but
determined, recounts the few fleeting moments he observed

Consider Holmes is equipped with an interactive tool, a
system designed to help him ask increasingly refined and
precise questions based on the witness’s evolving description and the candidate suspects assessed from these clues.
Rather than passively accepting general descriptions, this
tool empowers Holmes to analyze both the description and
the candidate suspects, dynamically adapting questions in
real time. By guiding the witness to recall specific, crucial
details about the suspect’s appearance or behavior, the sys-

1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models
for Engineering Numerical Simulation, Sichuan University, China.
∗
Correspondence to: Yijie Lin <linyijie.gm@gmail.com>, Xi
Peng <pengx.gm@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

