TinyMIG: Transferring Generalization from Vision Foundation Models to
Single-Domain Medical Imaging

Chuang Liu * 1 2 Hongyan Xu * 3 Yichao Cao 3 Xiu Su 3 Zhe Qu 3 Tianfa Li 4 Shan An 5 Haogang Zhu 1 2 6

Abstract

DAPSAM
Rein (Dinov2)

Medical imaging faces significant challenges in
single-domain generalization (SDG) due to the
diversity of imaging devices and the variability
among data collection centers. To address these
challenges, we propose TinyMIG, a framework
designed to transfer generalization capabilities
from vision foundation models to medical imaging SDG. TinyMIG aims to enable lightweight
specialized models to mimic the strong generalization capabilities of foundation models in terms
of both global feature distribution and local finegrained details during training. Specifically, for
global feature distribution, we propose a Global
Distribution Consistency Learning strategy that
mimics the prior distributions of the foundation
model layer by layer. For local fine-grained details, we further design a Localized Representation Alignment method, which promotes semantic alignment and generalization distillation between the specialized model and the foundation
model. These mechanisms collectively enable the
specialized model to achieve robust performance
in diverse medical imaging scenarios. Extensive
experiments on large-scale benchmarks demonstrate that TinyMIG, with extremely low computational cost, significantly outperforms stateof-the-art models, showcasing its superior SDG
capabilities. All the code and model weights will
be publicly available.

Rein
MedSAM
(SAM)

TinyMIG
(Ours)

TriD
SLAug

CSDG

DeepAll
70M

50M

30M 15M
GFLOPs

Figure 1. The proposed TinyMIG significantly surpasses the SDG
capabilities of SOTAs with extremely low computational cost and
model parameter size.

1. Introduction
In the field of medical imaging analysis, Domain Adaptation
(DA) (Kouw & Loog, 2021; Guan & Liu, 2021a) and Domain Generalization (DG) (Zhou et al., 2022a; Yoon et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2020) address the critical challenge of
managing variations in data distributions that deviate from
the conventional assumption of independent and identically
distributed (IID) data (Carlucci et al., 2019). Among these,
Single-source Domain Generalization (SDG) tackles the
practical problem of developing methods capable of generalizing from a single source to multiple out-of-distribution
(OOD) target domains (Liu et al., 2022b; Xu et al., 2023).
This task is especially relevant in medical imaging, where
data availability is often limited, and privacy requirements
are stringent (Price & Cohen, 2019). In recent years, key
approaches in SDG have been proposed include Data Augmentation (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2021; Su et al.,
2022b), Regularization (Chen et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2022), and Self-supervised Learning (Zhou et al., 2022b),
each of which aims to improve model robustness and adaptability to unseen domains. Despite these advancements, significant challenges remain in comprehensively addressing
the SDG problem, such as limited generalization capabilities and high computational complexity, highlighting the

*
Equal contribution 1 State Key Laboratory of Complex
& Critical Software Environment, Beihang University, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, China 3 Big Data Institute, Central
South University, China 4 Jinan Institute of Supercomputing Technology 5 School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China 6 Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University, China. Correspondence to: Xiu Su
<xiusu@csu.edu.cn>, Haogang Zhu <haogangzhu@buaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Rein
(SAM)

