ZebraLogic: On the Scaling Limits of LLMs for Logical Reasoning

Kyle Richardson
1

2

Bill Yuchen Lin 1
Ronan Le Bras 2
2
Ashish Sabharwal
Radha Poovendran 1
Peter Clark 2

University of Washington

2

Allen Institute for AI

3

Yejin Choi 3

Stanford University

byuchen@uw.edu
ronanlb@allenai.org
yejinc@stanford.edu
https://hf.co/spaces/WildEval/ZebraLogic

1. Introduction

Abstract

Logical reasoning stands as a cornerstone of human intelligence and remains a central challenge in AI. While recent advances have demonstrated promise in tasks requiring
common sense and general knowledge (Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Bubeck et al., 2023), the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) in handling complex
deductive problems remain uncertain. This limitation in our
understanding is especially critical as systematic reasoning
underpins many real-world applications. To systematically
study LLMs’ logical reasoning capabilities and their scaling limits, an ideal evaluation framework must: (1) isolate
pure logical reasoning from domain knowledge; (2) enable
precise control over problem complexity; (3) minimize data
leakage to prevent training data memorization; (4) provide
objective metrics for assessing an LLM’s reasoning results.

We investigate the logical reasoning capabilities
of large language models (LLMs) and their scalability in complex non-monotonic reasoning. To
this end, we introduce ZebraLogic, a comprehensive evaluation framework for assessing LLM reasoning performance on logic grid puzzles derived
from constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs). ZebraLogic enables the generation of puzzles with
controllable and quantifiable complexity, facilitating a systematic study of the scaling limits of
models such as Llama, o1 models, and DeepSeekR1. By encompassing a broad range of search
space complexities and diverse logical constraints,
ZebraLogic provides a structured environment
to evaluate reasoning under increasing difficulty.
Our results reveal a significant decline in accuracy
as problem complexity grows—a phenomenon we
term the “curse of complexity.” This limitation
persists even with larger models and increased
inference-time computation, suggesting inherent
constraints in current LLM reasoning capabilities.
Additionally, we explore strategies to enhance
logical reasoning, including Best-of-N sampling,
backtracking mechanisms, and self-verification
prompts. Our findings offer critical insights into
the scalability of LLM reasoning, highlight fundamental limitations, and outline potential directions for improvement.

Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) offer such a controlled framework (Dechter, 2003): they are mathematically
well-defined, scalable in both complexity and search space,
and have solutions that can be automatically verified. By formulating logical tasks as CSPs, we can rigorously evaluate
how well LLMs adhere to logical constraints, independent
of domain-specific data or heavy numerical computation.
As a representative class of CSPs, logic grid puzzles (specifically Zebra Puzzles or Einstein’s Riddle, (Prosser, 1993))
are particularly suitable as they require pure formal reasoning, remain accessible enough to serve as an effective
testbed, and embody core skills relevant to real-world applications such as task planning, scheduling, and resource
allocation. Hence, we introduce ZebraLogic, an evaluation
framework for creating logic puzzles with controllable, and
quantifiable complexity, thus improving our understanding
on the scaling limits of LLMs including Llama (AI@Meta,
2024), o1 (OpenAI, 2024) and R1 (DeepSeek-AI, 2025). 1

1

University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for AI
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Bill Yuchen Lin
<byuchen@uw.edu>.
3

Through extensive evaluation of various LLMs across di1

The closest related effort is by Tyagi et al. (2024), who focused
on a detailed analysis of the kinds of errors LLMs make when
solving grid puzzles using reasoning chains; more details in §7.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

