Counterfactual Graphical Models: Constraints and Inference

Juan D. Correa 1 Elias Bareinboim 2

Abstract

(Age)

Z

Graphical models have been widely used as parsimonious encoders of the constraints underlying
probability models. When organized in a structured way, these models can facilitate the derivation of non-trivial constraints, the inference of
quantities of interest, and the optimization of their
estimands. In particular, causal diagrams enable
the efficient representation of the structural constraints of the underlying causal system. In this
paper, we introduce an efficient graphical construction called Ancestral Multi-world Networks
that is sound and complete for reading counterfactual independences from a causal diagram using
d-separation. Moreover, we introduce the counterfactual (ctf-) calculus, which can be used to
transform counterfactual quantities using three
rules licensed by the constraints encoded in the diagram. This result generalizes Pearl’s celebrated
do-calculus from interventional to counterfactual
reasoning.

X

(Treatment)

Y

(Survival)

Figure 1. A causal diagram over three variables.

we recover some state of affairs, perform a change in the
sequence of events, and let a hypothetical situation to play
out. More generally, counterfactuals are an important component in the construction of explanations regarding why
certain events occurred the way they did (Pearl, 2000; Pearl
& Mackenzie, 2018; Bareinboim et al., 2020).
One fundamental topic of study in counterfactual reasoning
is understanding the various quantities, the constraints on
their relation, and the types of inferences allowed across various counterfactual worlds. Specifically, counterfactual quantities evoke hypothetical conditions that could contradict the
factual evidence, underpinning different applications involving blame and responsibility, credit assignment, and more
individualized types of decisions (Pearl, 2000). Examples of
such quantities include the effect of treatment on the treated
(Heckman, 1992; Pearl, 2000), path-specific effects (Pearl,
2001; Avin et al., 2005), and causal and spurious variations
(Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018; Plečko & Bareinboim, 2024).
There are also quantities such as the probability of necessity
(PN), probability of sufficiency (PS), and the probability of
necessity and sufficiency (PNS) that relate to fundamental
aspects of how events are related and can explain the other.
For example, consider the causal diagram in Figure 1 over
the variables age, treatment, and survival. The counterfactual event (Yx = 1 | X = x′ ) refers to the survival of a
person (Y = 1) that gets a treatment X = x when they
would naturally decide not to get treated (x′ ). Such queries
depict a quintessential counterfactual situation, since we
aim to evaluate a world that contradicts the factual one in
which the person was not treated.

1. Introduction
Counterfactuals form the basis of important notions across
human cognition that require retrospective thinking, where
one must compare what did happen in the real world versus
what would have happened under some different hypothetical conditions. Given the impossibility of observing an
alternative outcome once an action is taken, counterfactuals evoke “what if?” questions whose answers can only be
approached by imagining hypothetical conditions contrary
to this factual evidence. For instance, questions such as
“what would be the death rates had the vaccination started
two weeks earlier?” or “given that I arrived late, would I
have been on time had I taken the subway instead of the
taxi?” require us to carry out a mental experiment where
1
Department of Computer Science, Universidad Autónoma
de Manizales, Manizales, Colombia 2 Department of Commputer
Science, Columbia University, New York, United States. Correspondence to: Juan D. Correa <jcorrea@autonoma.edu.co>.

In the first part of our paper, we revisit and generalize
counterfactual constraints – exclusion and independence
restrictions, and consistency (Pearl, 2000) – and show how
they follow from the Structural Causal Model semantics.
Specifically, we introduce a new graphical representation

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

