Self-cross Feature based Spiking Neural Networks
for Efficient Few-shot Learning

Qi Xu 1 Junyang Zhu 1 Dongdong Zhou 1 Hao Chen 1 Yang Liu 1 Jiangrong Shen † 2 3 4 Qiang Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep neural networks (DNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016) have demonstrated
remarkable performance across various computer vision
tasks, such as object detection and sematic segmentation.
DNNs rely on large-scale labeled datasets and deep architectures, making them computationally expensive and energyintensive, which limits their scalability. Real-world data
is often scarce, dynamic, or non-stationary, which makes
few-shot learning with low energy consumption increasingly
important. Few-shot learning (FSL) (Fei-Fei et al., 2006;
Vinyals et al., 2016) enables models to generalize from only
few examples, which adapts to ever-changing conditions.
Moreover, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), recognized as
the third generation neural networks, are particularly wellsuited to few-shot learning due to the exceptionally low
energy consumption (Bu et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2022; Ma
et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a;b; 2025b)
compared to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) by leveraging event-driven nature. Furthermore, the spatiotemporal
dynamics of SNNs allow them effectively processing sparse
and temporal data, which are common in open environments.
This paper investigates the potential of SNNs to enhance
few-shot learning in these challenging circumstances, offering a promising solution to real-world applications that
require both adaptability and efficiency.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) excel in computer
vision tasks, especially, few-shot learning (FSL),
which is increasingly important for generalizing
from limited examples. However, DNNs are computationally expensive with scalability issues in
real world. Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs),
with their event-driven nature and low energy
consumption, are particularly efficient in processing sparse and dynamic data, though they
still encounter difficulties in capturing complex
spatiotemporal features and performing accurate
cross-class comparisons. To further enhance the
performance and efficiency of SNNs in few-shot
learning, we propose a few-shot learning framework based on SNNs, which combines a selffeature extractor module and a cross-feature contrastive module to refine feature representation
and reduce power consumption. We apply the
combination of temporal efficient training loss
and InfoNCE loss to optimize the temporal dynamics of spike trains and enhance the discriminative power. Experimental results show that the
proposed FSL-SNN significantly improves the
classification performance on the neuromorphic
dataset N-Omniglot, and also achieves competitive performance to ANNs on static datasets such
as CUB and miniImageNet with low power consumption.

Few-shot learning focuses on training models to address
the challenge of learning with minimal labeled data. Typical FSL approaches by ANNs rely on extensive parameter
optimization (Finn et al., 2017; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017;
Yoon et al., 2018) or metric learning (Qiao et al., 2019;
Jiang et al., 2020; Oreshkin et al., 2018), leveraging knowledge acquired during the training phase to classify new data
points with few examples. However, a significant drawback
of these ANN-based methods is their high computational
cost and energy consumption. Since ANNs depend heavily
on floating-point operations, they incur substantial energy
costs, which can be prohibitive for deployment in energyconstrained facilities such as embedded systems or Internet
of Things (IoT) devices (Madakam et al., 2015; Guo et al.,
2023b; Liu et al., 2024b). Additionally, the reliance on large
datasets and backpropagation algorithms (Cilimkovic, 2015)

1

School of Computer Science and Technology,Dalian University of Technology,Dalian,China 2 Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 National Key
Lab of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, Xi’an
Jiaotong University 4 State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence,
Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Jiangrong Shen <jrshen@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

