S2-Track: A Simple yet Strong Approach for End-to-End
3D Multi-Object Tracking

Tao Tang‡ * 1 Lijun Zhou * 2 Pengkun Hao 2 Zihang He 2 Kalok Ho 2 Shuo Gu 2 Zhihui Hao 2 Haiyang Sun 2
Kun Zhan 2 Peng Jia 2 Xianpeng Lang 2 Xiaodan Liang† 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

3D multiple object tracking (MOT) (Li et al., 2023d; Doll
et al., 2023; Pang et al., 2023; Qing et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023a; Ding et al., 2024)
is an essential component for the perception of autonomous
driving systems. The ability to accurately and robustly track
objects in dynamic environments is crucial for ensuring
smooth and safe navigation and reasonable decision-making.
Traditional 3D MOT methods (Yang et al., 2022; Chaabane
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021; Pang et al.,
2022; Weng et al., 2020; Wojke et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2024)
rely on detector outcomes followed by a post-processing
module like data association and trajectory filtering, leading
to a complex pipeline. To avoid human-crafted heuristic
design in detection-based trackers, recent advancements in
end-to-end query-based approaches have shown impressive
potential in addressing the 3D MOT task by simultaneously
detecting and tracking objects (Zeng et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2022a; Doll et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023d; Pang et al.,
2023; Ding et al., 2024). These methods have demonstrated
promising results in terms of tracking performance and efficiency. However, current end-to-end trackers are still in
the early stages of development and can not effectively handle the various complex driving scenarios with their naive
solution.

3D multiple object tracking (MOT) plays a crucial role in autonomous driving perception. Recent end-to-end query-based trackers simultaneously detect and track objects, which have shown
promising potential for the 3D MOT task. However, existing methods are still in the early stages
of development and lack systematic improvements, failing to track objects in certain complex
scenarios, like occlusions and the small size of
target object’s situations. In this paper, we first
summarize the current end-to-end 3D MOT framework by decomposing it into three constituent
parts: query initialization, query propagation, and
query matching. Then we propose corresponding
improvements, which lead to a strong yet simple
tracker: S2-Track. Specifically, for query initialization, we present 2D-Prompted Query Initialization, which leverages predicted 2D object and
depth information to prompt an initial estimate of
the object’s 3D location. For query propagation,
we introduce an Uncertainty-aware Probabilistic
Decoder to capture the uncertainty of complex
environment in object prediction with probabilistic attention. For query matching, we propose
a Hierarchical Query Denoising strategy to enhance training robustness and convergence. As
a result, our S2-Track achieves state-of-the-art
performance on nuScenes benchmark, i.e., 66.3%
AMOTA on test split, surpassing the previous
best end-to-end solution by a significant margin
of 8.9% AMOTA. We achieve 1st place on the
nuScenes tracking task leaderboard.

*

In driving scenarios, the environment could be highly complex, often when driving in cities, with numerous objects
such as vehicles and pedestrians interleaving across the
scene, and exhibiting substantial variations in their motion
patterns. Furthermore, tracked objects often cover a wide
spatial tracking range and a long temporal tracking sequence.
As a result, occlusion situations and the small size of target objects, frequently occur, which usually leads to some
undetected or occluded objects losing track. These factors
present significant challenges to current vanilla end-to-end
query-based approaches for achieving accurate and robust
3D MOT. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the previous state-ofthe-art end-to-end tracker, PF-Track (Pang et al., 2023), fails
to track objects in challenging scenarios.

Equal contribution , ‡ Work done during an internship at Li Auto Inc.
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Li Auto Inc. Correspondence to: Xiaodan Liang <liangxd9@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we aim to comprehensively enhance the existing end-to-end 3D MOT framework to achieve robust and
1

