Instance-Optimal Pure Exploration for Linear Bandits on Continuous Arms

Sho Takemori 1 Yuhei Umeda 1 Aditya Gopalan 2

Abstract

an -optimal arm (cf. (Bubeck et al., 2011, Theorem 1),
Lemma 4.1, (Banerjee et al., 2023, Theorem 2.2)), where
 > 0 is a given error tolerance. Furthermore, this paper
considers a continuous arm set X ⊂ Rd (a compact subset
of Rd ) and aims to optimize sampling distributions to minimize the posterior probability of misidentification under a
Bayesian reward model. Despite extensive existing research
on BAI problems, as we detail below, the -BAI problem on
continuous arm sets is an open problem.

This paper studies a pure exploration problem
with linear bandit feedback on continuous arm
sets, aiming to identify an -optimal arm with
high probability. Previous approaches for continuous arm sets have employed instance-independent
methods due to technical challenges such as the
infinite dimensionality of the space of probability
measures and the non-smoothness of the objective
function. This paper proposes a novel, tractable
algorithm that addresses these challenges by leveraging a reparametrization of the sampling distribution and projected subgradient descent. However,
this approach introduces new challenges related
to the projection and reconstruction of the distribution from the reparametrization. We address
these by focusing on the connection to the approximate Carathéodory problem. Compared to
the original optimization problem on the infinitedimensional space, our method is tractable, requiring only the solution of quadratic and fractional
quadratic problems on the arm set. We establish
an instance-dependent optimality for our method,
and empirical results on synthetic environments
demonstrate its superiority over existing instanceindependent baselines.

The pure exploration problem with linear bandit feedback
in the finite-armed setting has been extensively studied,
with instance-optimal algorithms proposed for the (, δ)PAC learning setting (Jourdan & Degenne, 2022), aiming
to identify an -optimal arm with probability at least 1 − δ.
These algorithms typically solve an optimization problem
over the probability simplex ∆K−1 ⊂ RK , where K is the
number of arms; for example, Lazy Track-and-Stop (Jedra & Proutiere, 2020) employs the Frank-Wolfe algorithm.
Naively applying these finite-armed algorithms to the continuous arm setting via discretization of the arm set X is
computationally intractable, as the number of discretization
points K can grow exponentially with the dimension d.
Although most existing works for pure exploration problems
focused on the finite-armed setting, there are few notable
exceptions. Jedra & Proutiere (2020) studied a linear pure
exploration problem with the fixed confidence setting and
proposed an (order-wise) optimal algorithm when the arm
set X is the unit sphere (along with the case of the finitearmed setting). However, their analysis shows that a uniform exploration is an (order-wise) optimal sampling rule
and such an exploration would not be optimal for general
continuous arm sets. Bhat & Amballa (2022) also studied
the (, δ)-PAC learning problem with the linear bandit setting for general continuous arm sets. However, their method
is also a uniform exploration and theoretical result (Bhat
& Amballa, 2022, Theorem 4.4, Eq. (10)) shows an upper
bound of the sample complexity involves the dimension d
and  rather than a problem instance, i.e., their analysis is
instance-independent. Therefore, even in the case of linear
bandits, to the best of our knowledge, it is an open problem
to develop a trackable algorithm for a pure exploration problem with linear bandit feedback with an instance-dependent
optimality.

1. Introduction
The stochastic linear bandit problem (Dani et al., 2008;
Jedra & Proutiere, 2020) is a well-studied online decisionmaking problem that has been widely applied to real-world
problems (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). While most research focuses on minimizing cumulative regret, this paper
considers a pure exploration problem, specifically the -BAI
(best arm identification) problem. Unlike regret-minimizing
algorithms, optimal pure exploration algorithms achieve
an exponentially decaying probability of misidentifying
1

Fujitsu Limited, Kawasaki, Japan 2 Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012, India. Correspondence to: Sho Takemori
<takemori.sho@fujitsu.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

