Geometric Contact Flows: Contactomorphisms for Dynamics and Control

Andrea Testa 1 2 Søren Hauberg 3 Tamim Asfour 2 Leonel Rozo 1

0.27

Ground Truth
MLP Reconstruction 1
MLP Reconstruction 2
Position

0.24
Ground Truth
GCF Reconstruction 1
GCF Reconstruction 2
Position

0.21
0.18

Figure 1. A dynamical system modeled via an MLP (left) and our
GCF (right). The first prediction (orange) starts within the data
support and the second (red) outside. The MLP fails to reconstruct
the dynamics and does not converge to the attractor, while GCF
provides reliable and physically–interpretable predictions due to
its contact Hamiltonian structure.

support (orange trajectory). This stems from the model’s
inability to encode the physical relationships between
variables, which are governed by an underlying energy
function. The model also extrapolates unreliably in data–
sparse regions (red trajectory), showing the lack of physical
interpretability and generalization capacity in black-box
approaches (Wang et al., 2020). To overcome these
limitations, physics–informed models incorporate physical
principles into the model architecture, to ensure consistency
with the underlying dynamics. These physical inductive
biases appear as geometric structures, such as symplectic
and contact manifolds (Blair & Blair, 2010), providing a
powerful differential geometric perspective that we exploit.

1. Introduction
Modeling dynamical systems is fundamental to many
scientific and engineering disciplines, enabling the analysis
and prediction of system behaviors across diverse applications (Yu & Wang, 2024). This involves generating state–
space trajectories to forecast the system evolution. While
the increasing availability of data has accelerated the adoption of data–driven methods, purely black-box models face
substantial challenges (Chen et al., 2018). As exemplified in
Fig. 1, a naive MLP network fails to capture the true dynamics, leading to inaccurate predictions even within the data

This paper introduces G EOMETRIC C ONTACT F LOWS
(GFC), a novel framework leveraging Riemannian and contact geometry as inductive biases to learn complex dynamical systems. By integrating these geometries (Sec. 3) with
a learning model, GCF provides robust, interpretable, and
physically–grounded dynamics modeling, overcoming the
limitations of black-box methods. First, a baseline latent dynamics encodes desired properties about the target dynamics
(e.g., stability, energy conservation) via a contact structure
and an associated Riemannian metric. We then adapt this
baseline model to the target dynamics through a contact diffeomorphism (Sec. 4). We improve the GCF generalization
robustness via an ensemble of contact diffeomorphisms to
identify uncertain regions, allowing the model to adapt its
behavior accordingly. This is achieved by modifying the
Riemannian metric to incorporate uncertainty, resulting in

1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany 3 Section of Cognitive Systems, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Lyngby, Denmark.
Correspondence to: Andrea Testa <andrea.testa@de.bosch.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Damping Coefficient

Accurately modeling and predicting complex
dynamical systems, particularly those involving
force exchange and dissipation, is crucial for
applications ranging from fluid dynamics to
robotics, but presents significant challenges due
to the intricate interplay of geometric constraints
and energy transfer. This paper introduces Geometric Contact Flows (GFC), a novel framework
leveraging Riemannian and Contact geometry
as inductive biases to learn such systems. GCF
constructs a latent contact Hamiltonian model
encoding desirable properties like stability or
energy conservation. An ensemble of contactomorphisms then adapts this model to the target
dynamics while preserving these properties. This
ensemble allows for uncertainty-aware geodesics
that attract the system’s behavior toward the
data support, enabling robust generalization and
adaptation to unseen scenarios. Experiments
on learning dynamics for physical systems
and for controlling robots on interaction tasks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

Momentum

0.30
Momentum

Abstract

