Weisfeiler and Leman Go Gambling: Why Expressive Lottery Tickets Win

Lorenz Kummer 1 2 Samir Moustafa 1 2 Anatol Ehrlich 1 2 Franka Bause 1 2
Nikolaus Suess 1 Wilfried N. Gansterer 1 Nils M. Kriege 1 3

Abstract

et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2018; Xiong et al.,
2021). One of the key fields in GNN research is expressivity, that is, a GNN’s ability to distinguish non-isomorphic
graphs. This expressivity is often benchmarked using the
Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test, with the 1-WL test being a
standard baseline for many models. Key contributions to
this field include Deep Sets (Zaheer et al., 2017), which
introduced permutation-invariant learning on sets, and the
Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) (Xu et al., 2019), which
explicitly aimed to match the expressivity of the 1-WL test.
GIN set a new standard in graph representation learning
by using a simple yet powerful aggregation function that
ensures the model’s ability to distinguish non-isomorphic
graphs at a level comparable to the 1-WL test. The combination of these advances has shaped the current understanding
of GNN expressivity, where models are judged by their capacity to approximate or exceed the performance of 1-WL
in distinguishing complex graph structures. A large amount
of research has been devoted to improving the expressivity
of GNNs, aiming to go beyond the limitations of 1-WL and
increase the model’s capacity to distinguish between structurally distinct graphs (Morris et al., 2023). Despite these
efforts, the 1-WL test continues to distinguish most graphs
in widely used benchmarks (Morris et al., 2021; Zopf, 2022),
demonstrating that, in many scenarios, it is not necessary to
go beyond this foundational approach.

The lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) is wellstudied for convolutional neural networks but has
been validated only empirically for graph neural
networks (GNNs), for which theoretical findings
are largely lacking. In this paper, we identify the
expressivity of sparse subnetworks, i.e. their ability to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs, as crucial for finding winning tickets that preserve the
predictive performance. We establish conditions
under which the expressivity of a sparsely initialized GNN matches that of the full network, particularly when compared to the Weisfeiler-Leman
test, and in that context put forward and prove
a Strong Expressive Lottery Ticket Hypothesis.
We subsequently show that an increased expressivity in the initialization potentially accelerates
model convergence and improves generalization.
Our findings establish novel theoretical foundations for both LTH and GNN research, highlighting the importance of maintaining expressivity
in sparsely initialized GNNs. We illustrate our
results using examples from drug discovery.

1. Introduction

Practically, in drug discovery and molecular property prediction, the impact of model expressivity on prediction quality
is not entirely clear. Structurally similar molecules can
exhibit drastically different potencies towards the same protein target, a phenomenon known as activity cliffs (PérezVillanueva et al., 2015). The accurate identification of these
activity cliffs is a challenging but essential task, as misclassifications may result in a drug candidate being erroneously
interpreted as safe or toxic. Furthermore, distinguishing between stereoisomers is crucial, as these are molecules with
the same molecular formula and bond structure but differ
only in the three-dimensional spatial arrangement of their
atoms. Even such small changes can significantly influence
a molecule’s biological activity and pharmacological profile.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as powerful tools for learning over graph-structured data. Complex
objects such as molecules, proteins or social networks are
represented as graphs. Nodes represent parts and edges their
relations, both can be enriched with features. GNNs generalize established deep learning techniques and extend their
applicability to new domains such as financial and social
network analysis, medical data analysis, or chem- and bioinformatics (Lu & Uddin, 2021; Cheung & Moura, 2020; Sun
1

Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria 2 Doctoral School Computer Science, University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria 3 Research Network Data Science, University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to: Lorenz Kummer
<lorenz.kummer@univie.ac.at>.

The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH), originally proposed
by Frankle & Carbin (2018), introduced the idea that large,
randomly initialized neural networks contain smaller, train-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

