Point-Level Topological Representation Learning on Point Clouds

Vincent P. Grande 1 Michael T. Schaub 1

Abstract

typical assumption underpinning many unsupervised learning methods is the so-called “manifold hypothesis” which
posits that real world data can be described well via submanifolds of n-dimensional space (Ma & Fu, 2012; Fefferman
et al., 2016). Using eigenvectors of some Laplacian, we can
then obtain a coordinate system intrinsic to the point cloud
(see e.g. (Shi & Malik, 2000; Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Coifman & Lafon, 2006)). Common to all these above examples
is the goal is to construct locally interpretable point-level
features that encode globally meaningful positional information robust to local perturbations of the data.

Topological Data Analysis (TDA) allows us to extract powerful topological and higher-order information on the global shape of a data set or point
cloud. Tools like Persistent Homology give a single complex description of the global structure
of the point cloud. However, common machine
learning applications like classification require
point-level information and features. In this paper,
we bridge this gap and propose a novel method
to extract point-level topological features from
complex point clouds using discrete variants of
concepts from algebraic topology and differential
geometry. We verify the effectiveness of these
topological point features (TOPF) on both synthetic and real-world data and study their robustness under noise and heterogeneous sampling.

Instead of focussing on the interpretation of individual points, topological data analysis (TDA), (Carlsson &
Vejdemo-Johansson, 2021), follows a different approach.
TDA extracts a global description of the shape of data, which
is typically considered in the form of a high-dimensional
point cloud. This is done measuring topological features
like persistent homology, which counts the number of generalised “holes” on multiple scales. Due to their flexibility
and robustness these global topological features have been
shown to contain relevant information in a broad range of application scenarios: In medicine, TDA has provided methods
to analyse cancer progression (Lawson et al., 2019). In biology, persistent homology has been used to analyse knotted
protein structures (Benjamin et al., 2023), and the spectrum
of the Hodge Laplacian has been used for predicting protein
behaviour (Wee et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning (Murphy, 2022), objects are
described by feature vectors. However, the coordinates of
a single vector can often only be understood in relation to
the entire data set: if the value x is small, average, large,
or even an outlier depends on the remaining data. In a
low-dimensional case this issue can be addressed simply by
normalising the data points according to the global mean and
standard deviation or similar procedures. We can interpret
this as the most straight-forward way to construct local
features informed by the global structure of the data set.

This success of topological data analysis is a testament to
the fact that relevant information is encoded in the global
topological structure of point cloud data. Such higher-order
topological information is however invisible to the tools of
data analysis discussed above like PCA or diffusion maps.
We are now faced by the problem that (i) important parts
of the global structure of a complex point cloud can only
be described by the language of applied topology, however
(ii) most standard methods to obtain positional point-level
information are not sensitive to the higher-order topology
of the point cloud.

In the case where not all data dimensions are equally relevant, or contain correlated and redundant information, we
can apply (sparse) PCA to project the data points to a lowerdimensional space using information about the global structure of the point cloud. For even more complex data, we
may first have to learn the encoded structure itself: indeed, a
1

Department of Computer Science, RWTH Aachen University, Germany. Correspondence to: Vincent P. Grande
<grande@cs.rwth-aachen.de>.

Contributions We introduce TOPF (Figure 1), a novel
method to compute point-level topological features relating individual points to global topological structures of
point clouds. TOPF (i) outperforms other methods and embeddings for clustering downstream tasks on topologically

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

