Controlling Neural Collapse Enhances
Out-of-Distribution Detection and Transfer Learning

Md Yousuf Harun 1 Jhair Gallardo 1 Christopher Kanan 2

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection and OOD
generalization are widely studied in Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), yet their relationship remains
poorly understood. We empirically show that the
degree of Neural Collapse (NC) in a network layer
is inversely related with these objectives: stronger
NC improves OOD detection but degrades generalization, while weaker NC enhances generalization at the cost of detection. This trade-off
suggests that a single feature space cannot simultaneously achieve both tasks. To address this, we
develop a theoretical framework linking NC to
OOD detection and generalization. We show that
entropy regularization mitigates NC to improve
generalization, while a fixed Simplex Equiangular
Tight Frame (ETF) projector enforces NC for better detection. Based on these insights, we propose
a method to control NC at different DNN layers.
In experiments, our method excels at both tasks
across OOD datasets and DNN architectures.

Figure 1: In this paper, we show that there is a close inverse
relationship between OOD detection and generalization with
respect to the degree of representation collapse in DNN
layers. This plot illustrates this relationship for VGG17 pretrained on ImageNet-100 using four OOD datasets, where
we measure collapse and OOD performance for various layers. For OOD detection, there is a strong positive Pearson
correlation (R = 0.77) with the degree of neural collapse
(NC1) in a DNN layer, whereas for OOD generalization,
there is a strong negative correlation (R = −0.60). We
rigorously examine this inverse relationship and propose a
method to control NC at different layers.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection and OOD generalization are two fundamental challenges in deep learning. OOD
detection enables deep neural networks (DNNs) to reject
unfamiliar inputs, preventing overconfident mispredictions,
while OOD generalization allows DNNs to transfer their
knowledge to new distributions. For applications like openworld learning, where a DNN continuously encounters new
concepts, both capabilities are essential: OOD detection
enables new concepts to be detected, while OOD generalization facilitates forward transfer to improve learning of these
new concepts. Despite their importance, these tasks have
primarily been studied in isolation. Here, we empirically
and theoretically demonstrate a link between both tasks and

Neural Collapse (NC), as illustrated in Fig. 1.
NC is a phenomenon where DNNs develop compact and
structured class representations (Papyan et al., 2020). While
NC was first identified in the final hidden layer, later work
has found that it occurs to varying degrees in the last K
DNN layers (Rangamani et al., 2023; Harun et al., 2024;
Súkenı́k et al., 2024). NC has a major impact on both OOD
detection and generalization. Strong NC improves OOD
detection by forming tightly clustered class features that
enhance separation between in-distribution (ID) and OOD
data (Haas et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024b; Ming et al., 2022).
Conversely, NC impairs OOD generalization by reducing
feature diversity, making it harder to transfer knowledge
to novel distributions (Kothapalli, 2023; Masarczyk et al.,
2023; Harun et al., 2024). However, past work has consid-

1
Rochester Institute of Technology 2 University of Rochester.
Correspondence to: Md Yousuf Harun <mh1023@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

