FairICP: Encouraging Equalized Odds via Inverse Conditional Permutation

Yuheng Lai 1 Leying Guan 2

Abstract

Encouraging equalized odds is more challenging due to
Y -conditioning compared to encouraging demographic parity, another common fairness notion that emphasizes equity
and requires Ŷ to be independent of A without conditioning on Y . Most existing algorithms targeting equalized
odds can only handle a single protected attribute, and extending them to multi-dimensional sensitive attributes is
challenging due to the well-known difficulties of estimating multi-dimensional densities (Scott, 2015). However,
real-world scenarios can involve biases that arise from multiple sensitive attributes simultaneously. For example, in
healthcare settings, patient outcomes can be influenced by
a combination of race, gender, and age (Ghassemi et al.,
2021; Yang et al., 2022). Moreover, ignoring the correlation
between multiple sensitive attributes can lead to fairness
gerrymandering (Kearns et al., 2018), where a model appears fair when considering each attribute separately but
exhibits unfairness when attributes are considered jointly.

Equalized odds, an important notion of algorithmic fairness, aims to ensure that sensitive variables, such as race and gender, do not unfairly
influence the algorithm’s prediction when conditioning on the true outcome. Despite rapid advancements, current research primarily focuses
on equalized odds violations caused by a single sensitive attribute, leaving the challenge of
simultaneously accounting for multiple attributes
under-addressed. We bridge this gap by introducing an in-processing fairness-aware learning
approach, FairICP, which integrates adversarial
learning with a novel inverse conditional permutation scheme. FairICP offers a flexible and efficient scheme to promote equalized odds under
fairness conditions described by complex and
multi-dimensional sensitive attributes. The efficacy and adaptability of our method are demonstrated through both simulation studies and empirical analyses of real-world datasets.

To address these limitations, we introduce FairICP, a flexible fairness-aware learning scheme that encourages equalized odds for complex sensitive attributes. Our method
leverages a novel Inverse Conditional Permutation (ICP)
strategy to generate conditionally permuted copies Ã of
sensitive attributes A given Y without the need to estimate
the multi-dimensional conditional density and encourages
equalized odds via enforcing similarity between (Ŷ , A, Y )
and (Ŷ , Ã, Y ). An illustration of the FairICP framework is
provided in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are increasingly important in aiding decision-making across various applications. Ensuring
fairness in these models—preventing discrimination against
minorities or other protected groups—remains a significant
challenge (Mehrabi et al., 2021). To address different needs,
several fairness metrics have been developed in the literature (Mehrabi et al., 2021; Castelnovo et al., 2022). The
equalized odds metric defines fairness by requiring that the
predicted outcome Ŷ provides the same level of information about the true response Y across different sensitive
attribute(s) A (e.g. gender/race/age) (Hardt et al., 2016):
Ŷ ⊥
⊥ A | Y.

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Inverse Conditional Permutation (ICP): We introduce
the ICP strategy to efficiently generate Ã, as conditional
permutations of A given Y , without estimating the multidimensional conditional density of A|Y . This makes
our method scalable and applicable to complex sensitive
attributes.
• Empirical Validation: Through simulations and realworld data experiments, we demonstrate FairICP’s flexibility and its superior fairness-accuracy trade-off compared to existing methods targeting equalized odds. Our
results also confirm that ICP is an effective sensitive
attribute resampling technique for achieving equalized
odds with increased dimensions.

(1)

1

Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Biostatistics, Yale University. Correspondence to:
Leying Guan <leying.guan@yale.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

