Adaptive Elicitation of Latent Information Using Natural Language

Jimmy Wang * 1 Thomas Zollo * 1 Richard Zemel 1 Hongseok Namkoong 1

Abstract

reduce uncertainty about a new environment or problem
instance. For example, before an optimal lesson plan can
be prepared for a particular student, information must first
be gathered about their underlying skills and abilities. Similarly, a patient’s health status must be quickly assessed upon
intake, while an online service seeking retention aims to
gain a fast understanding of a new customer’s preferences.

Eliciting information to reduce uncertainty about
a latent entity is a critical task in many application domains, e.g., assessing individual student learning outcomes, diagnosing underlying
diseases, or learning user preferences. Though
natural language is a powerful medium for this
purpose, large language models (LLMs) and existing fine-tuning algorithms lack mechanisms for
strategically gathering information to refine their
own understanding of the latent entity. To harness the generalization power and world knowledge of LLMs in developing effective information gathering strategies, we propose an adaptive
elicitation framework that actively reduces uncertainty on the latent entity. Since probabilistic
modeling of an abstract latent entity is difficult,
our framework adopts a predictive view of uncertainty, using a meta-learned language model
to simulate future observations and enable scalable uncertainty quantification over complex natural language. Through autoregressive forward
simulation, our model quantifies how new questions reduce epistemic uncertainty, enabling the
development of sophisticated information gathering strategies to choose the most informative next
queries. In experiments on the twenty questions
game, dynamic opinion polling, and adaptive student assessment, our method consistently outperforms baselines in identifying critical unknowns
and improving downstream predictions, illustrating the promise of strategic information gathering
in natural language settings.

Notably, in these (and many other) cases, the object of interest is latent, meaning it cannot be directly measured or
observed but can only be queried indirectly. This makes
gathering information particularly challenging, as it requires
carefully designed strategies to infer the latent entity’s characteristics through indirect signals. To achieve efficiency,
these strategies must be adaptive, dynamically tailoring subsequent queries based on the information gained so far. In
the context of student assessment, an adaptive approach
might start with broad math questions covering multiple
skills. If the student gets a question wrong, the system
would then drill down into each relevant skill individually,
asking questions of varying difficulty to determine the limits
of their proficiency. By progressively refining its queries
in this way, the system efficiently maps out the student’s
knowledge boundaries and thus reduces uncertainty about
their individual skill profile (see Figure 6).
As natural language is a particularly powerful and flexible
medium for eliciting such latent information, one might
assume that modern large language models (LLMs) (Brown
et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025)
could be helpful in such dynamic information gathering efforts. However, LLMs and existing fine-tuning algorithms
often treat uncertainty passively, and lack mechanisms for
strategically gathering information to refine their own understanding of the latent entity. While existing LLMs are
often trained to instill as much static world knowledge as
possible (Hendrycks et al., 2021), this world knowledge cannot directly be used to reduce uncertainty about new, unseen
individuals that the model has little information about.

1. Introduction
The performance of many valuable services and systems
depends on the ability to efficiently elicit information and
1

Columbia University.
Correspondence to:
Wang
<jw4209@columbia.edu>,
Thomas
<tpz2105@columbia.edu>.

To harness the generalization power and world knowledge of
LLMs to address the renewed uncertainty that arises whenever a new environment or individual is encountered, we
introduce an adaptive elicitation framework that uses natural
language to actively reduce uncertainty by simulating future
responses. Crucially, our approach leverages meta-learning,

Jimmy
Zollo

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

