All-Purpose Mean Estimation over R: Optimal Sub-Gaussianity with
Outlier Robustness and Low Moments Performance
Jasper C.H. Lee 1 Walter McKelvie 2 3 4 Maoyuan Song 2 Paul Valiant 2

Abstract

optimality guarantee was only known for medianof-means, but now it holds also for all estimators
that are simultaneously robust and sub-Gaussian,
including Lee and Valiant’s, resolving a question
raised by Dang et al. Lastly, we show (D) the
asymptotic normality and efficiency of Lee and
Valiant’s estimator, as further evidence for its performance across many settings.

We consider the basic statistical challenge of
designing an “all-purpose” mean estimation algorithm that is recommendable across a variety of settings and models. Recent work by
Lee & Valiant (2022) introduced the first 1-d
mean estimator whose error in the standard finitevariance+i.i.d. setting is optimal even in its constant factors; experimental demonstration of its
good performance was shown by Gobet et al.
(2022). Yet, unlike for classic (but not necessarily practical) estimators such as median-of-means
and trimmed mean, this new algorithm lacked
proven robustness guarantees in other settings, including the settings of adversarial data corruption
and heavy-tailed distributions with infinite variance. Such robustness is important for practical
use cases. This raises a research question: is it
possible to have a mean estimator that is robust,
without sacrificing provably optimal performance
in the standard i.i.d. setting? In this work, we
show that Lee and Valiant’s estimator is in fact an
“all-purpose” mean estimator by proving:

1. Introduction
The past decade has seen reinvigorated interest in understanding fundamental statistical problems, and in particular,
the foundational problem of mean estimation: given n samples from an unknown distribution, and an allowed failure
probability δ, what is the most accurate estimate of the distribution mean? The sample mean is the traditional estimate,
yet, its sensitivity to extreme values makes it an unreliable
estimator in practice. Other classic estimators, for example the well-known median-of-means estimator (Alon et al.,
1999; Nemirovsky & Yudin, 1983; Jerrum et al., 1986), also
suffer from poor empirical performance.
Recent work by Lee & Valiant (2022), sitting in a line of research initiated by the seminal paper of Catoni (2012), gave
the first 1-dimensional mean estimator whose estimation error is optimal (i.e. sub-Gaussian error) and tight even in the
leading constant. Gobet et al. (2022) further demonstrated
its good empirical performance against other competing
estimators.

(A) It is robust to an η-fraction of data corruption, even in the strong contamination model;
√
it has optimal estimation error O(σ η) for
distributions with variance σ 2 .
(B) For distributions with finite z th moment, for
z ∈ (1, 2), it has optimal estimation error,
matching the lower bounds of Devroye et al.
(2016) up to constants.

Fact 1.1 (Lee & Valiant 2022). Given any distribution D
with mean µ and variance σ 2 (both unknown), parameters
n, δ > 0, let X be a set of n independent samples from D.
Then, with probability at least 1 − δ over the sampling process, Estimator 1 on input δ and X will output an estimate
µ̂ with error at most


s
√
log 1δ

|µ̂ − µ| ≤ σ · ( 2 + o(1))
n

We further show (C) that outlier robustness for
1-d mean estimators in fact implies neighborhood
optimality, a notion of beyond worst-case and
distribution-dependent optimality recently introduced by Dang et al. (2023). Previously, such an
1

University of California, Davis 2 Purdue University 3 Columbia
University 4 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Jasper
C.H. Lee <jasperlee@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Here, the o(1) term tends to 0 as
crucially, is independent of D.
1



log δ1
n ,δ



→ (0, 0) and,

