PDE-Transformer: Efficient and Versatile Transformers for Physics Simulations

Benjamin Holzschuh 1 Qiang Liu 1 Georg Kohl 1 Nils Thuerey 1

Abstract

et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a), where they can be used in
a variety of downstream tasks such as surrogate modeling
(Kim et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020) or inverse problems
involving physics simulations (Ren et al., 2020; Holzschuh
et al., 2023). They are especially promising in areas where
only low amounts of training data are available.

We introduce PDE-Transformer, an improved
transformer-based architecture for surrogate modeling of physics simulations on regular grids. We
combine recent architectural improvements of diffusion transformers with adjustments specific for
large-scale simulations to yield a more scalable
and versatile general-purpose transformer architecture, which can be used as the backbone for
building large-scale foundation models in physical sciences. We demonstrate that our proposed
architecture outperforms state-of-the-art transformer architectures for computer vision on a
large dataset of 16 different types of PDEs. We
propose to embed different physical channels individually as spatio-temporal tokens, which interact via channel-wise self-attention. This helps to
maintain a consistent information density of tokens when learning multiple types of PDEs simultaneously. We demonstrate that our pre-trained
models achieve improved performance on several
challenging downstream tasks compared to training from scratch and also beat other foundation
model architectures for physics simulations. Our
source code is available at https://github.
com/tum-pbs/pde-transformer.

The adoption of machine learning for physics simulations
faces several characteristic challenges. The underlying
physics often exhibit an inherent multi-scale nature (Smith,
1985). The representation of data is tied to the numerical
methods used for simulations, ranging from regular grids to
meshes to particle-based representations (Anderson et al.,
2020). While numerical simulations produce vast amounts
of data, they oftentimes cannot readily be used as input
to machine learning models as further preprocessing is required. Additionally, machine learning models in this area
directly compete with traditional numerical methods. As
such, they need to either outperform such solvers in terms
of accuracy or speed while exhibiting high reliability. Alternatively, they need to provide solutions that solvers cannot
easily obtain, for example, uncertainty estimates (Geneva &
Zabaras, 2019; Jacobsen et al., 2025; Liu & Thuerey, 2024;
Kohl et al., 2024) or working with partial inputs (Wu et al.,
2024a).
We address these problems by introducing a multi-purpose
transformer architecture PDE-Transformer that is carefully
tailored to scientific machine learning: the same architecture
can be used to generalize between different types of PDEs,
different resolutions, domain extents, boundary conditions,
and it includes deep conditioning mechanisms for PDEand task-specific information. Our model works on regular
grids in two dimensions, and can be trained in a supervised
manner as an efficient surrogate model, or as a diffusion
model for downstream tasks where solutions have wider
posterior distributions. Specifically, our contributions are:

1. Introduction
Large multi-purpose networks that are trained on diverse,
high-quality datasets have shown great achievements when
adapted to specific downstream tasks. These so-called foundation models have received widespread recognition in
fields such as computer vision (Yuan et al., 2021; Awais
et al., 2025), decision making (Yang et al., 2023b), and
time series prediction (Liang et al., 2024). Naturally, these
models are likewise extremely interesting for the scientific
machine learning community (Bodnar et al., 2024; Herde
School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Benjamin
Holzschuh <benjamin.holzschuh@tum.de>.

• We augment existing SOTA diffusion transformer architectures to tailor them to PDE and physics simulations, among others, by token down- and upsampling
for efficient multi-scale modeling and shifted window
attention for improved scaling to high-resolution data.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We modify the attention operation to decouple token
interactions between the spatio-temporal axes and the
physical channel axis. This improves accuracy and

1

1

