CodeSteer: Symbolic-Augmented Language Models via Code/Text Guidance

Yongchao Chen 1 2 Yilun Hao 1 Yueying Liu 3 Yang Zhang 4 Chuchu Fan 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
While the reasoning and planning capabilities of LLMs
have improved significantly (Wang et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
2024c; Li et al., 2023), they still fail in ostensibly simple
tasks (Zhou et al., 2024a). Crucially, many tasks in existing benchmarks—such as Blocksworld (Valmeekam et al.,
2024) and Game 24 (Zhou et al., 2023b)—can be completely
solved with code solutions. Text-based reasoning excels at
semantic understanding and commonsense inference but is
less suited for exact computation, symbolic manipulation,
optimization, and algorithmic processing (Valmeekam et al.,
2022). In contrast, symbolic computing via code generation
is adept at handling rigorous operations and can easily leverage specialized tools (e.g., equation solvers). In many tasks,
prompting LLMs to generate and execute code outperforms
purely textual reasoning (Madaan et al., 2022; Liang et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2022).

Existing methods fail to effectively steer Large
Language Models (LLMs) between textual
reasoning and code generation, leaving symbolic computing capabilities underutilized.
We introduce CodeSteer, an effective method
for guiding LLM code/text generation. We
construct a comprehensive benchmark SymBench
comprising 37 symbolic tasks with adjustable
complexity and also synthesize datasets of 12k
multi-turn guidance/generation trajectories and
5.5k guidance comparison pairs. We fine-tune
the Llama-3-8B model with a newly designed
multi-turn supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and direct
preference optimization (DPO). The resulting
model, CodeSteerLLM, augmented with the
proposed symbolic and self-answer checkers, effectively guides the code/text generation of larger
models. Augmenting GPT-4o with CodeSteer
raises its average performance score from 53.3
to 86.4, even outperforming the existing best
LLM OpenAI o1 (82.7), o1-preview (74.8), and
DeepSeek R1 (76.8) across all 37 tasks (28
seen, 9 unseen). Trained for GPT-4o, CodeSteer
demonstrates superior generalizability, providing
an average 41.8 performance boost on Claude,
Mistral, and GPT-3.5. CodeSteer-guided LLMs
fully harness symbolic computing to maintain
strong performance on highly complex tasks.
Models, Datasets, and Codes are available at
https://github.com/yongchao98/
CodeSteer-v1.0
and
https:
//huggingface.co/yongchao98.

A key challenge is guiding LLMs to decide when to rely
on textual reasoning versus programmatic solutions, given
that most input questions lack explicit cues about which
approach is best. Recent OpenAI GPT models address this
by providing a Code Interpreter module, allowing the model
to iteratively generate and execute code, then further reason with the output (Achiam et al., 2023). Multi-agent
frameworks like AutoGen (Wu et al., 2023) adopt a specialized system prompt to steer LLM for code generation
when needed. However, recently Chen et al. (2025) finds
that all these existing methods struggle to effectively steer
between textual reasoning and code generation, failing to
fully leverage symbolic computing capabilities.
Our work tries to bridge this gap by developing an assistant
framework (CodeSteer) to guide the code/text generation
of the LLM solving the task (TaskLLM). By fine-tuning a
small model (Llama-3-8B (Dubey et al., 2024)) to be the
assistant, we enable large models (GPT-4o (Achiam et al.,
2023)) to fully leverage symbolic computing via code generation while preserving other capabilities. Recognizing that
iterative “executing and exploring” is the most effective way
to solve tasks, we build CodeSteer to generate prompts that
guide the TaskLLM through multiple turns of interaction
before finalizing answers.

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA,
USA 2 Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA 3 University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA 4 MIT-IBM
Watson AI Lab, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Yongchao Chen <yongchaochen@fas.harvard.edu>, Chuchu Fan
<chuchu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To achieve a comprehensive evaluation, we gather and develop a benchmark with 37 symbolic tasks, referred as Sym1

