The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models:
Concept Cones and Representational Independence

Tom Wollschläger * 1 Jannes Elstner * 1 Simon Geisler 1 2 Vincent Cohen-Addad 3
Stephan Günnemann 1 Johannes Gasteiger 3 4

Abstract

these advancements also
introduce serious risks.
As artificial intelligence
becomes more powerful,
it can be misused for
harmful purposes, such
as attacking critical infrastructure or spreading misinformation. Ensuring that these models remain aligned with
Figure 1. An example of a 3D
human values has beconcept cone with its basis veccome a crucial research
tors. All directions in the cone
challenge (Liu et al.,
mediate refusal.
2023; Schwinn et al.,
2025). Despite significant progress, LLMs, like all machine learning models, remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks that can bypass alignment mechanisms and induce harmful outputs (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Carlini et al., 2024).

The safety alignment of large language models (LLMs) can be circumvented through adversarially crafted inputs, yet the mechanisms by
which these attacks bypass safety barriers remain poorly understood. Prior work suggests
that a single refusal direction in the model’s activation space determines whether an LLM refuses a request. In this study, we propose a novel
gradient-based approach to representation engineering and use it to identify refusal directions.
Contrary to prior work, we uncover multiple independent directions and even multi-dimensional
concept cones that mediate refusal. Moreover,
we show that orthogonality alone does not imply independence under intervention, motivating
the notion of representational independence that
accounts for both linear and non-linear effects.
Using this framework, we identify mechanistically independent refusal directions. We show
that refusal mechanisms in LLMs are governed
by complex spatial structures and identify functionally independent directions, confirming that
multiple distinct mechanisms drive refusal behavior. Our gradient-based approach uncovers these
mechanisms and can further serve as a foundation
for future work on understanding LLMs.

Recent work in interpretability has provided valuable insights into how LLMs encode and process information
(Nanda et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2022; Cunningham et al.,
2023; Heinzerling & Inui, 2024). Prior studies (Belrose et al., 2023; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023; Marks &
Tegmark, 2024) suggest that concepts—ranging from simple to complex—are often encoded linearly in the model’s
residual stream. Methods such as representation engineering
(Zou et al., 2023a) allow researchers to use input prompts to
analyze model behavior by extracting and manipulating such
concepts. However, the mechanisms enabling adversarial
jailbreaks that bypass alignment safeguards remain poorly
understood. Some evidence suggests that refusals to harmful queries are mediated by a single “refusal direction” in
activation space (Arditi et al., 2024), and that jailbreaks rely
on manipulating this direction (Yu et al., 2024), yet these
assumptions require further examination. Understanding refusal mechanisms is crucial, as it has direct implications for
both offensive capabilities—informing more sophisticated
jailbreaks (Huang et al., 2024)—and more importantly developing robust defensive strategies like improved adversarial training (Yu et al., 2024) and inference–time monitoring.

1. Introduction
The breakthrough of scaling large language models (LLMs)
has led to an unprecedented leap in capabilities, driving
widespread real-world adoption (OpenAI, 2022). However,
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computation, Information
& Technology and Munich Data Science Institute, Technical
University of Munich 2 Now at Google Research 3 Google Research 4 Now at Anthropic. Correspondence to: Tom Wollschläger
<tom.wollschlaeger@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

