Tokenized Bandit for LLM Decoding and Alignment

Suho Shin 1 Chenghao Yang 2 Haifeng Xu 2 MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi 1

Abstract

et al., 2024). Recent success of commercial LLMs such as
ChatGPT, Gemini, and Claude (Team et al., 2023; Achiam
et al., 2023) gives evidence on the feasibility of LLMs as
personal assistants, supporting individuals’ daily life in decision making, problem solving, and planning.

We introduce the tokenized linear bandit (TLB)
and multi-armed bandit (TMAB), variants of linear and stochastic multi-armed bandit problems inspired by LLM decoding and alignment. In these
problems, at each round t ∈ [T ], a user submits
a query (context), and the decision maker (DM)
sequentially selects a token irrevocably from a
token set. Once the sequence is complete, the DM
observes a random utility from the user, whose
expectation is presented by a sequence function
mapping the chosen token sequence to a nonnegative real value that depends on the query.

To serve as a genuine personalized assistant, however, it
is crucial to align the LLM’s outcome with the designated
human preference, which remains as a core challenge in
LLMs (Mishra et al., 2021; Sanh et al., 2021; Shen et al.,
2023). Recent works suggest that aligning an LLM’s output with human preference can be partially addressed by
fine-tuning the model with reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Rafailov et al., 2024) (see Wang et al. (2024) for
comprehensive exposition). This line of research, however,
typically requires significant computational resources due to
fine-tuning, extensive human labeling, and frequent model
updates, rendering it less scalable in practical and rapidly
changing environments or as a genuine personalized assistant tailored to each individual’s preference.

In both problems, we first show that learning is
impossible without any structure on the sequence
function. We introduce a natural assumption, diminishing distance with more commons (DDMC),
√
and propose
algorithms with regret Õ(L T ) and
√
Õ(L T 2/3 ) for TLB and TMAB, respectively.
As a side product, we obtain an (almost) optimality of the greedy decoding for LLM decoding
algorithm under DDMC, which justifies the unresaonable effectiveness of greedy decoding in
several tasks. This also has an immediate application to decoding-time LLM alignment, when
the misaligned utility can be represented as the
frozen LLM’s utility and a linearly realizable latent function. We finally validate our algorithm’s
performance empirically as well as verify our assumptions using synthetic and real-world datasets.

Consequently, a more recent thread of studies proposes
decoding-time alignment methods, aiming to align the
LLM’s output on the fly during inference time without
fine-tuning the LLM (Josifoski et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2024; Mudgal et al., 2023). While these methods hold
promise in terms of scalability, their theoretical underpinnings remain largely uncharted, despite some recent evidences (Chakraborty et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Shi et al.,
2024b), and how it could sample-efficiently learn the preference from user feedback is yet questionable. Moreover, even
the decoding algorithm itself lacks foundational understanding from theoretical perspective despite being central to the
LLM’s quality, even the simplest ones such as greedy decoding or beam search, beyond a few recent works (Finlayson
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), in the past few years, received significant attention from extensive areas with its ability to serve numerous tasks including question answering,
image generation, code completion and reasoning (Brown
et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Fried et al., 2022; Zheng

In this work, we propose a fresh perspective in the decodingtime alignment as well as decoding algorithm for LLMs
by framing the LLM alignment and decoding problem as
variants of linear/multi-armed bandits framework whose
utility is represented via a sequence function and when a
decision maker faces an online problem to select the sequence irrevocably in a token-by-token manner. Overall,
our contributions are three-folds:

1
University of Maryland 2 University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Suho Shin <suhoshin@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

