Galileo: Learning Global & Local Features of Many Remote Sensing Modalities

Gabriel Tseng * 1 2 3 Anthony Fuller * 4 Marlena Reil 1 2 Henry Herzog 3 Patrick Beukema 3 Favyen Bastani 3
James R. Green 4 Evan Shelhamer 4 5 6 Hannah Kerner † 7 David Rolnick † 1 2

Abstract

ness vast quantities of unlabeled data, as is available in the
case of remote sensing. However, SSL methods for RS
(Jean et al., 2019; Manas et al., 2021) have been specialized
to certain input modalities or shapes, such as pixel time
series vs. image time series, following pioneering methods
for learning from images (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2022)
and text (Devlin et al., 2018). In a nutshell, these methods
create two versions (“views”) of an input and pretrain models to predict one view given the other. After pretraining,
the learned representations can then transfer to real tasks
through finetuning or reuse as features, even with limited
labels or computation. We unify SSL across multiple modalities and input shapes used for remote sensing in practice,
yielding a flexible model of both image and pixel time series.

We introduce a highly multimodal transformer
to represent many remote sensing modalities—
multispectral optical, synthetic aperture radar, elevation, weather, pseudo-labels, and more—across
space and time. These inputs are useful for diverse remote sensing tasks, such as crop mapping
and flood detection. However, learning shared representations of remote sensing data is challenging,
given the diversity of relevant data modalities,
and because objects of interest vary massively
in scale, from small boats (1−2 pixels and fast)
to glaciers (thousands of pixels and slow). We
present a novel self-supervised learning algorithm
that extracts multi-scale features across a flexible
set of input modalities through masked modeling.
Our dual global and local contrastive losses differ
in their targets (deep representations vs. shallow
input projections) and masking strategies (structured vs. not). Our Galileo is a single generalist
model that outperforms SoTA specialist models
for satellite images and pixel time series across
eleven benchmarks and multiple tasks.

For spatiotemporal scale, satellite imagery encompasses
objects of a variety of spatial and temporal extents. Common
resolutions are 10m per pixel and 6 acquisitions per month.
Thus — unlike in most natural imagery (e.g., ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009)) or video (e.g., Kinetics-400 (Kay et al.,
2017)) — an object in RS (such as a small fishing boat)
may be represented by only a single pixel in RS and can
be present in just a single frame (Beukema et al., 2023).
Conversely, an object may be a kilometer-scale glacier that
requires tracking over decades (Baraka et al., 2020).

1. Introduction

A second challenge is presented by the number and variety of sensors used in RS, where most methods have only
limited flexibility in the data types on which they operate.
Many methods model multispectral optical (MS) data (Cong
et al., 2022; Noman et al., 2024; Nedungadi et al., 2024),
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data (Wang et al., 2024b;a),
or joint MS and SAR data (Fuller et al., 2024; Xiong et al.,
2024), but not other modalities and not across time. Other
methods model MS data across time, but no other modalities (Bastani et al., 2023; Szwarcman et al., 2024). Limiting
the number and diversity of views of the Earth for learning
may limit the utility and generality of the resulting representations for predictions and analysis. This could limit
transfer with or without finetuning, and especially without,
which may be more computationally feasible for applied
and interdisciplinary practitioners.

Learning representations of large-scale and multimodal remote sensing and geospatial data is a long-standing scientific
and practical goal. This goal is motivated by the increasing
impact of machine learning (ML) and remote sensing (RS)
in societally important domains (e.g. food security (Kerner
et al., 2020) and disaster response (Frame et al., 2024))
where labels are expensive or difficult to acquire (Kebede
et al., 2024).
Self-supervised learning (SSL) can make it possible to har*

Equal contribution † Equal Supervision 1 Mila – Quebec AI Institute 2 McGill University 3 Allen Institute for AI (Ai2) 4 Carleton
University 5 University of British Columbia 6 Vector Institute
7
Arizona State University. Correspondence to: Gabriel Tseng
<gabriel.tseng@mail.mcgill.ca>.

To address both of these challenges, we propose Galileo,
a new family of models for multiple modalities (optical,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

