Learngene Tells You How to Customize:
Task-Aware Parameter Initialization at Flexible Scales
Jiaze Xu 1 2 Shiyu Xia 1 2 Xu Yang 1 2 Jiaqi Lv 1 2 Xin Geng 1 2

Abstract

2023), and other fields. However, pretraining such models
requires computational resources and training costs (Radford
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024; Peng
et al., 2025), thus making it challenging and costly to obtain
well-trained models in many task scenarios with resource constraints (Mehta & Rastegari, 2021; Fu et al., 2025). So that an
appropriate model initialization strategy becomes crucial, as
effective parameter initialization not only accelerates model
convergence but also enhances model performance (He et al.,
2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2022; 2024; Yao et al.,
2025), thereby significantly reducing overall training costs.

Appropriate parameter initialization strategies
are essential for reducing the high computational
costs of training large pretrained models in
various task scenarios. Graph HyperNetwork
(GHN), a parameter initialization method, has
recently demonstrated strong performance in
initializing models. However, GHN still faces
several challenges, including limited effectiveness
in initializing larger models, poor performance
on smaller datasets, and the requirement of
task-specific GHN training, where each new task
necessitates retraining the GHN model, leading
to increased computational and storage overhead.
To overcome these challenges, motivated by
the recently proposed Learngene framework,
we propose a novel method called Task-Aware
Learngene (TAL). Briefly, our approach pretrains
a TAL model under the guidance of a well-trained
model and then performs multi-task tuning to
obtain a shared TAL model that enables parameter
prediction based on both model architectures and
task-specific characteristics. Extensive experiments show the superiority of TAL. Models initialized with TAL outperform those initialized using
GHN method by an average of 24.39% in terms of
accuracy across Decathlon datasets. We provide
the code at https://github.com/mathieuxu/TaskAware-Learngene.

Recently, Graph HyperNetwork (GHN) (Zhang et al., 2018;
Knyazev et al., 2021; 2023) has been proposed as an approach
to make model pretraining more accessible by reducing computational costs and enabling parameter initialization for
models of multiple scales. Formally, given a set of neural
network architectures f as training data, where each architecture is represented as a computational graph f G (Knyazev
et al., 2021), a GHN (denoted as HD and parameterized
by θ) learns to predict the parameters of these neural networks. The prediction process can be formulated as wpred =
HD (f G ,θ), where wpred represents the predicted network
parameters. During training, the GHN is optimized to minimize the loss function on a target dataset D like ImageNet1K(Russakovsky et al., 2015). The predicted parameters
wpred demonstrate superior initialization performance compared to conventional random initialization methods, leading
to reduced training time and computational costs.
Despite the advantages demonstrated by GHN, as illustrated
in Fig.1(a), several significant limitations persist in their
practical applications. First, although the latest GHN method
LoGAH (Zhou et al., 2024) has demonstrated significant
progress in handling deep neural architectures, its effectiveness diminishes when initializing larger models like ViTbase (Dosovitskiy, 2020). And most GHN methods still have
considerable room for improvement in initialization accuracy
across various datasets, such as ImageNet-1K(Russakovsky
et al., 2015) and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009).
Second, GHN requires independent training for each specific
task, meaning that when facing different downstream applications, a new GHN model has to be retrained accordingly. This
requirement not only substantially increases computational
overhead but also imposes additional storage burdens.

1. Introduction
Pretrained models have achieved remarkable success in computer vision (Dosovitskiy, 2020; Radford et al., 2021), natural
language processing (Radford et al., 2019; Touvron et al.,
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China.
Correspondence to: Jiaqi Lv <is.jiaqi.lv@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

