Low-distortion and GPU-compatible Tree Embeddings in Hyperbolic Space

Max van Spengler 1 Pascal Mettes 1

Abstract

ral language (Miller, 1995; Tifrea et al., 2018; Yang et al.,
2016), social networks (Freeman, 2004), visual understanding (Desai et al., 2023; Van Spengler et al., 2023; Pal et al.,
2025) and more. To obtain faithful embeddings, Euclidean
space is ill-equiped; even simple trees lead to high distortion (Sonthalia & Gilbert, 2020). On the other hand, the
exponential nature of hyperbolic space makes it a natural
geometry for embedding trees (Nickel & Kiela, 2018). This
insight has led to rapid advances in hyperbolic learning,
with superior embedding (Sala et al., 2018) and clustering
(Chami et al., 2020) of tree-like data.

Embedding tree-like data, from hierarchies to ontologies and taxonomies, forms a well-studied
problem for representing knowledge across many
domains. Hyperbolic geometry provides a natural solution for embedding trees, with vastly superior performance over Euclidean embeddings.
Recent literature has shown that hyperbolic tree
embeddings can even be placed on top of neural networks for hierarchical knowledge integration in deep learning settings. For all applications, a faithful embedding of trees is needed,
with combinatorial constructions emerging as the
most effective direction. This paper identifies and
solves two key limitations of existing works. First,
the combinatorial construction hinges on finding
highly separated points on a hypersphere, a notoriously difficult problem. Current approaches
achieve poor separation, degrading the quality of
the corresponding hyperbolic embedding. We propose highly separated Delaunay tree embeddings
(HS-DTE), which integrates angular separation
in a generalized formulation of Delaunay embeddings, leading to lower embedding distortion. Second, low-distortion requires additional precision.
The current approach for increasing precision is
to use multiple precision arithmetic, which renders the embeddings useless on GPUs in deep
learning settings. We reformulate the combinatorial construction using floating point expansion
arithmetic, leading to superior embedding quality
while retaining utility on accelerated hardware.

Recent literature has shown that hyperbolic tree embeddings
are not only useful on their own, they also form powerful target embeddings on top of deep networks to unlock hierarchical representation learning (Peng et al., 2021; Mettes et al.,
2024). Deep learning with hyperbolic tree embeddings has
made it possible to effectively perform action recognition
(Long et al., 2020), knowledge graph completion (Kolyvakis
et al., 2020), hypernymy detection (Tifrea et al., 2018) and
many other tasks in hyperbolic space. These early adoptions of hyperbolic embeddings have shown a glimpse of
the powerful improvements that hierarchically aligned representations can bring to deep learning.
The rapid advances in hyperbolic deep learning underline the need for hyperbolic tree embeddings compatible with GPU accelerated software. Current tree embedding algorithms can roughly be divided in two categories; optimization-based and constructive methods. The
optimization-based methods, e.g. Poincaré embeddings
(Nickel & Kiela, 2017), hyperbolic entailment cones (Ganea
et al., 2018), and distortion optimization (Yu et al., 2022b),
train embeddings using some objective function based on
the tree. While these approaches are flexible due to minimal
assumptions, the optimization can be unstable, slow and
result in heavily distorted embeddings. Conversely, constructive methods traverse a tree once, placing the children
of each node on a hypersphere around the node’s embedding
(Sarkar, 2011; Sala et al., 2018). These methods are fast,
require no hyperparameter tuning and have great error guarantees. However, they rely on hyperspherical separation,
a notoriously difficult problem (Saff & Kuijlaars, 1997),
and on multiple precision floating point arithmetic, which is
incompatible with GPUs and other accelerated hardware.

1. Introduction
Tree-like structures such as hierarchies are key for knowledge representation, from biological taxonomies (Padial
et al., 2010) and phylogenetics (Kapli et al., 2020) to natu1
VIS Lab, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Max van Spengler <m.w.f.vanspengler@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

