Premise-Augmented Reasoning Chains Improve Error Identification
in Math Reasoning with LLMs

Sagnik Mukherjee * 1 Abhinav Chinta * 1 Takyoung Kim 1 Tarun Sharma 1 Dilek Hakkani-Tür 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting enhances
mathematical reasoning in large language models
(LLMs) by enabling detailed step-by-step solutions. However, due to the verbosity of LLMs, the
resulting reasoning chains can be long, making
it harder to verify the reasoning steps and trace
issues resulting from dependencies between the
steps that may be farther away in the sequence
of steps. Importantly, mathematical reasoning
allows each step to be derived from a small set
of premises, which are a subset of the preceding
steps in the reasoning chain. In this paper, we
present a framework that identifies the premises
for each step, to improve the evaluation of reasoning. We restructure conventional linear reasoning chains into Premise Augmented Reasoning
Chains (PARC) by introducing premise links,
resulting in a directed acyclic graph where the
nodes are the steps and the edges are the premise
links. Through experiments with a PARC-based
dataset that we built, namely PERL (Premises
and ERrors identification in LLMs), we demonstrate that LLMs can reliably identify premises
within complex reasoning chains. In particular,
even open-source LLMs achieve 90% recall in
premise identification. We also show that PARC
helps to identify errors in reasoning chains more
reliably. The accuracy of error identification improves by 6% to 16% absolute when step-bystep verification is carried out in PARC under
the premises. Our findings highlight the utility
of premise-centric representations in addressing
complex problem-solving tasks and open new avenues for improving the reliability of LLM-based
reasoning evaluations.

Chain-of-thought reasoning enhances problem solving by
breaking down complex tasks into a series of logical steps,
improving the accuracy and clarity of decision-making processes. There has been a well-documented success of the
reasoning capabilities of LLMs with chain of thought reasoning (CoT; (Wei et al., 2023)) across applications such as
embodied reasoning (Gao et al., 2023; Philipov et al., 2024),
code generation (Jiang et al., 2024), and mathematical and
scientific reasoning (Imani et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2024).
However, the corresponding evaluation methods and metrics
have a significant limitation: they focus solely on the correctness of the final answer, neglecting intermediate reasoning
processes and rationales that contribute to it. Although the
final answer serves as a proxy for the reasoning capability,
it is not sufficient to judge the reasoning performance of
the model. Hence, evaluating the final answer provides a
narrower view of the reasoning capabilities. Since the intermediate reasoning process is equally important as getting
the correct final answer (Huang & Chang, 2023; Golovneva
et al., 2023; Prasad et al., 2023), a comprehensive evaluation
of the reasoning chains is crucial to holistically understanding the reasoning capabilities of LLMs.
Evaluation of reasoning chains has been studied in literature in the context of self-verification (Weng et al., 2023).
Previous work has shown that LLMs struggle to find reasoning errors in chain-of-thought traces without the help
of external verifiers (Stechly et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024;
Tyen et al., 2024), casting doubt on the overoptimism of
LLMs’ self-critique abilities. Existing research focusing on
the evaluation of reasoning chains in LLMs can be broadly
categorized into reference-based and reference-free methods. Reference-based methods, which rely on the availability of a ground truth reasoning chain (Welleck et al.,
2021; Han et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2021), are reliable but
are constrained by the significant cost of human annotations, restricting their application. In contrast, referencefree methods (Prasad et al., 2023; Golovneva et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2024) bypass the need for annotations, but suffer
from two major drawbacks: (1) most such works assign
only a chain-level score rather than localizing specific errors, and (2) they often need fine-tuning of task-specific

* Equal contribution
1 University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign. Correspondence to: Sagnik Mukherjee <sagnikm3@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

