An All-Atom Generative Model for Designing Protein Complexes

Ruizhe Chen * 1 3
Dongyu Xue * † 3
Xiangxin Zhou 2 3
3
1
Zaixiang Zheng Xiangxiang Zeng Quanquan Gu 3

Abstract
Proteins typically exist in complexes, interacting with other proteins or biomolecules to perform their specific biological roles. Research
on single-chain protein modeling has been extensively and deeply explored, with advancements
seen in models like the series of ESM and AlphaFold2. Despite these developments, the study
and modeling of multi-chain proteins remain
largely uncharted, though they are vital for understanding biological functions. Recognizing
the importance of these interactions, we introduce
APM (All-Atom Protein Generative Model), a
model specifically designed for modeling multichain proteins. By integrating atom-level information and leveraging data on multi-chain proteins, APM is capable of precisely modeling interchain interactions and designing protein complexes with binding capabilities from scratch. It
also performs folding and inverse-folding tasks
for multi-chain proteins. Moreover, APM demonstrates versatility in downstream applications: it
achieves enhanced performance through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) while also supporting
zero-shot sampling in certain tasks, achieving
state-of-the-art results. We released our code at
https://github.com/bytedance/apm.

1

Figure 1. Interactions cause minor atom-level protein structure
changes in the binding surface (middle colored part). Blue indicates the isolated structure, pink indicates the binding structure.

design models for specific functions. The former includes
methods such as protein folding models (Jumper et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2023; Baek et al., 2021), inverse-folding models (Dauparas et al., 2022; Hsu et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2023), co-design models (Shi et al., 2023; Campbell et al.,
2024), and protein language models (Lin et al., 2023). These
works are not specifically designed for any particular protein design task but aim to learn the general distribution
of protein sequences and structures from extensive protein
data. The latter approach focuses on the design of proteins
with explicit biological activities, such as antibodies (Kong
et al., 2023a), binding peptides (Li et al., 2024), and enzymes (Song et al., 2024).
General protein foundation models have demonstrated impressive performance across a broad range of tasks. However, these approaches focus solely on modeling singlechain proteins. In contrast, when dealing with proteins
involved in specific functions, the target proteins usually appear in the form of complexes. Furthermore, in multi-chain
protein modeling, inter-chain interactions that occur at the
atom-level play a crucial role (Figure 1). This necessitates
incorporating models with atom-level information to enable
precise learning of these interactions, which is fundamental
for the effective modeling of multi-chain proteins.
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel method: APM (AllAtom Protein Generative Model). APM facilitates the generation of multi-chain protein complexes with all-atom
structures and can be applied to various tasks involving
multi-chain protein complexes, including generation, folding, inverse-folding, and specific functional protein designs.
To develop such a generative model that can be used for
designing bioactive complexes, we identify three core chal-

Introduction

The application of AI technology in protein design has become a prominent research direction across biology, materials science, and artificial intelligence (Notin et al., 2024).
The existing works can be categorized into two distinct approaches: general protein foundation models and protein
*
Equal contribution † Project Lead 1 College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University 2 School of
Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
ByteDance Seed (this work was done during Ruizhe Chen and
Xiangxin Zhou’s internship at ByteDance Seed). Correspondence
to: Quanquan Gu <quanquan.gu@bytedance.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

