A Closer Look at Backdoor Attacks on CLIP
Shuo He 1 Zhifang Zhang 2 Feng Liu 3 Roy Ka-Wei Lee 4 Bo An 1 Lei Feng 2 5

BadNet
Attack Success Rate (%)

We present a comprehensive empirical study on
how backdoor attacks affect CLIP by analyzing
the representations of backdoor images. Specifically, based on the methodology of representation
decomposing, image representations can be decomposed into a sum of representations across
individual image patches, attention heads (AHs),
and multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) in different
model layers. By examining the effect of backdoor attacks on model components, we have the
following empirical findings. (1) Different backdoor attacks would infect different model components, i.e., local patch-based backdoor attacks
mainly affect AHs, while global perturbationbased backdoor attacks mainly affect MLPs. (2)
Infected AHs are centered on the last layer, while
infected MLPs are decentralized on several late
layers. (3) Not all AHs in the last layer are infected and even some AHs could still maintain
the original property-specific roles (e.g., “color”
and “location”). These observations motivate us
to defend against backdoor attacks by detecting
infected AHs, repairing their representations, or
filtering backdoor samples with too many infected
AHs, in the inference stage. Experimental results
validate our empirical findings and demonstrate
the effectiveness of the defense methods.

BadCLIP

Kitty

GAP

MA MLP

Blended

Clean Accuracy (%)

Abstract

MA AH

(a) Mean-ablating components (ASR)

ISSBA

Reflection

GAP

MA MLP

MA AH

(b) Mean-ablating components (CACC)

Figure 1. Mean-ablation on all MLPs or AHs for various backdoor
attacks on CLIP. Dashed lines indicate the baseline ASR or CACC
of backdoor attacks. Best viewed in color.

backdoor attacks. Specifically, a malicious adversary can
poison a small proportion of backdoor image-text pairs into
the pre-training data, which would result in a backdoored
CLIP after multimodal contrastive learning. In the inference
stage, the backdoored CLIP would produce tampered image
representations when the trigger is attached to the images,
close to the text representation of the target attack class.
This situation exposes a serious security risk of deploying
CLIP in practical, real-world applications.
To defend against backdoor attacks on CLIP, recent research
has proposed many defense methods, e.g, robust multimodal
contrastive learning in the pre-training stage (Yang et al.,
2023b), fine-tuning the backdoored CLIP (Bansal et al.,
2023), reverse-engineering the trigger (Sur et al., 2023),
and detecting backdoor samples in the inference stage (Niu
et al., 2024). However, there still remains a limited systematic understanding of how backdoor attacks affect CLIP. To
fill this gap, we conduct a comprehensive empirical study
to investigate how backdoor attacks affect CLIP by analyzing the representations of backdoor images. Specifically,
following the methodology of representation decomposing
(Gandelsman et al., 2024), we decouple the image representation as a sum of representations across individual image
patches, attention heads (AHs), and multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs). Furthermore, we use mean-ablation (Gandelsman
et al., 2024), i.e., replacing representations of backdoor images on AHs or MLPs with mean representations of clean
images on the same components. In this way, we can examine the effect of backdoor attacks on these components by
comparing attack success rates (ASRs) and clean accuracies
(CACCs). Our key findings are summarized as follows.

1. Introduction
Recently, Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)
(Radford et al., 2021) has received much attention due to
its powerful visual representations learned from natural language supervision (Xu et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023). Recent
research (Carlini & Terzis, 2022; Carlini et al., 2023; Bansal
et al., 2023) has disclosed the vulnerability of CLIP against
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Southeast University
University of Melbourne 4 Singapore University of Technology
and Design 5 Idealism Technology (Beijing). Correspondence to:
Lei Feng <fenglei@seu.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

(1) Different backdoor attacks would infect different model
1

