Exploring and Mitigating Adversarial Manipulation
of Voting-Based Leaderboards

Yangsibo Huang * 1 Milad Nasr * 1 Anastasios Angelopoulos 2 Nicholas Carlini 3 Wei-Lin Chiang 2
Christopher A. Choquette-Choo 1 Daphne Ippolito 4 Matthew Jagielski 1 Katherine Lee 1 Ken Ziyu Liu 5
Ion Stoica 2 Florian Tramer 6 Chiyuan Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reliably evaluating the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs; e.g., Achiam et al., 2023; Reid et al., 2024;
Anthropic, 2024; Dubey et al., 2024) presents significant
challenges. Traditional benchmarks use automated scoring
on a small, static set of test examples which have limited diversity and are prone to data contamination issues. Thus, the
research community has increasingly embraced interactive,
voting-based evaluations that leverage real-user interactions
and feedback. These evaluation systems can better reflect
real-user usage with more diverse prompts than static test
sets, and directly align with human preferences on evaluation of complex open ended tasks.

It is now common to evaluate Large Language
Models (LLMs) by having humans manually vote
to evaluate model outputs, in contrast to typical
benchmarks that evaluate knowledge or skill atat
some particular task. Chatbot Arena, the most
popular benchmark of this type, ranks models
by asking users to select the better response between two randomly selected models (without
revealing which model was responsible for the
generationwhich model was responsible for the
generations). These platforms are widely trusted
as a fair and accurate measure of LLM capabilities. In this paper, we show that if bot protection
and other defenses are not implemented, these
voting-based benchmarks are potentially vulnerable to adversarial manipulation. Specifically, we
show that an attacker can alter the leaderboard
(to promote their favorite model or demote competitors) at the cost of roughly a thousand votes
(verified in a simulated, offline version of Chatbot
Arena). Our attack consists of two steps: first, we
show how an attacker can determine which model
was used to generate a given reply with more than
95% accuracy; and then, the attacker can use this
information to consistently vote for (or against)
a target model. Working with the Chatbot Arena
developers, we identify, propose, and implement
mitigations to improve the robustness of Chatbot
Arena against adversarial manipulation, which,
based on our analysis, substantially increases the
cost of such attacks.

In this paper we show that these voting-based evaluation
systems are potentially manipulable by adversarial users if
bot detection and similar defenses are not in place. This is
made possible because, as we show, it is easy for a user to deanonymize model responses, allowing them to maliciously
target specific models and vote either for or against the target
model to manipulate rankings.
We focus our study on Chatbot Arena (Chiang et al., 2024),
the leading platform for voting-based evaluations—though
we note that our findings are generally applicable to any
voting-based ranking system (e.g., those in (Lu et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2024)). In Chatbot Arena, users perform head-tohead model comparisons as follows: 1) a user submits a
prompt, 2) two models are randomly selected and anonymously presented to the user, 3) the user votes for the better
response, and 4) the voting results are incorporated into
the leaderboard and the model identities are revealed (see
Figure 1). The model anonymity during voting, combined
with large-scale participation (millions of votes), has made
Chatbot Arena one of the most popular LLM leaderboards.
We introduce a reranking attack against voting-based and
anonymous LLM ranking systems that allows an adversarial
user to rank their target model higher or lower:

*

Equal contribution 1 Google 2 UC Berkeley 3 Anthropic
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 Stanford University 6 ETH Zurich.
Correspondence to: Yangsibo Huang <yangsibo@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

