An Instrumental Value for Data Production and its Application to Data Pricing

Rui Ai 1 Boxiang Lyu 2 Zhaoran Wang 3 Zhuoran Yang 4 Haifeng Xu 5

Abstract

ing (Goldsmith & Freiden, 2004) to data-hungry applications such as natural language processing (Kang et al., 2020)
and self-driving (Ni et al., 2020). These applications highlight the demand for high-quality labeled data, a demand
that a growing number of data sellers wish to meet. Start-up
companies such as Scale AI, Parallel Domain, Dataloop, and
V7 compete with established companies, such as Acxiom,
Oracle, and Nielsen, in this growing arena, underlying the
importance of formal analyses of buying and selling data.

We develop a framework for capturing the instrumental value of data production processes, which
accounts for two key factors: (a) the context of
the agent’s decision-making; (b) how much data
or information the buyer already possesses. We
“micro-found” our data valuation function by establishing its connection to classic notions of signals and information design in economics. When
instantiated in Bayesian linear regression, our
value naturally corresponds to information gain.
Applying our proposed data value in Bayesian linear regression for monopoly pricing, we show that
if the seller can fully customize data production,
she can extract the first-best revenue (i.e., full surplus) from any population of buyers, i.e., achieving first-degree price discrimination. If data can
only be constructed from an existing data pool,
this limits the seller’s ability to customize, and
achieving first-best revenue becomes generally
impossible. However, we design a mechanism
that achieves seller revenue at most log(κ) less
than the first-best, where κ is the condition number associated with the data matrix. As a corollary, the seller extracts the first-best revenue in the
multi-armed bandits special case.

Like physical goods and systems, data has both instrumental value and intrinsic value at the same time. For example,
the New York Times (NYT) as a news source has its own
intrinsic value, containing major up-to-date news. However,
serving as a Corpus for a particular machine learning task
like retrieval augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al.,
2020), its value towards improving the performance of the
task is instrumental. The fundamental difference between
instrumental vs. intrinsic value is widely studied in philosophy. Citing the widely accepted definitions from Beardsley
(1965): X has instrumental value means X is conducive to
something that has intrinsic value. In the above example of
NYT data, its instrumental value to a RAG task depends on
the extra values it adds and, crucially, depends on what data
the buyer already has. For instance, when the RAG system
already has the data from other substitutable news sources
(e.g., the Washington Post, Wall Street Journal, etc.), the
NYT data’s instrumental value will become smaller, despite
holding the same intrinsic value. This is also the reason
that most economic activities, including the sale of data, are
based on items’ instrumental values, as illustrated by Foster
(1981): “The instrumental efficiency of the economic process is the criterion of judgment in terms of which, and only
in terms of which, we may resolve economic problems”.
To our knowledge, there is no notion of such instrumental
data value in current literature; this is what we embark on
studying in this work.

1. Introduction
Trading data forms an ever-growing segment in today’s
digital economy. Advances in machine learning motivate
companies to apply data-driven approaches to solve a growing variety of problems, ranging from personalized market1
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, MIT, Cambridge,
MA, USA 2 Booth School of Business, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA 3 Department of Industrial Engineering and
Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
USA 4 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
New Haven, CT, USA 5 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Rui Ai
<ruiai@mit.edu>, Haifeng Xu <haifengxu@uchicago.edu>.

Data sold by commercial companies falls into two situations, which we dub perfect customization and limited
customization. Perfect customization can offer data labels
for any feature directions specified by the buyer, whereas
limited customization can only curate data based on some
pre-collected dataset, hence has limited flexibility. For example, a company that wishes to develop a model for image
classification can either [perfect customization] submit its

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

