Doubly Robust Conformalized Survival Analysis with Right-Censored Data

Matteo Sesia 1 2 Vladimir Svetnik 3

Abstract

approaches are gaining popularity (Ishwaran et al., 2008;
Katzman et al., 2018), despite the difficulty of obtaining
uncertainty estimates and statistical guarantees.

We present a conformal inference method for
constructing lower prediction bounds for survival
times from right-censored data, extending recent
approaches designed for more restrictive type-I
censoring scenarios. The proposed method imputes unobserved censoring times using a machine learning model, and then analyzes the imputed data using a survival model calibrated via
weighted conformal inference. This approach is
theoretically supported by an asymptotic double
robustness property. Empirical studies on simulated and real data demonstrate that our method
leads to relatively informative predictive inferences and is especially robust in challenging settings where the survival model may be inaccurate.

A promising approach to providing rigorous statistical inferences for ML models in survival analysis was recently
introduced by Candès et al. (2023) and refined by Gui et al.
(2024). Their conformal inference (Vovk et al., 2005; Lei &
Wasserman, 2014) framework can use any survival model to
compute a lower prediction bound (LPB) for an individual’s
survival time, supported by rigorous statistical guarantees.
LPBs indicate the time beyond which a patient is expected
to survive with at least (1 − α) probability, for some fixed
level α ∈ (0, 1). They can be useful in many applications, including for priorizing treatments under resource
constraints. When the data are limited or the model overfits,
LPBs tend to be conservatively low, reflecting greater uncertainty. By quantifying uncertainty on an individual basis,
LPBs are potentially able to distinguish between patients
with confidently high survival expectations and those with
greater uncertainty. This can lead to actionable insights
for high-stakes applications, mitigating the risks associated
with over-reliance on potentially inaccurate ML predictions.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and Motivation
Survival analysis focuses on time-to-event data, with applications in many fields including clinical trials, engineering,
and marketing. For example, in a clinical trial, researchers
may aim to predict how long a cancer patient is likely to
survive based on individual characteristics and treatments received. Two central goals are modeling the probability that
an event will not occur before a given time and predicting
the actual event time. These tasks are complicated by the
fact that the data are censored—the exact event time may be
unknown due to study limitations or participant withdrawal.

1.2. Main Challenges and Contributions
A limitation of the methods proposed by Candès et al. (2023)
and Gui et al. (2024) is their focus on type-I censoring, a scenario not representative of many practical cases. In type-I
censoring, all censoring times need to be observed, including for individuals who experienced an event. Observations
are represented as (T̃ , C), where T̃ = min(T, C), with T
as the event time and C as the censoring time. For example,
in a clinical trial with a fixed end date, C is the time from
enrollment to the trial’s end, and patients are either censored
(T > C) or experience the event (T < C).

While traditional methods, such as the Kaplan-Meier estimator and parametric models like the Cox proportional hazards model (Cox, 1972), are valued for their interpretability,
they struggle in high-dimensional settings or when their assumptions are violated. As a result, machine learning (ML)

These methods, however, do not extend to situations where
the censoring times are unobserved for individuals who
experience the event—a more common practical scenario
known as right-censoring. Under right-censoring, we only
observe (T̃ , I[T < C]), where I[T < C] indicates whether
the event occurred before censoring. If T < C, the censoring time C is unknown. For example, in a survival study, T
is the time until death, and C is the time until withdrawal
or the study’s end. If a patient dies (T < C), we observe

1

Department of Data Sciences and Operations, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 2 Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. 3 Merck&Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA.
Correspondence to: Matteo Sesia <sesia@marshall.usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

