Refined Generalization Analysis of the Deep Ritz Method and Physics-Informed
Neural Networks
Xianliang Xu 1 Ye Li 2 3 4 Zhongyi Huang 1

Abstract

cessing and reinforcement learning have sparked interest
in applying machine learning techniques to solve various
types of PDEs. In fact, the idea of using machine learning
to solve PDEs dates back to the last century (Lagaris et al.,
1998), but it has recently gained renewed attention due to
the significant advancements in hardware technology and
the algorithm development.

In this paper, we derive refined generalization
bounds for the Deep Ritz Method (DRM) and
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs). For
the DRM, we focus on two prototype elliptic partial differential equations (PDEs): Poisson equation and static Schrödinger equation on the ddimensional unit hypercube with the Neumann
boundary condition. Furthermore, sharper generalization bounds are derived based on the localization techniques under the assumptions that
the exact solutions of the PDEs lie in the Barron spaces or the general Sobolev spaces. For
the PINNs, we investigate the general linear second order elliptic PDEs with Dirichlet boundary
condition using the local Rademacher complexity in the multi-task learning setting. Finally, we
discuss the generalization error in the setting of
over-parameterization when solutions of PDEs
belong to Barron space.

There are numerous methods proposed to solve PDEs using
neural networks. One popular method, known as PINNs
(Raissi et al., 2019), utilizes neural network to represent
the solution and enforces the neural network to satisfy the
PDE constraints, initial conditions and boundary conditions
by encoding these conditions into the loss function. The
flexibility and scalability of the PINNs make it a widely
used framework for addressing PDE-related problems. The
Deep Ritz method (Yu et al., 2018), on the other hand, incorporates the variational formulation into training the neural
networks due to the widespread use of the variational formulation in traditional methods. In comparison to PINNs, the
form of DRM has a lower derivative order, but the fact that
not all PDEs have variational forms limits its applications.
Both methods hinge on the approximation ability of the
deep neural networks.

1. Introduction

The approximation power of feed-forward neural networks
(FNNs) with diverse activation functions has been studied for different types of functions, including smooth functions (Lu et al., 2021a), continuous functions (Shen et al.,
2022), Sobolev functions (Belomestny et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2023b;a; Yarotsky, 2017), Barron functions (Barron,
1993). It was proven in the last century that a sufficiently
large neural network can approximate a target function in
a certain function class with any given tolerance. Specifically, it has been shown in Hornik (1991) that the twolayer neural network with ReLU activation function is a
universal approximator for continuous functions. More recently, specific approximate rate of neural networks has
been shown for different function classes in terms of depth
and width. Lu et al. (2021a) showed that a ReLU FNN with
width O(N log N ) and depth O(L log L) can achieve approximation rate O(N −2s/d L−2s/d ) for the function class
C s ([0, 1]d ) in the L∞ norm, which is nearly optimal. In
the context of applying neural networks to solve PDEs, the
focus shifts to the approximation rates in the Sobolev norms.

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) play a pivotal role
in modeling phenomena across physics, biology and engineering. However, solving PDEs numerically has been a
longstanding challenge in scientific computing. Classical numerical methods like finite difference, finite element, finite
volume and spectral methods may suffer from the curse of
dimensionality when dealing with high-dimensional PDEs.
Recent years, the remarkable successes of deep learning in
diverse fields like computer vision, natural language pro1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China 2 College of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing,
China 3 MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, Nanjing, China 4 State Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Ye Li <yeli20@nuaa.edu.cn>, Zhongyi Huang
<zhongyih@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

