Learning Along the Arrow of Time: Hyperbolic Geometry for
Backward-Compatible Representation Learning

Ngoc Bui† 1 Menglin Yang 1 Runjin Chen† 2 Leonardo Neves 3 Mingxuan Ju 3 Rex Ying 1 Neil Shah 3
Tong Zhao 3

Abstract
Backward-compatible representation learning enables updated models to integrate seamlessly with
existing ones, avoiding to reprocess stored data.
Despite recent advances, existing compatibility
approaches in Euclidean space neglect the uncertainty in the old embedding model and force the
new model to reconstruct outdated representations
regardless of their quality, thereby hindering the
learning process of the new model. In this paper,
we propose to switch perspectives to hyperbolic
geometry, where we treat time as a natural axis
for capturing a model’s confidence and evolution.
By lifting embeddings into hyperbolic space and
constraining updated embeddings to lie within
the entailment cone of the old ones, we maintain
generational consistency across models while accounting for uncertainties in the representations.
To further enhance compatibility, we introduce
a robust contrastive alignment loss that dynamically adjusts alignment weights based on the uncertainty of the old embeddings. Experiments
validate the superiority of the proposed method in
achieving compatibility, paving the way for more
resilient and adaptable machine learning systems.

Figure 1. a) A typical setting of the backward-compatible training
problem. A large gallery set is embedded and indexed into a vector
database using the old model. Updating to the model may require
re-indexing the entire vector database (backfilling). Backwardcompatible training allows the new model to query and retrieve
from the vector database of old embeddings directly. b) Simulating
the model evolution in hyperbolic space with the entailment cone.

numerous applications: from semantic search (Zhu et al.,
2023; Chandrasekaran & Mago, 2021) and recommendation systems (Liu et al., 2024; Ko et al., 2022) to retrievalaugmented generation in large language models (LLMs),
where a vector database is used to find and integrate relevant information at inference time (Gao et al., 2023). The
ubiquity of pretrained models such as BERT (Devlin, 2018),
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), or GPT-style architectures (Radford et al., 2018) makes these off-the-shelf embeddings readily available. Enterprises and researchers alike increasingly
rely on these pretrained representations, adapting them to
in-house data or tasks for streamlined development and fast
deployment (Bommasani et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Representation learning has become an integral part of
modern machine learning, offering a way to transform raw
data—be it text, images, or other modalities—into compact
representations or “embeddings” that encode their essential structure (Chen et al., 2022; Bengio et al., 2013; Guo
et al., 2019). A high-quality embedding model can unlock

Yet, embedding models do not remain static. Model updates
are often necessary to leverage more advanced architectures,
integrate new domain knowledge, or address performance
limitations (Wang et al., 2024). However, updating these
models typically introduces significant challenges. In largescale retrieval pipelines or scenarios where legacy embeddings have been indexed, these upgrades can be disruptive
if older embeddings become incompatible with the new
model’s representations. Meanwhile, re-embedding all data
not only incurs high computational and operational costs
but also raises privacy concerns (Price & Cohen, 2019), especially in applications like face recognition (Chen et al.,

† Work done during an internship at Snap Inc. 1 Yale University,
New Haven, CT, USA 2 The University of Texas at Austin, TX,
USA 3 Snap Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Rex
Ying <rex.ying@yale.edu>, Tong Zhao <tong@snap.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

