Generative Modeling Reinvents Supervised Learning:
Label Repurposing with Predictive Consistency Learning

Yang Li 1 2 Jiale Ma 1 2 Yebin Yang 1 2 Qitian Wu 3 Hongyuan Zha 4 Junchi Yan 1 2

Abstract

prominent example. This direct label prediction paradigm
has been widely applied across various domains, from image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), natural language processing (Vaswani, 2017; Devlin, 2018; Radford, 2018), to structured graph learning (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Veličković
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2022) where it is considered a standard practice. In such systems, it is very typical to employ a neural network to directly map the data inputs to
labels, with a particular focus on the expressive capacity
of (deep) models to compress high-dimensional inputs into
latent representations while preserving relevant information
for accurate predictions, viewed from an information theory perspective (Tishby et al., 2000; Tishby & Zaslavsky,
2015). This compression is believed to contribute to the
generalization ability of deep learning models, particularly
in high-dimensional and noisy input scenarios.

Predicting labels directly from data has been the
standard in label learning tasks, e.g., supervised
learning, where models often prioritize feature
compression and extraction from inputs under the
assumption that label information is less complex. However, recent prediction tasks often face
predicting complex labels, exacerbating the challenge of learning mappings from learned features
to high-fidelity label representations. To this end,
we draw inspiration from the consistency training concept in generative consistency models and
propose predictive consistency learning (PCL),
a novel learning paradigm that decomposes the
full label information into a progressive learning
procedure, mitigating the label capture challenge.
Besides data inputs, PCL additionally receives
input from noise-perturbed labels as an additional
reference, pursuing predictive consistency across
different noise levels. It simultaneously learns the
relationship between latent features and a spectrum of label information, which enables progressive learning for complex predictions and allows
multi-step inference analogous to gradual denoising, thereby enhancing the prediction quality. Experiments on vision, text, and graph tasks show
the superiority of PCL over conventional supervised training in complex label prediction tasks.

This paradigm typically assumes that the labels contain a significantly lower dimensionality and less information than the
data inputs, thus guiding model designs toward compressing
and extracting relevant features from the input space for efficient prediction (Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015). The assumption further implies that transforming meaningful latent features to label outputs is relatively straightforward compared
to the challenge of extracting expressive features. However,
recent advanced scenarios involve much more complex labels, leading to new challenges. Examples include image
prediction extending to dense, pixel-level outputs (Long
et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2017), natural language processing
tasks generating complex sentences (Brown, 2020; Touvron
et al., 2023), and predicting complex structured solutions
based on graph representations (Li et al., 2023b; Satorras
et al., 2021). These challenges expose predictive bottlenecks
due to the inherent complexity of transformations from features to labels, in addition to feature extraction. To address
this challenge, one approach involves learning an efficient
representation of the complex labels, facilitating a more
effective transformation within the low-dimensional feature
space. Indeed, this can correspond to methods that leverage
Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) (Kingma, 2013) to perform
learning tasks within the latent space (Rombach et al., 2022;
Hottung et al., 2021). However, this approach necessitates
that the transformation between labels and latent features

1. Introduction
Machine learning has long relied on the paradigm of mapping input data to corresponding output labels by minimizing prediction error, where supervised learning is a
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>. This work
is partly supported by NSFC 62222607. Code available at github
repository.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

