Hide & Seek: Transformer Symmetries Obscure Sharpness & Riemannian
Geometry Finds It

Marvin F. da Silva 1 2 Felix Dangel 2 Sageev Oore 1 2
broader theoretical insights into generalization itself.

Abstract
The concept of sharpness has been successfully
applied to traditional architectures like MLPs and
CNNs to predict their generalization. For transformers, however, recent work reported weak correlation between flatness and generalization. We
argue that existing sharpness measures fail for
transformers, because they have much richer symmetries in their attention mechanism that induce
directions in parameter space along which the network or its loss remain identical. We posit that
sharpness must account fully for these symmetries, and thus we redefine it on a quotient manifold that results from quotienting out the transformer symmetries, thereby removing their ambiguities. Leveraging tools from Riemannian geometry, we propose a fully general notion of sharpness in terms of a geodesic ball on the symmetrycorrected quotient manifold. In practice, we need
to approximate the geodesics. Doing so up to first
order yields existing adaptive sharpness measures,
and we demonstrate that including higher-order
terms is crucial to recover correlation with generalization. We present results on diagonal nets
with synthetic data and show that our geodesic
sharpness reveals strong correlation with generalization for real-world transformers on both text
and image classification tasks.

There is a long history of hypotheses linking sharpness to
generalization, but evidence has been conflicting (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1994; Andriushchenko et al., 2023).
Generalization has been speculated as correlating with flatness, but recent evidence has indicated that, in the case of
transformers, it has little to no correlation whatsoever. Measures of sharpness have varied widely, ranging from trace of
the Hessian to worst-case loss within a local neighborhood,
with adaptive and relative variations proposed to address
specific challenges (Kwon et al., 2021; Petzka et al., 2021).
We suspect that some of the confusion stems from the specificity of the problem these measures have attempted to address: the issue of parameter rescaling. In contrast, we argue
that rescaling (Dinh et al., 2017) is merely a special case of a
broader, more fundamental obstacle to measuring sharpness
accurately: the presence of full and continuous parameter
symmetries. Addressing this challenge is crucial to ensure
that we are studying the right quantity when investigating
the relationship between sharpness and generalization.
Beyond discrete permutation symmetries, neural nets naturally exhibit continuous symmetries in their parameter
space. These symmetries are intrinsic, data-independent
properties that emerge from standard architectural components. For example: normalization layers (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015; Ba et al., 2016; Wu & He, 2018) induce scale invariance on the pre-normalization weights (Salimans & Kingma,
2016); homogeneous activation functions like ReLU introduce re-scaling symmetries between pre- and post-activation
weights (Dinh et al., 2017); some normalization layers and
softmax impose translation symmetries in the preceding
layer’s biases (Kunin et al., 2021). As a result, arguably
almost any NN, along with its corresponding loss, exhibit
symmetries and can therefore represent the same function
using different parameter values (Figure 1a).

1. Introduction
Predicting generalization of neural nets (NNs)—the discrepancy between training and test set performance—remains an
open challenge. Generalization-predictive metrics are valuable though: they enable explicit regularization of training
to enhance generalization (Foret et al., 2021), and provide

Adaptive flatness (Kwon et al., 2021) accounts for some
symmetries, both element- and filter-wise re-scaling, but
fails to capture the attention mechanism’s full symmetry,
represented by GL(h) (re-scaling by invertible h × h matrices, where h is the hidden dimension), as we will discuss
later. Aiming to break the cycle between discovery of a

1

Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada 2 Vector Insitute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Marvin F. da Silva <marvinf.silva@dal.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

