The Best of Both Worlds: Bridging Quality and Diversity in
Data Selection with Bipartite Graph

Minghao Wu 1 Thuy-Trang Vu 1 Lizhen Qu 1 Gholamreza Haffari 1

Abstract

2023; Mesnard et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). Central to
the success of these models is the quality and diversity of
the data used during supervised fine-tuning (SFT). Finetuning on high-quality data ensures that the model learns
accurate language patterns and responds appropriately to
inputs (Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023), while diversity
in the data allows the model to generalize across different
contexts and topics (Abbas et al., 2023; Maharana et al.,
2024). However, the vastness of available SFT data presents
a challenge: selecting a subset of data that balances both
quality and diversity to optimize model performance.

The performance of large language models
(LLMs) is strongly influenced by the quality and
diversity of data used during supervised finetuning (SFT). However, current data selection
methods often prioritize one aspect over the other,
resulting in suboptimal training outcomes. To
address this, we formulate data selection as a
set cover problem and present G RAPH F ILTER, a
novel approach that balances both quality and diversity in data selection. G RAPH F ILTER models
the dataset as a bipartite graph connecting sentences to their constituent n-grams, then employs
a priority function that combines quality and diversity metrics multiplicatively. G RAPH F ILTER
iteratively selects sentences with the highest priority, removes covered n-grams from the bipartite graph, and recomputes priorities to reflect the
changing data landscape. We validate G RAPH F ILTER using three model backbones across six
widely-used benchmarks, demonstrating that it
outperforms nine existing baselines in both model
performance and computational efficiency. Further analysis shows that our design choices lead
to more effective subset selection, underscores
the value of instruction diversity, and provides insights into how quality and diversity interact with
different subset sizes.

Recent methods for data selection often prioritize either
quality or diversity, rarely achieving an optimal balance
of both. Approaches that focus exclusively on quality may
overlook the variety of language patterns necessary for effective generalization (Marion et al., 2023; Ankner et al., 2024).
Conversely, methods emphasizing diversity might include
lower-quality data, which could negatively impact model
performance (Abbas et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024). This
focus can result in models that either overfit to specific data
patterns or underperform due to the inclusion of irrelevant
or poor-quality data. Hence, it is crucial to develop a data
selection strategy that simultaneously maximizes both data
quality and diversity for effective supervised fine-tuning.
In response to this challenge, we formulate data selection as
a set cover problem and propose a novel method, G RAPH F ILTER, which models both diversity and quality in data
selection. The set cover problem aims to select the smallest
collection of subsets to cover every element in a given universal set (Garey & Johnson, 1979). To achieve this in data
selection, G RAPH F ILTER models the dataset as a bipartite
graph, where sentences and n-grams are represented as two
distinct sets of nodes, with edges indicating the presence of
n-grams in sentences. This bipartite structure allows us to
prioritize sentences that introduce unique n-grams, thereby
maximizing the diversity of the selected subset. In addition to diversity, G RAPH F ILTER incorporates quality into
the selection process by re-ranking sentences based on a
quality metric. To balance these two aspects, we employ a
priority function that combines quality and diversity metrics multiplicatively. Concretely, we use S UPER F ILTER (Li
et al., 2024a) as the quality metric. It measures the infor-

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced
the field of natural language processing (NLP), enabling
models to generate coherent and contextually relevant text
across a variety of tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Sanh et al.,
2022; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Anil et al.,
1

Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Minghao Wu <minghao.wu@monash.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

