Do Vision-Language Models Really Understand Visual Language?

Yifan Hou 1 Buse Giledereli 1 Yilei Tu 1 Mrinmaya Sachan 1
{ yifan.hou, bgiledereli, yiletu, mrinmaya.sachan }@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract

1. Introduction
Symbolic signals such as language serve as powerful tools
in communication by abstracting and interpreting information. Visual language is a form of communication that
uses symbols, shapes, and spatial arrangements to convey
complex ideas (Greenspan & Shanker, 2009; Li, 2023). Diagrams, which encapsulate symbolic information in the visual stream, are a prime example of visual language (Zdebik,
2012; Anderson et al., 2011) that are extensively used in
practice across various domains, e.g., mathematics (Seo
et al., 2015), science (Lu et al., 2022), education (Kembhavi
et al., 2016; 2017), and illustrations (Hiippala & Orekhova,
2018; Lu et al., 2021). Developing models capable of understanding symbolic information, e.g. in diagrams, is a
critical milestone in advancing machine intelligence (Bauer
& Johnson-Laird, 1993; de Rijke, 1999; Cromley et al.,
2010). Even though recent Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs, OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al., 2023) have demonstrated some success on diagram-based visual reasoning
tasks (Lu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024),
it remains unclear whether the performance on these tasks
truly reflects the models’ ability to comprehensively understand the symbolic information in diagrams.

Visual language is a system of communication that conveys information through symbols,
shapes, and spatial arrangements. Diagrams are
a typical example of a visual language depicting
complex concepts and their relationships in the
form of an image. The symbolic nature of diagrams presents significant challenges for building
models capable of understanding them. Recent
studies suggest that Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) can even tackle complex reasoning
tasks involving diagrams. In this paper, we investigate this phenomenon by developing a comprehensive test suite to evaluate the diagram comprehension capability of LVLMs. Our test suite uses
a variety of questions focused on concept entities
and their relationships over a set of synthetic as
well as real diagrams across domains to evaluate
the recognition and reasoning abilities of models.
Our evaluation of LVLMs shows that while they
can accurately identify and reason about entities,
their ability to understand relationships is notably
limited. Further testing reveals that the decent
performance on diagram understanding largely
stems from leveraging their background knowledge as shortcuts to identify and reason about
the relational information. Thus, we conclude
that LVLMs have a limited capability for genuine diagram understanding, and their impressive
performance in diagram reasoning is an illusion
emanating from other confounding factors, such
as the background knowledge in the models.

For this purpose, we design a comprehensive test suite that
investigates the ability of LVLMs to understand diagrams.
As defined by Foucault (1977) and Deleuze (1986), diagrams are abstract tools that organize visual entities using
relational information. Drawing inspiration from this, our
test suite focuses on evaluating diagram understanding by
assessing how well models can understand entities and relations in typical diagrams (§ 2.1). We evaluate diagram
understanding by defining two types of tasks pertaining to
fast recognition of entities and relations and slow multi-step
reasoning (Kahneman, 2011) over them (§ 2.2). While we
cannot cover every diagram type for practical reasons, we
still cover diagrams across six domains. To ensure that our
evaluation is both controlled and generalizable, our test suite
includes both clean synthetic diagrams and 1, 001 annotated
real diagrams carefully selected from existing datasets Krishnamurthy et al. (2016); Kembhavi et al. (2016) (§ 2.3).
Using our test suite, we conduct a detailed analysis of the

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Yifan Hou <yifan.hou@inf.ethz.ch>, Mrinmaya Sachan
<mrinmaya.sachan@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

