Adaptive Exploration for Multi-Reward Multi-Policy Evaluation

Alessio Russo 1 Aldo Pacchiano 1 2

Abstract

There are several applications where one has multiple policies to evaluate, e.g., multiple policies arising from using
different hyperparameters (Dann et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2024; Poddar et al., 2024). Similarly, multiple reward functions often arise in real-world decision-making problems,
making it crucial to evaluate how a policy performs across
diverse objectives. As an example, large language models
(Brown et al., 2020) are fine-tuned on human feedback that
spans a wide range of user preferences and goals (Ziegler
et al., 2019; Rafailov et al., 2024; Poddar et al., 2024), effectively producing multiple distinct reward signals. Other
applications, similarly, involve multiple rewards, such as:
user-preference modeling, robotics tasks aiming to reach
different goals, or intent-based radio network optimization
(Nahum et al., 2023; De Alwis et al., 2023; Russo & Vannella, 2024; Poddar et al., 2024).

We study the policy evaluation problem in an
online multi-reward multi-policy discounted setting, where multiple reward functions must be
evaluated simultaneously for different policies.
We adopt an (ϵ, δ)-PAC perspective to achieve
ϵ-accurate estimates with high confidence over
finite or convex sets of rewards, a setting that has
not been systematically studied in the literature.
Building on prior work on Multi-Reward Best
Policy Identification, we adapt the MR-NaS exploration scheme (Russo & Vannella, 2024) to
jointly minimize sample complexity for evaluating different policies across different reward
sets. Our approach leverages an instance-specific
lower bound revealing how the sample complexity scales with a measure of value deviation, guiding the design of an efficient exploration policy.
Although computing this bound entails a hard
non-convex optimization, we propose an efficient
convex approximation that holds for both finite
and convex reward sets. Experiments in tabular domains demonstrate the effectiveness of this
adaptive exploration scheme. Code repository:
https://github.com/rssalessio/mu
lti-reward-multi-policy-eval.

In general, it is challenging to efficiently and accurately
evaluate a policy over multiple objectives, potentially for
multiple policies aimed at solving different tasks (Sutton
et al., 2011; McLeod et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2024). Indeed, when multiple policies and distinct reward sets are
involved, it is not obvious how best to gather data in a way
that balances efficiency and accuracy.
Prior research approached this issue in different ways. One
direction aims to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) of
the value estimator (or the variance of the importance sampling estimator) to guide adaptive exploration. In (Hanna
et al., 2017), this is done for single-reward policy evaluation.
In (Mukherjee et al., 2022) they study single-reward policy evaluation in tree MDPs, and propose a variance-driven
behavior policy that minimizes the MSE. Similarly, Jain
et al. (2024) propose a variance-driven exploration scheme
for a finite collection of policy–reward pairs. However,
these methods may not always guarantee sample-efficient
exploration or provide (ϵ, δ)-PAC guarantees on the sample
complexity. Weissmann et al. (2025) recently introduced a
sample-efficient behavior-policy design for evaluating multiple target policies and proved (ϵ, δ) excess-risk guarantees;
their results, however, apply only to single-reward stochastic
bandit models (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). In (Dann
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024) the authors address multipolicy evaluation for a single reward under the (ϵ, δ)-PAC
criteria in episodic MDPs. However, their sample complexity guarantees are instance-dependent in the transition

1. Introduction
This paper investigates methods for efficiently evaluating
one or more policies across various reward functions in an
online discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014), a key challenge in Reinforcement Learning
(RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), where the aim is to compute
the value of each policy. Accurate value estimation serves
many purposes, from verifying a policy’s effectiveness to
providing insights for policy improvement.
1
Faculty of Computing and Data Sciences, Boston University, Boston (MA), USA. 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston (MA), USA. Correspondence to: Alessio Russo
<arusso2@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

