Bridging Protein Sequences and Microscopy Images with
Unified Diffusion Models
Dihan Zheng 1 Bo Huang 1 2 3

Abstract

development of generative models has enabled researchers
to design functional proteins (Madani et al., 2023; Dauparas et al., 2022) and drug-like molecules (Isigkeit et al.,
2024). These computational methods allow for large-scale
virtual screening, significantly reducing the costs and resources associated with experimental validation. The advent
of those technologies presents significant opportunities for
biomedical research, potentially accelerating advancements
in therapeutic target identification, drug discovery, and the
investigation of biochemical pathways (Palma et al., 2012).

Fluorescence microscopy is ubiquitously used in
cell biology research to characterize the cellular
role of a protein. To help elucidate the relationship between the amino acid sequence of a protein
and its cellular function, we introduce CELL-Diff,
a unified diffusion model facilitating bidirectional
transformations between protein sequences and
their corresponding microscopy images. Utilizing
reference cell morphology images and a protein
sequence, CELL-Diff efficiently generates corresponding protein images. Conversely, given
a protein image, the model outputs protein sequences. CELL-Diff integrates continuous and
diffusion models within a unified framework and
is implemented using a transformer-based network. We train CELL-Diff on the Human Protein
Atlas (HPA) dataset and fine-tune it on the OpenCell dataset. Experimental results demonstrate
that CELL-Diff outperforms existing methods in
generating high-fidelity protein images, making it
a practical tool for investigating subcellular protein localization and interactions.

Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94143 2 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94143 3 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158. Correspondence to: Bo
Huang <bo.huang@ucsf.edu>.

In this work, we focus on the relationship between protein
sequences and their cellular functions as characterized by
microscopy images. Specifically, we focus on fluorescence
microscopy, which is ubiquitously used in nearly all cell
biology research. Fluorescence microscopy images provide
extremely rich information for proteins of interest in the
cellular context, such as their expression level, subcellular
distribution, and molecular interactions as can be measured
by spatial colocalization. Such information characterizes
protein functional activities as well as the physiological and
pathological state of cells. Disease-causing genetic mutations can alter the amino acid sequence of proteins, resulting
in changes in image phenotypes by modifying gene expression patterns, reshaping molecular interaction profiles, or
globally perturbing cellular states. As a first step towards
building a model that connects the sequence of proteins
and their cellular images, recently, Khwaja et al. (2024b)
proposed CELL-E, a text-to-image transformer that predicts
fluorescence protein images from sequence input and cell
morphology condition. Furthermore, CELL-E2 (Khwaja
et al., 2024a) was developed to enhance the image generation speed of CELL-E by utilizing the idea of masked token
prediction (Chang et al., 2022). Additionally, CELL-E2 facilitates the bidirectional transformation between sequences
and images. However, their image model only allowed outputs of highly blurred images lacking fine details to discern
any of the subcellular structures other than the most prominent one (i.e., the nucleus), restricting their applicability
only to the study of a very limited set of sequence features
(i.e., the nuclear localization signal).

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To expand the application of sequence-to-cell-image generative models, we introduce CELL-Diff, a unified diffusion
model that enables bidirectional transformation between

1. Introduction
Protein sequences inherently encode their functions, and
predicting these functions solely from sequence information
has become a critical area of research. With the development of artificial intelligence, learning-based methods are
increasingly employed to predict a wide range of protein
properties, including structural conformation (Jumper et al.,
2021; Baek et al., 2021), interaction partners (Evans et al.,
2021), and subcellular localization (Almagro Armenteros
et al., 2017; Khwaja et al., 2024b). Concurrently, the rapid
1

1

