Exploring Criteria of Loss Reweighting to Enhance LLM Unlearning

Puning Yang 1 Qizhou Wang 1 Zhuo Huang 2 Tongliang Liu 2 Chengqi Zhang 3 Bo Han † 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The remarkable capabilities of large language models
(LLMs) are primarily attributed to the usage of extensive,
web-scale datasets. However, these datasets also pose substantial risks as they often contain illegal, private, and potentially sensitive content (Karamolegkou et al., 2023; Patil
et al., 2023). The associated LLMs may learn and later reproduce this sensitive information, raising ethical concerns
and legal implications (Yu et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023;
Barrett et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Zhou et al., 2024; 2025).
It has spurred recent research into LLM unlearning (Yao
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024; Maini et al.,
2024), which seeks to remove the influence of harmful data
post-training, thereby mitigating the risk associated with
reproducing undesirable information in LLM outputs.

Loss reweighting has shown significant benefits
for machine unlearning with large language models (LLMs). However, their exact functionalities are left unclear and the optimal strategy remains an open question, thus impeding the understanding and improvement of existing methodologies. In this paper, we identify two distinct
goals of loss reweighting, namely, Saturation
and Importance—the former indicates that those
insufficiently optimized data should be emphasized, while the latter stresses some critical data
that are most influential for loss minimization.
To study their usefulness, we design specific
reweighting strategies for each goal and evaluate their respective effects on unlearning. We
conduct extensive empirical analyses on wellestablished benchmarks, and summarize some
important observations as follows: (i) Saturation
enhances efficacy more than importance-based
reweighting, and their combination can yield additional improvements. (ii) Saturation typically
allocates lower weights to data with lower likelihoods, whereas importance-based reweighting
does the opposite. (iii) The efficacy of unlearning is also largely influenced by the smoothness
and granularity of the weight distributions. Based
on these findings, we propose SatImp, a simple
reweighting method that combines the advantages
of both saturation and importance. Empirical results on extensive datasets validate the efficacy of
our method, potentially bridging existing research
gaps and indicating directions for future research.
Our code is available at https://github.com/tmlrgroup/SatImp.

To implement LLM unlearning, existing methods typically
built upon gradient ascent (GA) (Yao et al., 2023; Maini
et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2025), which
minimizes the log-likelihood of model responses targeted
to be unlearned. Although GA-based methods are highly
powerful to remove unwanted responses, they frequently
result in over-forgetting (Liu et al., 2024d; Ye et al., 2025),
which severely impair the model performance on other, nontargeted tasks, undermining its general functionality.
To overcome this issue, several studies (Rafailov et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024; Maini et al., 2024) explore loss reweighting to regulate their unlearning processes, either implicitly or explicitly. Generally speaking, loss reweighting, cf.,
Eqs. (3)-(4), operates on the premise that certain data points
(or tokens) warrant heightened attention, with their loss
values and gradients being adjusted upwards over others.
However, despite the development of various reweighting
strategies, the precise physical interpretations or specific
functions of these strategies remain ambiguous. This uncertainty complicates the determination of which avenues to
explore in the pursuit of optimal reweighting strategies.

1

This paper seeks to deepen our understanding of loss
reweighting through a series of well-crafted experiments.
We outline two primary categories of loss reweighting,
namely, Saturation which advocates emphasizing examples that are not yet sufficiently unlearned, and Importance
which focuses on the critical examples for achieving the
unlearning goal. Specifically, the insufficiently unlearned

TMLR Group, Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong
Baptist University. 2 Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney. 3 Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Correspondence to: Bo Han
<bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

