Optimal Algorithm for Max-Min Fair Bandit

Zilong Wang 1 Zhiyao Zhang 2 Shuai Li 1

Abstract

expected reward throughout T rounds. Equivalently, they
minimize the total regret, defined as the difference of cumulative reward between their decision and the optimal strategy.
MP-MAB problems can be divided into the homogeneous
setting and the heterogeneous setting by whether the arm’s
reward varies among players. Besides, collision is also considered in many applications: when different players select
the same arm in one round, they collide and all receive a 0
reward rather than the original rewards drawn from the fixed
distribution (Wang et al., 2020b; Boursier & Perchet, 2019;
Wang et al., 2020a). For instance, in wireless networks,
when more than one users transfer information using one
channel, they will interfere with one another and fail, and
this is modeled as collisions in our MP-MAB problem.

Multi-player multi-armed bandit (MP-MAB) has
been widely studied owing to its diverse applications across numerous domains. We consider
an MP-MAB problem where N players compete for K arms in T rounds. The reward distributions are heterogeneous where each player
has a different expected reward for the same
arm. When multiple players select the same arm,
they collide and obtain zero rewards. In this paper, our target is to find the max-min fairness
matching that maximizes the reward of the player
who receives the lowest reward. This paper improves the existing max-min regret upper bound
of O(exp(1/∆) + K 3 log T log log T ). More
specifically, our decentralized fair elimination algorithm (DFE) deals with heterogeneity and collision carefully and attains a regret upper bound
of O((N 2 + K) log T /∆), where ∆ is the minimum reward gap between max-min value and
sub-optimal arms. In addition, this paper also provides an Ω(max{N 2 , K} log T /∆) regret lower
bound for this problem, which indicates that our
algorithm is optimal with respect to key parameters T, N, K, and ∆. Additional numerical experiments also show the efficiency and improvement
of our algorithms.

When considering the heterogeneous setting and collisions,
it often raises concerns about unfairness. In order to maximize the total rewards and avoid collisions meanwhile, some
players have to sacrifice for the global objective by selecting
arms with lower reward (Hossain et al., 2021; Bistritz et al.,
2020; Leshem, 2025). Therefore, the primitive objective
which only cares about maximizing total rewards, is unfair
to those players and makes them have a willingness to not
follow the algorithm. Thus researchers hope to search for
a better objective to avoid this unfairness. One reasonable
objective is to maximize the expected reward of the player
who receives the lowest reward, which is called max-min
fairness (Bistritz et al., 2020; Leshem, 2025). This ensures
that every player is considered equally and nobody should
sacrifice. In wireless networks, if only pursuing the maximal Quality of Service (QoS) globally, some users will be
annoyed as they can only use channels with low quality to
avoid collisions of others.

1. Introduction
Multi-player multi-armed bandit (MP-MAB) problem has
been widely studied in recent years due to its wide applications like cognitive radio and wireless network (Wang et al.,
2020a; Yang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2020b; 2022). In such
a problem, N players simultaneously play K arms. In each
round, each player selects an arm and observes the reward
generated from a fixed distribution. In typical MP-MAB
problems, players try to maximize the summation of their

Bistritz et al. (2020); Leshem (2025) study this max-min
fairness topic, but both of them have the following limitations. 1) Their regret upper bounds are larger than O(log T ).
The work of Bistritz et al. (2020) derives a regret lower
bound of Ω(log T ). However, existing works only achieve
the O(log T log log T ) regret upper bound (Bistritz et al.,
2020; Leshem, 2025). Additionally, their regret analysis
also relies on a large constant, which can grow exponentially with N and 1/∆, where N is the number of players
and ∆ is the minimum reward gap. 2) The lower bound
Ω(log T /∆) in Bistritz et al. (2020) only works for parameter T . Nevertheless, no lower bound for parameter N or K

1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to: Shuai
Li <shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

