SelfCite: Self-Supervised Alignment for
Context Attribution in Large Language Models

Yung-Sung Chuang 1 Benjamin Cohen-Wang 1 Shannon Zejiang Shen 1 Zhaofeng Wu 1 Hu Xu 2
Xi Victoria Lin 2 James Glass 1 Shang-Wen Li 2 Wen-tau Yih 2

Abstract

Even when provided with accurate context, models may
misinterpret the data or include details that are not supported
by the context (Shi et al., 2024; Chuang et al., 2024).

We introduce SelfCite, a novel self-supervised approach that aligns LLMs to generate high-quality,
fine-grained, sentence-level citations for the statements in their generated responses. Instead of
only relying on costly and labor-intensive annotations, SelfCite leverages a reward signal provided
by the LLM itself through context ablation: If a
citation is necessary, removing the cited text from
the context should prevent the same response; if
sufficient, retaining the cited text alone should preserve the same response. This reward can guide
the inference-time best-of-N sampling strategy
to improve citation quality significantly, as well
as be used in preference optimization to directly
fine-tune the models for generating better citations. The effectiveness of SelfCite is demonstrated by increasing citation F1 up to 5.3 points
on the LongBench-Cite benchmark across five
long-form question answering tasks. The source
code is available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/SelfCite.

Although completely eliminating hallucinations remains difficult, existing approaches have sought to enhance the reliability of LLMs by providing context attributions–commonly
referred to as citations–which are fine-grained references
to relevant evidences from the context, alongside generated
responses for user verification (Menick et al., 2022; Slobodkin et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). While they have shown
promise in generating citations, an outstanding challenge is
their reliance on annotated data either from human (Menick
et al., 2022; Slobodkin et al., 2024) or costly proprietary
APIs (Zhang et al., 2024) to train models to generate citations. Collecting annotations can be time-consuming or
costly, especially with long-context documents.
To address this challenge, we introduce SelfCite, a novel
alignment approach designed to autonomously enhance the
quality of citations generated by LLMs without the need for
any annotations in the alignment process. Drawing inspiration from model interpretability techniques (Lei et al., 2016;
Cohen-Wang et al., 2024), SelfCite leverages the inherent
capabilities of LLMs to provide feedback through context
ablation—a process to evaluate the necessity and sufficiency
of a citation. If removing the cited text prevents the LLM
from assigning high probability to the same response, we
can infer that it is necessary for the LLM. Conversely, if
the response remains highly probable despite removing all
context other than the cited text, this indicates that the citation is sufficient for the LLM to make the claim. This
self-evaluation mechanism enables SelfCite to calculate a
reward signal without relying on the annotation processes.

1. Introduction
Assistants built using large language models (LLMs) have
become ubiquitous in helping users gather information and
acquire knowledge (OpenAI, 2022; 2023). For instance,
when asked about recent news, an assistant can read through
dozens of relevant articles—potentially more than a user
could comb through themselves—and use these articles as
context to provide a clear, specific answer to the user’s
query. While this ability can greatly accelerate information
gathering, LLMs often produce hallucinations—content that
sounds plausible but is actually fabricated (Ji et al., 2023).

Building on this intuition, we design a reward that can be
cheaply computed by the LLM itself, composed by probability drop and probability hold in context ablation. By
integrating this reward function into a best-of-N sampling
strategy, SelfCite achieves substantial improvements in citation quality. Furthermore, we employ this reward for
preference optimization using SimPO (Meng et al., 2024),
which not only maintains these improvements but also eliminates the need for the computationally expensive best-of-N

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA 2 Meta FAIR, USA. Correspondence to: Yung-Sung Chuang
<yungsung@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

