Playmate: Flexible Control of Portrait Animation
via 3D-Implicit Space Guided Diffusion

Xingpei Ma * Jiaran Cai * † Yuansheng Guan * Shenneng Huang Qiang Zhang Shunsi Zhang
Guangzhou Quwan Network Technology
https://playmate.github.io/Playmate/

Figure 1. Playmate can generate lifelike talking faces for arbitrary identity, guided by a speech audio clip and a variety of
optional control conditions. (a) shows the generation results under different emotional conditions using the same audio clip.
The top row in (b) shows the driving images, while the bottom row shows the generated results. The poses in the generated
results are controlled by the driving images, and the lip movements are guided by the driving audio. (c) demonstrates highly
accurate lip synchronization and vivid, rich expressions across different style images.

Abstract

posture and the lack of fine-grained control over
facial expressions. In order to introduce more
face-guided conditions beyond speech audio clips,
a novel two-stage training framework Playmate is
proposed to generate more lifelike facial expressions and talking faces. In the first stage, we introduce a decoupled implicit 3D representation along
with a meticulously designed motion-decoupled
module to facilitate more accurate attribute disentanglement and generate expressive talking videos
directly from audio cues. Then, in the second
stage, we introduce an emotion-control module to
encode emotion control information into the latent
space, enabling fine-grained control over emotions and thereby achieving the ability to generate

Recent diffusion-based talking face generation
models have demonstrated impressive potential
in synthesizing videos that accurately match a
speech audio clip with a given reference identity.
However, existing approaches still encounter significant challenges due to uncontrollable factors,
such as inaccurate lip-sync, inappropriate head
*

Equal contribution † Project lead . Correspondence to:
Jiaran Cai <caijiaran@52tt.com>, Xingpei Ma <maxingpei@52tt.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

