Navigating Conflicting Views: Harnessing Trust for Learning

Jueqing Lu 1 Wray Buntine 2 Yuanyuan Qi 1 Joanna Dipnall 3 Belinda Gabbe 3 Lan Du 1

Abstract
Resolving conflicts is critical for improving the reliability of multi-view classification. While prior
work focuses on learning consistent and informative representations across views, it often assumes perfect alignment and equal importance
of all views, an assumption rarely met in realworld scenarios, as some views may express distinct information. To address this, we develop
a computational trust-based discounting method
that enhances the Evidential Multi-view framework by accounting for the instance-wise reliability of each view through a probability-sensitive
trust mechanism. We evaluate our method on six
real-world datasets using Top-1 Accuracy, Fleiss’
Kappa, and a new metric, Multi-View Agreement
with Ground Truth, to assess prediction reliability. We also assess the effectiveness of uncertainty in indicating prediction correctness via AUROC. Additionally, we test the scalability of our
method through end-to-end training on a largescale dataset. The experimental results show that
computational trust can effectively resolve conflicts, paving the way for more reliable multi-view
classification models in real-world applications.
Codes available at: https://github.com/
OverfitFlow/Trust4Conflict

Figure 1. Example of conflicting multi-view opinions. The Titanic’s route is safe in Captain’s and Polar Bear’s View, while
unsafe in Dolphin’s view.

on MVC rely on the assumption that data from different
views consistently provide reliable information about the
ground truth (Liang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023a; Xu
et al., 2024a). Nevertheless, this assumption may not always
be valid in real-world scenarios. Substantial variations in the
informativeness of data from different views can produce
conflicting results, thereby undermining the reliability of
the model’s predictions.
A possible solution for resolving conflicts is to project data
from different views into a shared latent space (Hardoon
et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2015; Federici et al., 2020; Hjelm
et al., 2019), and then draw a joint representation from the
latent space for the classification task. This is achieved by
integrating essential features via weighting schemes, such as
attention mechanisms (Zheng et al., 2021) and weighted fusion (Atrey et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2019). These methods
typically assign higher weights to more informative views
or features, thus reducing the impact of potential conflicting
information. Although these methods have achieved promising results in MVC, their focus on the joint representation
can be a limitation. Solely relying on the joint representation hinders the capacity to thoroughly grasp information
provided by different views. In contexts such as ocean navigation, characterized by observations sources from various
views (e.g., the perspectives of the captain, dolphin and Polar Bear when observing an iceberg as shown in Figure 1),
it is crucial to thoroughly analyze and comprehend each

1. Introduction
Multi-View Classification (MVC) plays a critical role in
deep learning by greatly enhancing the ability to make accurate decisions through integrating multi-source information. Its effectiveness has been verified with the successful
application in many domains such as autonomous driving
(Yurtsever et al., 2020) and AI-assisted medical diagnostic
systems (Kang et al., 2020). Most of the existing studies
1
Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University
College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity
3
School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University. Correspondence to: Lan Du <Lan.Du@monash.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

