Fast Min-ϵ Segmented Regression using Constant-Time Segment Merging

Ansgar Lößer 1 Max Schlecht 2 Florian Schintke 3 Joel Witzke 3 Matthias Weidlich 2 Björn Scheuermann 1

Abstract

involves specifying a segment for each interval of a partition
of the independent variables. See Figure 1, which models
14 sample values using three segments. Min-ϵ segmented
regression sets a fixed number of segments k and aims to
construct these segments such that the estimation error is
minimized.

Segmented regression is a statistical method that
approximates a function f by a piecewise function
fˆ using noisy data samples. Min-ϵ approaches
aim to reduce the regression function’s mean
squared error (MSE) for a given number of k segments. An optimal solution for min-ϵ segmented
regression is found in O(n2 ) time (Bai & Perron,
1998; Yamamoto & Perron, 2013) for n samples.
For large datasets, current heuristics improve time
complexity to O(n log n) (Acharya et al., 2016)
but can result in large errors, especially when exactly k segments are used. We present a method
for min-ϵ segmented regression that combines the
scalability of top existing heuristic solutions with
a statistical efficiency similar to the optimal solution. This is achieved by using a new method
to merge an initial set of segments using precomputed matrices from samples, allowing both merging and error calculation in constant time. Our
approach, using the same samples and parameter
k, produces segments with up to 1,000× lower
MSE compared to Acharya et al. (2016) in about
100× less runtime on datasets over 104 samples.

A common instance of the problem is polynomial regression and the minimization of the mean-squared error (MSE)
using ordinary least squares (OLS). For k = 1 and n samples, it is a simple polynomial regression and takes O(n)
time to solve. However, for k ≥ 2, finding the positions of
breakpoints is challenging. Most previous work relies on
dynamic programming (Bai & Perron, 1998; Yamamoto &
Perron, 2013). As shown by Acharya et al. (2016), finding
the optimal solution with exactly k segments requires O(n2 )
time.
In practice, quadratic time complexity is increasingly problematic because of the growing amount of available data.
Using a large number of samples is desirable to reduce noise
impact. Therefore, heuristic methods that reduce time complexity to O(n log n) have been proposed (Acharya et al.,
2016). These methods create many initial segments and
then merge them based on the minimal error of consecutive
segments. However, the merging is greedy, either assuming
knowledge on the noise distribution’s variance, or being
conducted separately for log(n) buckets over the segments’
lengths. In either case, many more than the desired k segments are created, which generally hampers a qualitative
analysis of the breakpoint positions. Reducing the number of segments by post-processing in order to solve the
actual segmented regression problem for a given k, in turn,
increases the MSE by orders of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Segmented regression models the relation between a dependent (response) variable and a set of independent (predictor)
variables by a piecewise function (Draper & Smith, 1981;
Chen & Wang, 2009). It has applications in fields such
as ecology (Shao & Campbell, 2002), econometrics (Yamamoto & Perron, 2013), clinical guidelines (Ansari et al.,
2003), spatial gene analysis (Chitra et al., 2025) and computer science (Galakatos et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2020). Segmented regression estimates a piecewise function fˆ based
on noisy samples of a function f denoting the true relationship between predictor and response variables. This

In this paper, we present a new heuristic solution to the
problem of min-ϵ segmented regression that achieves nearoptimal results and scales to large datasets, while using
exactly k segments. Our approach does not rely on any
knowledge about the noise distribution or its variance. It
follows the general idea of merging an initial set of segments, but we introduce a novel method: By leveraging
precomputed matrices derived from the samples and the initial segment set, we achieve constant-time merging of two
consecutive segments and computation of their combined
error term.

1

TU Darmstadt, Germany 2 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Germany 3 Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to:
Ansgar Lößer <ansgar.loesser@kom.tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

