Diffusion models for Gaussian distributions: Exact solutions and Wasserstein errors

Emile Pierret 1 Bruno Galerne 1 2

Abstract

SDE progressively transforms the initial data distribution
by adding more and more noise as time progresses. Then,
the reversal of this process, called backward SDE, allows us
to approximately sample the data distribution starting from
Gaussian white noise. Moreover, the SDE is associated
with an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) called the
probability flow (Song et al., 2021b). This flow preserves
the same marginal distributions as the backward SDE and
provides another way to sample the score-based generative
model.

Diffusion or score-based models recently showed
high performance in image generation. They rely
on a forward and a backward stochastic differential equations (SDE). The sampling of a data
distribution is achieved by numerically solving
the backward SDE or its associated flow ODE.
Studying the convergence of these models necessitates to control four different types of error: the
initialization error, the truncation error, the discretization error and the score approximation. In
this paper, we theoretically study the behavior of
diffusion models and their numerical implementation when the data distribution is Gaussian. Our
first contribution is to derive the analytical solutions of the backward SDE and the probability
flow ODE and to prove that these solutions and
their discretizations are all Gaussian processes.
Our second contribution is to compute the exact
Wasserstein errors between the target and the numerically sampled distributions for any numerical
scheme. This allows us to monitor convergence directly in the data space, while experimental works
limit their empirical analysis to Inception features.
An implementation of our code is available online.

An important issue about diffusion models is the theoretical
guarantees of convergence of the model: How close to the
data distribution is the generated distribution? There are
four main sources of errors to study to derive theoretical
guarantees for diffusion models: (a) the initialization error
is induced when approximating the marginal distribution
at the end of the forward process by a standard Gaussian
distribution. (b) The discretization error comes from the
resolution of the SDE or the ODE by a numerical method.
(c) The truncation error occurs because the backward time
integration is stopped at a small time ε > 0 to avoid numerical instabilities due to ill-defined score function near the
origin. (d) The score approximation error accounts for the
mismatch between the ideal score function and the one given
by the network trained using denoising score-matching.
Despite these numerous sources of errors, a lot of numerical
and theoretical research has been conducted to assess the
generative capacity of diffusion models. Several articles
(Franzese et al., 2023; Karras et al., 2022) provide strong
experimental studies for the choices of sampling parameters.
On the theoretical side, several works derive upper bounds
on the 1-Wasserstein or TV distance between the data and
the model distributions by making assumptions on the L2 error between the ideal and learned score functions and on
the compacity of the support of the data (Chen et al., 2023b;
Lee et al., 2024; De Bortoli et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023c;
Lee et al., 2022; Benton et al., 2024), eventually under an
additional manifold assumption (De Bortoli, 2022; Wenliang & Moran, 2022; Chen et al., 2023a). Yet, on one hand,
to the best of our knowledge, the derived theoretical bounds
mostly rely on worst case scenario and are not tight enough
to explain the practical efficiency of diffusion models. On
the other hand, numerical considerations mostly rely on Inception feature distributions through the FID metric (Heusel

1. Introduction
Over the last five years, diffusion models have proven to
be a highly efficient and reliable framework for generative
modeling (Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021a;b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Karras et al.,
2022). First introduced as a discrete process, Denoising
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020)
can be studied as a reversal of a continuous Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) (Song et al., 2021b). A forward
1
Université d’Orléans, Université de Tours, CNRS, IDP, UMR
7013, Orléans, France 2 Institut universitaire de France (IUF). Correspondence to: Emile Pierret <emile.pierret@univ-orleans.fr>,
Bruno Galerne <bruno.galerne@univ-orleans.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

