Does Graph Prompt Work?
A Data Operation Perspective with Theoretical Analysis

Qunzhong Wang * 1 Xiangguo Sun * 2 Hong Cheng 2

Abstract

sive experiments support our theoretical results
and confirm the practical implications of these
guarantees.

In recent years, graph prompting has emerged as
a promising research direction, enabling the learning of additional tokens or subgraphs appended
to the original graphs without requiring retraining of pre-trained graph models across various
applications. This novel paradigm, shifting from
the traditional “pre-training and fine-tuning” to
“pre-training and prompting” has shown significant empirical success in simulating graph data
operations, with applications ranging from recommendation systems to biological networks and
graph transferring. However, despite its potential,
the theoretical underpinnings of graph prompting remain underexplored, raising critical questions about its fundamental effectiveness. The
lack of rigorous theoretical proof of why and how
much it works is more like a “dark cloud” over
the graph prompt area to go further. To fill this
gap, this paper introduces a theoretical framework
that rigorously analyzes graph prompting from a
data operation perspective. Our contributions are
threefold: First, we provide a formal guarantee
theorem, demonstrating graph prompts’ capacity
to approximate graph transformation operators, effectively linking upstream and downstream tasks.
Second, we derive upper bounds on the error of
these data operations by graph prompts for a single graph and extend this discussion to batches of
graphs, which are common in graph model training. Third, we analyze the distribution of data
operation errors, extending our theoretical findings from linear graph aggregations (e.g., GCN) to
non-linear graph aggregations (e.g., GAT). Exten-

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely used
in analyzing various graph-structured data. A standard
workflow using GNNs is the “pre-training and fine-tuning”
paradigm, where a model is first trained on a large-scale,
general-purpose dataset and then fine-tuned on a specific
downstream task. While this method has been effective in
transferring learned representations, it often needs many advanced tricks to retrain the model parameters for each new
task, which can be computationally intensive and may not
fully capture the unique characteristics of the downstream
tasks, potentially limiting the model’s generalization.
Inspired by the success of prompting techniques in natural language processing (NLP), there has been a growing
interest in adapting similar ideas to graph data through “pretraining and prompting”. Graph prompts (Sun et al., 2023b)
modify the input graphs by adding learnable tokens or subgraphs, enabling the pre-trained GNN to better align with
the requirements of downstream tasks without tuning the
model parameters. Many empirical works (Sun et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2023; Tan et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Ma
et al., 2023) have found that graph prompting can reduce
computational overhead, preserve the generality of the pretrained model, and allow for seamless application across
multiple tasks to achieve better expressive capability than
the traditional paradigm.
Recently, some studies (Fang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2023a)
have realized that the reason why graph prompts work may
relate to their capability in simulating various data operations like deleting/adding nodes/edges, changing node features, and even removing subgraphs. This makes graph
prompts stand out from their counterpart in the NLP area
and inspires many empirical applications like recommendation systems (Yang et al., 2023; 2024), biological networks
(Diao et al., 2022), transferring knowledge across different graph domains (Guo et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024b),
and more. Unfortunately, despite these promising results,

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. 2 Department of
Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, and Shun
Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Xiangguo Sun <xiangguosun@cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

