MaskTwins: Dual-form Complementary Masking for
Domain-Adaptive Image Segmentation

Jiawen Wang 1 2 Yinda Chen 1 2 * Xiaoyu Liu 1 Che Liu 3 Dong Liu 1 Jianqing Gao 4 Zhiwei Xiong 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Inspired by Masked Language Modeling (MLM) (Devlin,
2018; Brown, 2020) in natural language processing, Masked
Image Modeling (MIM) (Bao et al., 2022; He et al., 2022;
Xie et al., 2022b) has achieved remarkable success in selfsupervised visual representation learning. MIM learns semantic representations by deliberately obscuring parts of
the input and then reconstructing the missing information
based on the unmasked parts, e.g., normalized pixels (He
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022b), HOG feature (Wei et al.,
2022), discrete tokens (Bao et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2023),
deep features (Zhou et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2022) or frequencies (Xie et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2023). The success
of these methods can be attributed to their ability to force
models to learn robust and generalizable features, even in
the face of incomplete or corrupted input data. By simulating real-world scenarios where visual information may
be partially occluded or distorted, masked reconstruction
techniques enable models to develop a more comprehensive
understanding of visual concepts.

Recent works have correlated Masked Image
Modeling (MIM) with consistency regularization in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA).
However, they merely treat masking as a special form of deformation on the input images
and neglect the theoretical analysis, which leads
to a superficial understanding of masked reconstruction and insufficient exploitation of its potential in enhancing feature extraction and representation learning. In this paper, we reframe
masked reconstruction as a sparse signal reconstruction problem and theoretically prove that the
dual form of complementary masks possesses superior capabilities in extracting domain-agnostic
image features. Based on this compelling insight, we propose MaskTwins, a simple yet effective UDA framework that integrates masked
reconstruction directly into the main training
pipeline. MaskTwins uncovers intrinsic structural patterns that persist across disparate domains by enforcing consistency between predictions of images masked in complementary ways,
enabling domain generalization in an end-to-end
manner. Extensive experiments verify the superiority of MaskTwins over baseline methods in
natural and biological image segmentation. These
results demonstrate the significant advantages of
MaskTwins in extracting domain-invariant features without the need for separate pre-training,
offering a new paradigm for domain-adaptive
segmentation. The source code is available at
https://github.com/jwwang0421/masktwins.
Theory contribution 1 University of Science and Technology
of China 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive
National Science Center 3 Data Science Institute, Imperial College
London 4 iFLYTEK CO., LTD. Correspondence to: Zhiwei Xiong
<zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn>, Jianqing Gao <jqgao@iflytek.com>.

Analogously, consistency regularization in unsupervised
domain adaptive segmentation learns domain-invariant features by enforcing consistency between the predictions of
transformed images and their original counterparts. In Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA), consistency regularization based methods (Choi et al., 2019; Araslanov &
Roth, 2021; Melas-Kyriazi & Manrai, 2021) typically utilize a variety of augmentations, like affine transformations,
color jittering and cutout (DeVries, 2017). Recently, MIC
(Hoyer et al., 2023) uses masked image consistency to learn
context relations. Meanwhile, Shin et al. (2024) and Yang
et al. (2025) have preliminarily explored the complementary
masking in multi-modal tasks. However, these methods rely
on specific multi-modal datasets and neglect the potential
of complementary masking in a single modality. Moreover,
the lacked theoretical analysis results in a cursory understanding of masked reconstruction and a failure to fully
harness complementary contexts for feature extraction and
representation learning.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a novel perspective on masked
reconstruction by reframing it as a sparse signal reconstruction problem and utilize it to design an effective strategy

*

1

