Continuous Visual Autoregressive Generation via Score Maximization

Chenze Shao 1 Fandong Meng 1 Jie Zhou 1

Abstract

from a finite vocabulary. Therefore, for continuous modalities such as visual data, Visual AutoRegressive modeling
(VAR1 ) typically resort to quantization-based approaches
(van den Oord et al., 2017; Razavi et al., 2019; Esser et al.,
2021; Yu et al., 2024a) to cast the data into a discrete space.

Conventional wisdom suggests that autoregressive models are used to process discrete data.
When applied to continuous modalities such as visual data, Visual AutoRegressive modeling (VAR)
typically resorts to quantization-based approaches
to cast the data into a discrete space, which can
introduce significant information loss. To tackle
this issue, we introduce a Continuous VAR framework that enables direct visual autoregressive
generation without vector quantization. The underlying theoretical foundation is strictly proper
scoring rules, which provide powerful statistical
tools capable of evaluating how well a generative model approximates the true distribution.
Within this framework, all we need is to select
a strictly proper score and set it as the training objective to optimize. We primarily explore
a class of training objectives based on the energy score, which is likelihood-free and thus
overcomes the difficulty of making probabilistic predictions in the continuous space. Previous efforts on continuous autoregressive generation, such as GIVT and diffusion loss, can
also be derived from our framework using other
strictly proper scores. Source code: https:
//github.com/shaochenze/EAR.

Discrete visual representation based on vector quantization
provides support for autoregressive generation, yet the primary concern lies in the information loss due to quantization
errors. During visual generation, quantization errors degrades the reconstruction quality of discrete image tokenizers, which upper-bounds the generation quality (Rombach
et al., 2022). Moreover, discrete representations compromise the model’s perception of low-level details, restricting
its ability to capture continuous variations and subtle differences. Consequently, in terms of visual understanding, the
performance of discrete tokenizers often lags behind that of
continuous tokenizers (Wu et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024).
Given the limitations associated with vector quantization,
there is a growing interest in continuous visual autoregressive generation. However, without a finite vocabulary, it is
generally intractable to explicitly predict the likelihood over
continuous spaces and train with likelihood maximization.
Prior to this work, autoregressive generation in continuous
spaces has been explored through GIVT (Tschannen et al.,
2023) and diffusion loss (Li et al., 2024). Nevertheless, the
expressive capability of GIVT is confined to the pre-defined
family of Gaussian mixtures (Tschannen et al., 2023), and
the per-token diffusion procedure necessitates multiple denoising iterations to recover the token distribution, which
significantly increases the inference latency (Li et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Autoregressive large language models (Achiam et al., 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023) have
demonstrated remarkable scalability and generalizability in
understanding and generating discrete text, which has inspired the exploration of autoregressive generation on other
data modalities. However, autoregressive models equipped
with cross-entropy loss are limited to handle discrete tokens

In this work, we introduce a Continuous VAR framework
that enables direct visual autoregressive generation without
vector quantization. The underlying theoretical foundation
is strictly proper scoring rules (Brier, 1950; Good, 1952;
Gneiting & Raftery, 2007), which provide powerful statistical tools capable of evaluating how well a generative
model approximates the true distribution. Specifically, scoring rules are functions to assess the quality of a probability
distribution based on the observed sample. A scoring rule
is considered strictly proper if it encourages the model to
make honest predictions. In other words, the expected score

1
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc. Correspondence to: Chenze Shao <chenzeshao@tencent.com>, Fandong Meng <fandongmeng@tencent.com>, Jie Zhou <withtomzhou@tencent.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Here, VAR refers to the autoregressive modeling of visual
content, not limited to next scale prediction (Tian et al., 2024).

1

