To Steer or Not to Steer?
Mechanistic Error Reduction with Abstention for Language Models

Anna Hedström 1 Salim I. Amoukou 2 Tom Bewley 2 Saumitra Mishra 2 Manuela Veloso 2

Abstract
We introduce Mechanistic Error Reduction
with Abstention (MERA), a principled framework
for steering language models (LMs) to mitigate
errors through selective, adaptive interventions.
Unlike existing methods that rely on fixed, manually tuned steering strengths, often resulting in
under or oversteering, MERA addresses these limitations by (i) optimising the intervention direction,
and (ii) calibrating when, and how much to steer,
thereby provably improving performance or abstaining when no confident correction is possible.
Experiments across diverse datasets, and LM families demonstrate safe, effective, non-degrading
error correction, and that MERA outperforms existing baselines. Moreover, MERA can be applied
on top of existing steering techniques to further
enhance their performance, establishing it as a
general-purpose, and efficient approach to mechanistic activation steering.

Figure 1. An illustration of traditional vanilla steering with fixed
steering strengths (left), leading to under-, and oversteering, and
MERA (right), providing calibrated steering thresholds.

for specific goals, these approaches are typically computationally intensive or context-sensitive.
An alternative approach is to intervene in the internal computations of the model itself. Mechanistic steering (or “representation engineering”) has emerged as a promising line
of research to influence model behaviour by intervening
on activations in inference-time, without permanent weight
updates (Li et al., 2023; Belrose et al., 2023; Todd et al.,
2024; Qiu et al., 2024; Turner et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Despite the impressive capabilities of current language models (LMs), they can be frustratingly error-prone. Failures
arise not only in open-ended tasks like reasoning, factual
consistency or planning (Kambhampati et al., 2024), but
also in simple prediction settings (Hendrycks et al., 2021b;
Webson & Pavlick, 2022; Zhou et al., 2024). Mitigating
such errors is an open research question.

One widely used instantiation of this approach is contrastive
steering (Arditi et al., 2024; Rimsky et al., 2024), where a
steering vector is constructed by taking the mean activation
difference between paired examples with, and without a targeted concept (e.g. toxic vs non-toxic outputs). This vector
can then be added to the model’s activations to amplify or
suppress such concept in the model (Ball et al., 2024), under
the assumption that the concept is represented along a linear
direction in the model’s representation space (Elhage et al.,
2022; Marks & Tegmark, 2024; Park et al., 2024).

Error reduction methods for LMs have evolved in several
directions, including fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2024; Yin et al., 2024), and inference-time approaches like
prompt engineering (Kojima et al., 2022), and guided decoding (Yang & Klein, 2021; Liu et al., 2021). While effective

A natural extension is to explore whether such additive linear steering can be applied for the specific goal of error
mitigation: directly reducing model errors on prediction
tasks. That is, can we find a linear direction in LM’s activation space that encodes the concept of “being wrong”,
and then steer away from it? Unlike traditional alignment
tasks such as reducing toxicity or harmful responses, steer-

1
Work done during an internship at J.P. Morgan AI Research. 2 J.P. Morgan AI Research. Correspondence to: Anna
Hedström <hedstroem.anna@gmail.com>, Salim I. Amoukou
<salim.ibrahimamoukou@jpmorgan.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

