ViTally Consistent: Scaling Biological Representation Learning for Cell
Microscopy

Kian Kenyon-Dean 1 Zitong Jerry Wang 1 John Urbanik 1 Konstantin Donhauser 2 Jason Hartford 2 3
Saber Saberian 1 Nil Sahin 1 Ihab Bendidi 2 Safiye Celik 1 Juan Sebastián Rodrı́guez Vera 1 Marta Fay 1
Imran S Haque 1 Oren Kraus 1
B
Model scaling

Deriving insights from experimentally generated
datasets requires methods that can account for
random and systematic measurement errors and
remove them in order to accurately represent the
underlying effects of the conditions being tested.
Here we present a framework for pretraining
on large-scale microscopy datasets that includes
three steps: (1) curating a set of diverse and selfconsistent training samples, (2) scaling training
of an appropriate foundation model architecture
on this dataset, (3) evaluating intermediate layers
of the trained model to identify the best representation for downstream tasks. Using this strategy, we present the largest foundation model for
cell microscopy data to our knowledge, a new
1.9 billion-parameter ViT-G/8 MAE trained on
over 8 billion microscopy image crops. Compared to a previous published ViT-L/8 MAE,
our new model achieves a 60% improvement
in linear separability of genetic perturbations
and obtains the best overall performance on
whole-genome relationship recall, batch correction replicate consistency, and compound-gene
activity prediction benchmarks.1

Curated data

Replicate
consistency

A

Abstract

Block search

StringDB

Proxy task

0.60
0.55
0.50
0.49
0.48
0.47

MAE G/8

307M → 1.9B

Strategies

MAE L/8

Block position

Block search
Curated data
Model scaling
Models

Figure 1: (A) Overview of performance gain from different MAE pretraining and inference strategies. (B) Example
whole-genome results for replicate consistency and biological relationship recall on StringDB for models trained
with different combinations of strategies, by model name
and dataset (left to right):

through microscopes studying how cells behave (Hooke,
1665). But with the advent of high throughput screening
platforms that capture cells’ responses to tens or hundreds
of thousands of perturbations, we can no longer rely on
people to study these images. Instead, we need representations of the cell images that capture the biologically meaningful information and capture the similarities and differences in cells’ response to perturbations.
State-of-the-art (SOTA) deep learning methods for learning representations of microscopy leverage Vision Transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) trained with selfsupervised learning (SSL) techniques (Balestriero et al.,
2023) from large-scale screens (Doron et al., 2023; Kim
et al., 2023; Bourriez et al., 2024). They have been shown
to be very effective at representing the subtle changes in
cell morphology in response to perturbations, and masked
autoencoders (He et al., 2022) in particular exhibit scaling
laws for recovering known biological relationships (Kraus
et al., 2024). However, given that this data has to be collected experimentally, there is a limit to how far we can
scale these approaches before one runs out of data. To continue to improve these representations, we need to use experimental data as efficiently as possible. In this paper, we
show how curated training datasets combined with care-

1. Introduction
Microscopy images capture detailed information about
a cell’s responses to perturbations: indeed many early
biological discoveries were made by biologists looking
1
Recursion 2 Valence Labs 3 University of Manchester. Correspondence to: Kian Kenyon-Dean <kian.kd@recursion.com>,
Oren Kraus <oren.kraus@recursion.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
An earlier version of this work appeared at the NeurIPS 2024
Foundation Models for Science Workshop (Kenyon-Dean et al.,
2024).

1

