R ESEARCH T OWN: Simulator of Human Research Community

Haofei Yu 1 * Zhaochen Hong 1 * Zirui Cheng 1 * Kunlun Zhu 1 *
Keyang Xuan 1 Jinwei Yao 1 Tao Feng 1 Jiaxuan You 1
Code:
Data:

https://github.com/ulab-uiuc/research-town
https://huggingface.co/datasets/ulab-ai/research-bench

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential in scientific domains,
yet a fundamental question remains unanswered:
Can we simulate human research communities
with LLMs? Addressing this question can deepen
our understanding of the processes behind idea
brainstorming and inspire the automatic discovery
of novel scientific insights. In this work, we propose R ESEARCH T OWN, a multi-agent framework
for research community simulation. Within this
framework, the human research community is simplified as an agent-data graph, where researchers
and papers are represented as agent-type and datatype nodes, respectively, and connected based on
their collaboration relationships. We also introduce TextGNN, a text-based inference framework
that models various research activities (e.g., paper
reading, paper writing, and review writing) as special forms of a unified message-passing process
on the agent-data graph. To evaluate the quality
of the research community simulation, we present
R ESEARCH B ENCH, a benchmark that uses a nodemasking prediction task for scalable and objective
assessment based on similarity. Our experiments
reveal three key findings: (1) R ESEARCH T OWN
can provide a realistic simulation of collaborative
research activities, including paper writing and review writing; (2) R ESEARCH T OWN can maintain
robust simulation with multiple researchers and
diverse papers; (3) R ESEARCH T OWN can generate interdisciplinary research ideas that potentially
inspire pioneering research directions.

LLMs have proved to be powerful copilots in scientific research (AI4Science & Quantum, 2023), demonstrating their
great potential for accelerating scientific discovery. Despite
the promising finding, a more ambitious question remains:
Can we simulate the human research community with LLMs?
Answering such a question has multiple benefits: (1) simulating the human research community helps understand the
underlying process behind the discovery of existing research
ideas; (2) it can further help democratize and accelerate the
discovery process of new research ideas.
However, simulating the human research community is challenging, as it involves leveraging multiple LLM agents to
interact with complex research data. While existing multiagent LLM frameworks have been successfully applied to
areas like social simulation (Zhou et al., 2023; Gao et al.,
2023) and game simulation (Hua et al., 2023; Xu et al.,
2023), they are not well-suited for simulating research communities due to the complexity of collaborative research
activities like paper writing and review writing. Although recent efforts have explored research automation using LLMs,
these frameworks are typically limited to specific research
tasks, such as idea generation (Girotra et al., 2023; Baek
et al., 2024) or code experimentation (Huang et al., 2024), or
focus on simulating single-agent workflows (Lu et al., 2024).
These frameworks cannot simulate collaborative research
activities where researchers with diverse backgrounds work
together to brainstorm ideas, review papers, etc—processes
that are fundamental to modern human research.
Research community as graph. Our key observation is
that the deeply interconnected research community can be
naturally represented as graphs. Indeed, similar graph structures like citation networks (Newman, 2001) and academic
social networks (Tang et al., 2008) have been extensively
studied within data mining research, with proven values in
applications such as citation prediction (Holm et al., 2020),
recommendation (West et al., 2016), and community detection (Yang & Leskovec, 2012). However, introducing LLMs
to a graph-structured research community can extend these
previous works from prediction and analysis with existing

*
Leading authors. Details of individual contributions are available at Appendix §A 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Haofei Yu <haofeiy2@illinois.edu>, Jiaxuan
You <jiaxuan@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

