Addressing Concept Mislabeling in Concept Bottleneck Models Through
Preference Optimization

Emiliano Penaloza 1 2 Tianyue H. Zhang 1 2 Laurent Charlin 2 3 * Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga 4 *

Abstract

objective that aids CBMs to learn tasks even in the presence
of label noise.

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) propose to
enhance the trustworthiness of AI systems by
constraining their decisions on a set of humanunderstandable concepts. However, CBMs typically assume that datasets contains accurate concept labels—an assumption often violated in practice, which we show can significantly degrade performance (by 25% in some cases). To address this,
we introduce the Concept Preference Optimization (CPO) objective, a new loss function based
on Direct Preference Optimization, which effectively mitigates the negative impact of concept
mislabeling on CBM performance. We provide an
analysis on some key properties of the CPO objective showing it directly optimizes for the concept’s
posterior distribution, and contrast it against Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) where we show CPO
is inherently less sensitive to concept noise. We
empirically confirm our analysis finding that CPO
consistently outperforms BCE in three real-world
datasets with and without added label noise. We
make our code available on Github1 .

CBMs have emerged as a promising solution to the opacity
of traditional Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). By leveraging human-understandable concepts as intermediate representations during inference, CBMs can explain their predictions using high-level concepts (e.g., “has tail”, “has
whiskers”, etc.) relevant to their downstream task (e.g.,
“cat”). This hierarchical formulation enables experts interacting with a CBM at test time to intervene, or correct, a
mispredicted concept and trigger an update to the CBM’s
output prediction (Shin et al., 2023). With their intervenability (Marcinkevičs et al., 2024) and interpretability, CBMs
are ideal model candidates for high-stakes tasks where verifiability is paramount.
Although promising, CBMs come with a significant constraint: their training requires the set of correct concept
annotations for all samples. In practice, it is unrealistic
to assume that potentially a hundred concepts per datum
would be correctly labeled. As a point of reference, a recent
study concludes that 12% of the ImageNet-1K animal validation images have an incorrect label (and “some classes
having > 90% of images incorrect labels”) (Luccioni &
Rolnick, 2023). We might expect those percentages to be
even higher for concept labels. Further, within real-world
domains where CBMs are intended to be deployed, such as
healthcare, datasets are inherently noisy (Sylolypavan et al.,
2023) and plagued with subjective labels (Wei et al., 2024).
Additionally, regardless of the correctness of the labeled
data, the training pipeline of CBMs depends on data augmentations (e.g., random crops/flips, see Figure 1) that can
obscure concepts. Such a training pipeline makes some concept mislabelling inevitable in CBMs, potentially affecting
them even under optimal labels. Thus, developing CBMs
that are robust to concept-label noise can significantly enhance their usability in real-world tasks (even when task
labels are correct).

1. Introduction
It is a well-known adage, etched in the memory of any computing student, that “garbage in” leads to “garbage out.” Yet,
when designing new machine learning (ML) methods whose
success hinges on the availability of high-quality labeled
data, this consideration is usually left undiscussed. We
show that this oversight affects Concept Bottleneck Models
(CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020), a popular but label-hungry family of interpretable neural architectures, when trained with
mislabeled concepts. As a remedy, we propose a learning
*
Equal Supervision 1 Université de Montreal 2 Mila - Québec AI
Institute 3 HEC Montréal 4 University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Emiliano Penaloza <emiliano.penaloza@mila.quebec>.

In this work, we take inspiration from the field of Preference
Optimization (PO), which relaxes the assumption made in
traditional supervised ML that their training data is sampled
from the optimal data distribution. PO algorithms only
assume preference of the preferred training labels, rather

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/Emilianopp/ConceptPreferenceOptimization

1

