Categorical Distributional Reinforcement Learning
with Kullback-Leibler Divergence: Convergence and Asymptotics

Tyler Kastner 1 2 Mark Rowland 3 Yunhao Tang 4 † Murat A. Erdogdu 1 2 Amir-massoud Farahmand 5 6 1

Abstract

ing methods cast the return distribution prediction problem
as one of classification. These methods have proven performant in a variety of large-scale settings.

We study the problem of distributional reinforcement learning using categorical parametrisations
and a KL divergence loss. Previous work analyzing categorical distributional RL has done so
using a Cramér distance-based loss, simplifying
the analysis but creating a theory-practice gap.
We introduce a preconditioned version of the algorithm, and prove that it is guaranteed to converge. We further derive the asymptotic variance
of the categorical estimates under different learning rate regimes, and compare to that of classical
reinforcement learning. We finally empirically
validate our theoretical results and perform an empirical investigation into the relative strengths of
using KL losses, and derive a number of actionable insights for practitioners.

Theoretical convergence analysis has also been established
for categorical dynamic programming, and categorical
temporal-difference learning using the Cramér loss (Rowland et al., 2018; Boeck & Heitzinger, 2022; Peng et al.,
2024). However, most large-scale implementations of categorical temporal-difference learning use a KL loss, rather
than Cramér loss. This is a crucial detail of large-scale implementations, but has not yet been theoretically analysed.
In this work, we study categorical temporal-difference learning with KL loss (KL-CTD) as a fundamental tabular algorithm for reinforcement learning in its own right. In
Section 3, we present several empirical examples of intriguing behaviour of KL-CTD in comparison to classical TD
learning, motivating our study. We then go on in Section 4
to establish a connection between KL-CTD and distributional dynamic programming algorithms, which allow us
to characterise the long-term behaviour of KL-CTD conditional on its convergence. In Section 5, we study the question of convergence, and introduce a novel preconditioned
variant of KL-CTD. We then provide theory on the finergrained asymptotic fluctuations of value function estimates
produced by KL-based categorical distributional algorithms
in Section 6. Our results provide a variety of hypotheses
about the behaviour of KL-CTD, when we should expect
it to perform well relative to classical TD, and intuition on
how to set hyperparameters such as learning rate. We then
validate these hypotheses in a variety of experiments.

1. Introduction
The expected return is a core object in reinforcement learning, allowing for both the evaluation of an agent’s behaviour,
and providing a means of improving this behaviour (Sutton,
2018). The traditional approach to predicting the expected
return is to directly model it as a mean-prediction regression
problem. Distributional reinforcement learning algorithms
take a different approach, instead predicting the full probability distribution of the random return; the expected return
then emerges as a byproduct of this richer prediction. Agents
making use of distributional reinforcement learning have
enjoyed a variety of empirical successes (Bellemare et al.,
2017; Hessel et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019; Bodnar et al.,
2020; Wurman et al., 2022).

2. Background
We consider a Markov decision process (Puterman, 2014;
Sutton, 2018) with finite state space X , action space A,
transition matrix P ∈ RX ×A×X , reward kernel R :
X × A → P(R), and discount factor γ. We assume a fixed policy π : X → P(A), which gives
rise to the policy
P π ∈ RX ×X (where
P transition matrix
π ′
′
P (x |x) =
a∈A π(a|x)P (x |x, a)) and the policy reπ
ward
kernel
R
: X → P(R) (where Rπ (x) =
P
a∈A π(a|x)R(x, a)). The policy π induces a distri-

In particular, categorical distributional reinforcement learn1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Google DeepMind
Meta Platforms, Inc. † Work done while at Google Deepmind 5 Polytechnique Montréal 6 Mila. Correspondence to: Tyler
Kastner <tkastner@cs.toronto.edu>, Mark Rowland <markrowland@google.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

