ESPFormer: Doubly-Stochastic Attention with Expected Sliced Transport Plans

Ashkan Shahbazi 1 Elaheh Akbari 1 Darian Salehi 2 Xinran Liu 1 Navid NaderiAlizadeh 3 Soheil Kolouri 1 4

Abstract

highly expressive and context-rich representations that accurately capture the essence of input data (Khan et al., 2022).
Although first developed to perform Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, the Transformer architecture has been
adapted to a wide range of domains such as computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021a;b;
2022), graphs (Yun et al., 2019; Rampášek et al., 2022;
Shirzad et al., 2023), point clouds (Zhao et al., 2021; Qin
et al., 2022), and biological sequences (Jumper et al., 2021;
Abramson et al., 2024; Rives et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023;
Hayes et al., 2025). Over the years, a considerable amount
of research has been devoted to enhancing the classic Transformer, focusing on better positional encoding (Dwivedi
et al., 2021; Ying et al., 2021), efficiency of the attention
mechanisms (Wang et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2020),
and variants of self-attention (Hou et al., 2019; Ho et al.,
2019), among others.

While self-attention has been instrumental in the
success of Transformers, it can lead to overconcentration on a few tokens during training, resulting in suboptimal information flow. Enforcing
doubly-stochastic constraints in attention matrices has been shown to improve structure and balance in attention distributions. However, existing
methods rely on iterative Sinkhorn normalization,
which is computationally costly. In this paper,
we introduce a novel, fully parallelizable doublystochastic attention mechanism based on sliced
optimal transport, leveraging Expected Sliced
Transport Plans (ESP). Unlike prior approaches,
our method enforces doubly stochasticity without
iterative Sinkhorn normalization, significantly enhancing efficiency. To ensure differentiability, we
incorporate a temperature-based soft sorting technique, enabling seamless integration into deep
learning models. Experiments across multiple
benchmark datasets, including image classification, point cloud classification, sentiment analysis,
and neural machine translation, demonstrate that
our enhanced attention regularization consistently
improves performance across diverse applications.
Our implementation code can be found at https:
//github.com/dariansal/ESPFormer.

Self-attention produces a row-stochastic matrix, which can
lead to a few tokens dominating the attention distribution.
To mitigate this, enforcing doubly-stochastic attention ensures a more balanced distribution across tokens. To that
end, Sander et al. (2022) introduced Sinkformer, replacing the softmax normalization in the classic Transformer
with Sinkhorn’s algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1964), resulting in a
doubly-stochastic attention matrix. Sander et al. (2022) establish a connection between self-attention matrices and the
optimal transport problem by theoretically demonstrating
that Sinkformers can be interpreted as a Wasserstein gradient
flow for an energy minimization in the infinite depth limit.
Indeed, doubly stochastic attention can be interpreted as a
transport plan between queries and keys, further strengthening the connection between optimal transport and attention
mechanisms. Owing to their inherent doubly stochastic
structure, transport plans (i.e., couplings between keys and
queries) naturally serve as strong candidates for attention
matrices in this setting.

1. Introduction
The debut of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) marked a
turning point in artificial intelligence and machine learning.
Self-attention mechanisms excel at modeling the interactions among features, allowing Transformers to generate
1

Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA. 3 Department of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 4 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA. Correspondence to: Ashkan Shahbazi
<ashkan.shahbazi@vanderbilt.edu>.

Nevertheless, computing optimal transport plans between
keys and queries is computationally expensive, with a
general complexity of O(N 3 ) for N tokens. A more
scalable approach is entropy-regularized transport (Cuturi,
2013), which leverages the Sinkhorn algorithm to iteratively approximate the transport plan, obtaining a complexity O(SN 2 ), where S denotes the number of iterations. The
Sinkhorn algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1964), as used in Sinkform-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

