Improving Transformer World Models for Data-Efficient RL

Antoine Dedieu * 1 Joseph Ortiz * 1 Xinghua Lou 1 Carter Wendelken 1 J. Swaroop Guntupalli 1
Wolfgang Lehrach 1 Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla 1 Kevin Murphy 1

Abstract

Reward (%)

We present an approach to model-based RL that
achieves a new state of the art performance on the
challenging Craftax-classic benchmark, an openworld 2D survival game that requires agents to
exhibit a wide range of general abilities—such
as strong generalization, deep exploration, and
long-term reasoning. With a series of careful
design choices aimed at improving sample efficiency, our MBRL algorithm achieves a reward of
69.66% after only 1M environment steps, significantly outperforming DreamerV3, which achieves
53.2%, and, for the first time, exceeds human performance of 65.0%. Our method starts by constructing a SOTA model-free baseline, using a
novel policy architecture that combines CNNs and
RNNs. We then add three improvements to the
standard MBRL setup: (a) “Dyna with warmup”,
which trains the policy on real and imaginary
data, (b) “nearest neighbor tokenizer” on image
patches, which improves the scheme to create the
transformer world model (TWM) inputs, and (c)
“block teacher forcing”, which allows the TWM
to reason jointly about the future tokens of the
next timestep.

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Human expert
Iris
-Iris
Our DreamerV3
Previous best MFRL
Our best MFRL
Our best MBRL (slow)

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Environment steps

0.8

1.0

1e6

Figure 1: Reward on Craftax-classic. Our best MBRL
and MFRL agents outperform all the previously published
MFRL and MBRL results, and for the first time, surpass the
reward achieved by a human expert. We display published
methods which report the reward at 1M steps with horizontal line from 900k to 1M steps.
Model-based RL (MBRL) aims to reduce the amount of data
needed to train the policy by also learning a world model
(WM), and using this WM to plan “in imagination”.
To evaluate sample-efficient RL algorithms, it is common to
use the Atari-100k benchmark (Kaiser et al., 2019). However, although the benchmark encompasses a variety of
skills (memory, planning, etc), each individual game typically only emphasizes one or two such skills. To promote
the development of agents with broader capabilities, we
focus on the Crafter domain (Hafner, 2021), a 2D version of
Minecraft that challenges a single agent to master a diverse
skill set. Specifically, we use the Craftax-classic environment (Matthews et al., 2024), a fast, near-replica of Crafter,
implemented in JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). Key features of
Craftax-classic include: (a) procedurally generated stochastic environments (at each episode the agent encounters a
new environment sampled from a common distribution); (b)
partial observability, as the agent only sees a 63 × 63 pixel
image representing a local view of the agent’s environment,
plus a visualization of its inventory (see Figure 2[left]); and
(c) an achievement hierarchy that defines a sparse reward
signal, requiring deep and broad exploration.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) provides a framework for training agents to act in environments
so as to maximize their rewards. Online RL algorithms
interleave taking actions in the environment—collecting observations and rewards—and updating the policy using the
collected experience. Online RL algorithms often employ
a model-free approach (MFRL), where the agent learns a
direct mapping from observations to actions, but this can
require a lot of data to be collected from the environment.
*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Antoine Dedieu <adedieu@google.com>, Joseph Ortiz <joeortiz@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we study improvements to MBRL methods,
based on transformer world models (TWM), in the context
1

