Optimization Proxies using Limited Labeled Data and Training Time
– A Semi-Supervised Bayesian Neural Network Approach

Parikshit Pareek 1 Abhijith Jayakumar 2 Kaarthik Sundar 2 Sidhant Misra 2 Deepjyoti Deka 3

Abstract

considerable efforts to solve optimization problems using
deep neural networks (DNNs) (Khadivi et al., 2025; Kotary
et al., 2021; Fajemisin et al., 2024). The idea of learning
input-to-output mappings has been explored via supervised
and unsupervised methods, particularly in power system
applications (Zamzam & Baker, 2020; Donti et al., 2021;
Park & Van Hentenryck, 2023; Fioretto et al., 2020; Kotary et al., 2021; Rolnick et al., 2022a; Piloto et al., 2024).
Additionally, constraint penalization approaches have been
proposed to enforce feasibility in predicted outputs within
DNN loss functions (AI4OPT, 2023).

Constrained optimization problems arise in various engineering systems such as inventory management and power grids. Standard deep neural
network (DNN) based machine learning proxies
are ineffective in practical settings where labeled
data is scarce and training times are limited. We
propose a semi-supervised Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) based optimization proxy for this
complex regime, wherein training commences in
a sandwiched fashion, alternating between a supervised learning step for minimizing cost, and
an unsupervised learning step for enforcing constraint feasibility. We show that the proposed
semi-supervised BNN outperforms DNN architectures on important non-convex constrained optimization problems from energy network operations, achieving up to a tenfold reduction in expected maximum equality gap and halving the
inequality gaps. Further, the BNN’s ability to provide posterior samples is leveraged to construct
practically meaningful probabilistic confidence
bounds on performance using a limited validation
data, unlike prior methods.

Supervised DNN models rely on labeled datasets obtained
by solving numerous ( 104 or more) instances of optimization problems. This data generation step poses a significant
limitation due to prohibitive computational times required
for moderate to large problem instances, particularly if the
system topology and other parameters change over time.
For example, (Park & Van Hentenryck, 2023) report that
generating labeled data for a medium-sized power grid problem takes over three hours1 . Unsupervised methods aim to
address the labeled data generation issue (Donti et al., 2021;
Park & Van Hentenryck, 2023); however, they often have
high training time requirements, particularly due to the use
of projection/correction steps to ensure feasibility within the
framework (Donti et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2022; Zamzam
& Baker, 2020). Moreover, unsupervised methods still require large number of labeled data to perform validation
and provide confidence bounds on error with respect to true
solution.

1. Introduction
Constrained optimization problems are fundamental in the
optimal operation of various engineering systems, such as
supply chains, transportation networks, and power grids.
Learning a forward mapping between the inputs and outputs
of these problems can significantly reduce computational
burdens, especially when rapid solutions are required, such
as in electricity markets or real-time transportation planning.

Thus, it is important to note that practical performance
of ML based optimization proxies needs to be qualified
under constraints of both : (a) Total Labeled Data
(training + validation), and (b) Training time.
This is true in the context of bi-level optimization problems
such as in power grid planning where ML proxies may serve
as subroutines to simulate decision-making processes for
given first-level decisions (Ibrahim et al., 2020). Here, ML
models must be adaptable in both training and validation
to changing problem inputs and parameters. Minimizing
or limiting both the time and data required for learning
input/output mappings in optimization problems is thus cru-

Recent advancements in machine learning (ML) have led to
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India 2 Los Alamos National Laboratory, NM,
USA 3 MIT Energy Initiative, MIT, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Parikshit Pareek <pareek@ee.iitr.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

See Table 4 in (Park & Van Hentenryck, 2023).

