Zero-shot Meta-learning for Tabular Prediction Tasks
with Adversarially Pre-trained Transformer

Yulun Wu 1 Doron L. Bergman 2

patible with, and drawn from, the same distribution as the
datasets it was previously trained on. Even in transfer learning, where the target of the model is changed, the input is at
most expanded, but at least overlaps heavily with the data
distribution that the model has previously seen in training.
This is in contrast with meta learning (Finn et al., 2017;
Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Lemke et al., 2015; Vanschoren,
2018; Feurer et al., 2022; Hospedales et al., 2021; Zintgraf
et al., 2021), where a model is trained to be adaptive to new
datasets such that few gradient updates or fine-tuning are
needed, instead of training a new model specialized to every
distinct dataset from scratch. In meta learning, rather than
modeling a specific dataset, the model is trained to learn
how to learn. This has multiple advantages. First, meta
learning is highly adaptable (Huisman et al., 2021; Finn
et al., 2017; Frans & Witkowski, 2021) – it learns more generalized representations that can be adapted to new tasks and
different domains. Second, meta learning makes efficient
use of data (Finn et al., 2017; Gevaert, 2021) – it supports
learning from just a few samples. Third, as a consequence
of its efficient use of (small) data, the model can reach a
point where it is able to make meaningful predictions very
quickly (Vanschoren, 2018).

Abstract
We present an Adversarially Pre-trained Transformer (APT) that is able to perform zero-shot
meta-learning on tabular prediction tasks without
pre-training on any real-world dataset, extending on the recent development of Prior-Data Fitted Networks (PFNs) and TabPFN. Specifically,
APT is pre-trained with adversarial synthetic data
agents, who continue to shift their underlying data
generating distribution and deliberately challenge
the model with different synthetic datasets. In
addition, we propose a mixture block architecture
that is able to handle classification tasks with arbitrary number of classes, addressing the class
size limitation – a crucial weakness of prior deep
tabular zero-shot learners. In experiments, we
show that our framework matches state-of-the-art
performance on small classification tasks without
filtering on dataset characteristics such as number
of classes and number of missing values, while
maintaining an average runtime under one second.
On common benchmark dataset suites in both classification and regression, we show that adversarial
pre-training was able to enhance TabPFN’s performance. In our analysis, we demonstrate that the
adversarial synthetic data agents were able to generate a more diverse collection of data compared
to the ordinary random generator in TabPFN. In
addition, we demonstrate that our mixture block
neural design has improved generalizability and
greatly accelerated pre-training.

In prior work, Verma et al. (2020) discussed the notion of
zero-shot meta-learning. They train a generative adversarial
network conditioned on class attributes, that can generate
novel (previously unseen) class samples. This relies on the
inputs present in the training data (class attributes) to be
indicative of the new unseen classes. While they do not use
gradient updates on the unseen data for prediction, they rely
on the input data coming at the very least from a very similar
distribution to that of the training data. The scope of problems this work aims to address is pristine zero-shot meta
learning: given an unseen dataset from an unseen task after
the model is pre-trained and deployed, can we do prediction
on this dataset without training the model on it? Specifically, with zero gradient update on the model, and with no
reliance on the context similarity between this dataset and
the datasets that the model was pre-trained on. Note that
this concept of zero-shot is slightly different from that in
large vision and language models (Mann et al., 2020; Perez
et al., 2021; Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021; Cahyawijaya et al.,
2024; Ahmed & Devanbu, 2022) – the unseen datasets can

1. Introduction
In standard deep learning workflows, models are either
trained per dataset, or employed on data in a form com1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Capital One. Correspondence to: Yulun Wu <yulun wu@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

