LASER: Attention with Exponential Transformation

Sai Surya Duvvuri 1 Inderjit S. Dhillon 2

Abstract
Transformers have had tremendous impact for several sequence related tasks, largely due to their
ability to retrieve from any part of the sequence
via softmax based dot-product attention. This
mechanism plays a crucial role in Transformer’s
performance. We analyze the gradients backpropagated through the softmax operation in the attention mechanism and observe that these gradients
can often be small. This poor gradient signal
backpropagation can lead to inefficient learning
of parameters preceeding the attention operations.
To this end, we introduce a new attention mechanism called LASER, which we analytically show
to admit a larger gradient signal. We show that
LASER attention can be implemented by making
small modifications to existing attention implementations. We conduct experiments on autoregressive large language models (LLMs) with upto
7.7 billion parameters with an average improvement of upto 1.44% over standard attention on
downstream evaluations and 1.65% finetuning improvements. Additionally, LASER demonstrates
generalization performance improvement across
a variety of tasks (vision, text and speech):Vision
Transformer (ViT) on Imagenet, Conformer on
the Librispeech speech-to-text and BERT with 2.2
billion parameters.

Figure 1. Backpropagating gradients through the softmax operation in the attention mechanism requires scaling with the Jacobian
of softmax. We show that this Jacobian scales with attention
probabilities/weights, which are typically small in large language
models (LLMs) with about 80% of the probabilties less than 10−3
and about 20% less than 10−7 . We propose LASER attention
that involves conducting dot-product attention with an exp(·)transformed value matrix V , i.e., conducting attention on exp(V ).
We show that LASER admits a larger Jacobian, is easier to implement and does not require any change to the underlying attention
function, which may have a more nuanced implementation (e.g.,
FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022)). In the image, exp(.) and log(.)
are element-wise operations.

problem (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; Bengio et al., 1994).
The attention mechanism plays a key role in Transformers, where different weights or probabilities are assigned
to token representations in a sequence, indicating their relative importance, and these weights are computed via a
softmax function (Vaswani et al., 2017). The Transformer
architecture consists of multiple stacked layers comprising
attention mechanism, where each layer operates on the output of the previous one, forming the Transformer encoder
or decoder. Learning within a neural network is performed
via gradient backpropagation, wherein gradients propagate
backward through the network layer by layer using the chain
rule (LeCun et al., 2002). During backpropagation, gradient
magnitudes tend to diminish, resulting in a weaker gradient
signal reaching the bottom layers and inefficient learning,
which is called as vanishing gradient problem (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010; Bengio et al., 1994). Residual connections
(He et al., 2016) are used in Transformers so that gradients
can bypass the layers via skip connections during backpropagation to improve the gradient magnitude for bottom

1. Introduction
Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017) have gained
prominence over traditional models like LSTMs (LongShort-Term-Memory) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997)
for various sequence-based tasks due to their ability to better capture long-range dependencies (Gemini, 2024; MetaAI, 2024) without suffering from the vanishing gradient
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas
at Austin 2 Google. Correspondence to: Sai Surya Duvvuri
<saisurya@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

