Retraining with Predicted Hard Labels Provably Increases Model Accuracy

Rudrajit Das * 1 Inderjit S Dhillon 2 3 Alessandro Epasto 1 Adel Javanmard 1 4 Jieming Mao 1 Vahab Mirrokni 1
Sujay Sanghavi 3 Peilin Zhong 1

Abstract

discriminative model M (for a classification problem) on
a dataset of n samples and noisy label pairs {(xj , ŷj )}nj=1 .
Let θ̂0 be the final learned weight/checkpoint of M and let
ỹj = M(θ̂0 , xj ) be the current checkpoint’s predicted hard
label for sample xj . Now, we propose to retrain M with
the ỹj ’s in one of the following two ways:

The performance of a model trained with noisy
labels is often improved by simply retraining the
model with its own predicted hard labels (i.e.,
1/0 labels). Yet, a detailed theoretical characterization of this phenomenon is lacking. In this
paper, we theoretically analyze retraining in a linearly separable binary classification setting with
randomly corrupted labels given to us and prove
that retraining can improve the population accuracy obtained by initially training with the given
(noisy) labels. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first such theoretical result. Retraining finds
application in improving training with local label
differential privacy (DP), which involves training
with noisy labels. We empirically show that retraining selectively on the samples for which the
predicted label matches the given label significantly improves label DP training at no extra privacy cost; we call this consensus-based retraining.
For example, when training ResNet-18 on CIFAR100 with ϵ = 3 label DP, we obtain more than 6%
improvement in accuracy with consensus-based
retraining.

1

(i) Full retraining: Retrain M with {(xj , ỹj )}nj=1 , i.e.,
retrain M with the predicted labels of all the samples.
(ii) Consensus-based retraining: Define Scons ∶= {j ∈
{1, . . . , n} ∣ ỹj = ŷj } to be the set of samples for
which the predicted label matches the given noisy label; we call this the consensus set. Retrain M with
{(xj , ỹj )}j∈Scons , i.e., retrain M with the predicted labels of only the consensus set.
Intuitively, retraining with predicted hard labels can be beneficial when the underlying classes are “well-separated”. In
such a case, the model can potentially correctly predict the
labels of many samples in the training set far away from the
decision boundary which were originally incorrectly labeled
and presented to it. As a result, the model’s accuracy (w.r.t.
the actual labels) on the training data can be significantly
higher than the accuracy of the noisy labels presented to
it. Hence, retraining with predicted labels can potentially
improve the model’s performance. This intuition is illustrated in Figure 1 where we consider a separable binary
classification problem with noisy labels. The exact details
are in Appendix A but importantly, Figures 1a and 1b correspond to versions of this problem with “large” and “small”
separation, respectively. Please see the figure caption for detailed discussion but in summary, Figure 1 shows us that the
success of retraining depends on the degree of separation
between the classes.

Introduction

We study the simple idea of retraining an already trained
model with its own predicted hard labels (i.e., 1/0 labels
and not the raw probabilities) when the given labels with
which the model is initially trained are noisy. This is a simple yet effective way to boost a model’s performance in the
presence of noisy labels. More formally, suppose we train a
*

Work done while Rudrajit was a PhD student at the University of Texas at Austin and student researcher at Google Research. 1 Google Research 2 Google 3 University of Texas at
Austin 4 University of Southern California. Correspondence
to: Rudrajit Das <dasrudrajit@google.com>, Alessandro Epasto
<aepasto@google.com>, Adel Javanmard <ajavanma@usc.edu>.

The motivation for consensus-based retraining is that matching the predicted and given labels can potentially yield a
smaller but much more accurate subset compared to the
entire set; such a filtering effect can further improve the
model’s performance. As we show in Section 5 (see Tables
3 and 11), this intuition bears out in practice.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

There are plenty of ideas revolving around training a model
with its own predictions, the two most common ones being
1

