RobustZero: Enhancing MuZero Reinforcement Learning Robustness
to State Perturbations
Yushuai Li 1 Hengyu Liu 1 Torben Bach Pedersen 1 Yuqiang He 2 Kim Guldstrand Larsen 1 Lu Chen 3
Christian S. Jensen 1 Jiachen Xu 1 Tianyi Li 1

Abstract

2022), transportation (Sun et al., 2023), and healthcare (Hao
et al., 2022). In DRL, an agent interacts repeatedly with an
environment: The agent receives a state update, or an observation, along with a reward; in response, the agent takes
an action that in turn yields a new state update and reward.
The objective of DRL is to achieve an agent that is able to
optimize the cumulative reward. Model-free DRL has the
strength of straightforwardly estimating the optimal policy
or value that is used to evaluate the policy, without knowing
the environment’s dynamics. However, model-free DRL
suffers from low sample efficiency and lacks sophisticated
look-ahead capabilities. Model-based DRL is capable of
addressing these weaknesses. However, most model-based
DRL methods, e.g., AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016) and AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017), require prior knowledge of
the environment’s dynamics, which restricts their applicability. To relax this requirement, MuZero (Schrittwieser et al.,
2020) learns an abstract environment model in combination with Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS). In this sense,
MuZero has the strengths of model-free and model-based
DRL and therefore has attracted broad attention (Hubert
et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2021; Danihelka et al., 2022; Niu
et al., 2024; Xuan et al., 2024).

The MuZero reinforcement learning method has
achieved superhuman performance at games, and
advances that enable MuZero to contend with
complex actions now enable use of MuZero-class
methods in real-world decision-making applications. However, some real-world applications are
susceptible to state perturbations caused by malicious attacks and noisy sensors. To enhance
the robustness of MuZero-class methods to state
perturbations, we propose RobustZero, the first
MuZero-class method that is robust to worst-case
and random-case state perturbations, with zero
prior knowledge of the environment’s dynamics.
We present a training framework for RobustZero
that features a self-supervised representation network, targeting the generation of a consistent initial hidden state, which is key to obtain consistent
policies before and after state perturbations, and
it features a unique loss function that facilitates
robustness. We present an adaptive adjustment
mechanism to enable model update, enhancing
robustness to both worst-case and random-case
state perturbations. Experiments on two classical
control environments, three energy system environments, three transportation environments, and
four Mujoco environments demonstrate that RobustZero can outperform state-of-the-art methods
at defending against state perturbations.

The superhuman performance achieved by MuZero-class
methods assumes real and unperturbed states. However, in
real-world applications, the observed states may undergo
imperceptible perturbations. Even a small “reality gap”
can compound errors in the predicted abstract states within
MuZero-class methods, causing reduced rewards and potentially harmful decision-making1 . To date, no studies
have been reported that address this problem. To improve
robustness, we address two challenges.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved notable
successes in numerous domains, e.g., energy (Wang et al.,

Challenge I: How to achieve robust training for MuZeroclass methods under state perturbations? The current robust training proposals for DRL focus mainly on designing
strategies to: 1) minimize balanced nominal and adversarial
losses (Pinto et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020a; Oikarinen
et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2022); 2) minimize the crossentropy/KL-divergence policy or value loss between ac-

1

Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark 2 School of Computer, Electronics and Information,
Guangxi University, Nanning, China 3 College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Tianyi Li <tianyi@cs.aau.dk>, Hengyu Liu <heli@cs.aau.dk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Appendix A provides an example to illustrate the importance
of considering state perturbations.

1

