Balancing Efficiency and Expressiveness:
Subgraph GNNs with Walk-Based Centrality

Joshua Southern * 1 Yam Eitan 2 Guy Bar-Shalom 2 Michael M. Bronstein 3 4 Haggai Maron 2 5
Fabrizio Frasca * 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Gori
et al., 2005; Micheli, 2009) have achieved great success in
learning tasks with graph-structured data. Typically, GNNs
are based on the message passing paradigm (Gilmer et al.,
2017), in which node features are aggregated over their
local neighborhood recursively, resulting in architectures
known as Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs).
MPNNs have been shown to suffer from limited expressive
power: they are bounded by 1-WL (Xu et al., 2018; Geerts
& Reutter, 2023; Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968; Morris et al.,
2019; 2023) cannot count certain substructures (Chen et al.,
2020; Bouritsas et al., 2022; Tahmasebi et al., 2020) or solve
graph bi-connectivity tasks (Zhang et al., 2023b).

Subgraph GNNs have emerged as promising architectures that overcome the expressiveness limitations of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) by
processing bags of subgraphs. Despite their compelling empirical performance, these methods are
afflicted by a high computational complexity: they
process bags whose size grows linearly in the
number of nodes, hindering their applicability to
larger graphs. In this work, we propose an effective and easy-to-implement approach to dramatically alleviate the computational cost of Subgraph GNNs and unleash broader applications
thereof. Our method, dubbed HyMN, leverages
walk-based centrality measures to sample a small
number of relevant subgraphs and drastically reduce the bag size. By drawing a connection to
perturbation analysis, we highlight the strength
of the proposed centrality-based subgraph sampling, and further prove that these walk-based
centralities can be additionally used as Structural
Encodings for improved discriminative power. A
comprehensive set of experimental results demonstrates that HyMN provides an effective synthesis
of expressiveness, efficiency, and downstream performance, unlocking the application of Subgraph
GNNs to dramatically larger graphs. Not only
does our method outperform more sophisticated
subgraph sampling approaches, it is also competitive, and sometimes better, than other state-of-theart approaches for a fraction of their runtime.

Recently, Subgraph GNNs (Bevilacqua et al., 2021; Frasca
et al., 2022; Zhang & Li, 2021; Cotta et al., 2021) have
been proposed to overcome some of the expressivity limitations of MPNNs. This approach preserves equivariance
while relying less on feature engineering. First, a Subgraph
GNN transforms a graph into a “bag of subgraphs” based
on a specific selection policy. These subgraphs are then
processed by an equivariant architecture and aggregated to
make graph- or node-level predictions. One common approach to generate subgraphs, known as node-marking, is
to mark a single node in the graph (Papp & Wattenhofer,
2022). In this case, each subgraph is then “tied” to a specific
node in the original graph, and a shared MPNN generates a
representation for each subgraph.
In general, Subgraph GNNs show good empirical performance but come with a high computational cost. For a
graph of N nodes and a maximum degree dmax , then Subgraph GNNs with node-marking based policies have a computational complexity O(N 2 · dmax ). To reduce computational complexity, it was suggested sampling subgraphs
randomly (Bevilacqua et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022) or,
more recently, learning sampling policies (Qian et al., 2022;
Bevilacqua et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2024). However,
while random approaches have been shown to be suboptimal (Bevilacqua et al., 2024; Bar-Shalom et al., 2024b),
learnable policies are difficult to train in practice and become impractical when sampling a larger number of sub-

*

Equal technical contribution 1 Imperial College London
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 3 University of Oxford 4 AITHYRA 5 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to:
Joshua Southern <jks17@ic.ac.uk>, Fabrizio Frasca <fabriziof@campus.technion.ac.il>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

