Semantic Shift Estimation via Dual-Projection and Classifier Reconstruction for
Exemplar-Free Class-Incremental Learning

Run He 1 Di Fang 1 Yicheng Xu 2 Yawen Cui 3 Ming Li 4 Cen Chen 1 Ziqian Zeng 1 Huiping Zhuang 1

Abstract

(a) Semantic Shift in Embedding Space

Exemplar-Free Class-Incremental Learning (EFCIL) aims to sequentially learn from distinct categories without retaining exemplars but easily
suffers from catastrophic forgetting of learned
knowledge. While existing EFCIL methods leverage knowledge distillation to alleviate forgetting,
they still face two critical challenges: semantic
shift and decision bias. Specifically, the embeddings of old tasks shift in the embedding space
after learning new tasks, and the classifier becomes biased towards new tasks due to training
solely with new data, hindering the balance between old and new knowledge. To address these
issues, we propose the Dual-Projection Shift Estimation and Classifier Reconstruction (DPCR)
approach for EFCIL. DPCR effectively estimates
semantic shift through a dual-projection, which
combines a learnable transformation with a rowspace projection to capture both task-wise and
category-wise shifts. Furthermore, to mitigate
decision bias, DPCR employs ridge regression
to reformulate a classifier reconstruction process.
This reconstruction exploits previous in covariance and prototype of each class after calibration
with estimated shift, thereby reducing decision
bias. Extensive experiments demonstrate that, on
various datasets, DPCR effectively balances old
and new tasks, outperforming state-of-the-art EFCIL methods. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/RHe502/ICML25-DPCR.

(b) Decision Bias towards New Tasks

Emebddings of new task
Emebddings of old task
Emebddings of old task
extracted by old backbone extracted by new backbone extracted by new backbone
Decision boundaries
Semantic shift

Figure 1. After learning new tasks, (a) the embeddings of old tasks
undergo semantic shift in embedding space, (b) and the embeddings are more likely to be classified as new classes.

ner. This paradigm addresses that data is only accessible at
specific times or locations, facilitating the accumulation of
machine intelligence in dynamic real-world scenarios. However, CIL encounters the challenge of catastrophic forgetting
(CF) (Belouadah et al., 2021), where the model rapidly loses
previous knowledge when acquiring new information. To
address forgetting, exemplar-based CIL (EBCIL) (Hou et al.,
2019; Zheng et al., 2024; Bian et al., 2024) stores a portion
of previous data as exemplars for replaying. However, this
method may be limited by privacy concerns or storage capacity constraints. By contrast, Exemplar-free CIL (EFCIL),
which does not store previous samples (Rypeść et al., 2024;
Masana et al., 2023), is more applicable in practical situations.
Recent EFCIL approaches mainly leverage knowledge distillation to mitigate CF (Li & Hoiem, 2017; Feng et al., 2022;
Gao et al., 2024a). However, their performance can be constrained by two key challenges: semantic shift in learned
representations caused by incremental updates to the backbone, and decision bias in classifier training due to the
absence of historical data (see Figure 1). These challenges
lead to stability-plasticity dilemma (Mermillod et al., 2013),
where the model struggles to balance preserving old knowledge (stability) with acquiring new knowledge (plasticity).
Specifically, when adapting the backbone to new tasks, the
embeddings of old classes inevitably shift in the embedding
space (Yu et al., 2020), reducing the compatibility of updated representations with previously learned classes and
thus compromising stability (Zhu et al., 2021a). Meanwhile,
updating the classifier via iterative back-propagation (BP)
without access to previous data often results in a prefer-

1. Introduction
Class-incremental learning (CIL) (Zhou et al., 2024; Rebuffi
et al., 2017) enables models to acquire knowledge from
distinct categories arriving sequentially in a task-wise man1
South China University of Technology 2 Institute of Science
Tokyo 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 4 Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ). Correspondence to: Huiping Zhuang <hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

