One-Shot Heterogeneous Federated Learning with
Local Model-Guided Diffusion Models
Mingzhao Yang 1 Shangchao Su 1 Bin Li∗ 1 Xiangyang Xue 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

In recent years, One-shot Federated Learning
(OSFL) methods based on Diffusion Models
(DMs) have garnered increasing attention due to
their remarkable performance. However, most of
these methods require the deployment of foundation models on client devices, which significantly raises the computational requirements and
reduces their adaptability to heterogeneous client
models. In this paper, we propose FedLMG, a heterogeneous one-shot Federated learning method
with Local Model-Guided diffusion models. In
our method, clients do not need access to any foundation models but only train and upload their local
models, which is consistent with traditional FL
methods. On the clients, we employ classification
loss and batch normalization loss to capture the
broad category features and detailed contextual
features of the client distributions. On the server,
based on the uploaded client models, we utilize
backpropagation to guide the server’s DM in generating synthetic datasets that comply with the
client distributions, which are then used to train
the aggregated model. By using the local models as a medium to transfer client knowledge, our
method significantly reduces the computational
requirements on client devices and effectively
adapts to scenarios with heterogeneous clients.
Extensive quantitation and visualization experiments on three large-scale real-world datasets,
along with theoretical analysis, demonstrate that
the synthetic datasets generated by FedLMG exhibit comparable quality and diversity to the client
datasets, which leads to an aggregated model that
outperforms all compared methods and even the
performance ceiling, further elucidating the significant potential of utilizing DMs in FL.

Federated learning (FL) (Mammen, 2021) has gained increasing attention recently. Standard FL relies on frequent
communication between the server and clients. With the
growing adoption of AI models by individual users, the
application scenarios of FL have expanded significantly, including mobile photo album categorization and autonomous
driving (Nguyen et al., 2022; Fantauzzo et al., 2022). However, in these scenarios, the substantial communication cost
associated with FL is often impractical for individual users.
As a result, one-shot FL (OSFL) has emerged as a solution (Li et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020). OSFL aims to
establish the aggregated model within a single communication round. Currently, mainstream OSFL methods can
be categorized into four types: 1) Methods using the auxiliary dataset (Guha et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a; Lin et al.,
2020). 2) Methods training generators (Zhang et al., 2022;
Heinbaugh et al., 2022). 3) Methods transferring auxiliary
information (Zhou et al., 2020; Su et al., 2023). 4) Methods
based on DMs (Yang et al., 2024a;b; Zhang et al., 2023a).
However, existing methods are hard to apply in real-world
scenarios due to the following reasons: 1) Collecting public
datasets that comply with all client distribution is impractical, owing to privacy concerns and data diversity issues.
2) Due to the limited computational power and data of the
clients, training generators on realistic client images is challenging. So most OSFL methods can only be applied to
small-scale toy datasets, such as MNIST and CIFAR10. 3)
The transmission of auxiliary information incurs communication cost, and extracting the auxiliary information on the
clients also incurs additional computation cost, further restricting the practicality of OSFL. 4) Current OSFL methods
that leverage DMs necessitate the deployment of foundation models on the clients (Yang et al., 2024a; Zhang et al.,
2023a), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and BLIP (Li
et al., 2023), or directly involve client training of diffusion
models (Yang et al., 2024b), leading to significant communication and computational costs. In comparison to widely
used traditional FL methods, which only require local training of client models, these additional burdens imposed by
OSFL methods significantly increase the strain on client
resources, thereby limiting their practical applicability.

1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University. Correspondence to: Bin Li <libin@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

