PAC-Bayes Analysis for Recalibration in Classification

Masahiro Fujisawa * 1 2 Futoshi Futami * 1 2

Abstract

evaluates the disparity between the predicted probability of a
model and the conditional probability of the label frequency
given by the model prediction. Analytically computing
the TCE is, however, challenging because the conditional
probabilities of the labels are intractable. Among various
methods proposed to address this issue, constructing its estimator called the expected calibration error (ECE) using
uniform-width binning (UWB) (Zadrozny and Elkan, 2001;
Naeini et al., 2015) is one of the most widely adopted. This
study centers on this approach.

Nonparametric estimation using uniform-width
binning is a standard approach for evaluating the
calibration performance of machine learning models. However, existing theoretical analyses of the
bias induced by binning are limited to binary classification, creating a significant gap with practical applications such as multiclass classification.
Additionally, many parametric recalibration algorithms lack theoretical guarantees for their generalization performance. To address these issues,
we conduct a generalization analysis of calibration error using the probably approximately correct Bayes framework. This approach enables us
to derive the first optimizable upper bound for generalization error in the calibration context. On the
basis of our theory, we propose a generalizationaware recalibration algorithm. Numerical experiments show that our algorithm enhances the performance of Gaussian process-based recalibration
across various benchmark datasets and models.

If the ECE is small, we consider the model well-calibrated
and its predictions highly reliable. Unfortunately, as has
already been made evident in recent studies, models such
as neural networks are not necessarily well-calibrated (Guo
et al., 2017). If a model shows poor calibration performance,
it is common to apply a post-processing technique known as
recalibration (Guo et al., 2017; Zadrozny and Elkan, 2001).
This technique adjusts predicted probabilities using a recalibration function—a parametric function trained separately
from the original model—on a dataset independent of both
training and test data. Recalibration aims to train a separate
function that, when composed with the original predictor,
yields a low ECE. Numerous methodologies have been proposed recently, including temperature scaling (Guo et al.,
2017) and recalibration based on variational inference (VI)
with a Gaussian process (GP) (Wenger et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Increasing the reliability of machine learning models is crucial in risk-sensitive applications such as autonomous driving (Chen et al., 2015). Recently, the concept of calibration
has become a significant measure of reliability, especially
in classification tasks. In this context, the calibration performance is evaluated by how well predictive probabilities
provided by our model align with the actual frequency of
true labels. A close correspondence between them indicates
that the model is well-calibrated (Dawid, 1982; Widmann
et al., 2021). To evaluate the calibration performance, a
calibration error (Gupta and Ramdas, 2021; Roelofs et al.,
2022) such as the top-label calibration error (TCE) (Kumar
et al., 2019; Gruber and Buettner, 2022) is often used. This

Given that the ECE is an estimator of the TCE, it is important for reliable uncertainty evaluation to understand the
extent of bias introduced between them before and after
recalibration. Nevertheless, the theoretical understanding
of this remains limited. In the context of bias analysis before recalibration, many studies have focused exclusively
on binary classification and have shown that the number of
bins used in binning significantly affects both the estimated
ECE and the bias (Gupta and Ramdas, 2021; Sun et al.,
2023; Futami and Fujisawa, 2024). Such insights remain
unclear in the multiclass classification context. Moreover,
regularization techniques have been proposed to reduce the
ECE on training data (Kumar et al., 2018; Popordanoska
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021a). However, a low ECE on
training data does not guarantee a similar low TCE. Verifying this requires a theoretical analysis of the gap between
these, which, to our knowledge, has not yet been explored.

*
Equal contribution 1 The University of Osaka, Osaka, Japan
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan.
Correspondence to: Masahiro Fujisawa <fujisawa@ist.osakau.ac.jp>, Futoshi Futami <futami.futoshi.es@osaka-u.ac.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

