Mastering Board Games by External and Internal Planning
with Language Models

John Schultz * 1 Jakub Adamek * 1 Matej Jusup * † 2 Marc Lanctot 1 Michael Kaisers 1 Sarah Perrin 1
Daniel Hennes 1 Jeremy Shar 1 Cannada Lewis 3 Anian Ruoss 1 Tom Zahavy 1 Petar Veličković 1
Laurel Prince 1 Satinder Singh 1 Eric Malmi ** 1 Nenad Tomašev ** 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

While large language models (LLMs) perform fluently on
text generation, language understanding and translation,
they are prone to hallucinations and reasoning errors, especially in complex contexts (Chang et al., 2024; Hadi et al.,
2023). Hence, special attention has been given to the development of planning and reasoning capabilities in LLMs (Minaee et al., 2024). In terms of Kahneman’s cognitive theory
of two systems (Kahneman, 2011), prior work primarily improved associative System 1 inference in language models,
whereas planning and reasoning now focuses on improving
the more deliberate System 2 thinking (Plaat et al., 2024).

Advancing planning and reasoning capabilities of
Large Language Models (LLMs) is one of the key
prerequisites towards unlocking their potential
for performing reliably in complex and impactful domains. In this paper, we aim to demonstrate this across board games (Chess, Fischer
Random / Chess960, Connect Four, and Hex),
and we show that search-based planning can yield
significant improvements in LLM game-playing
strength. We introduce, compare and contrast two
major approaches: In external search, the model
guides Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) rollouts and evaluations without calls to an external
game engine, and in internal search, the model
is trained to generate in-context a linearized tree
of search and a resulting final choice. Both build
on a language model pre-trained on relevant domain knowledge, reliably capturing the transition and value functions in the respective environments, with minimal hallucinations. We evaluate our LLM search implementations against
game-specific state-of-the-art engines, showcasing substantial improvements in strength over the
base model, and reaching Grandmaster-level performance in chess while operating closer to the
human search budget. Our proposed approach,
combining search with domain knowledge, is not
specific to board games, hinting at more general
future applications.

Planning and reasoning approaches typically fall into one
of two distinct categories: In internal planning the LLM
develops a plan in context, like Chain-of-Thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022), by autoregressively considering possible steps towards the goal and their consequences. By
contrast, external planning uses the LLM to generate steps
in a neurosymbolic system, such as in Tree of Thought (Yao
et al., 2024), where an outer loop performs explicit search
over possible sequences of steps. This paper presents
how language models can be trained for internal and external planning to improve reasoning in sequential decisionmaking, using board games as an experimental domain.
Board games have historically played an important role in
the development of automated decision-making, with Torres’ automaton El Ajedrecista playing three-piece chess endgames before the advent of digital computation (tor, November 1915). Games provide diverse reasoning challenges
about both environment dynamics and opponent strategies,
and thus have gained significant attention in pushing the
boundaries of LLM reasoning capabilities (Hu et al., 2024b;
Costarelli et al., 2024; Duan et al., 2024). LLMs have incidentally been struggling with reliably playing common
board games, like chess or even tic-tac-toe (Topsakal &
Harper, 2024). This may seem somewhat surprising, considering how much headway has been made in other areas.
However, as games astutely expose the inability of LLMs to
consistently reason over possible futures with world models, they make a great testbed for planning and reasoning.

Equal contribution ** Equal senior authorship † Research
conducted during an internship at Google 1 Google DeepMind 2 ETH Zürich 3 Google.
Correspondence to: Eric
Malmi <emalmi@google.com>, Nenad Tomasev <nenadt@google.com>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

