Aggregation of Dependent Expert Distributions
in Multimodal Variational Autoencoders
Rogelio A Mancisidor 1 Robert Jenssen 2 3 4 Shujian Yu 2 5 Michael Kampffmeyer 2 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Motivated by the observation that learned representations
from multimodal data tend to be more generalizable (Wu &
Goodman, 2018; 2019), variational autoencoders (VAEs)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) have been
used to learn representations from multiple data modalities as they are capable of simultaneously generating new
observations and inferring joint representations. However,
during model inference, it is not guaranteed that we will
have access to all modalities, as multimodal data is expensive to obtain (Wu & Goodman, 2018; 2019; Sutter et al.,
2021). Therefore, multimodal VAEs should be able to generate representations even when some modalities are missing. This fact has led to a line of research on scalable multimodal generative models with VAEs (Wu & Goodman,
2018; Shi et al., 2019; Sutter et al., 2021; Hwang et al.,
2021; Palumbo et al., 2023) in which the number of singlemodality distributions, called experts, is linear to the number of modalities M .

Multimodal learning with variational autoencoders (VAEs) requires estimating joint distributions to evaluate the evidence lower bound
(ELBO). Current methods, the product and mixture of experts, aggregate single-modality distributions assuming independence for simplicity,
which is an overoptimistic assumption. This research introduces a novel methodology for aggregating single-modality distributions by exploiting the principle of consensus of dependent
experts (CoDE), which circumvents the aforementioned assumption. Utilizing the CoDE
method, we propose a novel ELBO that approximates the joint likelihood of the multimodal
data by learning the contribution of each subset of modalities. The resulting CoDE-VAE
model demonstrates better performance in terms
of balancing the trade-off between generative
coherence and generative quality, as well as
generating more precise log-likelihood estimations. CoDE-VAE further minimizes the generative quality gap as the number of modalities increases. In certain cases, it reaches a
generative quality similar to that of unimodal
VAEs, which is a desirable property that is
lacking in most current methods. Finally, the
classification accuracy achieved by CoDE-VAE
is comparable to that of state-of-the-art multimodal VAE models. CoDE-VAE is available at:
https://github.com/rogelioamancisidor/codevae.

The product of experts (PoE) (Hinton, 2002) and mixture
of experts (MoE) are currently the predominant methods
to estimate joint variational posterior distributions in multimodal VAEs. However, both assume independence between the experts for simplicity. This is an overoptimistic
assumption, as the data modalities are simply different
sources of information on the same object. Besides, both
have flaws in the estimation of the joint posterior. PoE can
produce posterior distributions with lower density if any of
the experts also has low density, and if the precision of the
experts is miscalibrated, the results can be biased (Shi et al.,
2019). The weights in MoE, on the other hand, can be seen
as probabilities that the distribution is correct. However,
the notion of a “correct model” is not reasonable in this
context (Winkler, 1981), as the objective is to aggregate estimates from expert distributions. Furthermore, MoE is inefficient in high-dimensional spaces, as the joint posterior
cannot be sharper than any of the experts (Hinton, 2002).
In addition to the aforementioned limitations in estimating
the joint variational posterior distributions, the optimization of multimodal VAEs requires a valid evidence lower
bound (ELBO). In the past, this has been obtained by summing the ELBOs corresponding to each of the k-th subsets

1
Department of Data Science, BI Norwegian Business School,
Oslo, Norway 2 Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The
Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 4 Dept. BAMJO, Norwegian Computing Center, Oslo, Norway 5 Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Rogelio A
Mancisidor <rogelio.a.mancisidor@bi.no>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

