Federated Causal Structure Learning with Non-identical Variable Sets

Yunxia Wang 1 Fuyuan Cao 1 Kui Yu 2 Jiye Liang 1

Abstract

presents a challenging research task (Hernn & Robins, 2020;
Wang et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2024). With the rapid growth
of data volume, data owners gradually refuse to share their
personalized data to avoid privacy leakage (Cramer et al.,
2015; Yang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020), making the inference of causal graphs from centralized data troublesome.
Consequently, in recent years, federated causal structure
learning (CSL) has been increasing attentions in uncovering
the causal relationships between variables from decentralized data, with a data-privacy protecting way.

Federated causal structure learning aims to infer
causal relationships from data stored on individual clients, with privacy concerns. Most existing methods assume identical variable sets across
clients and present federated strategies for aggregating local updates. However, in practice, clients
often observe overlapping but non-identical variable sets, and non-overlapping variables may introduce spurious dependencies. Moreover, existing strategies typically reflect only the overall
quality of local graphs, ignoring the varying importance of relationships within each graph. In
this paper, we study federated causal structure
learning with non-identical variable sets, aiming
to design an effective strategy for aggregating
“correct” and “good” causal relationships across
distributed datasets. Specifically, we first develop theories for detecting spurious dependencies,
examining whether the learned causal and noncausal relationships are “correct” or not. Furthermore, we define stable relationships as those that
are both “correct” and “good” across multiple
graphs, and finally design a two-level priority selection strategy for aggregating local updates,
obtaining a global causal graph over the integrated variables. Experimental results on synthetic,
benchmark and real-world datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Existing federated CSL methods are usually classified into
constraint-based (Li et al., 2024b; Huang et al., 2023; Guo
et al., 2024), score-based (Mian et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2024),
and continuous-optimization-based (Abyaneh et al., 2022;
Ng & Zhang, 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Chengbo & Kai, 2024)
methods. Almost all of them focus on discovering causal
relations among a set of identical variables, without considering latent variables underlying the data. Additionally, the
federated strategies presented by these methods typically
reflect only the overall quality of locally discovered causal
graphs in every iteration, ignoring the varying importance
of relationships between variables within each graph. For
instance, PERI (Mian et al., 2023) learned the final global causal graph that minimizes the worst-case regret with
respect to the locally discovered causal networks, using distributed min-max regret optimization. FedCSL (Guo et al.,
2024) first estimated the sample size of each client and then
assigned sample-size-based weights for the local results.
Notears-ADMM (Ng & Zhang, 2022) relied on the ADMM
(Boyd et al., 2011) optimization, FedDAG (Gao et al., 2023)
employed the FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) technique,
and FedCDH (Li et al., 2024b) constructed the summary
statistics, all of which exchange statistics representing the
whole local graphs.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery holds significant roles in various scientific
fields, including biology, epidemiology, medicine, and economics (Replogle et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2023; Squires et al.,
2023; Feuerriegel et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a). Unveiling
the causal relationships between random variables from data

In practice, often due to privacy, ethical, financial, and practical concerns, the variables observed by different clients
are not entirely identical but partially overlapping (Tillman
& Spirtes, 2011), and the data collected by clients might be
suitable for uncovering the relationships between different
variables. For example, multiple hospitals, due to variations
in professional specialties, medical resources, and technical
proficiency, measure non-identical indicators and are suited for diagnosing different types of diseases. Therefore, it
is essential to study federated causal structure learning in

1
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi
University, Taiyuan, China 2 School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei,
China. Correspondence to: Fuyuan Cao <cfy@sxu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

