Jacobian Sparse Autoencoders: Sparsify Computations, Not Just Activations

Lucy Farnik 1 Tim Lawson 1 Conor Houghton 1 Laurence Aitchison 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have emerged as a powerful tool for understanding the internal representations of
large language models (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham
et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2024; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024b;
Lieberum et al., 2024; Lawson et al., 2024; Braun et al.,
2024; Kissane et al., 2024; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a).
By decomposing neural network activations into sparse, interpretable components, SAEs have helped researchers gain
significant insights into how these models process information (Marks et al., 2024; Lieberum et al., 2024; Templeton et al., 2024b; O’Brien et al., 2024; Farrell et al., 2024;
Paulo et al., 2024; Balcells et al., 2024; Lan et al., 2024;
Brinkmann et al., 2025; Spies et al., 2024).

Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have been successfully used to discover sparse and humaninterpretable representations of the latent activations of LLMs. However, we would ultimately
like to understand the computations performed
by LLMs and not just their representations. The
extent to which SAEs can help us understand computations is unclear because they are not designed
to “sparsify” computations in any sense, only latent activations. To solve this, we propose Jacobian SAEs (JSAEs), which yield not only sparsity in the input and output activations of a given
model component but also sparsity in the computation (formally, the Jacobian) connecting them.
With a naïve implementation, the Jacobians in
LLMs would be computationally intractable due
to their size. One key technical contribution is
thus finding an efficient way of computing Jacobians in this setup. We find that JSAEs extract a
relatively large degree of computational sparsity
while preserving downstream LLM performance
approximately as well as traditional SAEs. We
also show that Jacobians are a reasonable proxy
for computational sparsity because MLPs are approximately linear when rewritten in the JSAE basis. Lastly, we show that JSAEs achieve a greater
degree of computational sparsity on pre-trained
LLMs than on the equivalent randomized LLM.
This shows that the sparsity of the computational
graph appears to be a property that LLMs learn
through training, and suggests that JSAEs might
be more suitable for understanding learned transformer computations than standard SAEs.

When trained on the activation vectors from neural network
layers, SAEs learn to reconstruct the inputs using a dictionary of sparse ‘features’, where there are many more
features than basis dimensions of the inputs, and each feature tends to capture a specific, interpretable concept. However, the goal of this paper is to improve understanding of
computations in transformers. While SAEs are designed
to disentangle the representations of concepts in the LLM,
they are not designed to help us understand the computations
performed with those representations.
One approach to understanding computation would be to
train two SAEs, one at the input and one at the output
of an MLP in a transformer. We can then ask how the
MLP maps sparse latent features at the inputs to sparse
features in the outputs. For this mapping to be interpretable,
it would be desirable that it is sparse, in the sense that each
latent in the SAE trained on the output depends on a small
number of latents of the SAE trained on the input. These
dependencies can be understood as a computation graph or
‘circuit’ (Olah et al., 2020; Cammarata et al., 2020). SAEs
are not designed to encourage this computation graph to be
sparse. To address this, we develop Jacobian SAEs (JSAEs),
where we include a term in the objective to encourage SAE
bases with sparse computational graphs, not just sparse
activations. Specifically, we treat the mapping between the
latent activations of the input and output SAEs as a function
and encourage its Jacobian to be sparse by including an L1
penalty term in the loss function.

1

School of Engineering Mathematics and Technology, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Lucy Farnik
<lucyfarnik@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

With a naïve implementation, it is intractable to compute
1

