Average Sensitivity of Hierarchical k-Median Clustering

Shijie Li 1 Weiqiang He 1 Ruobing Bai 1 Pan Peng 1

Abstract

science (Jin et al., 2015; Charikar & Chatziafratis, 2017;
Dasgupta, 2016; Moseley & Wang, 2023; Lin et al., 2010)
because of its ability to reveal nested patterns in real-world
data. Several agglomerative and divisive methods have been
proposed and widely used in practice for hierarchical clustering, such as those based on single, complete, average
linkage and Ward’s method (see Appendix B).

Hierarchical clustering is a widely used method
for unsupervised learning with numerous applications. However, in the application of modern algorithms, the datasets studied are usually large and
dynamic. If the hierarchical clustering is sensitive
to small perturbations of the dataset, the usability of the algorithm will be greatly reduced. In
this paper, we focus on the hierarchical k -median
clustering problem, which bridges hierarchical
and centroid-based clustering while offering theoretical appeal, practical utility, and improved
interpretability. We analyze the average sensitivity of algorithms for this problem by measuring
the expected change in the output when a random
data point is deleted. We propose an efficient algorithm for hierarchical k-median clustering and
theoretically prove its low average sensitivity and
high clustering quality. Additionally, we show
that single linkage clustering and a deterministic
variant of the CLNSS algorithm exhibit high average sensitivity, making them less stable. Finally,
we validate the robustness and effectiveness of
our algorithm through experiments.

On the other hand, the stability of algorithms is becoming
increasingly important in practical applications. If an algorithm is highly sensitive to changes in data points, even
minor alterations can significantly impact the clustering results, leading analysts to make incorrect decisions based
on unreliable outcomes, which can, in turn, result in higher
costs for error correction. At the same time, such instability may inadvertently expose sensitive information, as
small perturbations in data could highlight individual contributions or reveal underlying patterns that compromise
privacy. Furthermore, unstable algorithms may erode trust
in the analysis process, making their adoption in critical
applications more challenging.
It is thus crucial to understand if a hierarchical clustering
algorithm is stable. Indeed, several studies have found that
many hierarchical clustering algorithms, such as those using
single linkage or complete linkage, are sensitive to small
changes in the data (Balcan et al., 2014; Cheng et al., 2019;
Eriksson et al., 2011). This sensitivity can cause the dendrogram structure to change dramatically with slight variations
in the data. However, most of these works focus only on
adversarial perturbations or attacks on the input and/or lack
theoretical rigor.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical clustering, as discussed in (McQuitty, 1957;
Hastie et al., 2009), is one of the most commonly used
clustering strategies. It produces a set of nested clusters,
organized into a tree-like structure known as a dendrogram.
In this structure, each leaf node typically encompasses only
a single object, whereas each internal node represents the
union of its child nodes. By exploring the dendrogram’s
multiple levels, one can identify clusters with varying levels
of granularity. Consequently, hierarchical clustering is adept
at detecting and analyzing complex data structures. Hierarchical clustering has attracted great interest in computer

In this paper, we investigate the question of the stability of
hierarchical clustering by adopting the concept of average
sensitivity, as introduced by (Peng & Yoshida, 2020; Varma
& Yoshida, 2021) that provides a theoretical framework
for measuring the stability of the output of hierarchical
clustering when data points are randomly removed from the
original dataset. Roughly speaking, for a (deterministic)
algorithm that outputs k clusters, its average sensitivity is
the expected size of the symmetric difference of the output
clusters before and after we randomly remove a few points.
One can generalize this notion to random algorithms for
hierarchical clustering. This notion effectively captures the
scenario where adversarial perturbations of the input are

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence
to: Pan Peng <ppeng@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

