Unisolver: PDE-Conditional Transformers Towards
Universal Neural PDE Solvers
Hang Zhou * 1 Yuezhou Ma * 1 Haixu Wu 1 Haowen Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

Arnol’d, 2013), such as meteorology, electromagnetism and
thermodynamics (Wang et al., 2023). Since it is usually
hard to obtain an analytic solution for a PDE, numerical
methods are widely explored (Ames, 2014). However, these
numerical methods often require huge computation costs to
generate a precise solution for each PDE. Recently, deep
learning models have facilitated significant advancements
across a wide range of domains (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2021; Jumper et al., 2021) and have been applied to
solving PDEs, i.e. neural PDE solvers (Karniadakis et al.,
2021). Owing to their excellent capability to approximate
nonlinear mappings, deep learning models can learn to fit
pre-collected data (Li et al., 2021a) or physics-informed loss
function (Raissi et al., 2019) and generalize in a flash to new
samples, providing an efficient approach to solving PDEs.

Deep models have recently emerged as promising tools to solve partial differential equations
(PDEs), known as neural PDE solvers. While neural solvers trained from either simulation data or
physics-informed loss can solve PDEs reasonably
well, they are mainly restricted to a few instances
of PDEs, e.g. a certain equation with a limited set
of coefficients. This limits their generalization to
diverse PDEs, preventing them from being practical surrogate models of numerical solvers. In this
paper, we present Unisolver, a novel Transformer
model trained on diverse data and conditioned on
diverse PDEs, aiming towards a universal neural PDE solver capable of solving a wide scope
of PDEs. Instead of purely scaling up data and
parameters, Unisolver stems from the theoretical
analysis of the PDE-solving process. Inspired by
the mathematical structure of PDEs that a PDE
solution is fundamentally governed by a series of
PDE components such as equation symbols and
boundary conditions, we define a complete set
of PDE components and flexibly embed them as
domain-wise and point-wise deep conditions for
Transformer PDE solvers. Integrating physical
insights with recent Transformer advances, Unisolver achieves consistent state-of-the-art on three
challenging large-scale benchmarks, showing impressive performance and generalizability. Code
is available at https://github.com/thuml/Unisolver.

As shown in Figure 1, previous neural solvers can be broadly
categorized into two paradigms: physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) and neural operators
(Li et al., 2021a). The former trains deep models using a
formalized PDE loss function, while the latter solely relies
on pre-collected data. However, for PINNs, while formulating the PDE equations as objective functions ensures
relatively accurate solutions, they struggle to generalize to
new scenarios, necessitating retraining for each new task.
Neural operators, on the other hand, directly learn from data
and generalize better to diverse initial states and PDEs than
PINNs. Nevertheless, purely based on training data may be
insufficient to guide PDE solving. For example, in the case
of a fluid governed by renowned Navier-Stokes equations,
the typical task of neural operators is to predict future states
based on past observations (Li et al., 2021a), while different
viscosity coefficients and forcing terms will lead to distinct
solutions even when the initial states stay the same. Thus,
due to the omission of PDE information, current neural operators are mainly trained and tested on a limited set of PDEs.
Notably, as neural solvers are expected to be efficient surrogate models of classical numerical solvers, generalization
to various PDEs is essential for a practical neural solver.

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are essential for numerous scientific and engineering problems (Evans, 2022;
*

1
Equal contribution
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China.
Hang Zhou<zhouh23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Correspondence to: Haixu
Wu <wuhx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Mingsheng Long
<mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

To tackle the generalization deficiency, several works have
been proposed by incorporating the PDE information into
deep models or training models with large-scale datasets.
For example, message-passing neural PDE solver (Brandstetter et al., 2022) concatenates PDE coefficients with the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

