Direct Motion Models for Assessing Generated Videos

Kelsey Allen * 1 Carl Doersch 1 Guangyao Zhou 1 Mohammed Suhail 2 Danny Driess 1 Ignacio Rocco 1
Yulia Rubanova 1 Thomas Kipf 1 Mehdi Sajjadi 1 Kevin Murphy 1 Joao Carreira 1 Sjoerd van Steenkiste * 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
As generative video models become increasingly capable,
the community needs more powerful methods for automatically evaluating the quality of generated videos. State-ofthe-art models are getting better at generating what appear
to be plausible looking frames, yet they still struggle to put
together coherent motion (Brooks et al., 2024). The current
gold standard for assessing video quality is collecting human judgments, but these are expensive to obtain and not
scalable as a metric for regularly measuring improvements
in modeling capabilities, e.g. throughout training.

A current limitation of video generative video
models is that they generate plausible looking
frames, but poor motion — an issue that is not
well captured by FVD and other popular methods
for evaluating generated videos. Here we go
beyond FVD by developing a metric which better
measures plausible object interactions and motion.
Our novel approach is based on auto-encoding
point tracks and yields motion features that can
be used to not only compare distributions of
videos (as few as one generated and one ground
truth, or as many as two datasets), but also for
evaluating motion of single videos. We show that
using point tracks instead of pixel reconstruction
or action recognition features results in a metric
which is markedly more sensitive to temporal
distortions in synthetic data, and can predict
human evaluations of temporal consistency
and realism in generated videos obtained from
open-source models better than a wide range of
alternatives. We also show that by using a point
track representation, we can spatiotemporally localize generative video inconsistencies, providing
extra interpretability of generated video errors
relative to prior work. An overview of the results
and link to the code can be found on the project
page: trajan-paper.github.io.

Existing metrics, such as those based on Fréchet Video
Distance (FVD) (Unterthiner et al., 2018; Ge et al., 2024;
Luo et al., 2025), can capture certain elements of plausibility,
but are more sensitive to frame-level content effects (Ge
et al., 2024), and depend on access to the underlying training
distribution which is not always available. Further, these
approaches cover only one way of evaluating generated
videos, i.e. by comparing entire distributions, and it remains
unclear how to evaluate pairs of videos, or individual videos,
with this approach.
Here we propose a new method that we show addresses
many of these issues, by directly modelling 2D video motion. Given a single generated video, we estimate low-level,
temporally-extended motion features as point tracks using
the publicly available BootsTAPIR model (Doersch et al.,
2024). Next, we (auto)encode these features to obtain dense
high-level motion features using a novel TRAJectory AutoeNcoder (TRAJAN) architecture. We can then use the
TRAJAN latent space to compare distributions of videos
(as few as one generated and one real, or as many as two
datasets), or the reconstruction error from TRAJAN to estimate per-video motion inconsistencies.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Kelsey Allen <krallen@google.com>, Sjoerd
van Steenkiste <svansteenkiste@google.com>. Author contributions: KA conceptualized the idea of using track-based latent
motion features to measure video quality, moving from distributional metrics to per-video or video-video metrics. KA, SVS co-led
the project and ran all the experiments. GZ invented an initial prototype of the TRAJAN architecture, which was further developed
by CD. MS supplied the WALT checkpoints. All authors advised
on the project direction and contributed to writing the paper.

Point tracking, by design, separates the semantics from
the motion content by focusing on features necessary for
predicting motion without reconstructing the whole scene
(Figure 1). This means that it will likely focus on plausible
motion irrespective of semantic information. We show that
this is indeed the case across the three major ways in which
the community generally uses metrics to evaluate videos:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. For individual videos, we measure how well TRA1

