A Lens into Interpretable Transformer Mistakes via Semantic Dependency

Ruo-Jing Dong 1 Yu Yao 1 Bo Han 2 Tongliang Liu 1

Abstract

generate false information (Lin et al., 2021), exhibit hallucinations (Ji et al., 2023), leak sensitive training data (Carlini
et al., 2021), and even engage in deception (OpenAI, 2023;
Scheurer et al., 2024). Addressing these issues has led to the
development of evaluation methods for LLM performance
(Liang et al., 2022) and strategies aimed at mitigating harmful outputs (Ganguli et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022).

Semantic Dependency refers to the relationship
between words in a sentence where the meaning
of one word depends on another, which is important for natural language understanding. In this
paper, we investigate the role of semantic dependencies in answering questions for transformer
models, which is achieved by analyzing how token values shift in response to changes in semantics. Through extensive experiments on models
including the BERT series, GPT, and LLaMA, we
uncover the following key findings: 1). Most tokens primarily retain their original semantic information even as they propagate through multiple
layers. 2). Models can encode truthful semantic
dependencies in tokens in the final layer. 3). Mistakes in model answers often stem from specific
tokens encoded with incorrect semantic dependencies. Furthermore, we found that addressing
the incorrectness by directly adjusting parameters
is challenging because the same parameters can
encode both correct and incorrect semantic dependencies depending on the context. Our findings
provide insights into the causes of incorrect information generation in transformers and help the
future development of robust and reliable models.

Existing research has elucidated several reasons for the
mistakes observed in LLMs. Studies have suggested that
non-linearity, insufficient model averaging, and inadequate
regularization lead to mistakes when encountering crafted
adversarial examples (Chakraborty et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2020). Additionally, the programmatic behavior of LLMs
may lead to vulnerabilities under security attacks and produce harmful content (Kang et al., 2024). Competing objectives and mismatched generalization may cause the susceptibility of safety-trained LLMs (Wei et al., 2024). Studies
also indicate various reasons for language models generating
unfaithful or nonsensical text, including source-reference
divergence in data, imperfect representation learning, erroneous decoding, exposure bias, and parametric knowledge
bias (Ji et al., 2023). These studies have identified various
reasons that lead to mistakes and enhanced our understanding, providing valuable insights into model weaknesses.
Building upon these insights, we aim to further explore the
internal mechanisms within the model’s architecture that
lead to mistakes.
We believe that mistakes produced by LLMs arise from
the way semantic dependencies, the relationships where
the meaning of one token depends on another (Mel’čuk,
2001), are encoded within transformer models. Intuitively,
in transformer models, inputs are tokenized and embedded
as vectors that carry semantic information. These tokens
then pass through multiple attention layers, where they exchange and aggregate semantic information to build semantic dependencies. These dependencies are crucial for the
model’s contextual understanding and reasoning, enabling
it to generate coherent outputs. Since the model’s predictions ultimately depend on the final layer outputs, which are
constructed from the representations generated by earlier
layers, any inaccuracies in the propagation and exchange of
semantic information can result in misrepresented semantic
dependencies. Such mistakes disrupt the model’s ability to
accurately understand token relationships and contextual

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) based on the transformer architecture such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018),
GPT(Radford et al., 2019; Brown, 2020), and LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities
across various natural language tasks. Alongside their benefits, LLMs pose significant risks and challenges (Weidinger
et al., 2021). For example, LLMs may intensify biases
(Navigli et al., 2023; Taori & Hashimoto, 2023), produce
toxic content (Gehman et al., 2020; Ousidhoum et al., 2021),
1

Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 2 TMLR Group,
Hong Kong Baptist University. Correspondence to: Tongliang Liu
<tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

