The Global Convergence Time of Stochastic Gradient Descent
in Non-Convex Landscapes: Sharp Estimates via Large Deviations

Waïss Azizian 1 Franck Iutzeler 2 Jérôme Malick 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 3

Abstract

where 𝜂 > 0 is the method’s step-size – or learning rate –
and 𝑔ˆ𝑛 , 𝑛 = 0, 1, . . ., is a computationally affordable stochastic approximation of the gradient of 𝑓 at 𝑥 𝑛 ∈ ℝ𝑑 .

In this paper, we examine the time it takes for
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to reach the
global minimum of a general, non-convex loss
function. We approach this question through the
lens of randomly perturbed dynamical systems
and large deviations theory, and we provide a tight
characterization of the global convergence time
of SGD via matching upper and lower bounds.
These bounds are dominated by the most “costly”
set of obstacles that the algorithm may need to
overcome in order to reach a global minimizer
from a given initialization, coupling in this way
the global geometry of the underlying loss landscape with the statistics of the noise entering the
process. Finally, motivated by applications to the
training of deep neural networks, we also provide
a series of refinements and extensions of our analysis for loss functions with shallow local minima.

1

The study of (SGD) goes back to the seminal work of Robbins & Monro [74] and Kiefer & Wolfowitz [37], who introduced the method in the context of solving systems of
nonlinear equations in the 1950’s. Originally, the analysis
of (SGD) involved a vanishing step-size 𝜂 𝑛 satisfying the
P
P
“𝐿 2 − 𝐿 1 ” summability conditions 𝑛 𝜂 𝑛 2 < ∞ = 𝑛 𝜂 𝑛 ,
and gave rise to the ODE method of stochastic approximation. In this context, the first convergence results for
(SGD) were obtained by Ljung [50, 51], Benaïm [8], and
Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis [10], who established the almost sure
convergence of the method in non-convex problems (with
different regularity conditions for 𝑓 ). In conjunction with
the above, a parallel thread in the literature launched by Pemantle [70] and Brandière & Duflo [13] showed that (SGD)
avoids saddle points with probability 1, so, barring degeneracies, it only converges to local minimizers of 𝑓 – see also
[2, 9, 28, 29, 35, 57, 58, 75] and references therein.
On the other hand, when (SGD) is run with a constant stepsize – the standard choice in data science and machine learning – the situation is drastically different. The trajectories of
(SGD) do not converge, but they instead wander around the
problem’s state space, spending most time near the critical
points of 𝑓 . This is quantified by “criticality
bounds” of
√
P
the form 𝔼[ 𝑛𝑘=0 ∥∇ 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑘 ) ∥ 2 ] = O( 𝑛), which certify an
output with small gradient norm, in expectation or with high
probability [41]. As in the vanishing step-size regime, these
results are supplemented by a range of saddle-point avoidance results [24, 79] which, under certain conditions, imply
that the output of (SGD) is approximately second-order
optimal (and hence, in most cases, a near-minimizer).

Introduction

Much of the success of modern machine learning applications hinges on solving non-convex problems of the form
min 𝑥 ∈ℝ𝑑 𝑓 (𝑥)

(Opt)

where 𝑓 : ℝ𝑑 → ℝ is a smooth function on ℝ𝑑 . When 𝑑
is so large as to make gradient calculations computationally prohibitive, the go-to method for solving (Opt) is the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm
𝑥 𝑛+1 = 𝑥 𝑛 − 𝜂 𝑔ˆ𝑛

(SGD)

Nevertheless, all these results for (SGD) are, at best, guarantees of local minimality, not global. When it comes to
approximating the global minimum of 𝑓 , we must tackle
the following fundamental question:

1 Univ.

Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France. 2 Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse,
Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 31062 Toulouse, France.
3 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG,
38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Waïss Azizian
<waiss.azizian@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.

How much time does it take (SGD) to reach
the vicinity of a global minimum of 𝑓 ?

Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Of course, attaining the global minimum of a non-convex
function is a lofty goal, so, before examining the time re1

