Non-stationary Diffusion For Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting

Weiwei Ye 1 * Zhuopeng Xu 1 * Ning Gui 1

Abstract

model conditional expectations (Zhou et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2020), effective decision-making, particularly in high-stakes
fields like healthcare (Bertozzi et al., 2020) and finance (Li
& Bastos, 2020), often requires accurately estimating the
uncertainty underlying the data (Kendall & Gal, 2017; Xu
et al., 2024). To address this problem, many recent studies
have focused on probabilistic time series forecasting (Rasul
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b), where the
goal to estimate a distribution of possible future outcomes
along with their associated uncertainties.

Due to the dynamics of underlying physics and
external influences, the uncertainty of time series varies over time. However, existing Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
fail to capture this non-stationary nature, constrained by their constant variance assumption
from the additive noise model (ANM). In this paper, we innovatively utilize the Location-Scale
Noise Model (LSNM) to relax the fixed uncertainty assumption of ANM. A diffusion-based
probabilistic forecasting framework, termed Nonstationary Diffusion (NsDiff), is designed based
on LSNM that is capable of modeling the changing pattern of uncertainty. Specifically, NsDiff
combines a denoising diffusion-based conditional
generative model with a conditional mean and a
variance estimator, enabling adaptive endpoint distribution modeling. Furthermore, we propose an
uncertainty-aware noise schedule, which dynamically adjusts the noise levels to accurately reflect
the data uncertainty at each step and integrates
the time-varying variances into the diffusion process. Extensive experiments conducted on nine
real-world and synthetic datasets demonstrate the
superior performance of NsDiff compared to existing approaches. Code is available at https:
//github.com/wwy155/NsDiff.

Endpoint Distribution

Prediction Interval
Denoise

Denoise

Denoise

Figure 1. A figure illustrates DDPMs with different endpoints
trained to estimate the number of influenza-like disease patients
weekly. We plot the endpoint distributions and prediction intervals of N (0, I) (Top), N (f (X), I) (Middle), and N (f (X), g(X))
(Bottom) on the left and right, respectively. The red dashed line
indicates the division of the training and test dataset.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a key role in various fields
such as traffic prediction (Ermagun & Levinson, 2018) and
supply chain management (Chopra & Meindl, 2021). Given
a historical multivariate series X, general forecasting methods involve training an f (X) to predict a future series Y,
which can be viewed as modeling the E[Y|X]. Although
recent research has demonstrated promising capabilities to

The Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
have recently gained significant attention for probabilistic
time series forecasting due to their powerful ability to generate high-dimensional data (Rasul et al., 2021; Tashiro et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2024a). Existing DDPMs typically rely on
the Additive Noise Model (ANM) (Spirtes et al., 2001),
which assumes Y = f (X) + ϵ, where ϵ ∼ N (0, σ) represents stationary Gaussian noise. The primary objective
of these models is not only to estimate the conditional expectation E[Y|X] via f (X), but also to accurately capture
uncertainty by modeling the noise distribution ϵ. While
DDPMs with stationary Gaussian noise have achieved sub-

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China. Correspondence
to: Ning Gui <ninggui@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

