Efficient Molecular Conformer Generation with
SO(3)-Averaged Flow Matching and Reflow

Zhonglin Cao * 1 Mario Geiger * 1 Allan dos Santos Costa 1 2 3 Danny Reidenbach 1 Karsten Kreis 1
Tomas Geffner 1 Franco Pellegrini 1 Guoqing Zhou 1 Emine Kucukbenli 1

Abstract

termined by the conformers. In the domain of drug discovery, molecular conformer generation is a prerequisite
for both structure-based (Trott & Olson, 2010) and ligandbased (Rush et al., 2005) compound virtual screening. For
established computational chemistry molecular conformer
generation tools, there is a trade-off between generation
speed and the quality or diversity of generated conformers
(Axelrod & Gomez-Bombarelli, 2022). For example, enhanced molecular dynamics simulation (Grimme, 2019) can
generate diverse conformers by sampling the conformation
space rather exhaustively, but this approach is slow due to
the need of multiple energy function evaluations. RDKit
(Landrum, 2016) and some rule-based tools (Hawkins et al.,
2010) are faster but may miss many low-energy conformer,
and the generation quality can deteriorate when molecule
size increases. Thus, deep generative models are being
sought as potential solutions to overcome such trade-off and
bring fast, diverse, and high-quality molecular conformer
generation.

Fast and accurate generation of molecular conformers is desired for downstream computational
chemistry and drug discovery tasks. Currently,
training and sampling state-of-the-art diffusion or
flow-based models for conformer generation require significant computational resources. In this
work, we build upon flow-matching and propose
two mechanisms for accelerating training and inference of generative models for 3D molecular
conformer generation. For fast training, we introduce the SO(3)-Averaged Flow training objective,
which leads to faster convergence to better generation quality compared to conditional optimal
transport flow or Kabsch-aligned flow. We demonstrate that models trained using SO(3)-Averaged
Flow can reach state-of-the-art conformer generation quality. For fast inference, we show that
the reflow and distillation methods of flow-based
models enable few-steps or even one-step molecular conformer generation with high quality. The
training techniques proposed in this work show a
path towards highly efficient molecular conformer
generation with flow-based models.

Many earlier works are based on generative models (Simm
& Hernández-Lobato, 2019; Zhu et al., 2022; Luo et al.,
2021; Shi et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022), given the
stochastic nature of the molecular conformer generation
task. However, established cheminformatics tools such as
OMEGA (Hawkins et al., 2010) still have better generation
quality and faster sampling speed compared to early deeplearning based methods. Torsional diffusion (Jing et al.,
2022) is the first diffusion model to achieve better generation quality than cheminformatics model. By restricting the
degree-of-freedom on the torsion angles, torsional diffusion
can generate diverse conformers with a lightweight model
and fewer number of reverse diffusion steps. More recent
works, such as Molecular conformer field (MCF) (Wang
et al., 2024) and ET-Flow (Hassan et al., 2024), perform
diffusion or flow-matching directly on the Cartesian coordinates of the atoms. With more scalable transformer architectures, they have achieved the state-of-the-art conformer generation quality. However, iterative ODE or SDE solving with
large transformer models to generate every conformer can
still be computationally infeasible when the virtual screening library contains billions of compounds (Bellmann et al.,
2022).

1. Introduction
Molecular conformer generation is the task to predict the
ensemble of 3D conformations of molecules given their
2D molecular graphs (Hawkins, 2017). Generating high
quality molecular conformers that fit their natural 3D structures is a crucial task for computational chemistry because
many physical and chemical properties (Guimarães et al.,
2012; Schwab, 2010; Shim & MacKerell Jr, 2011) are de*
Equal contribution 1 NVIDIA 2 MIT Center for Bits and Atoms
Work was completed during internship with NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Zhonglin Cao <zhonglinc@nvidia.com>, Mario Geiger
<mgeiger@nvidia.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

