Fairness Overfitting in Machine Learning: An Information-Theoretic Perspective

Firas Laakom 1 Haobo Chen 2 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 3 Yuheng Bu 2

Abstract

(Zemel et al., 2013). To mitigate these risks, various fairness
interventions (Barocas et al., 2019; Zafar et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2021), particularly regularization-based in-processing
methods (Kamishima et al., 2012; Baharlouei et al., 2020;
Mroueh et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022; Alghamdi et al., 2022; Shui et al., 2022), have been proposed
to ensure equitable predictions without significantly compromising model performance.

Despite substantial progress in promoting fairness
in high-stake applications using machine learning
models, existing methods often modify the training process, such as through regularizers or other
interventions, but lack formal guarantees that fairness achieved during training will generalize to
unseen data. Although overfitting with respect
to prediction performance has been extensively
studied, overfitting in terms of fairness loss has
received far less attention. This paper proposes a
theoretical framework for analyzing fairness generalization error through an information-theoretic
lens. Our novel bounding technique is based on
Efron–Stein inequality, which allows us to derive
tight information-theoretic fairness generalization
bounds with both Mutual Information (MI) and
Conditional Mutual Information (CMI). Our empirical results validate the tightness and practical
relevance of these bounds across diverse fairnessaware learning algorithms. Our framework offers
valuable insights to guide the design of algorithms
improving fairness generalization.

All these in-processing approaches are built on the implicit
assumption that imposing fairness constraints during training will inherently generalize and maintain these fairness
standards on new, unseen data. However, neural networks
are known for their strong memorization capabilities, often
leading to overfitting with limited training data. This suggests that the aforementioned assumption may not hold, and
neural networks could exhibit ‘fairness overfitting.’
Is there a ‘fairness overfitting?’ To investigate this question, we conduct experiments on the COMPAS dataset (Larson et al., 2016). We evaluate the performance of the standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) approach alongside three fairness regularization techniques. The results,
presented in Figure 1, reveal that all these algorithms exhibit
fairness overfitting, characterized by a noticeable fairness
generalization error, particularly in the low data regime.
Furthermore, the impact of different fairness techniques
on fairness generalization errors varies. While some approaches slightly mitigate the generalization error, others
worsen it, in certain cases doubling the generalization error
compared to ERM. This highlights the need for a deeper
theoretical understanding of fairness generalization, which
is the main goal of this paper.

1. Introduction
As machine learning advances, its deployment in highstakes applications, such as hiring, financial lending,
and criminal justice, has raised critical fairness concerns
(Mehrabi et al., 2021; Li & Liu, 2022; Barocas et al., 2019).
Deep learning models often inherit biases from the data they
are trained on, potentially leading to inequitable outcomes
for certain groups (Pessach & Shmueli, 2022; Ruggieri et al.,
2023). Addressing these issues is particularly challenging
because neural networks rely on high-dimensional, complex representations, which can obscure underlying biases

One key insight from these observations is that neural networks exhibit fairness overfitting, and the fairness generalization depends on both the data and the algorithms. This
paper introduces a theoretical framework for understanding
fairness generalization through information-theoretic tools.
These tools, which account for both data- and algorithmdependent factors (Xu & Raginsky, 2017; Harutyunyan
et al., 2021; Wang & Mao, 2023) rather than relying solely
on model complexity as in traditional VC-dimension analysis (Sontag et al., 1998; Harvey et al., 2017), provide a
rigorous foundation for understanding and characterizing
the fairness-generalization behavior of machine learning

1

Center of Excellence for Generative AI, KAUST, Saudi
Arabia 2 University of Florida, Gainesville, USA 3 The Swiss
AI Lab, IDSIA, USI & SUPSI, Switzerland. Correspondence
to: Firas Laakom <firas.laakom@kaust.edu.sa>, Yuheng Bu
<buyuheng@ufl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

