Fishers for Free? Approximating the Fisher Information Matrix
by Recycling the Squared Gradient Accumulator

YuXin Li 1 Felix Dangel 1 Derek Tam 1 Colin Raffel 1

Abstract

the statistical manifold of likelihoods and scales updates
according to the parameter space’s curvature, informing us
about the “steepness” or “flatness” of the objective function at a given point in the parameter space (Karakida et al.,
2019). This has made the FIM a valuable tool for training
neural networks, improving stability and convergence speed
(Karakida & Osawa, 2020).

The diagonal of a model’s Fisher Information Matrix (the “Fisher diagonal”) has frequently been
used as a way to measure parameter sensitivity.
Typically, the Fisher diagonal is estimated via
squared sampled gradients of the model’s likelihood with respect to its parameters, averaged over
a few hundred or thousand examples – a process
which incurs nontrivial computational costs. At
the same time, adaptive gradient methods like the
ubiquitous Adam optimizer compute a moving
average of the squared gradient over the course of
training. This paper therefore explores whether
an approximation of the Fisher diagonal can be
obtained “for free” by recycling the squared gradient accumulator that has already been computed
over the course of training. Through a comprehensive set of experiments covering five applications of the Fisher diagonal, we demonstrate that
the “Squisher” (Squared gradient accumulator as
an approximation of the Fisher) consistently performs similarly to the Fisher diagonal while outperforming baseline methods. Additionally, we
clarify the exact differences between the Squisher
and the Fisher diagonal and provide empirical
quantification of their respective impact.

Beyond optimization, recent work has explored the use of
the FIM’s diagonal (the “Fisher diagonal”) as a measure
of parameter sensitivity (Ly et al., 2017), including applications in model sparsification (Theis et al., 2018), sparse
training (Sung et al., 2021), task similarity measurement
(Achille et al., 2019), continual learning (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017), and model merging (Matena & Raffel, 2022; Daheim
et al., 2024). These applications leverage the fact that the
diagonal elements of the Fisher reflect each parameter’s
impact on the model output, when considering parameters
to be independent, providing a principled approach to understanding and modifying neural nets.
Despite its utility, computing the Fisher diagonal introduces
nontrivial computations beyond those for training. While
these costs are typically comparable to training on a few
hundred or a few thousand examples, the Fisher diagonal
requires computing, squaring, then summing per-example
gradients on sampled labels. Doing so efficiently is nontrivial in most deep learning frameworks. While there exist
specialized solutions (Dangel et al., 2020; Osawa et al.,
2023), practitioners often resort to sequential gradient computations (i.e. with a “batch size of one”), which sacrifices
parallelization opportunities. Additionally, computing the
Fisher diagonal requires access to training data that might
not be available – for example, trained models are frequently
released without their associated training data. We suspect
that these factors can hinder the adoption of methods that
require computing the Fisher diagonal – for example, Fisher
Merging (Matena & Raffel, 2022) is not implemented in the
ubiquitous mergekit library (Goddard et al., 2024), as it
does not support merging methods that require computing
gradients or accessing external data.

1. Introduction
The Fisher Information Matrix (FIM, Fisher, 1922) is a
fundamental concept in statistics, capturing how much information an observable random variable carries about an
unknown parameter. In machine learning, the FIM has
been widely used in optimization, particularly in Natural
Gradient Descent (NGD, Amari, 1998). Unlike standard
gradient-based methods, which update parameters using
the Euclidean gradient, NGD leverages the geometry from
1
University of Toronto & Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
YuXin Li <lyx.li@mail.utoronto.ca>.

At the same time, modern neural networks are typically
trained using adaptive gradient methods such as Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2014) that make use of an accumulator vari-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

