Revisiting Diffusion Models: From Generative Pre-training
to One-Step Generation

Bowen Zheng 1 Tianming Yang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Diffusion Models (DMs) (Song & Ermon, 2020a;b; Ho
et al., 2020) have emerged as powerful tools for generative
tasks, such as image and video synthesis, surpassing traditional methods such as Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) in terms of sample quality. However, the generation process in DMs is slow and
requires a series of iterative steps that impose significant
computational overhead.

Diffusion distillation is a widely used technique
to reduce the sampling cost of diffusion models,
yet it often requires extensive training, and the
student performance tends to be degraded. Recent studies show that incorporating a GAN objective may alleviate these issues, yet the underlying mechanism remains unclear. In this work,
we first identify a key limitation of distillation:
mismatched step sizes and parameter numbers between the teacher and the student model lead them
to converge to different local minima, rendering
direct imitation suboptimal. We further demonstrate that a standalone GAN objective, without
relying a distillation loss, overcomes this limitation and is sufficient to convert diffusion models
into efficient one-step generators. Based on this
finding, we propose that diffusion training may be
viewed as a form of generative pre-training, equipping models with capabilities that can be unlocked
through lightweight GAN fine-tuning. Supporting
this view, we create a one-step generation model
by fine-tuning a pre-trained model with 85% of
parameters frozen, achieving strong performance
with only 0.2M images and near-SOTA results
with 5M images. We further present a frequencydomain analysis that may explain the one-step
generative capability gained in diffusion training.
Overall, our work provides a new perspective for
diffusion training, highlighting its role as a powerful generative pre-training process, which can be
the basis for building efficient one-step generation
models.

To speed up the generation process, several distillation techniques (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Gu et al., 2023; Song et al.,
2023; Yin et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024a;c; Hsiao et al.,
2024) have been proposed to reduce the multi-step diffusion
process into a few- or one-step model. While promising,
these methods necessitate large computational resources for
the distillation and often fall short of matching the performance of the original multi-step diffusion models. However,
recent advances (Sauer et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Kang
et al., 2024; Sauer et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a; Kim et al.,
2024a) have shown that incorporating a GAN objective in
the distillation process can improve efficiency, demonstrating the potential of GAN-based ’distillation’ approaches.
In this work, we first identify a fundamental limitation of existing distillation methods: the local minima of the teacher
and student models may differ significantly, hindering effective knowledge transfer. In contrast, the GAN objective
naturally circumvents this issue. Building on this insight,
we propose D2O (Diffusion to One-Step), a novel approach
that relies solely on an exclusive GAN objective, eliminating
the need for instance-level distillation losses. D2O achieves
competitive performance with drastically reduced data requirements, while conventional distillation methods demand
vast training images when trained without a GAN objective.
This significant reduction suggests that the D2O model is
likely not learning from scratch, as that typically requires
tens or millions of images.

1

Institute of Neuroscience, Key Laboratory of Brain Cognition
and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, Center for Excellence
in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Tianming Yang
<tyang@ion.ac.cn>.

Based on these results, we propose that the diffusion objective can be viewed as a generative pre-training process,
wherein the model learns generalized generative capabilities
that can be rapidly adapted to downstream tasks. To verify
this idea, we create the D2O-F model, with most parameters

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

