Learning Time-Varying Multi-Region Brain Communications
via Scalable Markovian Gaussian Processes
Weihan Li 1 Yule Wang 1 Chengrui Li 1 Anqi Wu 1

Abstract

enable simultaneous measurement of neural activity across
numerous brain areas with unprecedented temporal and spatial resolution (Steinmetz et al., 2021; Siegle et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2024a; Nejatbakhsh et al., 2024). These large-scale
neural recordings necessitate computational methods capable of uncovering and characterizing the dynamic nature of
neural communication within the brain.

Understanding and constructing brain communications that capture dynamic communications
across multiple regions is fundamental to modern system neuroscience, yet current methods
struggle to find time-varying region-level communications or scale to large neural datasets
with long recording durations. We present a
novel framework using Markovian Gaussian Processes to learn brain communications with timevarying temporal delays from multi-region neural recordings, named Adaptive Delay Model
(ADM). Our method combines Gaussian Processes with State Space Models and employs
parallel scan inference algorithms, enabling efficient scaling to large datasets while identifying
concurrent communication patterns that evolve
over time. This time-varying approach captures
how brain region interactions shift dynamically
during cognitive processes. Validated on synthetic and multi-region neural recordings datasets,
our approach discovers both the directionality
and temporal dynamics of neural communication.
This work advances our understanding of distributed neural computation and provides a scalable tool for analyzing dynamic brain networks.
Code is available at https://github.com/
BRAINML-GT/Adaptive-Delay-Model.

Latent representations offer a promising approach to building time-varying multi-region communications (Wang et al.,
2023; 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). In the brain, communication patterns between brain regions manifest at varying
temporal scales: some regions exhibit fast, synchronous
interactions with short delays, indicative of strong functional coupling, while others display slower interactions
with longer delays, reflecting more indirect relationships.
Such communications provide a framework for understanding how these diverse communication patterns evolve over
time, capturing both feedforward and feedback pathways
that may shift during different cognitive states (Lillicrap
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2025).
Current computational approaches for modeling multiregion communications can be broadly categorized into nondelay models and delay models. Non-delay models, such
as mp-srSLDS (Glaser et al., 2020) and MR-SDS (KarniolTambour et al.), do not explicitly incorporate temporal delays when capturing latent dynamics across regions. As a
result, they can only learn the directional information of
communications. Delay models, including DLAG (Gokcen
et al., 2022), m-DLAG (Gokcen et al., 2024a), their approximated versions (Gokcen et al., 2024b), and MRM-GP
(Li et al., 2024b), introduce mechanisms to learn temporal
delays between pairs of communications. Learning delays
provides not only directional information but also insights
into relative communication speeds, which can help assess
the strength of functional coupling between brain regions.

1. Introduction
Modern system neuroscience faces a significant challenge in
discovering communication patterns that capture dynamic
interactions across multiple regions. Understanding these
time-varying communications has become increasingly critical with the advent of advanced recording technologies that

Although these methods have shown potential in capturing
inter-region brain communications, delay models, such as
DLAG and its variants, do not account for the dynamic nature of multi-region communication. They fail to model
time-varying temporal dependencies and communication
patterns, which are crucial for understanding neural processing. Non-delay models, such as MR-SDS and mp-srSLDS,

1

School of Computational Science & Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: Anqi
Wu <anqiwu@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

