Proxy-FDA: Proxy-based Feature Distribution Alignment
for Fine-tuning Vision Foundation Models without Forgetting

Chen Huang 1 Skyler Seto 1 Hadi Pouransari 1 Mehrdad Farajtabar 1 Raviteja Vemulapalli 1 Fartash Faghri 1
Oncel Tuzel 1 Barry-John Theobald 1 Josh Susskind 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Vision foundation models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
and DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024) pre-trained on large
amounts of data demonstrate remarkable performance
across various tasks and data distributions. Such foundation models are known to have learned vast knowledge
on real-world concepts that can serve as a useful prior for
downstream task adaptation via fine-tuning. Existing finetuning methods include end-to-end finetuning, linear probing, prompt tuning (Zhou et al., 2022a;b), and adapter learning (Gao et al., 2021). While these methods prove effective,
empirical evidence shows that they frequently suffer from an
undesirable effect called concept forgetting (Mukhoti et al.,
2024). Forgetting occurs when a fine-tuned model overfits
on the downstream task, and unlike its pre-trained counterpart, significantly loses the ability to recognize concepts on
other tasks.

Vision foundation models pre-trained on massive
data encode rich representations of real-world
concepts, which can be adapted to downstream
tasks by fine-tuning. However, fine-tuning foundation models on one task often leads to the issue of concept forgetting on other tasks. Recent
methods of robust fine-tuning aim to mitigate forgetting of prior knowledge without affecting the
fine-tuning performance. Knowledge is often preserved by matching the original and fine-tuned
model weights or feature pairs. However, such
point-wise matching can be too strong, without explicit awareness of the feature neighborhood structures that encode rich knowledge as well. We propose a novel regularization method Proxy-FDA
that explicitly preserves the structural knowledge
in feature space. Proxy-FDA performs Feature
Distribution Alignment (using nearest neighbor
graphs) between the pre-trained and fine-tuned
feature spaces, and the alignment is further improved by informative proxies that are generated
dynamically to increase data diversity. Experiments show that Proxy-FDA significantly reduces
concept forgetting during fine-tuning, and we find
a strong correlation between forgetting and a distributional distance metric (in comparison to L2
distance). We further demonstrate Proxy-FDA’s
benefits in various fine-tuning settings (end-toend, few-shot and continual tuning) and across
different tasks like image classification, captioning and VQA.

Concept forgetting has driven recent research on robust
fine-tuning. The goal is to preserve the pre-trained knowledge and perform well on downstream tasks. One simple approach is to ensemble models before and after finetuning (Wortsman et al., 2022b). Alternative methods use
regularization techniques to constrain the fine-tuned model
to remain close to the original foundation model in either
weight space (Li et al., 2018) or feature space (Mukhoti
et al., 2024). Feature-space regularization by matching the
pre-trained and fine-tuned features across samples shows
a more promising effect in reducing forgetting, since it directly minimizes the change in input-output behaviour of
the model. One key assumption behind such regularization
is that the L2 feature-space distance is a good indicator of
the similarity of encoded concepts in different models.
We argue that aligning individual feature points imposes too
strong of a constraint. Without an explicit insight of feature
neighborhoods, the concepts preserved point-wise are found
to be limited, resulting in sub-optimal performance of forgetting reduction. Here we suggest that it is desirable to explicitly inform the fine-tuning process of the local structure
of feature neighborhoods. By preserving this neighborhood
structure with a structure-wise regularization term, the rich
knowledge encoded in the local structure of the original

1
Apple, Cupertino, United States. Correspondence to: Chen
Huang <chen-huang@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

