Improved Sample Complexity for Private Nonsmooth Nonconvex Optimization

Guy Kornowski 1 Daogao Liu 2 Kunal Talwar 3

Abstract

Due to its fundamental importance in modern machine learning, the field of nonconvex optimization has received substantial attention in recent years. Moving away from the
classical regime of convex optimization, many works aimed
at understanding the complexity of producing approximatestationary points (with small gradient norm) for smooth
nonconvex functions (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Fang et al.,
2018; Carmon et al., 2020; Arjevani et al., 2023). However,
smoothness rarely holds in modern practice, posing a major
challenge for large and highly expressive models such as
deep neural networks. Indeed, using ReLUs and MaxPool
layers is common practice (LeCun et al., 2015), and moreover, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a large batch
size tends to converge to sharp minima (Keskar et al., 2017)

We study differentially private (DP) optimization
algorithms for stochastic and empirical objectives
which are neither smooth nor convex, and propose
methods that return a Goldstein-stationary point
with sample complexity bounds that improve on
existing works. We start by providing a singlepass (ε, δ)-DP algorithm that returns an (α, β)stationary
point as long as the dataset√is of size
√
e
Ω( d/αβ 3 + d/εαβ 2 ), which is Ω( d) times
smaller than the algorithm of Zhang et al. (2024)
for this task, where d is the dimension. We then
provide a multi-pass polynomial time algorithm
which further improves the sample
complexity

e d/β 2 + d3/4 /εα1/2 β 3/2 , by designing a
to Ω
sample efficient ERM algorithm, and proving that
Goldstein-stationary points generalize from the
empirical loss to the population loss.

As it turns out, without smoothness, it is actually impossible to directly minimize the gradient norm without suffering from an exponential-dimension dependent runtime in
the worst case (Kornowski & Shamir, 2022). Nonetheless,
a nuanced notion coined as Goldstein-stationarity (Goldstein, 1977), has been shown in recent years to enable favorable guarantees. Roughly speaking, a point x ∈ Rd
is called an (α, β)-Goldstein stationary point (or simply
(α, β)-stationary) if there exists a convex combination of
gradients in the α-ball around x whose norm is at most β.1
Following the groundbreaking work of Zhang et al. (2020),
a surge of works study NSNC optimization through the lens
of Goldstein stationarity, with associated finite-time guarantees (Davis et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Cutkosky et al.,
2023; Jordan et al., 2023; Kong & Lewis, 2023; Grimmer &
Jia, 2024; Kornowski & Shamir, 2024; Tian & So, 2024).

1. Introduction
We consider optimization problems in which the loss function is stochastic or empirical, of the form
F (x) := E [f (x; ξ)] ,

(stochastic)

1
FbD (x) :=
f (x; ξi ),
n i=1

(ERM)

ξ∼P
n
X

where P is the population distribution from which we sample a dataset D = (ξ1 , . . . , ξn ) ∼ P n , and the component
functions f ( · ; ξ) : Rd → R may be neither smooth nor
convex. Such problems are ubiquitous throughout machine
learning, where losses given by deep-learning based models
give rise to highly nonsmooth nonconvex (NSNC) landscapes.

In this work, we study NSNC optimization problems under
the additional constraint of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006). With the ever-growing deployment of ML
models in various domains, the privacy of the data on which
models are trained is a major concern. Accordingly, DP
optimization is an extremely well-studied problem, with a
vast literature focusing on functions that are assumed to be
either convex or smooth (Bassily et al., 2014; Wang et al.,
2017; Bassily et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Feldman et al.,

1

Weizmann Institute of Science; work done while interning at Apple. 2 Google; work done while at University of
Washington and Apple. 3 Apple. Correspondence to: Guy Kornowski <guy.kornowski@weizmann.ac.il>, Daogao Liu <liudaogao@gmail.com>.

1

Previous works typically use the notational convention (δ, ε)stationarity instead of (α, β), namely where δ is the radius (instead
of α) and ε is the norm bound (instead of β). We depart from this
notational convention in order to avoid confusion with the standard
privacy notation of (ε, δ)-DP.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

