Position: AI Evaluation Should Learn from How We Test Humans
Yan Zhuang 1 Qi Liu 1 2 Zachary A. Pardos 3 Patrick C. Kyllonen 4 Jiyun Zu 4 Zhenya Huang 1 2
Shijin Wang 1 5 Enhong Chen 1
Leaderboard on Benchmarks

Abstract

EX
AM

Rank

Name

Score

As AI systems continue to evolve, their rigorous
1
GPT-4
0.96
evaluation becomes crucial for their development
2
PaLM-2
0.95
Evaluating 3
ChatGPT
0.81
and deployment. Researchers have constructed
& Ranking
…
various large-scale benchmarks to determine their
10
LLaMA
0.75
Benchmarks
capabilities, typically against a gold-standard test
set and report metrics averaged across all items.
However, this static evaluation paradigm increasFigure 1. The traditional benchmarking paradigm for AI. However,
the reliability of evaluation results can be compromised by several
ingly shows its limitations, including high evalfactors, including item’s quality (e.g., redundancy, contamination,
uation costs, data contamination, and the impact
or errors) and the increasing complexity of AI behaviors.
of low-quality or erroneous items on evaluation
reliability and efficiency. In this Position, drawing from human psychometrics, we discuss a
and decision-making processes, it is crucial to determine
paradigm shift from static evaluation methods
the success of these techniques and evaluate whether a systo adaptive testing. This involves estimating the
tem is ready for deployment (Chang et al., 2024; Sandmann
characteristics or value of each test item in the
0.86 efforts have been made to examine
et al., 3
2024). Mixtral
Significant
benchmark, and tailoring each model’s evaluamodelsusing
from
various
perspectives,
including traditional lanLLMs are evaluated
the same
exams,
which requires a
tion instead of relying on a fixed test set. This
significant number
questions
to et
coveral.,
the full
range
of et al., 2023), natural
guageof tasks
(Peña
2023;
Bang
paradigm provides robust ability estimation, uncapabilities. sciences (Boiko et al., 2023; Arora et al., 2023), social scicovering the latent traits underlying a model’s
ences (Demszky et al., 2023; Nay et al., 2024), and agent
observed scores. This position paper analyze the
applications (Valmeekam et al., 2023). Diverse and extencurrent possibilities, prospects, and reasons for
sive benchmarking is essential for a holistic assessment of
adopting psychometrics in AI evaluation. We aradvanced AI systems, identifying their shortcomings and
gue that psychometrics, a theory originating in
guiding targeted improvements. For example, Google’s
the 20th century for human assessment, could be
BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2022) consists of over 200
a powerful solution to the challenges in today’s
different tasks, and HuggingFace’s Open LLM Leaderboard
AI evaluations.
(Beeching et al., 2023) includes six scenarios with approximately 29,000 items (questions) in total.
Traditionally, as shown in Figure 1, evaluating AI systems
involves testing against a large-scale gold-standard test set
and reporting standard metric (precision/recall/F1) scores
averaged across all items. For example, correct responses
are scored as 1, incorrect as 0, and the final score is averaged. However, these sheer size of benchmarks incurs
significant time and computational costs. For example, evaluating the performance of a single LLM on the full HELM
benchmark consumes over 4,000 GPU hours (or $10,000
for APIs) (Liang et al., 2023). In today’s era dominated by
large generative AI, the evaluation costs increase dramatically with model size, with inference latency reaching up to
1,000 times that of traditional language models like BERT
(Wang et al., 2024b). The challenges are compounded when
evaluating diverse generative tasks, which often require

1. Introduction
AI systems are demonstrating an ever-increasing level of
capability and generality, particularly those generative AI
models represented by Large Language Models (LLMs).
As AI systems become more integrated into our daily lives
1
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of
Science and Technology of China, China 2 Institute of Artificial
Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, China
3
University of California, Berkeley, USA 4 Educational Testing
Service, USA 5 iFLYTEK Co., Ltd, China. Correspondence to: Qi
Liu <qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

