Discriminative Finetuning of Generative Large Language Models
without Reward Models and Human Preference Data
Siqi Guo 1 Ilgee Hong 2 † Vicente Balmaseda 1 Changlong Yu 3 Liang Qiu 3 Xin Liu 3 Haoming Jiang 3
Tuo Zhao 3 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract

at https://github.com/Optimization-AI/DFT.

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) has become a crucial step for aligning pretrained large language
models (LLMs) using supervised datasets of inputoutput pairs. However, despite being supervised,
SFT is inherently limited by its generative training
objective. To address its limitations, the existing
common strategy is to follow SFT with a separate phase of preference optimization (PO), which
relies on either human-labeled preference data
or a strong reward model to guide the learning
process. In this paper, we address the limitations
of SFT by exploring one of the most successful
techniques in conventional supervised learning:
discriminative learning. We introduce Discriminative Fine-Tuning (DFT), an improved variant
of SFT, which mitigates the burden of collecting
human-labeled preference data or training strong
reward models. Unlike SFT that employs a generative approach and overlooks negative data, DFT
adopts a discriminative paradigm that increases
the probability of positive answers while suppressing potentially negative ones, aiming for data
prediction instead of token prediction. Our contributions include: (i) a discriminative probabilistic framework for fine-tuning LLMs by explicitly
modeling the discriminative likelihood of an answer among all possible outputs given an input;
(ii) efficient algorithms to optimize this discriminative likelihood; and (iii) extensive experiments
demonstrating DFT’s effectiveness, achieving performance better than SFT and comparable to if
not better than SFT→PO. The code can be found

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) has become an
essential step to adapt pretrained models to specific tasks,
significantly improving their performance and practical utility (Wei et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023; OpenAI, 2024; Guo et al., 2025). While pretraining
enables LLMs to acquire vast amounts of general knowledge, fine-tuning tailors the model to exhibit desirable behaviors, and excel in specialized domains. As LLMs become integral to applications like conversational AI, content
generation, and decision-making, developing effective and
efficient fine-tuning methods remains a critical challenge.
The current standard for aligning LLMs typically involves
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) followed by preference optimization (PO) denoted by SFT→PO, including techniques such as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022;
Bai et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2024). In this approach, SFT
first aligns the model with supervised data, and PO further
refines the model using preference data labeled by humans
or a reward model that simulates human preferences. This
two-stage process has achieved significant success, particularly in improving human alignment and response quality.
However, PO methods often require extensive human annotations or the construction of robust reward models, both of
which are resource-intensive and may limit scalability and
applicability in highly specialized areas.
This raises an intriguing question: Can we align LLMs
without human preference data or reward models while
achieving competitive performance to SFT→PO?

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, USA 2 H. Milton Stewart School
of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 3 Amazon.com Inc, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@tamu.edu>. † I.H.’s work
was done during the internship at Amazon.

To address this question, we propose Discriminative FineTuning (DFT), a novel alternative to SFT→PO that mitigates the burden of collecting human-labeled preference
data or training strong reward models. Unlike SFT, which
uses a generative approach and overlooks negative examples,
DFT adopts a discriminative notion, explicitly discriminating good from “bad” outputs generated by the base model
to be finetuned. We formalize this approach by introducing

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

