Not All Wrong is Bad: Using Adversarial Examples for Unlearning

Ali Ebrahimpour-Boroojeny 1 Hari Sundaram 1 Varun Chandrasekaran 1

Abstract

and the California Consumer Privacy Act. Despite early
efforts on proposing “exact” solutions to this problem (Cao
& Yang, 2015; Bourtoule et al., 2021), the community has
favored “approximate” solutions due to their ability to preserve the original model’s accuracy while being more computationally efficient (Chen et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024;
Fan et al., 2024).

Machine unlearning, where users can request the
deletion of a forget dataset, is becoming increasingly important because of numerous privacy regulations. Initial works on “exact” unlearning (e.g.,
retraining) incur large computational overheads.
However, while computationally inexpensive, “approximate” methods have fallen short of reaching
the effectiveness of exact unlearning: models produced fail to obtain comparable accuracy and prediction confidence on both the forget and test (i.e.,
unseen) dataset. Exploiting this observation, we
propose a new unlearning method, Adversarial
Machine UNlearning (AMUN), that outperforms
prior state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods for image
classification. AMUN lowers the confidence of
the model on the forget samples by fine-tuning
the model on their corresponding adversarial examples. Adversarial examples naturally belong
to the distribution imposed by the model on the
input space; fine-tuning the model on the adversarial examples closest to the corresponding forget
samples (a) localizes the changes to the decision
boundary of the model around each forget sample
and (b) avoids drastic changes to the global behavior of the model, thereby preserving the model’s
accuracy on test samples. Using AMUN for unlearning a random 10% of CIFAR-10 samples, we
observe that even SOTA membership inference
attacks cannot do better than random guessing.

Given a training set D and a subset DF ⊂ D of the samples
that have to be unlearned from a model trained on D, recent
works on unlearning have emphasized the use of evaluation
metrics that measure the similarity to the behavior of the
models that are retrained from scratch on D − DF . However,
prior unlearning methods do not effectively incorporate this
evaluation criterion in the design of their algorithm. In this
paper, we first characterize the expected behavior of the
retrained-from-scratch models on D − DF . Using this characterization, we propose Adversarial Machine UNlearning
(AMUN). AMUN is a method that, when applied to the
models trained on D, replicates that (desired) behavior after a few iterations. The success of AMUN relies on an
intriguing observation: fine-tuning a trained model on the
adversarial examples of the training data does not lead to a
catastrophic forgetting and instead has limited effect on the
deterioration of model’s test accuracy.
Upon receiving a request for unlearning a subset DF of the
training set D, AMUN finds adversarial examples that are
as close as possible to the samples in DF . It then utilizes
these adversarial examples (with the wrong labels) during
fine-tuning of the model for unlearning the samples in DF .
Fine-tuning the model on these adversarial examples, which
are naturally mispredicted by the model, decreases the confidence of the predictions on DF . This decreased confidence
of model’s predictions on DF is similar to what is observed
in the models that are retrained on D − DF . The distance
of these adversarial examples to their corresponding samples in DF is much smaller than the distance of DF to other
samples in D − DF ; this localizes the effect of fine-tuning
to the vicinity of the samples in DF and prevents significant
changes to the decision boundary of the model and hurting
the model’s overall accuracy (see § 3.1).

1. Introduction
The goal of machine unlearning is to remove the influence
of a subset of the training dataset for a model that has been
trained on that dataset (Vatter et al., 2023). The necessity for
these methods has been determined by privacy regulations
such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Act
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Ali Ebrahimpour-Boroojeny
<ae20@illinois.edu>.

As we will show in § 6, AMUN outperforms prior stateof-the-art (SOTA) unlearning methods (Fan et al., 2024) in
unlearning random subsets of the training data from a trained

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

