Improved Online Confidence Bounds for Multinomial Logistic Bandits

Joongkyu Lee 1 Min-hwan Oh 1

Abstract

ment selection problems. At every round t, an agent offers
an assortment of at most K items among total N items
and receives feedback only for the chosen decisions. The
user choice probability follows an MNL model (McFadden,
1977). This framework is widely deployed in industry, with
applications ranging from news recommendation systems
to online retail, where assortment selections are optimized
based on user-choice feedback from the offered options. In
such applications, the agent often has access to item features and, potentially, contextual information about the user.
This setup is referred to as the contextual MNL bandit problem (Agrawal et al., 2019; 2017; Ou et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2020; Oh & Iyengar, 2019; 2021; Perivier & Goyal, 2022;
Agrawal et al., 2023; Lee & Oh, 2024).

In this paper, we propose an improved online confidence bound for multinomial logistic (MNL)
models and apply this result to MNL bandits,
achieving variance-dependent optimal regret. Recently, Lee & Oh (2024) established an online
confidence bound for MNL models and achieved
nearly minimax-optimal regret in MNL bandits.
However, their results still depend on the normboundedness of the unknown parameter B and
the maximum size of possible outcomes K. To
address this, ´we first derive an ¯
online confidence
?
?
bound of O
d log t ` B d , which is a significant ?
improvement over the previous bound
of OpB d log t log Kq (Lee & Oh, 2024). This
is mainly achieved by establishing tighter selfconcordant properties of the MNL loss and applying Ville’s inequality to bound the estimation
error. Using this new online confidence bound, we
propose a constant-time algorithm, OFU-MNL++,
which achievesba variance-dependent regret bound
´
¯
řT
2 for sufficiently large
of O d log T
σ
t
t“1

Recently, in contextual MNL bandits, Lee & Oh (2024)
proposed a constant-time algorithm
and obtained a regret
?
of OpB 3{2 d log Kplog T q3{2 T q. Although this result is
nearly minimax optimal when ignoring B and logarithmic
terms, it still depends on the maximum assortment size K
and the norm-boundedness of the parameter B. Intuitively,
a larger K may provide more information (Lee & Oh, 2024),
suggesting that the regret should not scale with any factor
involving K. Moreover, while polypBq-free regret bound
has been established for generalized linear model (GLM)
bandits (Lee et al., 2024b) using the MLE, it remains unclear
whether such a bound can be obtained while maintaining a
constant per-round computational cost.

T , where σt2 denotes the variance of the rewards at round t, d is the dimension of the contexts, and T is the total number of rounds. Furthermore, we introduce a Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE)-based algorithm, OFU-M2 NL,
which achieves an
banytime ¯polypBq-free regret
´
řT
2
of O d logpBT q
t“1 σt .

Our main goal is to design a constant-time algorithm that
achieves improved regret with respect to polypBq and K.
The main challenge in achieving such regret lies in deriving
a tight confidence bound.?Currently, the best-known online
confidence bound is OpB d log t log Kq (Lee & Oh, 2024),
which explicitly depends on both B and log K. This dependency poses a significant bottleneck for obtaining improved
regret. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no variance-dependent regret in contextual MNL bandits.
Hence, the following research questions arise:

1. Introduction
The multinomial logistic (MNL) bandit framework (Rusmevichientong et al., 2010; Sauré & Zeevi, 2013; Agrawal
et al., 2017; 2019; Oh & Iyengar, 2019; 2021; Perivier &
Goyal, 2022; Agrawal et al., 2023; Lee & Oh, 2024) provides a principled approach to tackling sequential assort-

• Can we derive a B, K-improved confidence bound for
online parameter estimation in MNL models?

1

Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to:
Min-hwan Oh <minoh@snu.ac.kr>.

• Can we design a constant-time algorithm that achieves
B, K-improved (or free) and variance-dependent regret in contextual MNL bandits?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

