Stealing That Free Lunch:
Exposing the Limits of Dyna-Style Reinforcement Learning

Brett Barkley 1 David Fridovich-Keil 2

Abstract

implies that performance will vary depending on the environment and problem characteristics. In that light, this paper
begins with a simple, yet novel and unexpected observation:
Model-Based Policy Optimization (MBPO) (Janner et al.,
2019), a popular Dyna-style (Sutton, 1991) model-based
reinforcement learning (DMBRL) algorithm, demonstrates
strong performance across tasks in OpenAI Gym (Brockman
et al., 2016), but performs significantly worse than its base
off-policy algorithm, Soft Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja
et al., 2019a), when trained in DeepMind Control Suite
(DMC) (Tassa et al., 2020) — cf. Figure 1.

Dyna-style off-policy model-based reinforcement
learning (DMBRL) algorithms are a family of
techniques for generating synthetic state transition
data and thereby enhancing the sample efficiency
of off-policy RL algorithms. This paper identifies
and investigates a surprising performance gap observed when applying DMBRL algorithms across
different benchmark environments with proprioceptive observations. We show that, while DMBRL algorithms perform well in control tasks in
OpenAI Gym, their performance can drop significantly in DeepMind Control Suite (DMC), even
though these settings offer similar tasks and identical physics backends. Modern techniques designed to address several key issues that arise in
these settings do not provide a consistent improvement across all environments, and overall our results show that adding synthetic rollouts to the
training process — the backbone of Dyna-style
algorithms — significantly degrades performance
across most DMC environments. Our findings
contribute to a deeper understanding of several
fundamental challenges in model-based RL and
show that, like many optimization fields, there is
no free lunch when evaluating performance across
diverse benchmarks in RL.

Interestingly, the Gym and DMC benchmarks feature similar tasks and identical physics backends (Todorov et al.,
2012). Yet, despite the popularity of MBPO, with around
1k citations (as of late 2024), only two studies report evaluating MBPO in DMC (Wang et al., 2024; Voelcker et al.,
2024), and a performance gap has only been noted in the
hopper-hop task (Voelcker et al., 2024). Our results generalize these findings, and call into question the robustness
of MBPO, and of Dyna-style algorithms more broadly.

1. Introduction
Colloquially, the “no free lunch theorem” states that no
optimization algorithm can be universally optimal across
all problem instances. In reinforcement learning (RL), this

Figure 1. Comparison of normalized final return for two different
DMBRL algorithms with and without Dyna-style enhancements.
Results are averaged across 6 random seeds per task, with 6 tasks
from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016) and 15 from DMC
(Tassa et al., 2020). For training curves, cf. Figures 3 and 17.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas
at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 2 Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Brett Barkley
<bbarkley@utexas.edu>.

Beyond robustness, these discrepancies raise critical questions for us in the RL community. First, is the performance gap fundamental, or merely an artifact we can “fix”
with modern techniques applied to predictive models, other
model-based RL components, and/or the base off-policy

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

