On the Duality between Gradient Transformations and Adapters

Lucas Torroba-Hennigen 1 Hunter Lang 1 Han Guo 1 Yoon Kim 1

Abstract

In response, a wealth of literature has developed around
memory-efficient training methods. Most of these fall
into one of two families. The first involves modifications
to the model parameterization, in particular by introducing “adapters” to the model architecture that have a small
number of additional parameters, and only tuning those
adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019; Li & Liang, 2021; Hu et al.,
2022). Adapters such as LoRA increase the total number
of parameters but reduce the number of trainable parameters, resulting in overall memory savings. While LoRA
was originally introduced for memory-efficient finetuning,
recent works such as ReLoRA (Lialin et al., 2024), LoRAthe-Explorer (LTE; Huh et al., 2024), and Flora (Hao et al.,
2024) find that LoRA can even enable memory-efficient
pretraining if the adapters are periodically merged back
into the full model (and then reinitialized).

We study memory-efficient optimization of neural networks (in particular language models) with
linear gradient transformations, where the gradients are linearly mapped to a lower dimensional
space than the full parameter space, thus saving
memory required for gradient accumulation and
optimizer state persistence. The model parameters are updated by first performing an optimization step in the lower dimensional space and then
going back into the original parameter space via
the linear map’s transpose. We show that optimizing the model in this transformed space is
equivalent to reparameterizing the original model
through a linear adapter that additively modifies the model parameters, and then only optimizing the adapter’s parameters. When the transformation is Kronecker-factored, this establishes
an equivalence between GaLore (Zhao et al.,
2024) and one-sided LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). We
show that this duality between gradient transformations and adapter-based reparameterizations
unifies existing approaches to memory-efficient
training and suggests new techniques for improving training efficiency and memory use.

The second family of methods involves more direct
changes to the optimization strategy, either by designing
optimizers that store fewer extra bits of information per
parameter (Anil et al., 2019; Shazeer & Stern, 2018), or
(broadly) compressing the gradients, e.g., via quantization (Bernstein et al., 2018; Dettmers et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2024a) or low-rank approximations (Gooneratne et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2023). For LLMs, GaLore (Zhao et al.,
2024) has recently emerged as a promising gradient compression approach for memory-efficient pretraining. GaLore transforms the gradient matrices of linear layers via
projections derived from an SVD of the gradient matrix,
and then performs optimization in this projected space.

1. Introduction
Training neural networks, in particular large language models (LLMs), can be extremely memory-intensive. Standard approaches for LLM training use gradient accumulation across multiple batches and optimizers such as
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), which maintains estimates of
the first and second moments of the (stochastic) gradient.
Hence, the amount of GPU memory needed for standard
training can be as much as four times the amount of memory needed to store the model (assuming the gradients/optimization states are kept in the same precision as the model
parameters).

Is there a relationship between methods that directly transform/compress gradients, and adapter-based methods that
reparameterize the underlying model into frozen and trainable components? In the case of GaLore and LoRA, recent
works find that the answer is yes, in particular showing that
training a LoRA adapter with one side frozen can be seen as
a form of gradient compression where the gradient matrices are sketched to a lower dimensional space with random
matrices (Hao et al., 2024) or through SVD-based projections (Loeschcke et al., 2024).

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Lucas Torroba-Hennigen <lucastor@mit.edu>.

In this work, we show that the connection between GaLore
and LoRA is more general by proving that training a neural network by applying an arbitrary linear transformation
to the gradient vector is equivalent (in the sense that the re-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

