VinePPO: Refining Credit Assignment in RL Training of LLMs

Amirhossein Kazemnejad * 1 Milad Aghajohari * 1 Eva Portelance 1 6 Alessandro Sordoni 1 2 Siva Reddy 1 3 4
Aaron Courville † 1 4 5 Nicolas Le Roux † 1 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reinforcement learning (RL) has become instrumental in
training large language models (LLMs) to solve complex
reasoning tasks such as mathematical problem solving
(DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), web navigation (Putta et al.,
2024), or code generation (OpenAI, 2024). In these settings,
LLMs often engage in extended reasoning steps, executing
multiple actions to arrive at a solution. However, not all
steps are equally impactful—some contribute significantly,
while others are irrelevant or detrimental. For example, in
Figure 1.a, only step s2 provides a key insight. Indeed,
most reasoning steps generated by a model do not affect
the chance of it solving the problem (Figure 1.b). Identifying the contribution of each action is crucial for improving
model performance. However, this is inherently difficult due
to the significant delay between actions and their eventual
effect. This issue, known as the Credit Assignment (CA)
problem, is a core challenge in RL (Sutton & Barto, 1998).

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly
applied to complex reasoning tasks that require
executing several complex steps before receiving
any reward. Properly assigning credit to these
steps is essential for enhancing model performance. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), a
common reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm
used for LLM finetuning, employs value networks
to tackle credit assignment. However, recent approaches achieve strong results without it, raising
questions about the efficacy of value networks in
practice. In this work, we systematically evaluate
the efficacy of value networks and reveal their significant shortcomings in reasoning-heavy LLM
tasks, showing that they often produce poor estimate of expected return and barely outperform
a random baseline when comparing alternative
steps. This motivates our key question: Can improved credit assignment enhance RL training for
LLMs? To address this, we propose VinePPO, a
straightforward approach that leverages the flexibility of language environments to compute unbiased Monte Carlo-based estimates. Our method
consistently outperforms PPO and other baselines
across MATH and GSM8K datasets in less wallclock time (up to 3.0x). Crucially, it achieves
higher test accuracy for a given training accuracy,
capturing more generalization signal per sample.
These results emphasize the importance of accurate credit assignment in RL training of LLM.

Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO; Schulman et al. 2017)
addresses credit assignment through a value network (or
critic), a mechanism retained in its application to RL-based
finetuning of LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022). This network,
typically a separate model initialized from a pretrained
checkpoint, is trained during PPO finetuning to estimate
the expected cumulative rewards (or value) of an intermediate action. In Figure 1.b, an ideal value network would
assign high value to step s2 and subsequent steps, where
the model has a high chance of successfully solving the
problem. PPO uses these value estimates to measure the
advantage of each action and update the model accordingly.
However, recent approaches such as DPO (Rafailov et al.,
2023) or GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) simplify PPO’s design
by discarding fine-grained credit assignment and treating
all tokens equally. Despite such simplifications, they often
demonstrate strong performance (Xu et al., 2024; Chang
et al., 2023). This challenges classic RL principles, where
accurate CA is considered critical for optimal performance
(Sutton & Barto, 1998; Greensmith et al., 2001), especially
in tasks with delayed rewards. In this work, we address
this apparent discrepancy by showing that PPO’s credit assignment mechanism, the value network, performs poorly
in practice. Our systematic evaluation (Section 7) on tasks

Code available at https://github.com/
McGill-NLP/VinePPO
Equal contribution † Equal advising 1 Mila 2 Microsoft Research
McGill University 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 5 Université de
Montréal 6 HEC Montréal. Correspondence to: Amirhossein
Kazemnejad <amirhossein.kazemnejad@mila.quebec>, Milad
Aghajohari <aghajohm@mila.quebec>.
*

3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

