SL I M: One-shot Quantization and Sparsity
with Low-rank Approximation for LLM Weight Compression

Mohammad Mozaffari 1 Amir Yazdanbakhsh 2 Maryam Mehri Dehnavi 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

LLMs (Team et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024) have significantly advanced natural language understanding and generation (Suzgun et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023). However, their
extensive parameter counts lead to significant memory overhead and high inference costs (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023; Ma
et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024). To mitigate these challenges,
recent methods (Shao et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Lin et al.,
2024) leverage compression to reduce inference costs while
aiming to retain accuracy as much as possible, albeit often
with some trade-offs compared to dense models.

Conventional model compression techniques for
LLMs address high memory consumption and
slow inference challenges but typically require
computationally expensive retraining to preserve
accuracy. In contrast, one-shot compression methods eliminate retraining costs, but struggle to
achieve accuracy comparable to dense models.
This paper presents SL I M, a new one-shot compression framework that holistically integrates
hardware-friendly quantization, sparsity, and lowrank approximation into a unified process. First,
we formulate the quantization process using a
probabilistic approach (SL I M-Quant) that enables us to apply uniform quantization. Then,
we use an existing one-shot pruning method to
apply semi-structured sparsity on top of the quantized weights. Finally, to compensate for the introduced aggregated quantization and sparsity error,
we use a novel saliency function with unique invertible and additive features that enables us to
mathematically compute the value of low-rank
adapters. SL I M improves model accuracy by up
to 5.66% (LLaMA-2-7B) for 2:4 sparsity with
4-bit weight quantization, outperforming prior
methods. Models compressed with SL I M achieve
up to 4.3× and 3.8× layer-wise speedup on
Nvidia RTX3060 and A100 GPUs, respectively.
Additionally, they achieve up to 0.23× end-to-end
memory reduction in comparison to their dense
counterparts. We also propose an optional PEFT
recipe that further improves accuracy by up to
1.66% (LLaMA-2-13B) compared to SL I M without fine-tuning.1

Pruning and quantization methods effectively reduce the
computational and memory overhead of LLMs, but they often require costly retraining on large-scale datasets to restore
accuracy (Sanh et al., 2020; Park et al., 2018). The computational overhead of retraining, coupled with the numerical and optimization challenges of fine-tuning quantized
models (Gholami et al., 2022), makes these approaches impractical for many real-world applications (Frantar et al.,
2022).
To eliminate the need for retraining, one-shot compression
methods have gained traction, achieving high accuracy using
only a relatively small set of calibration data. State-of-theart methods such as SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023)
and Wanda (Sun et al., 2023) have demonstrated strong
one-shot pruning performance. However, these methods
perform well with unstructured sparsity but struggle with
semi-structured patterns, such as NVIDIA’s 2:4 sparsity
pattern (Mishra et al., 2021), which is crucial for efficient
hardware-accelerated inference. To solve this challenge,
unlike SparseGPT and Wanda that focus on layer-wise error
minimization, MaskLLM (Fang et al., 2024) uses a learnable
mask that minimizes the end-to-end model error, resulting
in a significant boost to the accuracy of the model at the
cost of an expensive mask training phase. One-shot quantization methods use various methods including row/column
reordering (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023), scaling (Xiao et al.,
2023; Lin et al., 2024), and other transformations (Shao
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024) to mitigate model accuracy
loss. However, their dependence on complex GPU kernel
implementations can limit the practical benefits of quantization and add challenges to their development.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
Google DeepMind 3 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to: Mohammad Mozaffari <mmozaffari@cs.toronto.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code and data for SL I M is available at: https://github.
com/Mohammad-Mozaffari/slim

1

