Quantifying Treatment Effects: Estimating Risk Ratios via Observational
Studies
Ahmed Boughdiri 1 Julie Josse 1 Erwan Scornet 2

Abstract

from extraneous or undesirable factors. The medical guideline CONSORT (Moher et al., 2010) recommends reporting
the treatment effect with relative measures like the Risk
Ratio (RR) along with absolute measures like the Risk Difference (RD) to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the effect and its implications, as neither measure
alone offers a complete picture. Indeed, selecting one measure over another carries several implication. For instance,
with 3% baseline mortality reduced to 1% by treatment,
RD shows a 2% drop, while RR shows controls have three
times the risk: RD suggests a small effect; RR highlights a
larger one. In addition, (Naylor et al., 1992) and (Forrow
et al., 1992) demonstrated that physicians’ inclination to
treat patients, based on their perception of therapeutic impact, is influenced by the scale utilized to present clinical
effects. Finally, the treatment effect may be heterogeneous
in one scale, i.e. the treatment effect varies according to
patient characteristics, but homogeneous in another scale
(Rothman, 2011), which significantly disrupts interpretation.
(Colnet et al., 2024) discusses causal measure properties
with a focus on generalization of the treatment effect from a
trial to a target population.

The Risk Difference (RD), an absolute measure
of effect, is widely used and well-studied in both
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies. Complementary to the RD, the
Risk Ratio (RR), as a relative measure, is critical
for a comprehensive understanding of intervention effects: RD can downplay small absolute
changes, while RR can highlight them. Despite
its significance, the theoretical study of RR has received less attention, particularly in observational
settings. This paper addresses this gap by tackling the estimation of RR in observational data.
We propose several RR estimators and establish
their theoretical properties, including asymptotic
normality and confidence intervals. Through analyses on simulated and real-world datasets, we
evaluate the performance of these estimators in
terms of bias, efficiency, and robustness to generative data models. We also examine the coverage
and length of the associated confidence intervals.
Due to the non-linear nature of RR, influence
function theory yields two distinct efficient estimators with different convergence assumptions.
Based on theoretical and empirical insights, we
recommend, among all estimators, one of the
two doubly-robust estimators, which, intriguingly,
challenges conventional expectations.

Consequently, both RD and RR measures are widely used
in the analysis of clinical trial data as explained in Malenka
et al. (1993), Sinclair & Bracken (1994) and Nakayama et al.
(1998). The Risk Ratio is particularly relevant in scenarios where outcomes are always either positive or negative
(Malenka et al., 1993) and in cases where both expected
potential outcomes being compared are small, as it is more
stable and interpretable than the RD. Furthermore, in cases
of rare treatment occurrences, the Risk Ratio closely approximates the Odds Ratio (OR), further enhancing its relevance
and utility in clinical analyses (Schechtman, 2002). Barratt et al. (2004) recommend using the RR from clinical
trials with an estimation of the individual patient baseline to
provide the right treatment.

1. Introduction
Treatment effect estimation in trials. Modern evidencebased medicine prioritizes Randomized Controlled Trials
(RCTs) as the cornerstone of clinical evidence. Randomization in RCTs allows for the quantification of the average
treatment effect (ATE) by removing confounding influences
*

Equal contribution 1 INRIA Sophia-Antipolis 2 Sorbonne Université and Université Paris Cité. Correspondence to: Ahmed
Boughdiri <ahmed.boughdiri@inria.fr>.

Treatment effect estimation in observational data. Despite being the gold standard to assess treatment effects,
RCTs may face limitations due to stringent eligibility criteria, unrealistic real-world compliance, short study durations,
and limited sample sizes. Medical journals such as JAMA
(Bibbins-Domingo, 2024) and others (Hernan & Robins,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

