Position: Causal Machine Learning Requires Rigorous Synthetic Experiments
for Broader Adoption

Audrey Poinsot * 1 2 Panayiotis Panayiotou * 3 Alessandro Leite 4 2 Nicolas Chesneau 1 Özgür Şimşek 3
Marc Schoenauer 2

Abstract

able assumptions, their practical value is often questioned.
Practitioners argue that such assumptions are unrealistic for
real-world applications, while ML researchers, accustomed
to working with assumption-free methods, criticize the limited applicability of methods that require strict validation
of such assumptions. In this context, Loftus (2024) argued
that wide adoption of causal inference requires a mindset
shift towards human-centered scientific pragmatism, prioritizing utility by striking the right balance between flexible
hypothesis-free and “correct” (i.e., based on strong assumptions) models. However, a significant barrier to changing the
community mindset is the limitations of current evaluation
practices, which often fail to provide tangible evidence of
the practical utility of causal methods and how they would
perform under realistic conditions (Feuerriegel et al., 2024;
Curth et al., 2024; Berrevoets et al., 2024).

Causal machine learning has the potential to revolutionize decision-making by combining the predictive power of machine learning algorithms with
the theory of causal inference. However, these
methods remain underutilized by the broader machine learning community, in part because current
empirical evaluations do not permit assessment
of their reliability and robustness, undermining
their practical utility. Specifically, one of the principal criticisms made by the community is the
extensive use of synthetic experiments. We argue,
on the contrary, that synthetic experiments are
essential and necessary to precisely assess and
understand the capabilities of causal machine
learning methods. To substantiate our position,
we critically review the current evaluation practices, spotlight their shortcomings, and propose
a set of principles for conducting rigorous empirical analyses with synthetic data. Adopting
the proposed principles will enable comprehensive evaluations that build trust in causal machine
learning methods, driving their broader adoption
and impactful real-world use.

In predictive ML, researchers have increasingly criticized
current empirical practices, particularly the overreliance on
predictive performance as the sole metric of success (Herrmann et al., 2024; Karl et al., 2024; Dehghani et al., 2021).
They also argue that benchmarks often focus on narrow,
well-defined tasks, failing to evaluate models’ robustness,
interpretability, and real-world applicability (Geirhos et al.,
2020; Freiesleben & Grote, 2023; Longjohn et al., 2024).
While these predictive-ML-oriented critiques offer valuable
lessons for Causal ML, they need to be extended to meet
the particular challenges of Causal ML empirical analysis.

1. Introduction
Causal machine learning (Causal ML) uses Machine Learning (ML) algorithms to answer causal questions (Pearl &
Mackenzie, 2018). Despite its transformative potential for
decision-making, Causal ML has yet to achieve widespread
adoption in the broader ML community. Indeed, because
Causal ML methods are based on strong and often unfalsifi-

A core challenge in evaluating causal methods stems from
the fundamental problem of causal inference (Holland,
1986): for the same unit, it is impossible to observe the
outcome under both conditions: when it has acted and when
it has not. For example, in the case of vaccines, one can
observe the outcome for individuals who have received the
vaccine or for those who have not, but not both for the same
individuals. This fundamental limitation means that counterfactual outcomes, as the basis of causal reasoning and
describing any causal queries, remain unobservable. Consequently, evaluations of Causal ML methods rely predominantly on synthetic datasets (Geffner et al., 2024; Mahajan
et al., 2024; Javaloy et al., 2023).

*
Equal contribution 1 Ekimetrics, France 2 TAU, LISN, INRIA Saclay, France 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, Bath, UK 4 INSA Rouen Normandy, Normandy
University, LITIS, Rouen, France. Correspondence to: Panayiotis Panayiotou <pp2024@bath.ac.uk>, Audrey Poinsot <audrey.poinsot@ekimetrics.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In addition to the possibility of accessing fully observable
1

