Adaptive Learn-then-Test: Statistically Valid and Efficient Hyperparameter
Selection
Matteo Zecchin 1 Sangwoo Park 1 Osvaldo Simeone 1

Abstract

In the current scaling-centric era of large, Internet-scale,
data sets (Xiao, 2024), hyperparameter optimization is typically modeled as a bandit problem in which the goal is the
minimization of the training loss over a set of discrete configurations. The configurations may include prompt designs
for the fine-tuning of large language models (LLMs) (Zhou
et al., 2023; Quach et al., 2023; Schneider et al., 2024), architectural choices related to model scale (Nasir et al., 2024)
or to the timing of early decisions (Schuster et al., 2022),
or policy settings for offline reinforcement learning (Paine
et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021).

We introduce adaptive learn-then-test (aLTT), an
efficient hyperparameter selection procedure that
provides finite-sample statistical guarantees on
the population risk of AI models. Unlike the existing learn-then-test (LTT) technique, which relies
on conventional p-value-based multiple hypothesis testing (MHT), aLTT implements sequential
data-dependent MHT with early termination by
leveraging e-processes. As a result, aLTT can reduce the number of testing rounds, making it particularly well-suited for scenarios in which testing
is costly or presents safety risks. Apart from maintaining statistical validity, in applications such as
online policy selection for offline reinforcement
learning and prompt engineering, aLTT is shown
to achieve the same performance as LTT while
requiring only a fraction of the testing rounds.

The learn-then-test (LTT) method introduced by (Angelopoulos et al., 2021) has recently emerged as a formal
framework to address hyperparameter selection over a discrete space. LTT treats the calibration task of hyperparameter selection as a multiple hypothesis testing (MHT)
problem. Accordingly, it associates each hyperparameter in
a candidate set to the null hypothesis that the hyperparameter does not meet a reliability requirement on the population
risk. Hypotheses are tested using p-values, and the probability of mistakenly detecting a hyperparameter as reliable is
guaranteed via family-wise error rate (FWER)-controlling
statistical procedures (Keselman & Rogan, 1977). This way,
LTT ensures finite-sample, high-probability guarantees on
the population risk of the selected hyperparameters.

1. Introduction
1.1. Context and Motivation
The safe and reliable deployment of AI applications, or apps
for short, hinges on the possibility of certifying their performance (Seshia et al., 2022; Tegmark & Omohundro, 2023).
Depending on the problem, this may require controlling the
missed detection probability in medical imaging (Lu et al.,
2022; Mehrtash et al., 2020), ensuring safety measures for
control policies (Lindemann et al., 2023; Zecchin et al.,
2024), or verifying the correctness of the answers given by
a large language model (LLM) (Quach et al., 2023).

To prevent p-hacking (Head et al., 2015), LTT’s guarantees
apply only to non-adaptive MHT procedures. However, related work on hyperparameter optimization has shown the
significant benefits that can be accrued by adaptive exploration strategies that test hyperparameters sequentially in
a data-driven manner (Swersky et al., 2014; Rakotoarison
et al., 2024). This work aims at improving the data efficiency
of LTT by leveraging recent advances in sequential MHT
based on e-processes (Vovk & Wang, 2021; Waudby-Smith
& Ramdas, 2024; Xu et al., 2021).

In practice, before deployment, AI apps can be often calibrated by selecting hyperparameters based on data set aside
for this purpose or based on rounds of real-world testing.

1.2. Related Work

1
Centre for Intelligent Information Processing Systems, Department of Engineering, King’s College London, London, United
Kingdom. Correspondence to: Sangwoo Park, Matteo Zecchin
<sangwoo.park@kcl.ac.uk, matteo.1.zecchin@kcl.ac.uk>.

Finite-sample statistical guarantees on inferential outputs
can be obtained via conformal prediction methods (Shafer &
Vovk, 2008; Angelopoulos et al., 2023) and, more generally,
via conformal risk control and risk-controlling set-valued
predictions (Angelopoulos et al., 2022; Bates et al., 2021).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

