Multi-Turn Code Generation Through Single-Step Rewards

Arnav Kumar Jain * 1 2 Gonzalo Gonzalez-Pumariega * 3 Wayne Chen 3 Alexander M Rush 3
Wenting Zhao † 3 Sanjiban Choudhury † 3

Abstract

2023; Ni et al., 2024). However, these struggle to iteratively
correct errors over multiple turns. Multi-turn approaches,
on the other hand, rely on complex reinforcement learning
(RL) (Gehring et al., 2024a; Kumar et al., 2024b; Zhou et al.,
2024) to optimize long-term rewards. While effective in
principle, these methods suffer from sparse learning signals
which makes learning inefficient.

We address the problem of code generation from
multi-turn execution feedback. Existing methods either generate code without feedback or use
complex, hierarchical reinforcement learning to
optimize multi-turn rewards. We propose a simple yet scalable approach, µC ODE, that solves
multi-turn code generation using only single-step
rewards. Our key insight is that code generation
is a one-step recoverable MDP, where the correct
code can be recovered from any intermediate code
state in a single turn. µC ODE iteratively trains
both a generator to provide code solutions conditioned on multi-turn execution feedback and a
verifier to score the newly generated code. Experimental evaluations show that our approach
achieves significant improvements over the stateof-the-art baselines. We provide analysis of the
design choices of the reward models and policy,
and show the efficacy of µC ODE at utilizing the
execution feedback. Our code is available here.

Our key insight is that code generation is a one-step recoverable Markov Decision Process (MDP), implying that the
correct code can be recovered from any intermediate state
in a single step. This allows us to greedily maximize a onestep reward instead of relying on complex multi-step reward
optimization. As a result, this reduces the problem from reinforcement learning, which requires exploration and credit
assignment, to imitation learning, where the model simply
learns to mimic correct code, leading to a more stable and
efficient training process.
We propose µC ODE, a simple and scalable approach for
multi-turn code generation from execution feedback. During training, µC ODE follows an expert iteration (Anthony
et al., 2017) framework with a local search expert, enabling
iterative improvement of both the generator and the expert.
The process begins by rolling out the current code generator to collect interaction data with execution feedback. A
single-step verifier is then trained on this data and utilized
to guide a local search expert in refining the code and generating training labels. Finally, the generator is fine-tuned
using these labels. Given recent trends of test-time scaling
in generating high quality solutions (Brown et al., 2024;
Snell et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024), µC ODE also uses the
learned verifier for inference-time scaling. Here, µC ODE
samples N trajectories; at each step, µC ODE picks the best
code solution ranked by the learned verifier.

1. Introduction
Software engineers often iteratively refine their code based
on execution errors. A common strategy for machine code
generation is thus to repair code using execution feedback
at test time (Chen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b; Zhao
et al., 2024). However, prompting alone is insufficient as it
cannot teach how to recover from all possible errors within
a limited context.
We need to train models that can learn from execution feedback during training. Existing approaches fall into either
single-turn or multi-turn settings. In the single-turn setting,
methods either train without execution feedback (Zelikman
et al., 2022) or perform one-step corrections (Welleck et al.,

The key contributions of this work are as follows:
1. A novel framework, µC ODE, for training code generators and verifiers through multi-turn execution feedback.
We add theoretical analysis of performance bounds using
the property of one-step recoverability for this task.
2. We propose a multi-turn Best-of-N (BoN) approach for
inference-time scaling and present benefits of learned
verifier to select the code solution at each turn.
3. Our approach µC ODE outperforms leading multi-turn

*

Equal contribution 1 Mila- Quebec AI Institute 2 Université de
Montréal 3 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Arnav <arnavkumar.jain@mila.quebec>, Gonzalo <gg387@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

