Benign Samples Matter!
Fine-tuning On Outlier Benign Samples Severely Breaks Safety

Zihan Guan * 1 Mengxuan Hu * 1 Ronghang Zhu 2 Sheng Li † 1 Anil Vullikanti † 1

Abstract

compromise the safety alignment of LLMs (Qi et al., 2023;
Zhan et al., 2023). By fine-tuning the LLMs on a few calibrated harmful Q&A pairs, the safety alignment of LLMs,
which is reinforced during the alignment stage (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023), can be easily undermined.
This process, known as harmful fine-tuning, can cause finetuned LLMs to generate harmful outputs, including content
related to illegal activities, child abuse, and hate speech.

Recent studies have uncovered a troubling vulnerability in the fine-tuning stage of large language models (LLMs): even fine-tuning on entirely benign datasets can lead to a significant increase in the harmfulness of LLM outputs. Building on this finding, our red teaming study takes
this threat one step further by developing a more
effective attack. Specifically, we analyze and
identify samples within benign datasets that contribute most to safety degradation, then fine-tune
LLMs exclusively on these samples. We approach this problem from an outlier detection
perspective and propose Self-Inf-N, to detect
and extract outliers for fine-tuning. Our findings reveal that fine-tuning LLMs on 100 outlier samples selected by Self-Inf-N in the benign datasets severely compromises LLM safety
alignment. Extensive experiments across seven
mainstream LLMs demonstrate that our attack exhibits high transferability across different architectures and remains effective in practical scenarios.
Alarmingly, our results indicate that most existing mitigation strategies fail to defend against this
attack, underscoring the urgent need for more
robust alignment safeguards. Codes are available at https://github.com/GuanZihan/BenignSamples-Matter/.

However, these harmful Q&A pairs can be easily screened
out using off-the-shelf toxicity detection tools such as the
Perspective API (Lees et al., 2022) or the OpenAI Moderation API (Markov et al., 2023). Hence, fine-tuning service
providers (e.g., OpenAI Platform) might refuse the request
for fine-tuning models on harmful datasets (see Figure 7). A
recent study (Qi et al., 2023), (un)fortunately, offers another
alarming possibility: even fine-tuning on entirely benign
datasets (e.g., Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023)) can still lead to
a non-trivial increase in the harmfulness of LLMs’ output.
This astounding finding poses a significant threat to LLM
alignment and raises a critical yet underexplored question:
Could seemingly harmless, benign samples be exploited to
further undermine LLM’s safety alignment?
More specifically, is it possible to intentionally select samples from benign datasets that strongly break safety alignment during the fine-tuning stage? Unlike evidently harmful
samples, these benign samples would evade detection by
existing toxicity and safety tools, making them exceptionally stealthy and difficult to defend against. Such an attack
strategy represents a serious escalation in the threat model
for LLM alignment. In this work, we aim to investigate this
emerging vulnerability and propose a systematic exploration
of how benign datasets might be weaponized to subtly undermine LLM alignment during fine-tuning. The problem
setting is visualized in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning has demonstrated significant success in tailoring pre-trained large language models (LLMs) to various
specialized use cases (Jeong, 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Wang
et al., 2024). However, alongside its advantages, recent research has uncovered a critical vulnerability: fine-tuning can

To our best knowledge, only one existing work explicitly targets this problem, but it leaves notable gaps and limitations.
Specifically, (He et al., 2024) proposed a similarity-based
approach to filter the top k samples from benign datasets that
are most similar to curated harmful examples and farthest
from curated safety samples. They have demonstrated that
fine-tuning LLMs on these filtered samples could degrade

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Virginia 2 University
of Georgia. Correspondence to: Anil Vullikanti <vsakumar@virginia.edu>, Sheng Li <shengli@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

