Mixture of Experts Provably Detect and Learn the Latent Cluster Structure
in Gradient-Based Learning

Ryotaro Kawata * 1 2 Kohsei Matsutani * 1 2 Yuri Kinoshita 1 Naoki Nishikawa 1 2 Taiji Suzuki 1 2

Abstract

gated MoE (Shazeer et al., 2017), which was later integrated
into transformer-based large language models (LLMs) and
further refined in subsequent works (Fedus et al., 2022;
Achiam et al., 2023; Georgiev et al., 2024; Jiang et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024). This kind of MoE enables the activation of only a limited number of trained experts in one
forward pass, drastically reducing the inference cost while
maintaining performance competitive with other successful
architectures of the same order of parameters.

Mixture of Experts (MoE), an ensemble of specialized models equipped with a router that dynamically distributes each input to appropriate experts, has achieved successful results in the field
of machine learning. However, theoretical understanding of this architecture is falling behind due
to its inherent complexity. In this paper, we theoretically study the sample and runtime complexity
of MoE following the stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) when learning a regression task with an underlying cluster structure of single index models.
On the one hand, we prove that a vanilla neural
network fails in detecting such a latent organization as it can only process the problem as a whole.
This is intrinsically related to the concept of information exponent which is low for each cluster,
but increases when we consider the entire task.
On the other hand, we show that a MoE succeeds
in dividing this problem into easier subproblems
by leveraging the ability of each expert to weakly
recover the simpler function corresponding to an
individual cluster. To the best of our knowledge,
this work is among the first to explore the benefits of the MoE framework by examining its SGD
dynamics in the context of nonlinear regression.

However, theoretical understanding of this architecture is
falling behind due to its inherent complexity. Especially,
while the mechanism of the initialization, the optimization
procedure and the behavior of the router are essentially
the same for each expert, it has been repeatedly reported
that each expert ultimately specializes in its own way, each
contributing to different aspects of the learned task. It is still
unclear why such phenomenon happens and why the router
can learn to fairly distribute an input to appropriate experts
without collapsing to a single expert.
To address these fundamental questions, prior work mathematically studied the mechanism of MoE from the perspectives of approximation theory on MoE for multi-level
data (Fung & Tseung, 2022), statistical learning in Gaussian
MoE models (Ho et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2023; 2024a)
and nonlinear regression (Nguyen et al., 2024b;c), as well
as optimization in both classification (Chen et al., 2022;
Chowdhury et al., 2023) and linear regression, especially
for continual learning (Li et al., 2024). However, a clear
explanation of the success of the MoE is lacking in the context of optimization in nonlinear regression which is a more
general problem than optimization in classification.

1. Introduction
Mixture of Experts (MoE) (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan &
Jacobs, 1993), an ensemble of specialized models equipped
with a router that dynamically distributes each input to appropriate experts, has been extensively studied and successfully deployed in a wide range of scenarios over the past few
years. A key milestone was the development of sparsely-

Therefore, in this paper, we focus on such a broader problem
setting of optimization in nonlinear regression. We will
theoretically study the sample and runtime complexity of
MoE optimized with the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
when learning a regression task with an underlying cluster
structure.

*
Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 Center
for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan. Correspondence
to: Ryotaro Kawata <kawata-ryotaro725@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>,
Kohsei Matsutani <matsutani-kohsei140@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Contributions Our contributions are summarized as follows. On the one hand, we prove that a vanilla neural
network fails in detecting such a latent organization as it can
only process the problem as a whole. This is intrinsically

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

