Doubly Robust Fusion of Many Treatments for Policy Learning

Ke Zhu 1 2 * Jianing Chu 3 * Ilya Lipkovich 4 Wenyu Ye 4 Shu Yang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In precision medicine, individualized treatment rules (ITRs)
aim to optimize patient outcomes by tailoring treatment
recommendations to individuals based on their characteristics. This personalization is essential because treatment
effects can vary across individuals. Developing a rule that
recommends the most effective treatment for each person
requires accounting for these variations in a systematic and
data-driven manner. For settings with two or multiple treatments, numerous machine learning approaches have been
developed for estimating ITRs, commonly referred to as ITR
learning or policy learning. These methods can be broadly
classified into two categories. The first involves modeling
treatment outcomes, as in Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan,
1992; Qian & Murphy, 2011; Song et al., 2015), A-learning
(Murphy, 2003; Shi et al., 2018), or D-learning (Qi & Liu,
2018), where the focus is on estimating the expected outcome under each treatment to derive the optimal rule. The
second class of methods directly optimizes the value function, which measures the expected outcome under a given
decision rule (Zhang et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2012; Athey
& Wager, 2021). In these methods, inverse propensity score
weighting (IPW) or augmented IPW (AIPW) estimators are
employed to evaluate the value function, and the optimal
rule is identified by maximizing the value function over a
class of decision functions, such as linear ITRs (Zhang et al.,
2012; Zhao et al., 2012) or tree-based ITRs (Zhang et al.,
2015; Laber & Zhao, 2015; Athey & Wager, 2021).

Individualized treatment rules/recommendations
(ITRs) aim to improve patient outcomes by tailoring treatments to the characteristics of each
individual. However, when there are many treatment groups, existing methods face significant
challenges due to data sparsity within treatment
groups and highly unbalanced covariate distributions across groups. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel calibration-weighted treatment fusion procedure that robustly balances covariates across treatment groups and fuses similar
treatments using a penalized working model. The
fusion procedure ensures the recovery of latent
treatment group structures when either the calibration model or the outcome model is correctly specified. In the fused treatment space, practitioners
can seamlessly apply state-of-the-art ITR learning
methods with the flexibility to utilize a subset of
covariates, thereby achieving robustness while addressing practical concerns such as fairness. We
establish theoretical guarantees, including consistency, the oracle property of treatment fusion, and
regret bounds when integrated with multi-armed
ITR learning methods such as policy trees. Simulation studies show superior group recovery and
policy value compared to existing approaches. We
illustrate the practical utility of our method using
a nationwide electronic health record-derived deidentified database containing data from patients
with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia and Small
Lymphocytic Lymphoma.

However, these approaches encounter significant challenges
when the number of treatment levels becomes large (Rashid
et al., 2021). When treatment levels are numerous, data is
often sparse within each treatment group, making it difficult to estimate treatment effects accurately. Additionally,
covariate shifts across treatment groups exacerbate instability, particularly when balancing methods like IPW are
used. This instability is further amplified in underrepresented treatment groups, where propensity scores are small
and highly variable.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, U.S.A. 2 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710,
U.S.A. 3 Amazon (This work was done prior to joining Amazon)
4
Eli Lilly & Company, Indianapolis, IN 46285, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Shu Yang <syang24@ncsu.edu>.

A key insight to address these challenges lies in recognizing that many treatments share commonalities (Ma et al.,
2022; 2023). For example, different pharmaceutical companies may develop treatments targeting the same disease
mechanisms or symptoms, resulting in similar effects across

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

