DINO-WM: World Models on Pre-trained Visual Features
enable Zero-shot Planning

Gaoyue Zhou 1 Hengkai Pan 1 Yann LeCun 1 2 Lerrel Pinto 1

Abstract

2024; Hansen et al., 2024; Haldar et al., 2024; Jia et al.,
2024). Despite this progress, generalization remains a major challenge (Zhou et al., 2023). Existing approaches predominantly rely on policies that, once trained, operate in
a feed-forward manner during deployment—mapping observations to actions without any further optimization or
reasoning. Under this framework, successful generalization
inherently requires agents to possess solutions to all possible tasks and scenarios once training is complete, which is
only possible if the agent has seen similar scenarios during
training (Reed et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2023b;a; Etukuru
et al., 2024). However, it is neither feasible nor efficient to
learn solutions for all potential tasks and environments in
advance.

The ability to predict future outcomes given control actions is fundamental for physical reasoning.
However, such predictive models, often called
world models, remain challenging to learn and
are typically developed for task-specific solutions
with online policy learning. To unlock world models’ true potential, we argue that they should 1)
be trainable on offline, pre-collected trajectories,
2) support test-time behavior optimization, and
3) facilitate task-agnostic reasoning. To this end,
we present DINO World Model (DINO-WM), a
new method to model visual dynamics without
reconstructing the visual world. DINO-WM leverages spatial patch features pre-trained with DINOv2, enabling it to learn from offline behavioral
trajectories by predicting future patch features.
This allows DINO-WM to achieve observational
goals through action sequence optimization, facilitating task-agnostic planning by treating goal
features as prediction targets. We demonstrate
that DINO-WM achieves zero-shot behavioral solutions at test time on six environments without
expert demonstrations, reward modeling, or prelearned inverse models, outperforming prior stateof-the-art work across diverse task families such
as arbitrarily configured mazes, push manipulation with varied object shapes, and multi-particle
scenarios.

Instead of learning the solutions to all possible tasks during training, an alternative is to fit a dynamics model on
training data and optimize task-specific behavior at runtime.
These dynamics models, also called world models (Ha &
Schmidhuber, 2018), have a long history in robotics and
control (Sutton, 1991; Todorov & Li, 2005; Williams et al.,
2017). More recently, several works have shown that world
models can be trained on raw sensory data (Hafner et al.,
2019; Micheli et al., 2023; Robine et al., 2023; Hansen
et al., 2024; Hafner et al., 2024). This enables flexible use
of model-based optimization to obtain policies as it circumvents the need for explicit state-estimation. Despite this,
significant challenges remain in its use for solving generalpurpose tasks.
To understand the challenges in world modeling, let us consider the two broad paradigms in learning world models:
online and offline. In the online setting, access to the environment is often required so data can be continuously collected to improve the world model, which in turn improves
the policy and the subsequent data collection. However,
the online world model is only accurate in the cover of the
policy that was being optimized. Hence, while it can be
used to train powerful task-specific policies, it requires retraining for every new task even in the same environment.
Instead, in the offline setting, the world model is trained
on an offline dataset of collected trajectories in the environment, which removes its dependence on the task specificity
given sufficient coverage in the dataset. However, when

1. Introduction
Robotics and embodied AI have seen tremendous progress
in recent years. Advances in imitation learning and reinforcement learning have enabled agents to learn complex
behaviors across diverse tasks (Agarwal et al., 2022; Zhao
et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2024; Hafner et al.,
1
Courant Institute, New York University 2 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Gaoyue Zhou <gz2123@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

