Risk and cross validation in ridge regression with correlated samples

Alexander Atanasov * 1 2 Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth * 2 3 Cengiz Pehlevan 2 4 5

Abstract

& Potters, 2003; Mudelsee, 2014; Williams & Linderman,
2021)—rendering results obtained under the i.i.d. assumption inapplicable. In particular, estimators of the out-ofsample prediction risk based on cross-validation assume
independence (Golub et al., 1979; Craven & Wahba, 1978;
Bates et al., 2024; Xu & Huang, 2012; Gu & Ma, 2005;
Xu et al., 2018; 2019). To enable accurate prediction of
risk for regression from timeseries data, it is imperative that
correlations be taken into account.

Recent years have seen substantial advances in
our understanding of high-dimensional ridge
regression, but existing theories assume that
training examples are independent. By leveraging
techniques from random matrix theory and
free probability, we provide sharp asymptotics
for the in- and out-of-sample risks of ridge
regression when the data points have arbitrary
correlations. We demonstrate that in this setting,
the generalized cross validation estimator (GCV)
fails to correctly predict the out-of-sample
risk. However, in the case where the noise
residuals have the same correlations as the
data points, one can modify the GCV to yield
an efficiently-computable unbiased estimator
that concentrates in the high-dimensional limit,
which we dub CorrGCV. We further extend
our asymptotic analysis to the case where the
test point has nontrivial correlations with the
training set, a setting often encountered in time
series forecasting. Assuming knowledge of the
correlation structure of the time series, this again
yields an extension of the GCV estimator, and
sharply characterizes the degree to which such
test points yield an overly optimistic prediction of
long-time risk. We validate the predictions of our
theory across a variety of high dimensional data.

In the paradigmatic setting of ridge regression, a significant body of recent research has aimed to provide sharp
asymptotic characterizations of the out-of-sample risk when
the in-sample risk is estimated using i.i.d. samples (Hastie
et al., 2022; Dobriban & Wager, 2018; Advani & Ganguli,
2016; Canatar et al., 2021b; Loureiro et al., 2021; Atanasov
et al., 2024; Mel & Pennington, 2021; Mel & Ganguli, 2021;
Bordelon et al., 2020; Jacot et al., 2020; Gerace et al., 2020).
The crucial feature of these high-dimensional asymptotics
is that they allow both the dimensionality of the covariates
and the number of examples to be large.1 This body of work
reveals two broad principles: First, ridge regression has a
spectral bias towards learning functions aligned with eigenfunctions of the feature covariance (Canatar et al., 2021b;
Bordelon et al., 2020; Mel & Pennington, 2021; Mel & Ganguli, 2021). Second, ridge regression displays Gaussian
universality in high dimension, i.e., the out-of-sample risk
for a given dataset will under general conditions be asymptotically identical to that for a Gaussian dataset with matched
first and second moments (Hastie et al., 2022; Montanari
& Saeed, 2022; Hu & Lu, 2022). Importantly, nearly all of
these works assume the training examples are i.i.d.. A rare
exception is a recent paper by Bigot et al. (2024), who allow
for independent but non-identically distributed Gaussian
data with per-example modulation of total variance.

Statistics classically assumes that one has access to independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples. However, this fundamental assumption is often violated when
one considers data sampled from a time series—e.g., in the
case of financial, climate, or neuroscience data (Bouchaud

These sharp asymptotics are omniscient risk estimates: they
assume one has access to the true joint distribution of covariates and labels from which the training set is sampled.
If one wants to perform hyperparameter tuning in practice—
for ridge regression this of course means tuning the ridge
parameter—a non-omniscient estimate is required. A standard approach to this problem is the method of generalized

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Physics, Harvard University 2 Center for Brain Science, Harvard University 3 Society
of Fellows, Harvard University 4 The John A. Paulson School
of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University 5 The
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University. Correspondence to: JAZ-V <jzavatoneveth@fas.harvard.edu>, CP <cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In contrast, classical asymptotics assume that the dimension
is small relative to the number of examples (Hastie et al., 2009).

1

