D-Fusion: Direct Preference Optimization for Aligning Diffusion Models
with Visually Consistent Samples

Zijing Hu * 1 Fengda Zhang * 2 Kun Kuang 1
SD

Abstract
The practical applications of diffusion models
have been limited by the misalignment between
generated images and corresponding text prompts.
Recent studies have introduced direct preference
optimization (DPO) to enhance the alignment of
these models. However, the effectiveness of DPO
is constrained by the issue of visual inconsistency, where the significant visual disparity between well-aligned and poorly-aligned images
prevents diffusion models from identifying which
factors contribute positively to alignment during
fine-tuning. To address this issue, this paper introduces D-Fusion, a method to construct DPOtrainable visually consistent samples. On one
hand, by performing mask-guided self-attention
fusion, the resulting images are not only wellaligned, but also visually consistent with given
poorly-aligned images. On the other hand, DFusion can retain the denoising trajectories of the
resulting images, which are essential for DPO
training. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of D-Fusion in improving promptimage alignment when applied to different reinforcement learning algorithms.

DPO

DPO+D-Fusion

SD

DPO

DPO+D-Fusion

“a monkey eating a sandwich”

“a horse playing basketball”

“a rabbit driving a car”

Figure 1. (Misalignment) Diffusion models (e.g., Stable Diffusion
(SD) (Rombach et al., 2022)) often encounter the issue that the
generated images do not accurately match the given prompts. Existing RL-based fine-tuning methods (e.g., DPO (Wallace et al.,
2023)) have limited effectiveness in improving the alignment. For
each set of images above, we use the same seed for sampling.

models transform random noises to corresponding images
via a sequential denoising process. However, as shown
in Figure 1, diffusion models often encounter the issue of
prompt-image misalignment (Jiang et al., 2024; Mrini et al.,
2024). Prompt-image misalignment refers to the problem
that the generated images do not accurately match the given
text prompts, which limits the real-world applications of
diffusion models.

1. Introduction

To address this issue, recent studies have explored incorporating reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to fine-tune
pre-trained diffusion models (Black et al., 2024; Clark et al.,
2024; Fan et al., 2023; Wallace et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2024a;b; Hu et al., 2025). In the paradigm of
RL, the step-by-step denoising process of diffusion models
is reinterpreted as a sequential decision-making problem.
In this formulation, the intermediate noisy image at each
timestep is regarded as a state, while each denoising operation corresponds to an action. Among these RL algorithms,
direct preference optimization (DPO) stands out for its advantage of eliminating the need for an explicit reward model,
making it a widely adopted approach (Wallace et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2024a). As illustrated in Figure 2(a), researchers
first sample images from the diffusion model with given

Diffusion models have made remarkable success in various
domains, such as medicine (Xu et al., 2022), robotics (Chi
et al., 2024), and 3D synthesis (Poole et al., 2022). Recently,
the application of diffusion models in the field of text-toimage generation has gained widespread attention (Ho et al.,
2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Under the guidance of
the given text descriptions, usually called prompts, these
*
Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 College of Computing
and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

