CVE-Bench: A Benchmark for AI Agents’ Ability to Exploit Real-World Web
Application Vulnerabilities

Yuxuan Zhu 1 Antony Kellermann Dylan Bowman Philip Li 1 Akul Gupta 1 Adarsh Danda 1 Richard Fang 1
Conner Jensen 1 Eric Ihli Jason Benn Jet Geronimo 1 Avi Dhir 1 Sudhit Rao 1 Kaicheng Yu 1 Twm Stone
Daniel Kang 1

Abstract

raised concerns about the potential misuse of LLM agents in
conducting cyberattacks (Abdali et al., 2024). Consequently,
there has been increasing efforts from government agencies
(Raimondo, 2024), industry practitioners (Hurst et al., 2024),
and researchers (Fang et al., 2024a;c; Abdali et al., 2024;
Zhou et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b; Guo et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2024a) to evaluate and red-team with LLM agents.
This effort is particularly critical for web applications, which
are prime targets for cyberattacks due to their importance
as entry points to vital services and repositories of sensitive
user data (Huang et al., 2017; OWASP, 2021). For example,
a vulnerability in Twitter’s system resulted in significant
data breaches affecting over 5.5 million people from 2014
to 2020 (Twitter, 2022; Winde, 2022).

Large language model (LLM) agents are increasingly capable of autonomously conducting cyberattacks, posing significant threats to existing
applications. This growing risk highlights the urgent need for a real-world benchmark to evaluate
the ability of LLM agents to exploit web application vulnerabilities. However, existing benchmarks fall short as they are limited to abstracted
Capture-the-Flag competitions or lack comprehensive coverage. Building a benchmark for realworld vulnerabilities involves both specialized
expertise to reproduce exploits and a systematic
approach to evaluating unpredictable attacks. To
address this challenge, we introduce CVE-Bench,
a real-world cybersecurity benchmark based on
critical-severity Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures. In CVE-Bench, we design a sandbox
framework that enables LLM agents to exploit vulnerable web applications in scenarios that mimic
real-world conditions, while also providing effective evaluation of their exploits. Our experiments
show that the state-of-the-art agent framework can
exploit up to 13% of the vulnerabilities.

Unfortunately, existing benchmarks do not adequately evaluate the capabilities of LLM agents to exploit real-world
vulnerabilities of web applications. These benchmarks focus on short code-snippets (Zhou et al., 2024) or abstracted
“Capture The Flag” (CTF) challenges (Zhang et al., 2024a;
Yang et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2024; Bhatt et al., 2024; Wan
et al., 2024). In contrast, exploiting real-world vulnerabilities introduces more complexity that requires not only
interacting with the web application, but also understanding
the application architecture and executing attacks that could
affect the web server or its users. Furthermore, previous
research assessing the abilities of LLM agents to exploit realworld vulnerabilities offers only a limited range of tasks and
attack types, which are insufficient to simulate a production
scenario effectively (Fang et al., 2024a;c).

1. Introduction
In recent years, large language model (LLM) agents have
increasingly demonstrated capabilities in complex tasks that
require reasoning (Jaech et al., 2024) and tool use (Wu
et al., 2024), including resolving GitHub issues (Yang et al.,
2024a; Jimenez et al., 2023), fixing bugs (Mündler et al.,
2024), and interacting with real computing environments
(Xie et al., 2024). The advancement of these capabilities has

Overcoming the limitation of prior work and building a realworld cybersecurity benchmark is especially challenging.
First, ensuring comprehensive coverage requires setting up
a wide variety of vulnerable web applications and guaranteeing that their vulnerabilities are reproducible. Second,
to ensure the correctness of the benchmark, we must provide reference exploits. Manually exploiting a vulnerability
can be complicated and requires an in-depth understanding of web architecture, analyzing the vulnerability and
corresponding patches (if any), identifying security weaknesses, and devising feasible exploits to compromise the

1

Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Daniel
Kang <ddkang@g.illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

