CursorCore: Assist Programming through Aligning Anything

Hao Jiang 1 Qi Liu 1 2 Rui Li 1 Shengyu Ye 1 Shijin Wang 3

Abstract

Liang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). The technology mainly
takes two forms. One form involves completing a specified
code snippet at the end or inserting corresponding code at
a designated position, typically accomplished by foundation models (Chen et al., 2021; Bavarian et al., 2022) that
support relevant input formats. The other form involves generating or editing code snippets based on natural language
instructions or reflections through interaction with the environment, usually carried out by instruction models that
have been further aligned (Shinn et al., 2023; Cassano et al.,
2023b; Muennighoff et al., 2024; Paul-Gauthier, 2024). Figure 1 shows simple examples of these forms.

Large language models have been successfully
applied to programming assistance tasks, such
as code completion, code insertion, and instructional code editing. However, these applications
remain insufficiently automated and struggle to
effectively integrate various types of information
during the programming process, including coding history, code context, and user instructions. In
this work, we propose a new framework that comprehensively integrates these information sources,
and collect data to train models and evaluate their
performance. Firstly, to thoroughly evaluate how
well models align with different types of information and the quality of their outputs, we introduce
a new benchmark, APEval (Assist Programming
Eval), to comprehensively assess the performance
of models in programming assistance tasks. Then,
for data collection, we develop a data generation
pipeline, Programming-Instruct, which synthesizes training data from diverse sources, such as
GitHub and online judge platforms. This pipeline
can automatically generate various types of messages throughout the programming process. Finally, using this pipeline, we generate 219K samples, fine-tune multiple models, and develop the
CursorCore series. We show that CursorCore outperforms other models of comparable size. This
framework unifies applications such as inline chat
and automated editing, contributes to the advancement of coding assistants.

However, in practical applications, neither the completion
or insertion mode nor the instruction-based mode is perfect. The completion or insertion mode generates based on
the current code context, but in actual coding, we are continuously editing the code rather than just completing and
inserting. We prefer that the model predicts the upcoming
edits, as neither completion nor insertion accurately reflects
the coding process, and requires programmers to perform
additional operations. The instruction-based mode allows
for code editing, but it also has drawbacks, such as writing
prompts for specific tasks may be slower or challenging.
The process is not automated enough, programmers would
prefer a model that can proactively predict future changes
without needing extra prompts. In our view, the core issue lies in the limitations of the input and output in both
forms of programming assistance. These forms either just
align the output with the current code context, limiting completion or insertion instead of editing, or align the output
with the user’s natural language instructions. However, to
effectively assist with programming, an AI programming
assistant needs to utilize anything throughout the programming process. It should be capable of aligning with the
history of code changes, the current content of the code,
and any instructions provided by the user, predicting the
required responses and corresponding changes, reducing
any actions required by users.

1. Introduction
Since the rise of large language models (LLMs), AI-assisted
programming technology has developed rapidly, with many
powerful LLMs being applied in this field (Zan et al., 2022;
1
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of
Science and Technology of China 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 3 iFLYTEK
Co., Ltd. Correspondence to: Qi Liu <qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn>.

To solve these issues, in this paper, we introduce a new
framework of AI-assisted programming task: AssistantConversation to align anything during programming process. To comprehensively evaluate the alignment of models
with different information in the programming process and
the quality of the corresponding outputs, we propose a new

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

