Flat-LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation over a Flat Loss Landscape

Tao Li * 1 Zhengbao He * 1 Yujun Li 2 Yasheng Wang 2 Lifeng Shang 2 Xiaolin Huang 1

Abstract
Fine-tuning large-scale pre-trained models is prohibitively expensive in terms of computation and
memory costs. Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), a
popular Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)
method, offers an efficient solution by optimizing
only low-rank matrices. Despite recent progress
in improving LoRA’s performance, the relationship between the LoRA optimization space and
the full parameter space is often overlooked. A
solution that appears flat in the loss landscape of
the LoRA space may still exhibit sharp directions
in the full parameter space, potentially compromising generalization. We introduce Flat-LoRA,
which aims to identify a low-rank adaptation situated in a flat region of the full parameter space. Instead of adopting the well-established sharpnessaware minimization approach, which incurs significant computation and memory overheads, we
employ a Bayesian expectation loss objective to
preserve training efficiency. Further, we design a
refined strategy for generating random perturbations to enhance performance and carefully manage memory overhead using random seeds. Experiments across diverse tasks—including mathematical reasoning, coding abilities, dialogue generation, instruction following, and text-to-image generation—demonstrate that Flat-LoRA improves
both in-domain and out-of-domain generalization.
Code is available at https://github.com/
nblt/Flat-LoRA.

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8 l
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
4

2
X

0

2

4

4

2

0

2

4

Y

Figure 1: Illustration of LoRA optimization space. LoRA
constrains optimization to a lower-dimensional space (blue).
A flat minimum in LoRA space (blue curve) may exhibit
sharp directions in the full parameter space (red curve).
of-the-art performance by leveraging the versatile capabilities of pre-trained models (Girshick et al., 2014; Kolesnikov
et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2024c). However,
the enormous size of these models makes fine-tuning all
parameters resource-intensive. Recently, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) has been proposed to address
this challenge. LoRA fine-tunes only low-rank matrices,
which can be merged with the pre-trained weights after
training, incurring no extra overhead during inference. This
approach significantly reduces trainable parameters, thereby
lowering both training and storage requirements.
Many methods have been proposed to enhance LoRA performance, such as adaptive rank allocation (Zhang et al.,
2023a), decomposition of optimization into direction and
magnitude (Liu et al., 2024), and improved initialization
strategies (Meng et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). Despite
the promising potential these methods offer, the connection
between the LoRA optimization space and the original full
parameter space is often overlooked. Essentially, LoRA
constrains optimization to a much lower-dimensional space,
and its performance depends on how solutions in this restricted space relate to the full parameter space since the
merged weights are ultimately used during inference. As
illustrated in Figure 1, a flat minimum in the LoRA space
may contain sharp directions in the view of the full parameter space, potentially leading to performance degradation.
Figure 6 further demonstrates this phenomenon, revealing

1. Introduction
Pre-training followed by fine-tuning has become the dominant paradigm in modern machine learning, achieving state*

Equal contribution. This work was conducted when Tao was
an intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. 1 Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Xiaolin Huang <xiaolinhuang@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

