A Geometric Approach to Personalized Recommendation with Set-Theoretic
Constraints Using Box Embeddings

Shib Dasgupta 1 Michael Boratko 1 Andrew McCallum 1

Abstract

products, movies, articles, and more. In addition to generic
recommendation, these platforms often present the option
for the user to search for items, either via natural language
or structured queries. While collaborative filtering methods
like matrix factorization have proven successful in addressing data sparsity for unconditional generation, they often
fall short when attempting to combine them with more complicated queries. This is not unexpected, as vector embeddings, while effectively capturing linear relationships, are
ill-equipped to handle the complex set-theoretic relationships. Even advanced neural network-based approaches,
which are designed to capture intricate relationships, have
been shown to struggle with set-theoretic compositionally
that underlie many real-world preferences.

Personalized item recommendation typically suffers from data sparsity, which is most often addressed by learning vector representations of
users and items via low-rank matrix factorization.
While this effectively densifies the matrix by assuming users and movies can be represented by
linearly dependent latent features, it does not capture more complicated interactions. For example,
vector representations struggle with set-theoretic
relationships, such as negation and intersection,
e.g. recommending a movie that is “comedy and
action, but not romance”. In this work, we formulate the problem of personalized item recommendation as matrix completion where rows are
set-theoretically dependent. To capture this settheoretic dependence we represent each user and
attribute by a hyper-rectangle or box (i.e. a Cartesian product of intervals). Box embeddings can
intuitively be understood as trainable Venn diagrams, and thus not only inherently represent
similarity (via the Jaccard index), but also naturally and faithfully support arbitrary set-theoretic
relationships. Queries involving set-theoretic constraints can be efficiently computed directly on
the embedding space by performing geometric
operations on the representations. We empirically
demonstrate the superiority of box embeddings
over vector-based neural methods on both simple
and complex item recommendation queries by up
to 30% overall.

Let us consider an example where a user named Bob wants
to watch a comedy which is not a romantic comedy. Assuming we have a prior watch history for users, standard collaborative filtering techniques (e.g. low-rank matrix factorization) would yield a learned score function score(m, Bob)
for each movie m. If we also have movie-attribute annotations, we could form the set of comedies C and set of romance movies R and simply filter to those movies in C \ R,
however this assumes that the movie-attribute annotations
are complete, which is rarely the case in practice. In fact,
Dasgupta et al. (2023) show that item-attribute matrices,
even manually curated, are often incomplete, and remain
sparse and noisy due to limited coverage and annotation
effort.
A standard approach in a setting with sparse data is to learn
a low-rank approximation for the attribute × movie matrix A, yielding a dense matrix Â. We can then form sets
of movies based on this dense matrix using an (attributespecific) threshold, e.g. Ĉ := {m | Âcomedy,m > τcomedy }
and R̂ := {m | Âromance,m > τromance }, and then rank
movies m ∈ Ĉ \ R̂ according to score(m, Bob). While this
approach does allow for performing the sort of queries we
are after, it suffers from three fundamental issues:

1. Introduction
Recommendation systems are a standard component of most
online platforms, providing personalized suggestions for
1

Manning College of Information & Computer Sciences,
UMass Amherst. Correspondence to: Shib Dasgupta <ssdasgupta@cs.umass.edu>.

1. Limited user-attribute interaction: Since the attribute
classification is done independently from the user, any
latent relationships between the user and attribute cannot be taken into account.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

