Revisiting Instance-Optimal Cluster Recovery
in the Labeled Stochastic Block Model
Kaito Ariu 1 Alexandre Proutiere 2 Se-Young Yun 3

Abstract

for a detailed overview, see (Abbe, 2018). However, it offers a somewhat simplistic representation of how nodes
interact. In real-world applications, interactions can vary in
type—such as ratings in recommender systems or proximity
levels in social networks. To capture this richer, more nuanced interaction data, the Labeled Stochastic Block Model
(LSBM) was introduced and analyzed in (Heimlicher et al.,
2012; Lelarge et al., 2013; Yun & Proutiere, 2016). LSBM
represents interactions through labels drawn from an arbitrary set. The aim of this paper is to illustrate the tightest
condition under which clustering is possible based on observing these labels. For that purpose, we develop a clustering algorithm that minimizes the expected number of
misclassified nodes. In the following sections, we formally
introduce LSBMs and summarize our results.

In this paper, we investigate the problem of recovering hidden communities in the Labeled Stochastic Block Model (LSBM) with a finite number of
clusters whose sizes grow linearly with the total
number of nodes. We derive the necessary and sufficient conditions under which the expected number of misclassified nodes is less than s, for any
number s = o(n). To achieve this, we propose
IAC (Instance-Adaptive Clustering), the first algorithm whose performance matches the instancespecific lower bounds both in expectation and
with high probability. IAC is a novel two-phase
algorithm that consists of a one-shot spectral clustering step followed by iterative likelihood-based
cluster assignment improvements. This approach
is based on the instance-specific lower bound and
notably does not require any knowledge of the
model parameters, including the number of clusters. By performing the spectral clustering only
once, IAC maintains an overall computational
complexity of O(n polylog(n)), making it scalable and practical for large-scale problems.

The Labeled Stochastic Block Model. In the LSBM,
the set I consisting of n items or nodes is randomly
partitioned into K unknown disjoint clusters I1 , . . . , IK .
The cluster index of the node i is denoted by σ(i). Let
α = (α1 , α2 , . . . , αK ) represent the probabilities of nodes
belonging to each cluster, i.e., for all k ∈ [K] and i ∈ I,
P(i ∈ Ik ) = αk . We assume that α1 , . . . , αK are strictly
positive constants and that K and α are fixed as n grows
large. The number of clusters K is initially unknown. Without loss of generality, we also assume that α1 ≤ . . . ≤ αK .
Let L = {0, 1, . . . , L} be the finite set of labels. For each
edge (v, w) ∈ Ii × Ij , the learner observes the label ℓ with
probability p(i, j, ℓ), independently of the
Plabels observed
in other edges. We have ∀i, j ∈ [K]2 ,
ℓ∈L p(i, j, ℓ) =
1. Without loss of generality,
0
is
the
most
frequent laPK PK
bel: 0 = arg maxℓ i=1 j=1 αi αj p(i, j, ℓ). Let p̄ =
maxi,j,ℓ≥1 p(i, j, ℓ) be the maximum probability of observing a label different from 0. We will mostly consider the
challenging sparse regime where p̄ = O((log n)/n) and
p̄n → ∞ as n → ∞, but we will precise the assumptions
made on n and p̄ for each of our results. We further assume
for all i, j, k ∈ [K]:

1. Introduction
Community detection or clustering refers to the task of
gathering similar nodes into a few groups from the data
that, most often, correspond to observations of pair-wise
interactions between nodes (Newman & Girvan, 2004). A
benchmark commonly used to assess the performance of
clustering algorithms is the celebrated Stochastic Block
Model (SBM) (Holland et al., 1983), where pair-wise interactions are represented by a random graph. In this graph,
the vertices correspond to nodes, and the presence of an
edge between two nodes indicates their interaction.
The SBM has been widely studied over the past two decades;
CyberAgent 2 KTH, Digital Futures 3 KAIST. Correspondence
to: Kaito Ariu <kaito ariu@cyberagent.co.jp>.

(A1)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

(A2)

1

p(i, j, ℓ)
≤ η and
p(i, k, ℓ)
PK PL
2
k=1
ℓ=1 (p(i, k, ℓ) − p(j, k, ℓ))
≥ ε,
2
p̄

∀ℓ ∈ L,

where η and ε are positive constants independent of n. (A1)
1

