The Number of Trials Matters in Infinite-Horizon
General-Utility Markov Decision Processes

Pedro P. Santos 1 2 Alberto Sardinha 3 Francisco S. Melo 1 2

Abstract

the scalar reward function, which expresses the degree of
desirability of each state-action pair, allows the encoding
of different objectives. MDPs have found a wide range of
applications in different domains (White, 1988), such as
inventory management (Dvoretzky et al., 1952), optimal
stopping (Chow et al., 1971) or queueing control (Stidham,
1978). MDPs are also of key importance in the field of
reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) since
the agent-environment interaction is typically formalized
under the framework of MDPs. Recent years witnessed
significant progress in solving challenging problems across
various domains using RL (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al.,
2017; Lillicrap et al., 2016). Such results attest to the flexibility of MDPs as a general framework to study sequential
decision-making under uncertainty.

The general-utility Markov decision processes
(GUMDPs) framework generalizes the MDPs
framework by considering objective functions that
depend on the frequency of visitation of stateaction pairs induced by a given policy. In this
work, we contribute with the first analysis on the
impact of the number of trials, i.e., the number of
randomly sampled trajectories, in infinite-horizon
GUMDPs. We show that, as opposed to standard
MDPs, the number of trials plays a key-role in
infinite-horizon GUMDPs and the expected performance of a given policy depends, in general, on
the number of trials. We consider both discounted
and average GUMDPs, where the objective function depends, respectively, on discounted and average frequencies of visitation of state-action pairs.
First, we study policy evaluation under discounted
GUMDPs, proving lower and upper bounds on
the mismatch between the finite and infinite trials
formulations for GUMDPs. Second, we address
average GUMDPs, studying how different classes
of GUMDPs impact the mismatch between the
finite and infinite trials formulations. Third, we
provide a set of empirical results to support our
claims, highlighting how the number of trajectories and the structure of the underlying GUMDP
influence policy evaluation.

However, there are relevant objectives that cannot be easily
specified within the framework of MDPs (Abel et al., 2022).
These include, for example, imitation learning (Hussein
et al., 2017; Osa et al., 2018), pure exploration problems
(Hazan et al., 2019), risk-averse RL (Garcı́a et al., 2015),
diverse skills discovery (Eysenbach et al., 2018; Achiam
et al., 2018) and constrained MDPs (Altman, 1999; Efroni
et al., 2020). Such objectives, including the scalar reward
objective of standard MDPs, can be formalized under the
framework of general utility Markov decision processes
(GUMDPs) (Zhang et al., 2020; Mutti et al., 2023). In
GUMDPs, the objective is, instead, encoded as a function of
the occupancy induced by a given policy, i.e., as a function
of the frequency of visitation of states (or state-action pairs)
induced when running the policy on the MDP. Recent works
have unified such objectives under the same framework
and proposed general algorithms to solve GUMDPs under
convex objective functions (Zhang et al., 2020; Zahavy et al.,
2021; Geist et al., 2022). Extensions to the case of unknown
dynamics are also provided by the aforementioned works.

1. Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014) provide a mathematical framework to study stochastic sequential decision-making. In MDPs, the agent aims to find a
mapping from states to actions such that some function of
the stream of rewards is maximized. The specification of

Despite providing a more flexible framework with respect
to objective-specification in comparison to standard MDPs,
Mutti et al. (2023) show that finite-horizon GUMDPs implicitly make an infinite trials assumption. In other words,
GUMDPs implicitly assume the performance of a given
policy is evaluated under an infinite number of episodes of
interaction with the environment. Since this assumption may

1

INESC-ID, Lisbon, Portugal 2 Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal 3 PUC-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Correspondence
to: Pedro P. Santos <pedro.pinto.santos@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

