Visual Autoregressive Modeling for Image Super-Resolution

Yunpeng Qu 1 2 Kun Yuan 2 Jinhua Hao 2 Kai Zhao 2 Qizhi Xie 1 2 Ming Sun 2 Chao Zhou 2

Abstract

methods leverage generative model priors to tackle ISR,
with approaches based on GAN models (Zhang et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2021) and diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020).
While these methods have achieved significant advancements, ISR, as an ill-posed problem, struggles to balance
the realism and fidelity of the restoration results. GANbased methods achieve higher fidelity metrics, but limitations in generation capability and the goal of over-fidelity
optimization make it challenging to reproduce vivid and realistic textures (Wu et al., 2024a). Diffusion methods, based
on their strong generative priors, can generate extremely
rich image details. However, the random noise sampling
approach and the gap between generative priors and LR
distribution pose challenges for pixel-level fidelity (Yu et al.,
2024). Building upon previous works, we aim to explore
further existing frameworks to enhance fidelity and realism.

Image Super-Resolution (ISR) has seen significant progress with the introduction of remarkable
generative models. However, challenges such
as the trade-off issues between fidelity and realism, as well as computational complexity, have
also posed limitations on their application. Building upon the tremendous success of autoregressive models in the language domain, we propose
VARSR, a novel visual autoregressive modeling
for ISR framework with the form of next-scale
prediction. To effectively integrate and preserve
semantic information in low-resolution images,
we propose using prefix tokens to incorporate the
condition. Scale-aligned Rotary Positional Encodings are introduced to capture spatial structures, and the Diffusion Refiner is utilized for
modeling quantization residual loss to achieve
pixel-level fidelity. Image-based Classifier-free
Guidance is proposed to guide the generation of
more realistic images. Furthermore, we collect
large-scale data and design a training process to
obtain robust generative priors. Quantitative and
qualitative results show that VARSR is capable
of generating high-fidelity and high-realism images with more efficiency than diffusion-based
methods. Our codes are released at https:
//github.com/quyp2000/VARSR.

Introducing the generative capability of large models to
enhance ISR is a prevalent trend. With the rich semantic
priors of T2I models pretrained on massive datasets, many
works (Yang et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024b) have applied the
powerful generative models to ISR tasks and achieved significant results. However, for ISR tasks demanding pixel-level
fidelity, the diffusion model presents certain limitations, including the high computational complexity of iterative inference and potential issues with semantic hallucinations (Kim
et al., 2025). With the success of autoregressive (AR) modeling in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Touvron et al.,
2023; Achiam et al., 2023), visual autoregressive modeling
(VAR) has gained great attention, exemplified by VQGAN
(Esser et al., 2021) and DALL-E (Reddy et al., 2021), which
apply discrete token prediction for image generation. VAR
(Tian et al., 2024) takes a step further by quantizing images
into scale-wise token maps and generating images through
next-scale prediction, leading to excellent results across multiple generation tasks (Tang et al.; Zhang et al., 2024; Yao
et al., 2024). This novel approach provides new insights
into ISR, showcasing potential advantages over diffusion
methods: (1) The coarse-to-fine next-scale prediction conforms to Markov unidirectional modeling, providing better
structural preservation and naturally adapting to ISR tasks;
(2) The reduced number of inference steps and lower complexity in preceding scales result in higher efficiency.

1. Introduction
Image Super-Resolution (ISR) aims to generate realistic
high-resolution (HR) images from their degraded lowresolution (LR) counterparts. Traditional ISR methods focus on restoring LR images by assuming simple and known
degradations (Dong et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018b), which
limits their practicality in real-world scenarios with complex
distortions (Gu et al., 2019a; Zhang et al., 2023b). Recent
1

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Kun Yuan
<yuankun03@kuaishou.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, unlike other controllable generation tasks, ISR requires generation with pixel-level fidelity alongside seman1

