AGAV-Rater: Adapting Large Multimodal Model for
AI-Generated Audio-Visual Quality Assessment

Yuqin Cao 1 Xiongkuo Min 1 Yixuan Gao 1 Wei Sun 2 Guangtao Zhai 1

Abstract

Question: The video is [video]. The

audio 1 is [audio 1]. The audio 2 is
[audio 2]. The audio 3 is [audio 3].
The audio 4 is [audio 4]. Which audio
best matches this video in terms of
audio content, quality and rhythm?

Many video-to-audio (VTA) methods have been
proposed for dubbing silent AI-generated videos.
An efficient quality assessment method for AIgenerated audio-visual content (AGAV) is crucial
for ensuring audio-visual quality. Existing audiovisual quality assessment methods struggle with
unique distortions in AGAVs, such as unrealistic and inconsistent elements. To address this,
we introduce AGAVQA-3k, the first large-scale
AGAV quality assessment dataset, comprising
3, 382 AGAVs from 16 VTA methods. AGAVQA3k includes two subsets: AGAVQA-MOS, which
provides multi-dimensional scores for audio quality, content consistency, and overall quality, and
AGAVQA-Pair, designed for optimal AGAV pair
selection. We further propose AGAV-Rater, a
LMM-based model that can score AGAVs, as well
as audio and music generated from text, across
multiple dimensions, and selects the best AGAV
generated by VTA methods to present to the
user. AGAV-Rater achieves state-of-the-art performance on AGAVQA-3k, Text-to-Audio, and Textto-Music datasets. Subjective tests also confirm
that AGAV-Rater enhances VTA performance and
user experience. The dataset and code are available at https://github.com/charlotte9524/AGAVRater.

[video]
[audio 1]

STAV2A [audio 2]

Im2Wav

[audio 3]
Answer:

Diff-Foley [audio 4]

VTA-LDM V2A-SceneDetector

AGAV-Rater (Ours):
Audio 1
GPT-4o+Audio Caption: Audio 2
GPT-4o+Video Caption: Audio 2
Audio 3
Gemini-2.0 Flash:
Audio 4
Gemini-1.5 Flash-8b:
Audio 3
Gemini-1.5 Pro:
Audio 2
Reka Core:
Audio 3
Reka Flash:
Audio 4

SonicVisionLM

0.71

1.0

0.7

Figure 1. Comparison of answer accuracy between AGAV-Rater
and proprietary LMMs on AGAV-Pair subset. We construct
question-answer pairs from demonstration AGAVs on VTA GitHub
pages, prompting LMMs to identify the optimal AGAV pair. Each
dimension in the radar chart represents the answer accuracy with
the correct answer corresponding to the current VTA method.

1. Introduction
The quality of AI-generated content needs to be controlled. Many researchers focus on developing video-toaudio (VTA) methods to add sound to silent AI-generated
videos. Some researchers (Wang et al., 2024f; Lu et al.,
2024) combine large multimodal models (LMMs) with diffusion models, empowering them with the ability to generate
audio from videos. On the commercial side, companies like
ElevenLabs have launched efficient VTA models to dub
videos. Although VTA methods can significantly improve
post-production efficiency and enhance the audio-visual
(A/V) experience of AI-generated content (AIGC), they occasionally encounter issues such as poor A/V alignment or
low perceptual audio quality when generating audio. Therefore, there is a need for an automated model to evaluate
AI-generated audio-visual content (AGAV), select the most
user-preferred results to present to users, and provide feedback for improving the generated content.

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271312, Grant 62132006,
Grant 62225112 and Grant 62301316; in part by STCSM under Grant 22DZ2229005; and in part by the Oceanic Interdisciplinary Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (project number
SL2020ZD102). 1 Institute of Image Communication and Network
Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmissions, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 2 School of Communication & Electronic Engineering, East
China Normal University, Shanghai. Correspondence to: Guangtao Zhai <zhaiguangtao@sjtu.edu.cn>, Xiongkuo Min <minxiongkuo@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Traditional audio-visual quality assessment (AVQA) methods (Cao et al., 2023a;b; Min et al., 2020) focus on distortions caused during the capture and transmission stages,
which makes it difficult to identify unique distortions in
AIGC, such as inconsistent A/V content and unnatural audio.
With the rise of LMMs, researchers (Wang et al., 2024b;c;
Wu et al.) utilize the powerful content and language com-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

