Why Has Predicting Downstream Capabilities of
Frontier AI Models with Scale Remained Elusive?
Rylan Schaeffer 1 Hailey Schoelkopf 2 Brando Miranda 1 Gabriel Mukobi 1 Varun Madan 1 Adam Ibrahim 3
Herbie Bradley 4 Stella Biderman 2 Sanmi Koyejo 1

Abstract

tributes towards establishing scaling-predictable
evaluations of frontier AI models.

Predicting changes from scaling advanced AI
systems is a desirable property for engineers,
economists, governments and industry alike, and,
while a well-established literature exists on how
pretraining performance scales, predictable scaling behavior on downstream capabilities remains
elusive. While many factors are certainly responsible, this paper identifies a significant factor
that makes predicting scaling behavior on widely
used multiple-choice question answering benchmarks challenging and illuminates a path towards
making such downstream evaluations predictable
with scale. Using five model families and twelve
well-established multiple-choice benchmarks, we
demonstrate that downstream performance is computed from negative log likelihoods via a sequence of transformations that progressively degrades the statistical relationship between performance and scale. We then pinpoint the mechanism causing this degradation: downstream metrics require comparing the correct choice against a
small number of specific incorrect choices, meaning accurately predicting downstream capabilities
requires predicting not just how probability mass
concentrates on the correct choice with scale, but
also how probability mass fluctuates on the alternative incorrect choices with scale. We empirically study how probability mass on the correct
choice co-varies with probability mass on incorrect choices with increasing compute, suggesting
that scaling laws for incorrect choices might be
achievable. Our work also explains why pretraining scaling laws are commonly regarded as more
predictable than downstream capabilities and con-

1. Introduction
Predictable scaling behavior of frontier AI systems such as
Gemini (Team et al., 2023; Reid et al., 2024) and GPT (OpenAI, 2024; OpenAI et al., 2024) is crucial for anticipating
capabilities and informing key decisions regarding model
development and deployment (Anthropic, 2023; OpenAI,
2023; Dragan et al., 2024). Predictable scaling behaviors
enable engineers to make informed decisions about optimal model design choices and to de-risk investment in exceedingly expensive pretraining runs by determining the
payoff from scaling up compute; for example, OpenAI publicly noted that “A large focus of the GPT-4 project was
building a deep learning stack that scales predictably” and
that “[OpenAI] developed infrastructure and optimization
methods that have very predictable behavior across multiple
scales” (Achiam et al., 2023); OpenAI noted that this ideally goes beyond predicting loss values, and that “Having
a sense of the capabilities of a model before training can
improve decisions around alignment, safety, and deployment”. Additionally, predicting capabilities is of interest
beyond AI practitioners: economists and governments also
have a significant interest in predicting the capabilities of
current and future frontier AI systems for better decisionmaking (regulation, taxation, and safety) and forecasting of
economic impacts (Council of Economic Advisers, 2024).
Downstream capabilities are especially of interest because
quantities like pretraining loss are difficult to translate into
quantities more meaningful to society, such as the impact
on economic labor or societal harms.
However, while scaling laws for pretraining loss are wellestablished (Hestness et al., 2017; Rosenfeld et al., 2019;
Henighan et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Gordon et al.,
2021; Hernandez et al., 2021; Jones, 2021; Zhai et al., 2022;
Hoffmann et al., 2022; Clark et al., 2022; Neumann & Gros,
2022; Hernandez et al., 2022; Maloney et al., 2022; Sardana
& Frankle, 2023; Muennighoff et al., 2024; Besiroglu et al.,
2024), the literature is less conclusive regarding predicting
specific downstream capabilities with scale. Prior work has

1
Stanford Computer Science 2 EleutherAI 3 MILA
University of Cambridge.
Correspondence to:
Rylan Schaeffer <rschaef@cs.stanford.edu>, Sanmi Koyejo
<sanmi@cs.stanford.edu>.
4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

