Compositional Generalization via Forced Rendering of Disentangled Latents

Qiyao Liang* 1 Daoyuan Qian* 2 Liu Ziyin 1 3 Ila Fiete 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
A core motivation for disentangled representation learning
is the belief that factoring an environment into independent
latent dimensions, or “concepts”, should lead to powerful
combinatorial generalization: if a model can learn the representation of each factor separately, then in principle it
can synthesize new combinations of those factors without
extensive retraining. This property is often referred to as
compositional generalization and is considered crucial for
data efficiency and robust extrapolation in high-dimensional
tasks, such as language understanding and vision (Lake &
Baroni, 2018).

Composition—the ability to generate myriad variations from finite means—is believed to underlie
powerful generalization. However, compositional
generalization remains a key challenge for deep
learning. A widely held assumption is that learning disentangled (factorized) representations naturally supports this kind of extrapolation. Yet,
empirical results are mixed, with many generative models failing to recognize and compose factors to generate out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. In this work, we investigate a controlled 2D
Gaussian “bump” generation task with fully disentangled (x, y) inputs, demonstrating that standard generative architectures still fail in OOD
regions when training with partial data, by reentangling latent representations in subsequent
layers. By examining the model’s learned kernels
and manifold geometry, we show that this failure
reflects a “memorization” strategy for generation
via data superposition rather than via composition
of the true factorized features. We show that when
models are forced—through architectural modifications with regularization or curated training
data—to render the disentangled latents into the
full-dimensional representational (pixel) space,
they can be highly data-efficient and effective at
composing in OOD regions. These findings underscore that disentangled latents in an abstract
representation are insufficient and show that if
models can represent disentangled factors directly
in the output representational space, it can achieve
robust compositional generalization.

Despite many attempts, disentangled representation learning
has shown mixed results when it comes to compositional
generalization. Some studies report clear data-efficiency
gains and OOD benefits (Higgins et al., 2017a; Chen et al.,
2018), while others find no significant advantage or even
detrimental effects (Locatello et al., 2019; Ganin et al.,
2017). This tension motivates a deeper theoretical exploration:
Is a disentangled/factorized1 representation alone
sufficient for compositional generalization? If not,
why, and what other ingredients or constraints
are necessary?
In this paper, we develop a mechanistic perspective on why
even fully disentangling the intermediate (or input) representations is often insufficient to enable robust out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization. Concretely, we focus
on a synthetic 2D Gaussian “bump” generation task, where
a network learns to decode given (x, y) coordinates into a
spatial image. We provide a detailed empirical investigation
into why disentangled representations often fail to achieve
robust compositional generalization. Specifically, we show
that:
• From a representational manifold viewpoint, even if the
input or bottleneck (latent) layer are fully disentangled,
subsequent layers usually “warp” and remix factors, leading to poor out-of-distribution (OOD) extrapolation.
• From a kernel-based perspective, networks failing to

*
Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge MA, USA 02139 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1EW, U.K 3 NTT Research. Correspondence to: Qiyao
Liang <qiyao@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

We use the terms “disentanglement” and “factorization” interchangeably. See Section A.2 for a discussion of the definitions and
distinctions.

1

