What Do Learning Dynamics Reveal About
Generalization in LLM Mathematical Reasoning?

Katie Kang 1 Amrith Setlur 2 Dibya Ghosh 1
Jacob Steinhardt 1 Claire Tomlin 1 Sergey Levine 1 Aviral Kumar 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable problem-solving capabilities, yet the mechanisms by
which they learn and generalize remain largely opaque. For
instance, consider a set of LLMs, each derived from the
same pretrained model and finetuned on the same reasoning
dataset but with varying learning rates (Fig. 1). While several of these models reach near-perfect accuracy on training
data, their test performances were vastly different. This
raises the question: what factors in an LLM’s finetuning
training lead to differences in its generalization behavior?
Understanding these factors could help us design better
training methods that foster genuine reasoning abilities in
models, rather than mere pattern matching.

Modern large language models (LLMs) excel at
fitting finetuning data, but often struggle on unseen examples. In order to teach models genuine
reasoning abilities rather than superficial pattern
matching, our work aims to better understand
how the learning dynamics of LLM finetuning
shapes downstream generalization. Our analysis focuses on reasoning tasks, whose problem
structure allows us to distinguish between memorization (the exact replication of reasoning steps
from the training data) and performance (the correctness of the final solution). We find that a
model’s performance on test prompts can be effectively characterized by a training metric we
call pre-memorization train accuracy: the accuracy of model samples on training queries before
they begin to copy the exact reasoning steps from
the training set. On the dataset level, this metric is able to almost perfectly predict test accuracy, achieving R2 of ≥ 0.9 across various models (Llama3 8B, Gemma2 9B), datasets (GSM8k,
MATH), and training configurations. On a perexample level, this metric is also indicative of
whether individual model predictions are robust to
perturbations in the training query. By connecting
a model’s learning dynamics to test performance,
pre-memorization train accuracy can inform training decisions, such as the makeup of the training
data. Our experiments on data curation show that
prioritizing examples with low pre-memorization
accuracy leads to 1.5-2x improvements in data efficiency compared to i.i.d. data scaling and other
data scaling techniques.

We focus on mathematical problem-solving tasks, whose
structure is particularly amenable for investigating this question. In reasoning tasks, models are trained to generate both
a final answer and intermediate reasoning steps. Although
each problem has a single correct answer, the reasoning
steps in the target solution trace represent just one of many
valid ways to solve a problem. Therefore, a model that
has memorized the training data is likely to replicate exact
reasoning steps from the training data, while a model with
general problem-solving skills may produce the correct final
answer but follow a different reasoning path. By analyzing model responses on training queries, focusing on both
the accuracy of the final answer and the similarity of the
response to the target solution trace, we can gain insights
into the generalizability of the model’s learned solution.
Our findings reveal that, while LLMs often fully memorize the finetuning dataset by the end of training, model
predictions for training queries prior to memorization are
strongly indicative of final test performance. For certain
examples, models first learn to generate diverse solution
traces (distinct from the target solution trace) that lead to
the correct final answer, before later memorizing the target
solution trace. For other training examples, models only
produce incorrect responses before memorizing the target
trace. To capture this distinction, we introduce the concept
of pre-memorization train accuracy: the highest accuracy
a model achieves on a training example through the course

*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 CMU. Correspondence to:
Katie Kang <katiekang@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

