An Efficient Search-and-Score Algorithm for Ancestral Graphs using
Multivariate Information Scores for Complex Non-linear and Categorical Data

Nikita Lagrange 1 Hervé Isambert 1

Abstract

the asymptotic probability that the N independent samples, x(1) , · · · , x(N ) , are drawn from the model
Q distribution, q(x), i.e. LD|G ≡ q(x(1) , · · · , x(N ) ) = i q(x(i) ),
rather than the P
empirical distribution, p(x). This leads
to, P
log LD|G = i log q(x(i) ), which converges towards
N x p(x) log q(x) = −N H(p, q) in the large sample
size limit, N → ∞, with log ZD,G = O(log N ).

We propose a greedy search-and-score algorithm
for ancestral graphs, which include directed as
well as bidirected edges, originating from unobserved latent variables. The normalized likelihood score of ancestral graphs is estimated in
terms of multivariate information over relevant
“ac-connected subsets” of vertices, C, that are
connected through collider paths confined to the
ancestor set of C. For computational efficiency,
the proposed two-step algorithm relies on local information scores limited to the close surrounding
vertices of each node (step 1) and edge (step 2).
This computational strategy, although restricted to
information contributions from ac-connected subsets containing up to two-collider paths, is shown
to outperform state-of-the-art causal discovery
methods on challenging benchmark datasets.

The structural constraints of the model G translate into the
factorization form of the theoretical probability distribution,
q(x) (Pearl & Paz, 1985; Pearl, 1988; 2009; Spirtes et al.,
2000; Richardson, 2009). In particular, the probability distribution of Bayesian networks (BN) factorizes in terms of
conditional probabilities
of each variable given its parents,
Q
as qBN (x) = i q(xi |paXi ), where paXi denote the values of the parents of node Xi in G, PaXi . For Bayesian networks, the factors of the model distribution, q(xi |paXi ), can
be directly estimated with the empirical conditional probabilities of each node given its parents as, q(xi |paXi ) ≡
p(xi |paXi ), leading to the well known estimation of
the likelihood function
P in terms of conditional entropies
H(Xi |PaXi ) = − x p(xi , paXi ) log p(xi |paXi ),

1. Introduction
The likelihood function plays a central role in the selection of a graphical model G based on observational data D.
Given N independent samples from D, the likelihood LD|G
that they might have been generated by the graphical model
G is given by (Koller & Friedman, 2009),
LD|G =

1

LD|G BN =

vertices


X
exp − N
H(Xi |PaXi )

1
ZD,G

BN

(2)

Xi ∈V

This paper concerns the experimental setting for which some
variables of the underlying Bayesian model are not observed.
This frequently occurs in practice for many applications. We
derive an explicit likelihood function for the class of ancestral graphs, which include directed as well as bidirected
edges, arising from the presence of unobserved latent variables. Tian and Pearl 2002 showed that the probability
distribution of such graphs factorizes into c-components
including subsets of variables connected through bidirected
paths (i.e. containing only bidirected edges). Richardson
2009 later proposed a refined factorization of the model
distribution of the broader class of acyclic directed mixed
graphs in terms of conditional probabilities over “head” and
“tail” subsets of variables within each ancestrally closed subsets of vertices. However, unlike with Bayesian networks,
the contributions of c-components or head-and-tail factors
to the likelihood function cannot simply be estimated in
terms of empirical distribution p(x), as shown below. This



exp −N H(p, q)

(1)
ZD,G
P
where H(p, q) = − x p(x) log q(x) is the cross-entropy
between the empirical probability distribution p(x) of
the observed data D and the theoretical probability distribution q(x) of the model G and ZD,G a data- and
model-dependent factor ensuring proper normalization condition for finite dataset. In short, Eq.1 results from
1

CNRS, UMR168, Institut Curie, PSL University, Sorbonne
University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Hervé Isambert
<herve.isambert@curie.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

