A Variational Perspective on Generative Protein Fitness Optimization

Lea Bogensperger 1 Dominik Narnhofer 2 Ahmed Allam 1 Konrad Schindler 2 Michael Krauthammer 1

Abstract

tory with a time-consuming, yet narrow random exploration
of the fitness landscape. This highlights the need for efficient in-silico methods capable of exploring the space of
potential sequences, so as to prioritize promising candidates
for experimental validation.

The goal of protein fitness optimization is to discover new protein variants with enhanced fitness
for a given use. The vast search space and the
sparsely populated fitness landscape, along with
the discrete nature of protein sequences, pose significant challenges when trying to determine the
gradient towards configurations with higher fitness. We introduce Variational Latent Generative Protein Optimization (VLGPO), a variational
perspective on fitness optimization. Our method
embeds protein sequences in a continuous latent
space to enable efficient sampling from the fitness
distribution and combines a (learned) flow matching prior over sequence mutations with a fitness
predictor to guide optimization towards sequences
with high fitness. VLGPO achieves state-of-theart results on two different protein benchmarks
of varying complexity. Moreover, the variational
design with explicit prior and likelihood functions
offers a flexible plug-and-play framework that can
be easily customized to suit various protein design
tasks.

Many different approaches exist, from generative models (Jain et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2024; Notin et al.,
2022), evolutionary greedy algorithms (Sinai et al., 2020) to
gradient-based sampling strategies, such as Gibbs With Gradients (GWG) (Grathwohl et al., 2021; Emami et al., 2023)
and smoothed GWG variants (Kirjner et al., 2023). In general, these methods are challenged by the high-dimensional,
sparse and discrete nature of the fitness landscape, characterized by ruggedness (Van Cleve & Weissman, 2015) due
to epistasis as well as holes due to proteins with very low
fitness (Johnston et al., 2023; Sinai & Kelsic, 2020). To deal
with the inherently discrete nature of amino acids, computational methods tend to rely on discretized processes, and
thus must cope with issues such as non-smooth gradients
and the vast diversity of possible sequences (Kirjner et al.,
2023; Frey et al., 2023).
Here we look at the problem from a different perspective:
instead of relying on a token-based sequence representation,
we embed sequences in a continuous latent space and learn
the corresponding latent distribution in a generative manner.
In this way, patterns and relationships can be captured that
are difficult to model in the original discrete space, especially if one only has access to a small data set containing
only a few thousand mutations of a protein.

1. Introduction
Protein fitness optimization seeks to improve the functionality of a protein by altering its amino acid sequence, to
achieve a desired biological property of interest called “fitness” – for instance, stability, binding affinity, or catalytic
efficiency. It requires searching through a vast combinatorial space (referred to as the “fitness landscape”), where
the number of possible sequences grows exponentially with
the sequence length d, while only a small subset of these
sequences exhibit meaningful biological functionality (Hermes et al., 1990). Traditionally, protein fitness optimization
has been addressed through directed evolution (Romero &
Arnold, 2009), mimicking natural evolution in the labora-

To construct a prior distribution over latent protein sequences, we leverage flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2022), a powerful generative modeling scheme
that learns smooth, continuous representations amenable to
gradient-based sampling and optimization. The prior is then
integrated into a variational framework, making it possible
to guide the search towards regions of high fitness with a
fitness predictor in the form of a neural network, trained
on a limited set of sequence mutations with associated fitness labels. See Figure 1. The versatility of the variational
framework means that it can easily be tuned to different
protein optimization tasks by suitably adapting the prior and
the guidance function. We validate VLGPO on two public
benchmarks for protein fitness optimization in limited data

1
University of Zurich 2 ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Lea
Bogensperger <lea.bogensperger@uzh.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

