Rapid Overfitting of Multi-Pass SGD in Stochastic Convex Optimization

Shira Vansover-Hager 1 Tomer Koren 1 2 Roi Livni 3

Abstract

analysis of SGD has traditionally focused on its behavior
in the one-pass (single-epoch) setting, particularly in the
context of convex optimization, where it is well understood
that SGD√achieves an optimal excess population loss of order Θ(1/ 𝑛) when trained on a sample of size 𝑛. This rate
is known to be minimax optimal under standard assumptions (Nemirovskiı̆ & Yudin, 1983).

We study the out-of-sample performance of multipass stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in the fundamental stochastic convex optimization (SCO)
model. While one-pass
SGD is known to achieve
√
an optimal Θ(1/ 𝑛) excess population loss given
a sample of size 𝑛, much less is understood about
the multi-pass version of the algorithm which is
widely used in practice. Somewhat surprisingly,
we show that in the general non-smooth case of
SCO, just a few epochs of SGD can already hurt
its out-of-sample performance significantly and
lead to overfitting.
In particular, using a step size
√
𝜂 = Θ(1/ 𝑛), which gives the optimal rate after
one pass, can lead to population loss as large as
Ω(1) after just one additional pass. More generally, we show that the population loss from the√second pass onward is of the order Θ(1/(𝜂𝑇) +𝜂 𝑇),
where 𝑇 is the total number of steps. These results reveal a certain phase-transition in the outof-sample behavior of SGD after the first epoch,
as well as a sharp separation between the rates of
overfitting in the smooth and non-smooth cases of
SCO. Additionally, we extend our results to withreplacement SGD, proving that the same asymptotic bounds hold after 𝑂 (𝑛 log 𝑛) steps.
√ Finally,
we also prove a lower bound of Ω(𝜂 𝑛) on the
generalization gap of one-pass SGD in dimension
e(𝑛), improving on recent results of Koren
𝑑=𝑂
et al. (2022) and Schliserman et al. (2024).

However, in practice, it is common to run multiple passes
over the training data, a scheme often referred to as multipass SGD, where, in each pass, training examples are sampled without-replacement, with or without reshuffling between passes. Despite its empirical success, the theoretical
implications of performing multiple passes are far less understood, particularly with respect to generalization and outof-sample performance. The standard intuition, based on
empirical observations, suggests that more training should
lead to better empirical performance, yet, more steps and
passes might eventually lead to overfitting as the model
becomes too closely tailored to the training data being processed repeatedly.
Indeed, a substantial body of work has studied the convergence of multi-pass SGD in finite-sum problems (e.g., Recht
& Re, 2012; Hardt et al., 2016; Nagaraj et al., 2019; Rajput
et al., 2020; Safran & Shamir, 2020; 2021; Koren et al.,
2022; Cha et al., 2023). However, these studies primarily focus on optimization convergence in terms of empirical risk
and how it is influenced by without-replacement sampling,
as opposed to with-replacement which is significantly easier
to analyze theoretically. Far less attention has been given to
convergence in terms of population risk, which quantifies
out-of-sample performance and is arguably the true goal in
the context of machine learning.

1. Introduction

In fact, to the best of our knowledge, the following basic
question still remains, rather surprisingly, unanswered:

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one of the most fundamental algorithms in machine learning and optimization,
widely used for training large-scale models. Theoretical

How does the population risk performance of
SGD, tuned to attain the minimax optimal rate
after a single pass, deteriorate (if at all) after
making just a few additional passes?

1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv Univer-

sity 2 Google Research 3 School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to: Shira
Vansover-Hager <shirav@mail.tau.ac.il>, Tomer Koren <tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il>, Roi Livni <rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il>.

While there are several existing upper bounds on the population risk in the multi-pass scenario (e.g., Hardt et al.,
2016; Bassily et al., 2020), none of them give a meaningful,
nontrivial answer to this question in the general stochas-

Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

