MindLLM: A Subject-Agnostic and Versatile Model for fMRI-to-Text Decoding

Weikang Qiu 1 Zheng Huang * 2 Haoyu Hu * 3 Aosong Feng 1 Yujun Yan 2 Rex Ying 1

Abstract

Multiple Subjects
Perception & Scene Understanding

Decoding functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) signals into text has been a key challenge
in the neuroscience community, with the potential
to advance brain-computer interfaces and
uncover deeper insights into brain mechanisms.
However, existing approaches often struggle with
suboptimal predictive performance, limited task
variety, and poor generalization across subjects.
In response to this, we propose MindLLM, a
model designed for subject-agnostic and versatile
fMRI-to-text decoding. MindLLM consists of
an fMRI encoder and an off-the-shelf LLM. The
fMRI encoder employs a neuroscience-informed
attention mechanism, which is capable of accommodating subjects with varying input shapes and
thus achieves high-performance subject-agnostic
decoding. Moreover, we introduce Brain Instruction Tuning (BIT), a novel approach that enhances
the model’s ability to capture diverse semantic
representations from fMRI signals, facilitating
more versatile decoding. We evaluate MindLLM
on comprehensive fMRI-to-text benchmarks.
Results demonstrate that our model outperforms
the baselines, improving downstream tasks by
12.0%, unseen subject generalization by 24.5%,
and novel task adaptation by 25.0%. Furthermore,
the attention patterns in MindLLM provide interpretable insights into its decision-making process.
Code is available at https://github.com/
Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/
MindLLM.

Brain
Instruction
Tuning

Subject-Agnostic
Encoder

Memory & Knowledge Retrieval
Language & Symbolic Processing

MindLLM

Complex Reasoning

Training
Usage

He wants to
turn off the
light.

Subject-Agnostic
Encoder

Potential
Downstream
Application

Embodied AI

Human
Brain

What does the
subject want to
do right now?

MindLLM
Prosthetics
movement

Open
Question

Figure 1. The overview of our method. MindLLM is equipped
with a subject-agnostic fMRI encoder and an off-the-shelf LLM.
MindLLM is trained on multiple subjects with varying input shapes
and an instruction-tuning dataset, aiming to encode different facets
of semantic information in fMRI. After training, MindLLM is
capable of various text decoding tasks. One application is that the
decoded contents can be used to achieve neural control of existing
systems that are not designed for it.

Hmamouche et al., 2024). The ability to translate brain
activity patterns into natural language carries both academic
and societal importance. For neuroscientists, it provides
deeper and novel insights into cognition, behavior, and consciousness (Qiu et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023). On a societal
level, it presents opportunities for medical applications and
improves human-computer interaction (HCI) (Bernal et al.,
2022; Du et al., 2022). For example, for individuals with
speech impairments, this technology could restore communication capabilities, enabling them to express their thoughts
effortlessly (Card et al., 2024). Moreover, as shown in Figure 1, it benefits healthy individuals by allowing neural control of digital devices, such as embodied AIs or prosthetic
limbs, allowing for more intuitive and precise movements.

1. Introduction
Decoding human brain activity (fMRI) to text has sparked
significant interest within the neuroscience community
(Xia et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023a; Luo et al., 2023;

Despite its potential, decoding brain activity to language
still faces significant challenges. One major obstacle is the
need for versatile decoding tailored to specific applications.
For example, decoding may aim to translate a subject’s
movement intention to control a prosthesis, or to interpret
abstract thoughts or memories. Traditional models fail to
accommodate such diverse requirements. To address this,
UMBRAE (Xia et al., 2024) integrates a Visual Language
Model (VLM) (Chen et al., 2023b) and learns to map from

*

Equal contribution 1 Yale University 2 Dartmouth College
University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Weikang Qiu
<weikang.qiu@yale.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

