K2 IE: Kernel Method-based Kernel Intensity Estimators
for Inhomogeneous Poisson Processes

Hideaki Kim 1 Tomoharu Iwata 1 Akinori Fujino 1

Abstract

assess the risk of experiencing events at speciﬁed domains
and forecast the timings/locations of future events. Poisson
processes have a variety of applications in reliability engineering (Lai & Xie, 2006), clinical research (Cox, 1972;
Clark et al., 2003; Lánczky & Győrffy, 2021), seismology
(Ogata, 1988), epidemiology (Gatrell et al., 1996), ecology
(Heikkinen & Arjas, 1999), and more.

Kernel method-based intensity estimators, formulated within reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces (RKHSs), and classical kernel intensity
estimators (KIEs) have been among the most
easy-to-implement and feasible methods for estimating the intensity functions of inhomogeneous
Poisson processes. While both approaches share
the term “kernel”, they are founded on distinct
theoretical principles, each with its own strengths
and limitations. In this paper, we propose a novel
regularized kernel method for Poisson processes
based on the least squares loss and show that
the resulting intensity estimator involves a specialized variant of the representer theorem: it
has the dual coefﬁcient of unity and coincides
with classical KIEs. This result provides new
theoretical insights into the connection between
classical KIEs and kernel method-based intensity
estimators, while enabling us to develop an efﬁcient KIE by leveraging advanced techniques
from RKHS theory. We refer to the proposed
model as the kernel method-based kernel intensity estimator (K2 IE). Through experiments on
synthetic datasets, we show that K2 IE achieves
comparable predictive performance while signiﬁcantly surpassing the state-of-the-art kernel
method-based estimator in computational efﬁciency.

Kernel intensity estimators (KIEs) are the simplest nonparametric approaches to estimating intensity functions
(Ramlau-Hansen, 1983; Diggle, 1985), with advantages
that include superior computational efﬁciency and theoretical tractability. They represent the underlying intensity
function as a sum of smoothing kernels1 evaluated at data
points, where rescaled versions of density functions are
usually adopted as smoothing kernels to correct the edge
effects, that is, the estimation biases around the edges of
observation domains.
Recently, Flaxman et al. (2017) developed a feasible Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) formulation for
inhomogeneous Poisson processes. They showed that the
representer theorem (Wahba, 1990; Schölkopf et al., 2001)
holds for a penalized maximum likelihood estimation under the constraint that the square root of the intensity function lies in an RKHS: the obtained square root of the intensity estimator is given by a linear combination of transformed RKHS kernels1 evaluated at data points. The transformed RKHS kernels, often referred to as the equivalent
RKHS kernels, naturally account for edge effects through
likelihood functions, and the intensity estimator has been
shown to outperform KIEs in scenarios where edge effects
are prominent, such as in high-dimensional domains. Although the kernel method-based intensity estimator has a
form similar to KIEs, it requires ﬁtting the dual coefﬁcient
using a gradient descent method, making it less favorable
than KIEs in terms of computational efﬁciency.

1. Introduction
Poisson processes have been the gold standard for
modeling point patterns that occur randomly in multidimensional domains. They are characterized by an intensity function, that is, the instantaneous probability of events
occurring at any point in the domain, which allows us to

In this paper, we propose a penalized least squares loss formulation for estimating intensity functions under the con-

1
NTT Corporation, Japan. Correspondence to: Hideaki Kim
<hideaki.kin@ntt.com>.

1
Traditionally, the term “kernel” is used to refer both to the
weights assigned to data points in kernel density estimation and
to the positive-deﬁnite kernels that deﬁne an RKHS. To avoid ambiguity, this paper employs two distinct terms “smoothing” and
“RKHS” kernels, following Flaxman et al. (2017).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

