What Limits Bidirectional Model’s Generative Capabilities?
A Uni-Bi-Directional Mixture-of-Expert Method For Bidirectional Fine-tuning

Zuchao Li 1 Yonghua Hei 2 Qiwei Li 3 Lefei Zhang 3 Ping Wang 4 Hai Zhao 5 Baoyuan Qi 6 Guoming Liu 6

Abstract

language processing (Muennighoff et al., 2024; Bao et al.,
2020; Dong et al., 2019). Large causal language models
have shown strong capabilities across multiple tasks (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Jiang et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023),
making them a promising choice for achieving this goal.
Recent research indicates that causal language models are
limited by their causal attention mechanisms in embedding
tasks, making unidirectional models suboptimal for these
tasks (BehnamGhader et al., 2024; Springer et al., 2024;
Muennighoff et al., 2024). A natural idea to address this
issue is to enhance the bidirectional modeling capabilities of
causal language models. However, simply enabling bidirectional modeling in Large Language Model (LLMs) results
in a significant decline in generative performance (Muennighoff et al., 2024). Therefore, a critical challenge in building such a unified model is how to enhance its bidirectional
modeling capabilities while maintaining robust generative
performance.

Large Language Models (LLMs) excel in generation tasks, yet their causal attention mechanisms
limit performance in embedding tasks. While
bidirectional modeling may enhance embeddings,
naively fine-tuning unidirectional models bidirectionally severely degrades generative performance. To investigate this trade-off, we analyze
attention weights as dependence indicators and
find that bidirectional fine-tuning increases subsequent dependence, impairing unidirectional generation. Through systematic Transformer module
evaluations, we discover the FFN layer is least
affected by such dependence. Leveraging this discovery, we propose UBMoE-LLM, a novel UniBi-directional Mixture-of-Experts LLM, which
integrates the original unidirectional FFN with a
bidirectionally fine-tuned FFN via unsupervised
contrastive learning. This MoE-based approach
enhances embedding performance while preserving robust generation. Extensive experiments
across diverse datasets and model scales validate our attention dependence metric and demonstrate UBMoE-LLM’s superior generative quality and reduced hallucination. Code is available
at: https://github.com/heiyonghua/
ubmoe_llm.

Previous studies have explored two main methods to enhance the bidirectional modeling capabilities of unidirectional language models:

1
School of Artificial intelligence, Wuhan University 2 This work
was conducted during Yonghua Hei’s internship at the School of
Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University. 3 School of Computer
Science, Wuhan University 4 School of Information Management,
Wuhan University 5 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 6 Xiaomi, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lefei Zhang <zhanglefei@whu.edu.cn>, Ping
Wang <wangping@whu.edu>.

(1) Transforming a unidirectional decoder-only language
model into a bidirectional encoder model This method
initializes the weights using a unidirectional language model
and enables bidirectional attention. As shown in the Bidirection in Figure 1, the tokens in the model self-attention matrix
are visible to each other. Through contrastive learning (Gao
et al., 2022; BehnamGhader et al., 2024; Muennighoff et al.,
2024), this approach maximizes the similarity between the
representations of positive samples while minimizing the
similarity with negative sample representations, thereby
enhancing the model’s ability to contextually model bidirectional information. Behamghader et al. (BehnamGhader
et al., 2024) and Li et al. (Li & Li, 2024b) use this method
to turn a unidirectional decoder-only language model into
a strong bidirectional encoder model. This method can
make the model have a better text understanding ability, but
will bring disastrous effects on the generation tasks (Muennighoff et al., 2024).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

(2) Constructing generative models with local bidirectional modeling In the instruction fine-tuning phase,

1. Introduction
Creating a model capable of both generation and text embedding has been a long-term goal in the field of natural

1

