Diversity By Design: Leveraging Distribution Matching
for Offline Model-Based Optimization

Michael S. Yao 1 James C. Gee 1 Osbert Bastani 1

Abstract

Baseline BO-qUCB
DynAMO-Modified BO-qUCB

The goal of offline model-based optimization
(MBO) is to propose new designs that maximize
a reward function given only an offline dataset.
However, an important desiderata is to also propose a diverse set of final candidates that capture
many optimal and near-optimal design configurations. We propose Diversity in Adversarial
Model-based Optimization (DynAMO) as a
novel method to introduce design diversity as an
explicit objective into any MBO problem. Our
key insight is to formulate diversity as a distribution matching problem where the distribution of
generated designs captures the inherent diversity
contained within the offline dataset. Extensive
experiments spanning multiple scientific domains
show that DynAMO can be used with common
optimization methods to significantly improve the
diversity of proposed designs while still discovering high-quality candidates.

Figure 1. Overview of Diversity in Adversarial Model-based
Optimization (DynAMO). Traditional model-based optimization (MBO) (Trabucco et al., 2021) techniques can generate highscoring designs, although often at the expense of the diversity
of proposed designs. Ideally, the final set of candidates should
be of high quality while capturing multiple ‘modes of goodness’
within the design space. For example, although there are 3 unique
global maxima (stars) in the 2D Branin (Branin, 1972) optimization
problem, traditional Bayesian optimization (BO-qUCB) proposes
designs clustered around only a singla optima (diamonds). In contrast, we show how DynAMO can be used to modify the MBO
objective to discover diverse and high-quality designs (circles).

1. Introduction
Discovering designs that optimize certain desirable properties is a ubiquitous task that spans a wide range of scientific
and engineering domains. For example, we might seek
to design a drug with the most potent therapeutic efficacy
(Brown et al., 2019; Kong et al., 2023; Du et al., 2024); build
a robot that is most capable of navigating complex environments (Ahn et al., 2020; Trabucco et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2023); or engineer a material with a certain desirable property (Stanev et al., 2018; Pogue et al., 2023; Gashmard et al.,
2024; Ma et al., 2024). However, experimentally validating
every proposed design can be expensive, time-intensive, or
even impossible in many applications. These limitations
can preclude the use of conventional ‘online’ optimization
methods for such generative design tasks.
1
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Michael Yao <myao2199@seas.upenn.edu>.

An alternative approach is to instead discover design candidates in the offline setting, where we assume that no newly
proposed designs can be experimentally evaluated during
the course of the optimization process. Instead, we only
have access to a static dataset of previously observed designs and their corresponding reward values. The objective
then is to propose a (small) set of candidate designs to ultimately evaluate experimentally, with the hope that using
the information available in the offline dataset will yield
desirable designs in the real-world.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Multiple prior works have proposed a variety of offline optimization algorithms (Yu et al., 2021; Trabucco et al., 2021;
Fu & Levine, 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Mashkaria et al., 2023;
1

