SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables

Ayushi Mishra * 1 Yang Bai * 1 Priyadarshan Narayanasamy 1 Nakul Garg 1 Nirupam Roy 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
■ Vision. Large language models (LLMs) have created new
possibilities by enabling intuitive, contextual, and natural interactions with machine (Choi & Li, 2024; Cui et al., 2024;
Kumaran et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Alayrac et al., 2022).
Introduction of this capability to smart earbuds and other
wearables is around the corner (FusionChat, 2025). Spatial
understanding of speech in LLMs can open up a frontier for
wearable applications, as it enables such ubiquitous devices
to process directional cues, recognize speech from multiple
sources, and associate spoken content to its spatial context.
This capability can be a cornerstone in significantly enhancing user experiences by making devices more responsive,
intuitive, and context-aware, particularly in applications
like virtual assistants, augmented reality (AR), and accessibility tools. By enabling LLMs to reason about spatial
acoustic cues, wearables can offer advanced features such as
selective voice summarization in meetings (Ma et al., 2025;
Kumar & Kabiri, 2022), sound-based navigation for visually
impaired individuals (Chen et al., 2020; Gan et al., 2020),
and immersive XR experiences that react dynamically to
the user’s surroundings (Parkkola, 2023; Kailas & Tiwari,
2021).

Integrating spatial context into large language
models (LLMs) has the potential to revolutionize
human-computer interaction, particularly in wearable devices. In this work, we present a novel system architecture that incorporates spatial speech
understanding into LLMs, enabling contextually
aware and adaptive applications for wearable technologies. Our approach leverages microstructurebased spatial sensing to extract precise Direction
of Arrival (DoA) information using a monaural microphone. To address the lack of existing
dataset for microstructure-assisted speech recordings, we synthetically create a dataset by using
the LibriSpeech dataset. This spatial information
is fused with linguistic embeddings from OpenAI’s Whisper model, allowing each modality to
learn complementary contextual representations.
The fused embeddings are aligned with the input
space of LLaMA-3.2 3B model and fine-tuned
with lightweight adaptation technique LoRA to
optimize for on-device processing. SING supports spatially-aware automatic speech recognition (ASR), achieving a mean error of 25.72°—a
substantial improvement compared to the 88.52°
median error in existing work—with a word error
rate (WER) of 5.3. SING also supports soundscaping, for example, inference how many people
were talking and their directions, with up to 5
people and a median DoA error of 16°. Our system demonstrates superior performance in spatial
speech understanding while addressing the challenges of power efficiency, privacy, and hardware
constraints, paving the way for advanced applications in augmented reality, accessibility, and
immersive experiences.

Spatial context is yet to be explored to its full potential
with LLMs. BAT (Zheng et al., 2024) is one of the first
to support spatial understanding for LLM. While inspiring,
BAT supports inference only on non-verbal audio, such as
dog barking or bird chirping, without the context of spoken
language. In this paper, we aim to advance the idea of
introducing spatial knowledge in LLMs for speech signals
and at the same time make it more compatible for wearables
and ubiquitous computing devices. This work strive to
achieve high accuracy of directional audio sensing using a
novel monaural setup and extending its capability to spatial
speech processing.
■ Challenges and Our Approach.
While promising, realization of this vision needs to overcome several unique challenges.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Nirupam
Roy <niruroy@umd.edu>.

A. Spatial cues in wearables. Sensing spatial features
of sound, such as direction-of-arrival (DoA) or source location, requires sampling the wave in space using an array
of microphones. However, traditional methods are limited
by space-time sampling constraints and requires large and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

