OrcaLoca: An LLM Agent Framework for Software Issue Localization

Zhongming Yu * 1 Hejia Zhang * 1 Yujie Zhao 1 Hanxian Huang 1 Matrix Yao 2 Ke Ding 2 Jishen Zhao 1

Abstract

80
70

Percentage

Recent developments in Large Language Model
(LLM) agents are revolutionizing Autonomous
Software Engineering (ASE), enabling automated
coding, problem fixes, and feature improvements.
However, localization – precisely identifying
software problems by navigating to relevant code
sections – remains a significant challenge. Current
approaches often yield suboptimal results due to a
lack of effective integration between LLM agents
and precise code search mechanisms. This paper
introduces O RCA L OCA , an LLM agent framework that improves accuracy for software issue
localization by integrating priority-based scheduling for LLM-guided action, action decomposition
with relevance scoring, and distance-aware context
pruning. Experimental results demonstrate that
O RCA L OCA becomes the new open-source stateof-the-art (SOTA) in function match rate (65.33%)
on SWE-bench Lite. It also improves the final
resolved rate of an open-source framework by 6.33
percentage points through its patch generation
integration. O RCA L OCA is available at https:
//github.com/fishmingyu/OrcaLoca.

60

% Resolved
% Function
% File
Mean

72.08%
53.50%

50
40
30

33.10%

20

% Resolved

% Function

% File

Figure 1. Distribution and average of file / function match rate and
resolved rate on SWE-Bench Lite LeaderBoard.

leverage capabilities such as fault localization, action planning, and program-building unit tests. Among these abilities,
localization – the ability to precisely identify and navigate
to relevant code for resolving software engineering problems
– remains a crucial yet underexplored challenge in ASE.
Localization is well-recognized as a critical yet challenging
step (Yang et al., 2024b; Xia et al., 2024) in ASE. As
shown in Figure 1, on average, only 53.5% of issues
achieve a correct function match across all submitted agents
solutions (Jimenez et al., 2025). Localization is challenging
due to an inherent complexity of software repositories. For
instance, the average codebase of SWE-bench (Jimenez
et al., 2024) consists of 3,010 files with around 438K lines
of code.Worse yet, user requirements are often expressed in
imprecise natural language, making it even more challenging
to extract relevant code from a large repository based on
the user’s issue input. In particular, we identify three key
challenges of LLM agent-based localization:

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have advanced rapidly,
driving intelligent agents across diverse domains. In
Autonomous Software Engineering (ASE) (Devin, 2024),
LLM-driven agents enable automatic code generation, program repair, and feature enhancement. Incorporating LLMs
into software development processes has been demonstrated
promising by tools such as GitHub Copilot (Microsoft, 2023)
and LLM-based agents like AutoCodeRover (Zhang et al.,
2024b) and SWE-agent (Yang et al., 2024b). To navigate
repositories, create patches, and fix problems, these agents

1) How to explore the codebase with strategic action planning and precise navigation? Prior works on agent-based
software localization encounter two key limitations: (i)
action planning inefficiencies arise as certain methods
rely solely on LLMs for guidance (Zhang et al., 2024a),
resulting in unstable and redundant search behaviors; (ii)
graph-based scheduling (Ma et al., 2024b) limits flexibility
by enforcing preprocessed traversal routes that confine
searches to neighboring nodes.

*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, San Diego,
USA 2 Intel Corporation. Correspondence to: Jishen Zhao
<jzhao@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2) How to achieve both context conciseness and search space
completeness? Concise context, such as code skeletons,
1

