From Crowdsourced Data to High-quality Benchmarks:
Arena-Hard and Benchbuilder Pipeline

Tianle Li * 1 Wei-Lin Chiang * 1 Evan Frick 1 Lisa Dunlap 1 Tianhao Wu 1
Banghua Zhu 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1 Ion Stoica 1

Abstract
The rapid evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has outpaced the development of
model evaluation, highlighting the need for continuous curation of new, challenging benchmarks. However, manual curation of high-quality,
human-aligned benchmarks is expensive and timeconsuming. To address this, we introduce BenchBuilder, an automated pipeline that leverages
LLMs to curate high-quality, open-ended prompts
from large, crowd-sourced datasets, enabling continuous benchmark updates without humans in
the loop. We apply BenchBuilder to datasets
such as Chatbot Arena and WildChat-1M, extracting challenging prompts. To validate benchmark quality, we propose new metrics to measure a benchmark’s alignment with human preferences and ability to separate models. We release
Arena-Hard-Auto, a benchmark consisting of 500
challenging prompts curated by BenchBuilder.
Arena-Hard-Auto provides 3x higher separation
of model performances compared to MT-Bench
and achieves 98.6% correlation with human preference rankings, all at a cost of $20. Our work
sets a new framework for the scalable curation of
automated benchmarks from extensive data. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
lmarena/arena-hard-auto.

Figure 1. Classification of LLM benchmarks: we categorize benchmarks on how the evaluation can be done, whether the evaluated
tasks are ground-truth or open-ended, how are the prompts curated,
and whether the developer can control the source for the prompts.

Markert, 2005; Hendrycks et al., 2021a) are quickly becoming saturated and struggle to differentiate state-of-the-art
models.
To address these limitations, recent benchmarks like
GPQA (Rein et al., 2023) source high-quality and challenging prompts from domain experts. Although these efforts
have produced challenging evaluation sets, they come at
a steep price—GPQA, for instance, cost over $120,000 to
curate its 500 multiple-choice questions (Rein, 2024). The
reliance on manual curation makes such benchmarks difficult to produce. Moreover, their static nature is susceptible
to test-set leakage and overfitting as models are trained on
similar datasets. This necessitates the continuous development of new benchmarks, exacerbating the cost and labor
of manual curation. Further, many of these benchmarks
rely on close-ended tasks that fail to capture the open-ended
nature of real-world interactions, undermining their costeffectiveness for evaluating alignment to user preference.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of Large Language Models (LLMs) has
spurred advancements as models expand their capabilities
by training on increasingly vast and diverse datasets. Traditional static benchmarks (Wang et al., 2019; Rajpurkar et al.,
2016; Bowman et al., 2015; Dolan & Brockett, 2005; Bos &

An alternative approach without manual curation involves
crowdsourcing prompts through live evaluation platforms
such as Chatbot Arena (Chiang et al., 2024). These platforms test models against a continuous stream of fresh,
open-ended queries and user feedback. However, real-time
human evaluation is both expensive and time-consuming,

*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Tianle Li <tianleli@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

