Modeling All-Atom Glycan Structures via
Hierarchical Message Passing and Multi-Scale Pre-training

Minghao Xu 1 2 3 Jiaze Song 1 Keming Wu 4 Xiangxin Zhou 5 Bin Cui 1 Wentao Zhang 1 3

Abstract

essential structural components in cells, forming the backbone of extracellular matrices and cell membranes (Yanagishita, 1993). Based on such structures, they modulate intercellular communication (Liu & Wang, 2023) and impact biological processes such as immune response (Zhang, 2006)
and cell differentiation (Lau et al., 2007). With the accumulation of glycan data in public repositories (Tiemeyer
et al., 2017; Yamada et al., 2020), it is a promising way
to understand various glycan properties and functions with
data-driven methods like machine learning.

Understanding the various properties of glycans
with machine learning has shown some preliminary promise. However, previous methods mainly
focused on modeling the backbone structure of
glycans as graphs of monosaccharides (i.e., sugar
units), while they neglected the atomic structures underlying each monosaccharide, which
are actually important indicators of glycan properties. We fill this blank by introducing the
GlycanAA model for All-Atom-wise Glycan
modeling. GlycanAA models a glycan as a heterogeneous graph with monosaccharide nodes
representing its global backbone structure and
atom nodes representing its local atomic-level
structures. Based on such a graph, GlycanAA
performs hierarchical message passing to capture from local atomic-level interactions to global
monosaccharide-level interactions. To further enhance model capability, we pre-train GlycanAA
on a high-quality unlabeled glycan dataset, deriving the PreGlycanAA model. We design a
multi-scale mask prediction algorithm to endow
the model about different levels of dependencies in a glycan. Extensive benchmark results
show the superiority of GlycanAA over existing glycan encoders and verify the further improvements achieved by PreGlycanAA. We maintain all resources at https://github.com/
kasawa1234/GlycanAA.

In this research direction, most existing works (Burkholz
et al., 2021; Lundstrøm et al., 2022; Carpenter et al., 2022;
Alkuhlani et al., 2023) model a glycan as a graph with
monosaccharides (i.e., sugar units) as its nodes, and use
graph neural networks (GNNs) to predict various glycan
properties, e.g., glycosylation, immunogenicity, binding
affinity with a protein, etc. Though performing well on
some tasks, these methods fail to capture the atomic-level
structures underlying each monosaccharide, which are actually important determinants of many glycan properties and
functions. For example, atomic-level interactions between a
glycan and a protein determine their binding affinity.
There have been some preliminary attempts at modeling
all-atom-wise glycan structures with state-of-the-art small
molecule encoders (Xu et al., 2024). However, because
of the gap between a small molecule with tens of atoms
and a glycan with hundreds of atoms (i.e., essentially a
macromolecule), these small molecule encoders are shown
to be ineffective, which perform even worse than the models
utilizing only monosaccharide-level information. Therefore,
it is still to be answered how to realize the potential of allatom glycan modeling on boosting glycan understanding.

1. Introduction

To answer this question, in this work, we propose the
GlycanAA model for All-Atom-wise Glycan modeling.
Note that, a glycan naturally possesses a hierarchical structure with (1) atoms making up the local structure of each
monosaccharide and (2) different monosaccharides making
up the global backbone structure of the glycan. Inspired
by this fact, we design GlycanAA based on a hierarchical
modeling approach. Specifically, GlycanAA first represents
a glycan as a heterogeneous graph consisting of (1) a set of
atom nodes for its local structures and (2) a set of monosac-

Glycans, complex macromolecules composed of sugar
molecules, play pivotal roles in life science. They serve as
*
1
Equal contribution
Peking University 2 BioGeometry
Zhongguancun Academy 4 Tsinghua University 5 University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Wentao Zhang
<wentao.zhang@pku.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

