Improved Algorithm for Deep Active Learning under Imbalance via Optimal
Separation

Shyam Nuggehalli * 1 Jifan Zhang * 1 Lalit Jain 2 Robert Nowak 1

Abstract

To mitigate this issue, many recent active learning algorithms have focused on labeling more class-balanced and
informative examples (Aggarwal et al., 2020; Kothawade
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; 2024b; Soltani et al., 2024).
For many large-scale annotation jobs, this challenge of data
imbalance is further compounded by label noise – a critical
and common issue that results from annotator decision fatigue and perception differences. A rich body of literature
on agnostic active learning (Balcan et al., 2006; Dasgupta
et al., 2007; Hanneke et al., 2014; Katz-Samuels et al., 2021)
addresses this challenge on low-complexity model classes
(e.g. linear models). However, for deep learning models,
these algorithms often becomes ineffective due to the large
model class complexity. In this paper, we propose a novel
active learning strategy for both class imbalance and label
noise. Our algorithm DIRECT sequentially and adaptively
chooses informative and more class-balanced examples for
annotation while being robust to noisy annotations. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first deep active learning study to address the challenging yet prevalent scenario
where both imbalance and label noise coexist.

Class imbalance severely impacts machine learning performance on minority classes in real-world
applications. While various solutions exist, active learning offers a fundamental fix by strategically collecting balanced, informative labeled
examples from abundant unlabeled data. We introduce DIRECT, an algorithm that identifies class
separation boundaries and selects the most uncertain nearby examples for annotation. By reducing
the problem to one-dimensional active learning,
DIRECT leverages established theory to handle
batch labeling and label noise – another common
challenge in data annotation that particularly affects active learning methods. Our work presents
the first comprehensive study of active learning
under both class imbalance and label noise. Extensive experiments on imbalanced datasets show
DIRECT reduces annotation costs by over 60%
compared to state-of-the-art active learning methods and over 80% versus random sampling, while
maintaining robustness to label noise.

To bridge the gap between the imbalanced deep active learning and the agnostic active learning literature, we propose
a novel reduction of the imbalanced classification problem
into a set of one-dimensional agnostic active learning problems. For each class, our reduction sorts unlabeled examples
into an list ordered by one-vs-rest margin scores. The objective of DIRECT is to find the optimal separation threshold
which best separates the examples in the given class from
the rest. By relating our problem to that of finding the best
threshold classifier, we are able to employ ideas from the agnostic active learning literature to learn the separation threshold robustly under label noise. By annotating around the
threshold, the annotated examples are more class-balanced
and informative.

1. Introduction
Large-scale deep learning models are playing increasingly
important roles across many industries. Human feedback
and annotations have played a significant role in developing such systems. Progressively over time, we believe the
role of humans in a machine learning pipeline will shift to
annotating rare yet important cases. However, under data
imbalance, the typical strategy of randomly choosing examples for annotation becomes especially inefficient. This is
because the majority of the labeling budget would be spent
on common and well-learned classes, resulting in insufficient rare class examples for training an effective model.

Comparing to existing active learning algorithms such
as BADGE (Ash et al., 2019), Cluster-Margin (Citovsky
et al., 2021), SIMILAR (Kothawade et al., 2021),
GALAXY (Zhang et al., 2022) and many others, DIRECT
improves significantly in label efficiencies – less annotations
needed to reach the same accuracy. Notably, most existing
methods mentioned above are proposed to handle batch la-

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Washington, Seattle. Correspondence to: Jifan
Zhang <jifan@cs.wisc.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

