Fast, Accurate Manifold Denoising by
Tunneling Riemannian Optimization

Shiyu Wang 1 2 Mariam Avagyan 1 2 Yihan Shen 3 2 Arnaud Lamy 1 2 Tingran Wang 1 2 Szabolcs Márka 4 2 5
Zsuzsanna Márka 6 2 John Wright 1 7 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Learned denoisers play a fundamental role in various signal generation (e.g., diffusion models) and
reconstruction (e.g., compressed sensing) architectures, whose success derives from their ability
to leverage low-dimensional structure in data. Existing denoising methods, however, either rely on
local approximations that require a linear scan
of the entire dataset or treat denoising as generic
function approximation problems, sacrificing efficiency and interpretability. We consider the problem of efficiently denoising a new noisy data point
sampled from an unknown d-dimensional manifold M ∈ RD , using only noisy samples. This
work proposes a framework for test-time efficient
manifold denoising, by framing the concept of
“learning-to-denoise” as “learning-to-optimize”.
We have two technical innovations: (i) online
learning methods which learn to optimize over the
manifold of clean signals using only noisy data,
effectively “growing” an optimizer one sample at
a time. (ii) mixed-order methods which guarantee
that the learned optimizers achieve global optimality, ensuring both efficiency and near-optimal
denoising performance. We corroborate these
claims with theoretical analyses of both the complexity and denoising performance of mixed-order
traversal. Our experiments on scientific manifolds
demonstrate significantly improved complexityperformance tradeoffs compared to nearest neighbor search, which underpins existing provable
denoising approaches based on exhaustive search.

Denoising is a core task in signal and image processing.
Denoisers also play a fundamental role in state-of-the-art
approaches to signal generation and reconstruction. Diffusion models generate intricate images from pure noise,
via a sequence of denoising steps; learned compressed sensing methods reconstruct accurate medical and scientific images from incomplete, indirect measurements, again via a
sequence of denoising steps. While these iterative procedures produce high-quality results, they are computationally
costly: a sophisticated learned denoiser needs to be applied
repeatedly to produce a single output. The test-time cost
of denoising is a major bottleneck for both high-resolution
image generation and real-time image reconstruction.
Accurate denoising is critical, because the denoiser encodes
prior knowledge about the set of images of interest (natural,
medical, scientific, etc.). These images reside near lowdimensional subsets of the image space, which are often
conceptualized as low-dimensional manifolds; learning to
denoise is tantamount to learning these manifolds.
In this paper, we study a model manifold denoising problem,
in which the goal is to learn to denoise data lying near a
d-dimenisonal submanifold M of a high-dimensional space
RD . As we will review below, there are extensive literatures
on learning to denoise, and learning manifold models from
data. However, there is relatively little work on provably
learning test-time efficient denoisers. Existing methods with
provable good manifold denoising performance involve linearly scanning large datasets. As a baseline, nearest neighbor search across a minimal covering set has worst case
complexity at least O(Decd ), where ecd is the size of the
dataset required to cover the d-dimensional manifold, and D
is the cost of computing distance in the ambient dimension.
On the other hand, more practical neural network models
currently lack guarantees of performance and efficiency.

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University
Data Science Institute, Columbia University 3 Department of
Computer Science, Columbia University 4 Department of Physics
5
Institute of Advanced Studies (iASK), Chernel utca 14, Kőszeg,
9730, Hungary 6 Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory 7 Department
of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Shiyu Wang <sw3601@columbia.edu>.
2

We bridge this gap, developing and analyzing a family of
manifold denoisers that are (i) test-time efficient, (ii) accurate, and (iii) trainable. Our main idea is to cast the problem
of denoising a new, noisy test sample x as an optimization
problem over the a-priori unknown Riemannian manifold

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

