GEFA: A General Feature Attribution Framework
Using Proxy Gradient Estimation

Yi Cai 1 Thibaud Ardoin 1 Gerhard Wunder 1

Abstract

parency has seen the development of various techniques,
including feature attribution, which is the focus of this work.

Feature attribution explains machine decisions by
quantifying each feature’s contribution. While
numerous approaches rely on exact gradient measurements, recent work has adopted gradient estimation to derive explanatory information under
query-level access, a restrictive yet more practical accessibility assumption known as the blackbox setting. Following this direction, this paper introduces GEFA (Gradient-estimation-based
Explanation For All), a general feature attribution
framework leveraging proxy gradient estimation.
Unlike the previous attempt that focused on explaining image classifiers, the proposed explainer
derives feature attributions in a proxy space, making it generally applicable to arbitrary black-box
models, regardless of input type. In addition to
its close relationship with Integrated Gradients,
our approach, a path method built upon estimated
gradients, surprisingly produces unbiased estimates of Shapley Values. Compared to traditional
sampling-based Shapley Value estimators, GEFA
avoids potential information waste sourced from
computing marginal contributions, thereby improving explanation quality, as demonstrated in
quantitative evaluations across various settings.

Current attempts to determine feature attribution typically
fall into two categories depending on the model accessibility assumption: the white-box and black-box methods.
White-box approaches assume full access to a model, deriving explanations by investigating in detail the model’s
internal workings through, for example, analysis of gradients (Simonyan et al., 2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017) or
supervision of information flow (Samek et al., 2021). Albeit
beneficial to explanation procedures, the full accessibility
assumption limits the applicability of white-box approaches
under practical settings due to safety and security concerns.
Models deployed for public use are usually wrapped by
limited APIs and accessible only via queries. On the other
hand, the black-box explainers, following the assumption
of query-level access, determine feature attributions by analyzing the correlation between input features and model
outcomes (Ribeiro et al., 2016). As a trade-off for the loosened accessibility assumption, black-box explanations tend
to be less precise, especially when explaining models operating in high-dimension feature spaces. This is because
inferring explanatory information indirectly from queries is
computationally expensive, with the cost positively correlated to the dimensionality of the feature space.
Cai & Wunder (2024) sought to combine the strengths of
both categories and proposed GEEX. Focusing on explaining image classifiers, GEEX delivers gradient-like explanations under a black-box setting based on estimated gradients,
achieving a performance that matches white-box explainers. However, the method is limited to models operating
on continuous input features and struggles with discrete
or categorical features, such as text. This limitation arises
from GEEX’s reliance on path integrals, which are not welldefined in discrete feature spaces. Although applying GEEX
at the embedding layer offers a plausible workaround, it
arguably violates the black-box assumption by accessing
internal model details during the transformation from the
original feature space to an embedding space.

1. Introduction
With the explosive growth of deep learning models, explainability has become an increasingly important research
topic. While data-driven models excel in performance,
their opaque nature, originating from the implicit learning processes, raises concerns and risks, particularly when
deployed in critical domains such as medical diagnosis,
finance, and autonomous driving. The demand for trans1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Yi Cai
<yi.cai@fu-berlin.de>.

To bridge the gap in applicability to models operating on
discrete data, this paper extends gradient-estimation-based

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

