Refining Adaptive Zeroth-Order Optimization at Ease

Yao Shu 1 Qixin Zhang 2 Kun He 3 Zhongxiang Dai 4

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recently, zeroth-order (ZO) optimization plays an
essential role in scenarios where gradient information is inaccessible or unaffordable, such as blackbox systems and resource-constrained environments. While existing adaptive methods such as
ZO-AdaMM have shown promise, they are fundamentally limited by their underutilization of moment information during optimization, usually resulting in underperforming convergence. To overcome these limitations, this paper introduces Refined Adaptive Zeroth-Order Optimization (RAdaZO). Specifically, we first show the untapped
variance reduction effect of first moment estimate
on ZO gradient estimation, which improves the
accuracy and stability of ZO updates. We then
refine the second moment estimate based on these
variance-reduced gradient estimates to better capture the geometry of the optimization landscape,
enabling a more effective scaling of ZO updates.
We present rigorous theoretical analysis to show
(I) the first analysis to the variance reduction of
first moment estimate in ZO optimization, (II) the
improved second moment estimates with a more
accurate approximation of its variance-free ideal,
(III) the first variance-aware convergence framework for adaptive ZO optimizers, which may be
of independent interest, and (IV) the faster convergence of R-AdaZO than existing baselines
like ZO-AdaMM. Our extensive experiments, including synthetic problems, black-box adversarial
attack, and memory-efficient fine-tuning of large
language models (LLMs), further verify the superior convergence of R-AdaZO, indicating that
R-AdaZO offers an improved solution for realworld ZO optimization challenges.

Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization has emerged as an indispensable technique at the forefront of machine learning,
addressing critical challenges where gradient information
is either unavailable or computationally prohibitive. This
necessity stems from the prevalence of black-box optimization problems, such as adversarial attacks (Ru et al., 2020;
Hiranandani et al., 2021), and resource-constrained environments, like fine-tuning large language models (LLMs)
on memory-limited devices (Malladi et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024b). Consequently, ZO optimization algorithms,
which rely solely on function evaluations, have become
a crucial alternative to traditional gradient-based methods.
Despite the growing body of research in ZO optimization,
a significant portion of existing methods adapt stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) updates to the ZO setting (Liu et al.,
2018a;b; Shu et al., 2023; 2024). This reliance on SGD,
however, will lead to performance limitations, especially in
complex and non-convex optimization landscapes. The need
for more adaptive and versatile update mechanisms is hence
evident. However, the exploration of adaptive strategies
beyond SGD-based updates remains surprisingly limited.
While adaptive methods such as ZO-AdaMM (Chen et al.,
2019; Nazari et al., 2020) have demonstrated potential in
addressing the missing adaptivity in zeroth-order optimization, they are fundamentally limited by their underutilization of moment information, often resulting in suboptimal
convergence rates. This limitation in fact arises from their
reliance on noisy and high-variance gradient estimates derived solely from function evaluations—a stark contrast to
the first-order (FO) methods that leverage direct and more
stable gradients. This issue becomes even more pronounced
in high-dimensional and complex settings.
To address this critical limitation, we introduce Refined
Adaptive Zeroth-Order Optimization (R-AdaZO), a novel
approach that effectively capitalizes on moment information
through two key innovations. First, R-AdaZO is the first to
analyze the untapped but inherent variance reduction effect
of the first moment estimates on the gradient estimates in
ZO optimization, leading to more accurate and stable ZO
updates. This is accomplished through the integration of
historical gradient estimates, which effectively averages out
the estimation noise (Sec. 4.1). Second, R-AdaZO refines

1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
3
(Guangzhou) Nanyang Technological University Huazhong Uni4
versity of Science and Technology The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Zhongxiang Dai
<daizhongxiang@cuhk.edu.cn>.
nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

