Positional Attention: Expressivity and Learnability of Algorithmic Computation

Artur Back de Luca * 1 George Giapitzakis * 1 Shenghao Yang * 1 Petar Veličković 2 Kimon Fountoulakis 1

Abstract

algorithms (Veličković & Blundell, 2021). Notable applications range from basic arithmetic to solving problems on
abstract data structures such as graphs and lists (Lee et al.,
2024; Tang et al., 2020; Tay et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020;
Veličković et al., 2020; Veličković et al., 2022; Dudzik &
Veličković, 2022; Ibarz et al., 2022; Cappart et al., 2023;
Diao & Loynd, 2023; Bevilacqua et al., 2023; Rodionov &
Prokhorenkova, 2023; Minder et al., 2023; Georgiev et al.,
2023; Engelmayer et al., 2023a; Georgiev et al., 2024; Li
et al., 2024). Due to this success, there is a growing interest
in understanding neural networks as computational models
that can solve complex algorithmic and computational tasks.

There is a growing interest in the ability of neural
networks to execute algorithmic tasks (e.g., arithmetic, summary statistics, and sorting). The goal
of this work is to better understand the role of
attention in Transformers for algorithmic execution. Its importance for algorithmic execution has
been studied theoretically and empirically using
parallel computational models. Notably, many
parallel algorithms communicate between processors solely using positional information. Inspired
by this observation, we investigate how Transformers can execute algorithms using positional
attention, where attention weights depend exclusively on positional encodings. We prove that
Transformers with positional attention (positional
Transformers) maintain the same expressivity of
parallel computational models, incurring a logarithmic depth cost relative to the input length.
We analyze their in-distribution learnability and
explore how parameter norms in positional attention affect sample complexity. Our results show
that positional Transformers introduce a learning
trade-off: while they exhibit better theoretical dependence on parameter norms, certain tasks may
require more layers, which can, in turn, increase
sample complexity. Finally, we empirically explore the out-of-distribution performance of positional Transformers and find that they perform
well in tasks where their underlying algorithmic
solution relies on positional information.

In this context, Pérez et al. (2021); Wei et al. (2022) show
that Transformers are Turing Complete, and Giannou et al.
(2023); Back De Luca & Fountoulakis (2024); Yang et al.
(2024) illustrate how Transformers can effectively encode
instructions in their parameters to solve linear algebra and
graphs problems. Additionally, it has been shown that Transformers can perform computational tasks using far fewer
layers than the number of sequential steps (Liu et al., 2023),
indicating a connection between Transformers and parallel
algorithms. Building on this, Sanford et al. (2024) demonstrates that Transformers can simulate the Massively Parallel
Computation (MPC) model (Andoni et al., 2018), which is
based on the MapReduce framework for large-scale data
processing (Dean & Ghemawat, 2008).
While parallel computational models like MPC do not restrict how communication is established, we observe that
in many parallel algorithms, the communication between
processors is independent of the processed data. Instead,
this communication relies solely on processor identification (see Appendix A.3 for examples). Motivated by this
observation, we study a Transformer variant that reflects
this data-agnostic communication property. Specifically, we
investigate positional attention, where the attention weights
are determined exclusively by fixed positional encodings.1

1. Introduction
Neural network models, particularly Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017), have achieved remarkable success across various domains, especially in their ability to learn and execute

Our contributions. We examine Transformers with posi-

*

Equal contribution 1 David R. Cheriton School of Computer
Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
2
Google DeepMind, London, UK.. Correspondence to: Artur
Back de Luca <abackdel@uwaterloo.ca>.

1
While positional encodings remain constant across layers,
their attention weights can vary – unlike Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), which take a fixed connectivity structure as input. Furthermore, the tasks in this paper lack a predefined graph structure,
necessitating an artificial graph for application to GNNs. For
experimental comparisons, see Appendix D.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

