EEG-Language Pretraining for
Highly Label-Efficient Clinical Phenotyping

Sam Gijsen 1 2 Kerstin Ritter 1 2

Abstract

2020; Yang et al., 2021), the temporal ordering of EEG data
(Banville et al., 2021), subject identities of EEG crops (Gijsen & Ritter, 2025), as well as masking and reconstruction
(Jiang et al., 2024). However, these are hindered by the
difficulty of creating appropriate data augmentations and,
especially reconstruction techniques, by low signal-to-noise.
Thus, progress in the medical context has lagged, likely further exacerbated by the modality displaying high similarity
between pathologies.

Multimodal language modeling has enabled
breakthroughs for representation learning, yet remains unexplored in the realm of functional brain
data for clinical phenotyping. This paper pioneers
EEG-language models (ELMs) trained on clinical
reports and 15000 EEGs. We propose to combine multimodal alignment in this novel domain
with timeseries cropping and text segmentation,
enabling an extension based on multiple instance
learning to alleviate misalignment between irrelevant EEG or text segments. Our multimodal models significantly improve over EEG-only models
across four clinical evaluations and for the first
time enable zero-shot classification as well as retrieval of both neural signals and reports. In sum,
these results highlight the potential of ELMs, representing significant progress for clinical applications.

Meanwhile, important further progress was made in computer vision by leveraging natural language as a signal during pretraining (Radford et al., 2021). Specifically, contrastive approaches which aim to align embeddings of imagetext pairs have shown to yield representations powerful for
downstream tasks in radiology (Zhang et al., 2022a; 2023).
Given that success in radiology is also believed to be bottlenecked by the availability of labeled data and the reliance
on fine-grained information (Zhang et al., 2022a), this joint
modeling approach is a particularly interesting and novel
application for the challenging problem of medical EEG.
Fortunately, this is made possible by the clinical reports of
physicians which accompany hospital EEG recordings and
contain information about the patient and recording itself
(Obeid & Picone, 2016).

Medical neuroimaging, including electroencephalography
(EEG), has lagged behind other fields in leveraging the
significant advancements of deep learning. While EEG
sees widespread clinical use for clinical phenotyping such
as pathology detection, in particular for epilepsy (Binnie
& Stefan, 1999; Jing et al., 2020) as well as sleep disorders (Malhotra & Avidan, 2013), available annotated data is
scarce. As the impressive scaling properties of deep learning are now well described (Kaplan et al., 2020; Smith et al.,
2023), self-supervised learning (SSL) is a promising direction by enabling pretraining with unlabeled data and thereby
increasing available training sample sizes (Hadsell et al.,
2006; Chen et al., 2020). Various such approaches have
shown initial success when applied to EEG. These include
methods relying on data-augmentations (Mohsenvand et al.,

However, language-EEG pretraining also entails unique
challenges. First, datasets are generally smaller than those
used in radiology and especially computer vision. Second,
the clinical reports tend to be highly heterogeneous. While
previous applications have paired natural and medical images with short captions (Radford et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022a), EEG reports tend to span multiple paragraphs and
include information irrelevant to downstream clinical tasks,
potentially hindering the pretraining process. Moreover,
they do not contain temporal information about when events
occurred during the recording.
The current work presents the application of aligning functional brain data with medical textual information for the
first time by training EEG-language models (ELMs). To
overcome the challenging formats of modalities, constituting long timeseries and multiparagraph reports, we propose
sub-unit alignment. To address inconsistent relevance of
EEG-text pairs, we additionally propose an extension draw-

1

Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Berlin, Germany 2 Hertie Institute for AI in
Brain Health, University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence
to: Sam Gijsen <sam.gijsen@charite.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

