Efficient Motion Prompt Learning for Robust Visual Tracking

Jie Zhao 1 Xin Chen 2 Yongsheng Yuan 1 Michael Felsberg 3 Dong Wang 1 Huchuan Lu 1

Abstract

Template image

Due to the challenges of processing temporal information, most trackers depend solely on visual
discriminability and overlook the unique temporal coherence of video data. In this paper, we
propose a lightweight and plug-and-play motion
prompt tracking method. It can be easily integrated into existing vision-based trackers to build
a joint tracking framework leveraging both motion
and vision cues, thereby achieving robust tracking through efficient prompt learning. A motion
encoder with three different positional encodings
is proposed to encode the long-term motion trajectory into the visual embedding space, while
a fusion decoder and an adaptive weight mechanism are designed to dynamically fuse visual
and motion features. We integrate our motion
module into three different trackers with five models in total. Experiments on seven challenging
tracking benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed motion module significantly improves the
robustness of vision-based trackers, with minimal training costs and negligible speed sacrifice.
Code is available at https://github.com/
zj5559/Motion-Prompt-Tracking.

Search image

Backbone & Relation
(Similarity learning)

Vision
+
Motion

Head

(a) Vision-based Tracking Framework

(b) Human Tracking Paradigm

❄❄
Template image
Search image
Trajectory

Backbone & Relation
(Similarity learning)

🔥🔥

❄❄

🔥🔥

Fusion Decoder

Head

Prompt Encoder
(Motion Embedding)
(c) Tracking Framework with Motion Prompt (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of different tracking paradigms. Our plugand-play method enables visual trackers to benefit from motion
prompts, making them more akin to the human tracking paradigm.

on the discriminative ability of visual models but overlook
the crucial temporal coherence in videos. The temporal
consistency of these trackers can be only reflected in determining the next local search region by the predicted target
position. As shown in Fig. 1(a), due to inherent limitations of appearance cues, these vision-based trackers are
prone to tracking drift when confronted with complex challenges, like distractors, severe occlusion, and so on. Unlike
relying solely on visual information, the human tracking
paradigm (Ramachandran, 1985; Sokhandan & Monadjemi,
2024) seamlessly integrates both vision and motion cues.
As shown in Fig. 1(b), humans can effortlessly identify the
specified target among multiple visually similar objects by
discerning its motion patterns from trajectories.

1. Introduction

However, due to the blend of object and camera movement,
the irregularity in observed motion patterns makes it challenging to incorporate temporal coherence into tracking
frameworks. Recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) trackers (Wei
et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024) start exploring effective temporal mechanisms to enhance tracking accuracy, but sequential training (Kim et al., 2022) is
required for these methods, which considerably increases
computational and memory demands. Beyond the substantial training costs, constrained computing resources will also
limit the ability of these models to perceive long temporal
information. In this paper, we post a question: Is heavy sequential training necessary for trackers to capture temporal
relations? We answer this question by proposing a trainingefficient Motion Prompt-based Tracking module (MPT),
which demonstrates that sequential training is unnecessary
for temporal-related tracking.

Given a sequence and an arbitrary object with interest, visual
object tracking (VOT) aims to locate this specified object
in each subsequent frame. As one of the fundamental computer vision tasks, VOT has been developed rapidly over
the past decade. Mainstream trackers (Li et al., 2019; Bhat
et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2023) perceive
VOT as a visual matching problem between a pair of discrete image patches, including a template and a local search
image cropped from the initial and current frames, respectively. These vision-based tracking frameworks mainly rely
1

Dalian University of Technology 2 City University of Hong
Kong 3 Linköping University. Correspondence to: Dong Wang
<wdice@dlut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

