MemFreezing: A Novel Adversarial Attack on Temporal Graph Neural
Networks under Limited Future Knowledge

Yue Dai * 1 Liang Liu * 2 Xulong Tang 1 Youtao Zhang 1 Jun Yang 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Dynamic graphs are prevalent in real-world scenarios, spanning areas like social media (Kumar et al., 2018), knowledge graphs (Leblay & Chekol, 2018), autonomous systems (Leskovec et al., 2005), and traffic graphs (Pareja et al.,
2020). Inspired by the success of GNNs (Kipf & Welling,
2016; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2017; Xu et al.,
2018), Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs) have
become leading solutions for dynamic graph tasks (Trivedi
et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Rossi et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2023; You et al., 2022). As such, there is a pressing
need to study their robustness towards adversarial attacks,
especially since such attacks have shown significant efficacy against traditional GNNs (Wang et al., 2018; Tao et al.,
2021; Zügner et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2020;
Zang et al., 2020; Bojchevski & Günnemann, 2019; Sun
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022). By modifying the input graphs
with imperceptible and subtle perturbations, the adversarial
attacks can make the models yield incorrect or adversaryexpected results. For instance, a social media such as REDDIT (Kumar et al., 2018) may employ TGNN to decide
whether comments (as edges) from users to posts (as nodes)
should be banned based on his/her comment histories. With
subtle adversarial attacks, malicious messages can easily
bypass this checking functionality.

Temporal graph neural networks (TGNN) have
achieved significant momentum in many realworld dynamic graph tasks. While most existing
TGNN attack methods assume worst-case scenarios where attackers have complete knowledge of
the input graph, the assumption may not always
hold in real-world situations, where attackers can,
at best, access information about existing nodes
and edges but not future ones after the attack.
However, studying adversarial attacks under these
constraints is crucial, as limited future knowledge
can reveal TGNN vulnerabilities overlooked in
idealized settings. Nevertheless, designing effective attacks in such scenarios is challenging: the
evolving graph can weaken their impact and make
it hard to affect unseen nodes. To address these
challenges, we introduce MemFreezing, a novel
adversarial attack framework that delivers longlasting and spreading disruptions in TGNNs without requiring post-attack knowledge of the graph.
MemFreezing strategically injects fake nodes or
edges to push node memories into a stable “frozen
state,” reducing their responsiveness to subsequent graph changes and limiting their ability to
convey meaningful information. As the graph
evolves, these affected nodes maintain and propagate their frozen state through their neighbors.
Experimental results show that MemFreezing persistently degrades TGNN performance across various tasks, offering a more enduring adversarial
strategy under limited future knowledge.

While several studies have explored the effectiveness of
adversarial attacks on dynamic graphs (Lee et al., 2024;
Sharma et al., 2022; 2023; Chen et al., 2021), they often
assume that attackers have complete knowledge of the input
graphs at the time of the attack, which may be challenging
to achieve in many real-world scenarios. In practice, as
dynamic graphs evolve, by the time attackers observe the
entire evolution (i.e., track all changing nodes and edges)
and identify the optimal timestamps to inject adversarial
perturbations (e.g., adding fake nodes or edges), those key
timestamps may have already passed, making it challenging
to inject noises timely. Hence, in real-world cases, despite
white-box (i.e., model parameters are known) or black-box
setups (i.e., model parameters are unknown), the adversary
may attack TGNN without knowing future changes on the
graph. Therefore, studying TGNN adversarial attacks under
these real-world constraints is essential since attacking un-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
USA. Correspondence to: Yue Dai <yud42@pitt.edu>, Liang Liu
<lil125@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

