Edge-Colored Clustering in Hypergraphs: Beyond Minimizing Unsatisfied Edges

Alex Crane 1 Thomas Stanley 2 Blair D. Sullivan 1 Nate Veldt 2

Abstract
We consider a framework for clustering edgecolored hypergraphs, where the goal is to cluster (equivalently, to color) objects based on the
primary type of multiway interactions they participate in. One well-studied objective is to color
nodes to minimize the number of unsatisfied hyperedges – those containing one or more nodes
whose color does not match the hyperedge color.
We motivate and present advances for several directions that extend beyond this minimization
problem. We first provide new algorithms for
maximizing satisfied edges, which is the same at
optimality but is much more challenging to approximate, with all prior work restricted to graphs.
We develop the first approximation algorithm for
hypergraphs, and then refine it to improve the bestknown approximation factor for graphs. We then
introduce new objective functions that incorporate notions of balance and fairness, and provide
new hardness results, approximations, and fixedparameter tractability results.

Figure 1. The node coloring on the left satisfies 4 edges (2 blue, 2
red, 0 green). The coloring on the right only satisfies 3, but each
color has a satisfied edge.

example, if nodes are researchers, edges are author lists for
publications, and colors indicate publication field (computer
science, biology, etc.), then ECC provides a framework for
inferring researchers’ fields based on publications. ECC has
also been used for temporal hypergraph clustering (Amburg
et al., 2020), where edge colors encode time windows in
which interactions occur. ECC then clusters nodes into time
windows in which they are especially active. Variants of
ECC have also been used for team formation (Amburg et al.,
2022), in which case nodes are people, edges represent team
tasks, and colors indicate task type. In this setting, ECC corresponds to assigning tasks based on prior team experiences.
Related work and research gaps. Edge-colored clustering
has been well-studied in the machine learning and data mining literature from the perspective of approximation algorithms (Amburg et al., 2020; 2022; Veldt, 2023; Crane et al.,
2024; Angel et al., 2016) and fixed-parameter tractability
results (Kellerhals et al., 2023; Cai & Leung, 2018; Crane
et al., 2024). It is also closely related to chromatic correlation clustering (Bonchi et al., 2012; 2015; Anava et al.,
2015; Klodt et al., 2021; Xiu et al., 2022), which is an
edge-colored variant of correlation clustering (Bansal et al.,
2004). Several variants of ECC have been encoded using
different combinatorial objective functions for assigning
colors to nodes. The earliest and arguably the most natural
is M AX ECC (Angel et al., 2016), which seeks to maximize the number of satisfied edges—edges in which all the
nodes match the color of the edge. More recent attention
has been paid to M IN ECC (Amburg et al., 2020), where
the goal is to minimize the number of unsatisfied edges.
The latter is the same as M AX ECC at optimality but differs
in terms of approximations and fixed-parameter tractability results. The approximability of M IN ECC is currently
well-understood: a recent ICML paper designed improved
approximation guarantees that are tight with respect to linear

1. Introduction
Edge-colored clustering (ECC) is an optimization framework for clustering datasets characterized by categorical
relationships among data points. The problem is formally
encoded as an edge-colored hypergraph (Figure 1), where
each edge represents an interaction between data objects (the
nodes) and the color of the edge indicates the type or category of that interaction. The goal is to assign colors to nodes
in such a way that edges of a color tend to include nodes
of that color, by minimizing or maximizing some objective
function relating edge colors and node colors. ECC algorithms have been applied to various clustering tasks where
cluster labels naturally match with interaction types. For
1
Kahlert School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Texas A&M University, College Station, USA. Correspondence to:
Alex Crane <alex.crane@utah.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

