Towards the Efficient Inference by Incorporating Automated Computational
Phenotypes under Covariate Shift

Chao Ying 1 2 Jun Jin 3 Yi Guo 4 Xiudi Li 5 Muxuan Liang 6 Jiwei Zhao 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Automated computational phenotype (ACP) refers to the
process of using advanced algorithms and models, including but not limited to, machine learning, natural language
processing (NLP), large language model (LLM) and generative AI, to automatically compute and define phenotypes
from complex data such as electronic health records (EHRs).
Though obtaining gold-standard phenotype data via manual extraction is labor-intensive and slow, ACP allows researchers to obtain phenotypes systemically and quickly,
scaling their efforts in precision medicine and supporting
the broader goal of turning raw data into actionable insights
for research and healthcare improvements.

Collecting gold-standard phenotype data via manual extraction is typically labor-intensive and
slow, whereas automated computational phenotypes (ACPs) offer a systematic and much faster
alternative. However, simply replacing the goldstandard with ACPs, without acknowledging their
differences, could lead to biased results and misleading conclusions. Motivated by the complexity
of incorporating ACPs while maintaining the validity of downstream analyses, in this paper, we
consider a semi-supervised learning setting that
consists of both labeled data (with gold-standard)
and unlabeled data (without gold-standard), under the covariate shift framework. We develop
doubly robust and semiparametrically efficient
estimators that leverage ACPs for general target
parameters in the unlabeled and combined populations. In addition, we carefully analyze the
efficiency gains achieved by incorporating ACPs,
comparing scenarios with and without their inclusion. Notably, we identify that ACPs for the
unlabeled data, instead of for the labeled data,
drive the enhanced efficiency gains. To validate
our theoretical findings, we conduct comprehensive synthetic experiments and apply our method
to multiple real-world datasets, confirming the
practical advantages of our approach. Code: §

Despite these benefits, simply replacing gold-standard data
with ACPs in downstream analyses introduces new challenges. As computational phenotyping algorithms are often trained to minimize prediction error such as the mean
squared error (MSE), ACPs may contain a non-negligible
bias for important downstream tasks such as statistical inference. Therefore, the indiscriminate use of ACPs, without
acknowledging their distinction from gold-standard phenotype data, can lead to biased results and misleading conclusions. In this work, instead of replacing gold-standard
phenotype data, we investigate the benefits of appropriately
incorporating these ACPs, in order to enhance the estimation efficiency and to achieve the more powerful statistical
inference.
In many applications, gold-standard phenotypes (labels)
are only available for a small subset of individuals due to
the high cost of manual extraction, while unlabeled data are
more readily accessible. Meanwhile, the selection of labeled
individuals is often based on baseline characteristics rather
than being purely random. This creates a semi-supervised
learning setting, where the covariate distribution differs
between labeled and unlabeled data. In this paper, we aim
to integrate ACPs into classical semi-supervised learning
frameworks to enable efficient estimation and inference.

1
Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA 2 Department of Biostatistics &
Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA 3 Henry Ford Health, Detroit, Michigan, USA 4 Department of Health Outcomes & Biomedical Informatics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
5
Biostatistics Division, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA 6 Department of Biostatistics, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA. Correspondence to: Jiwei Zhao <jiwei.zhao@wisc.edu>.

Our motivating study is an analysis on diabetes among children and adolescents from the UF (University of Florida)
health system (Li et al., 2025), where diabetes status is adjudicated by medical experts through manual chart reviews for

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

