Diff-MoE: Diffusion Transformer with Time-Aware and Space-Adaptive Experts

Kun Cheng * 1 Xiao He * 1 Lei Yu 2 Zhijun Tu 2 Mingrui Zhu 1 Nannan Wang † 1 Xinbo Gao 1 Jie Hu 2

FID-50K (400K iter, cfg=1.5)

Abstract
Diffusion models have transformed generative
modeling but suffer from scalability limitations
due to computational overhead and inflexible architectures that process all generative stages and
tokens uniformly. In this work, we introduce DiffMoE, a novel framework that combines Diffusion
Transformers with Mixture-of-Experts to exploit
both temporarily adaptability and spatial flexibility. Our design incorporates expert-specific
timestep conditioning, allowing each expert to
process different spatial tokens while adapting
to the generative stage, to dynamically allocate
resources based on both the temporal and spatial characteristics of the generative task. Additionally, we propose a globally-aware feature
recalibration mechanism that amplifies the representational capacity of expert modules by dynamically adjusting feature contributions based
on input relevance. Extensive experiments on
image generation benchmarks demonstrate that
Diff-MoE significantly outperforms state-of-theart methods. Our work demonstrates the potential
of integrating diffusion models with expert-based
designs, offering a scalable and effective framework for advanced generative modeling. The
code is available at https://github.com/
kunncheng/Diff-MoE.

50
40
30

DiT-S
DiT-B
DiT-XL
SiT-XL
DTR-S
DTR-B
DTR-XL

20

Switch-DiT-S
Switch-DiT-B
Switch-DiT-XL
DiT-MoE-S
DiT-MoE-B
DiT-MoE-L
DiT-MoE-XL

Ours-S
Ours-S+
Ours-B
Ours-B+
Ours-L
Ours-XL

10
6
4
3
2

108

Number of Parameters

109

Figure 1. Comparison of FID performance and Parameters
across different sizes. We compare the class of DiT models
trained for 400K iterations on ImageNet 256×256 generation with
cf g = 1.5. Diff-MoE achieves better FID across different sizes.

2023; Qi et al., 2023). However, their scalability remains
limited by significant computational costs. Despite recent
advancements, such as Diffusion Transformers (DiT) (Peebles & Xie, 2023), the representation capacity and scalability of these models is constrained by two inherent limitations. First, the densely activated nature of DiT requires
every parameter to be utilized across all stages of generation, regardless of their relevance to the specific task or
input, resulting in excessive computational overhead. Second, DiT employs a monolithic design that processes all
diffusion timesteps uniformly, assuming that the same network components can handle both the coarse-grained global
structures of early diffusion stages and the fine-grained local
refinements in later stages. This lack of timestep-specific
adaptation prevents the model from specializing in the distinct requirements of different generative phases, ultimately
hindering its representational capacity.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) have
revolutionized generative modeling, achieving state-of-theart results across various tasks, including image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2024; Esser et al., 2024), video generation (Blattmann
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b) and editing (Brooks et al.,

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures have emerged as a
scalable paradigm for deep learning (Shazeer et al., 2017;
Dai et al., 2024), offering computational efficiency through
dynamic parameter activation. By assigning distinct ”experts” to process different parts of the input, MoE models
unlock unprecedented capacity without proportionally increasing computational cost. While MoE models excel in
language tasks by routing inputs to specialized sub-networks
(”experts”), their potential in diffusion-based generative

*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Nannan Wang <nnwang@xidian.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

