MIB: A Mechanistic Interpretability Benchmark

Aaron Mueller * 1 Atticus Geiger * 2 Sarah Wiegreffe 3 Dana Arad 4 Iván Arcuschin 5 Adam Belfki 6
Yik Siu Chan 7 Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman 6 Tal Haklay 4 Michael Hanna 8 Jing Huang 9 Rohan Gupta 10
Yaniv Nikankin 4 Hadas Orgad 4 Nikhil Prakash 6 Anja Reusch 4 Aruna Sankaranarayanan 11 Shun Shao 12
Alessandro Stolfo 13 Martin Tutek 4 Amir Zur 2 David Bau 6 Yonatan Belinkov 4
Circuit
localization (§3)

Abstract
How can we know whether new mechanistic interpretability methods achieve real improvements?
In pursuit of lasting evaluation standards, we propose MIB, a Mechanistic Interpretability Benchmark, with two tracks spanning four tasks and
five models. MIB favors methods that precisely
and concisely recover relevant causal pathways or
causal variables in neural language models. The
circuit localization track compares methods that
locate the model components—and connections
between them—most important for performing
a task (e.g., attribution patching or information
flow routes). The causal variable localization
track compares methods that featurize a hidden
vector, e.g., sparse autoencoders (SAEs) or distributed alignment search (DAS), and align those
features to a task-relevant causal variable. Using MIB, we find that attribution and mask optimization methods perform best on circuit localization. For causal variable localization, we
find that the supervised DAS method performs
best, while SAE features are not better than neurons, i.e., non-featurized hidden vectors. These
findings illustrate that MIB enables meaningful
comparisons, and increases our confidence that
there has been real progress in the field.

Causal variable
localization (§4)
The user provides …

1

Location L, Featurizer F

Circuits of di erent sizes

{
2

{

F

L

Track-speci c computations

Compute faithfulness scores

L

Featurize using F

x =“12 + 9 =”

Tens

}

f

Carry the 1

Ones

Align with variable in
high-level causal model

% Edges
3

Area under curve (CPR)

0.75

Compute results
Faithfulness

0.38

Figure 1. Overview of MIB. We compare different circuit (§3) and
causal variable (§4) localization methods on their ability to faithfully represent a model’s behavior on a given task. We provide
standardized datasets and metrics for this purpose, and accept user
submissions for display on two public leaderboards.

Equal contribution 1 Boston University 2 Pr(AI)2 R Group 3 Ai2
Technion 5 University of Buenos Aires 6 Northeastern University
7
Brown University 8 University of Amsterdam 9 Stanford University 10 Independent 11 MIT 12 Cambridge University 13 ETH Zürich.
Correspondence to: Aaron Mueller <amueller@bu.edu>.

(MI) methods have proliferated quickly. MI methods can
yield deep insights into LM behaviors (Räuker et al., 2023;
Ferrando et al., 2024; Sharkey et al., 2025, i.a.), and sometimes yield more fine-grained control over LM behaviors
than standard training or inference techniques (Meng et al.,
2022; Marks et al., 2025). However, it is difficult to directly
compare the efficacy of MI methods. New methods are often compared to prior methods via ad hoc evaluations using
metrics that may not produce generalizable insights. Thus,
how can we know whether new methods are producing real
advancements over prior work?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We propose a benchmark to provide a basis for comparisons.
A benchmark is a claim as to what should be considered important to a field. In our case, the ability to precisely locate,

1. Introduction
To understand how and why language models (LMs) behave
the way they do, we must understand the underlying causes
of their behavior. To this end, mechanistic interpretability
fiff

*

4

1

