LDMol: A Text-to-Molecule Diffusion Model with Structurally
Informative Latent Space Surpasses AR Models

Jinho Chang 1 Jong Chul Ye 1

Abstract

graphs (Lim et al., 2020), and point clouds (Hoogeboom
et al., 2022). The attributes controlled by these models
evolved from simple chemical properties (Olivecrona et al.,
2017; Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018) to complex biological
activity (Staszak et al., 2022) and multi-objective conditioning (Li et al., 2018; Chang & Ye, 2024). More recently,
as deep learning models’ natural language comprehension
ability has rapidly increased, there’s a growing interest in
molecule generation controlled by natural language (Edwards et al., 2022; Pei et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Su
et al., 2022) which encompasses much broader and userfriendly controllable conditions.

With the emergence of diffusion models as a frontline generative model, many researchers have proposed molecule generation techniques with conditional diffusion models. However, the unavoidable discreteness of a molecule makes it difficult
for a diffusion model to connect raw data with
highly complex conditions like natural language.
To address this, here we present a novel latent diffusion model dubbed LDMol for text-conditioned
molecule generation. By recognizing that the suitable latent space design is the key to the diffusion model performance, we employ a contrastive
learning strategy to extract novel feature space
from text data that embeds the unique characteristics of the molecule structure. Experiments show
that LDMol outperforms the existing autoregressive baselines on the text-to-molecule generation
benchmark, being one of the first diffusion models
that outperforms autoregressive models in textual
data generation with a better choice of the latent
domain. Furthermore, we show that LDMol can
be applied to downstream tasks such as moleculeto-text retrieval and text-guided molecule editing,
demonstrating its versatility as a diffusion model.

Meanwhile, diffusion models (Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho
et al., 2020) have emerged as a frontline of generative models over the past few years. Through a simple and stable
training objective of predicting noise from noisy data (Ho
et al., 2020), diffusion models have achieved highly realistic
and controllable data generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Karras et al., 2022; Ho & Salimans, 2021). Furthermore,
leveraging that the score function of the data distribution is
learned in their training (Song et al., 2021b), state-of-theart image diffusion models enabled various applications on
the image domain (Saharia et al., 2022; Kim & Ye, 2021;
Chung et al., 2023). Inspired by the success of diffusion
models, several papers suggested diffusion-based molecule
generative models on various molecule domains including a
molecular graph (Luo et al., 2023), strings like Simplified
Molecular-Input Line-Entry System (SMILES) (Gong et al.,
2024), and point clouds (Hoogeboom et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Designing compounds with the desired characteristics is
the essence of solving many chemical tasks. Inspired by
the rapid development of generative models in the last
decades, de novo molecule generation via deep learning models has been extensively studied. Diverse models
have been proposed for generating molecules that agree
with a given condition on various data modalities, including string representations (Segler et al., 2017), molecular

However, a discrepancy between molecule data and common data domains like images makes it hard to connect the
diffusion models to molecule generation. Whereas diffusion
models are deeply studied on a continuous data domain
with Gaussian noise, any molecule modality has inevitable
discreteness such as atom and bond type, connectivity, and
SMILES tokens (Figure 1-(a)). As a result, diffusion models
trained on raw molecule data often failed to faithfully follow
the given conditions or showed poor data quality (e.g., invalid molecules) as the condition became more sophisticated
like natural language. Most molecule diffusion models presented so far have used a few, relatively simple conditions
to control, while major developments in text-to-molecule

1

Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jong Chul Ye <jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

