Self-Disentanglement and Re-Composition for Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Segmentation

Jintao Tong 1 Yixiong ZouB 1 Guangyao Chen 2 Yuhua Li 1 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation (CD-FSS)
aims to transfer knowledge from a source-domain
dataset to unseen target-domain datasets with limited annotations. Current methods typically compare the distance between training and testing
samples for mask prediction. However, we find
an entanglement problem exists in this widely
adopted method, which tends to bind sourcedomain patterns together and make each of them
hard to transfer. In this paper, we aim to address
this problem for the CD-FSS task. We first find a
natural decomposition of the ViT structure, based
on which we delve into the entanglement problem
for an interpretation. We find the decomposed
ViT components are crossly compared between
images in distance calculation, where the rational
comparisons are entangled with those meaningless ones by their equal importance, leading to
the entanglement problem. Based on this interpretation, we further propose to address the entanglement problem by learning to weigh for all
comparisons of ViT components, which learn disentangled features and re-compose them for the
CD-FSS task, benefiting both the generalization
and finetuning. Experiments show that our model
outperforms the state-of-the-art CD-FSS method
by 1.92% and 1.88% in average accuracy under
1-shot and 5-shot settings, respectively.

Figure 1: (a) A problem of feature entanglement exists
in current works, which entangles multiple patterns and
reduces the transferability. (b)(c) To handle this problem, we
find a natural decomposition in ViT’s feature, then analyze
the entanglement problem based on this decomposition, and
finally propose to self-disentangle and re-compose the ViT
feature to address this problem for efficient cross-domain
transferring and target-domain adaptation.
on abundant labeled data poses a major challenge, especially for dense prediction tasks like semantic segmentation. Cross-Domain Few-shot Semantic Segmentation (CDFSS) (Shaban et al., 2017; Dong & Xing, 2018; Zhang et al.,
2020b; Lei et al., 2022) has been introduced to address this
issue, enabling predictions for target-domain unseen classes
by limited annotated samples, with knowledge transferred
from a data-sufficient source domain.
Existing CD-FSS works (Herzog, 2024; Su et al., 2024; He
et al., 2024; Tong et al., 2024) usual perform segmentation
by measuring the similarity between the support and query
set based on features output by the encoder (Fig. 1a). However, we find this well-adopted method always leads to the
entanglement of multiple patterns1 and harms the transferability. For example, in Fig. 1a, the model tends to entangle
the patterns of wings and bodies, i.e., detecting wings and
bodies only when these two patterns appear simultaneously.
However, if an image contains only the wings but the body
is different from the training data (e.g., another kind of

1. Introduction
Recent progress in deep neural networks (Long et al., 2015;
Zhao et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) has been driven
by large-scale annotated datasets. However, the reliance
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Yixiong ZouB <yixiongz@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Represent various attributes such as object region, texture,
color, and more, we visualize the activated object regions.

1

