Beyond Minimax Rates in Group Distributionally Robust Optimization via a
Novel Notion of Sparsity

Quan Nguyen 1 Nishant A. Mehta 1 Cristóbal Guzmán 2

Abstract

important goals in building machine learning models (BenTal et al., 2013; Williamson & Menon, 2019; Sagawa et al.,
2020). These goals are especially important for models making decisions that could have societal and safety impacts. A
recently proposed framework for achieving these goals is the
group distributionally robust optimization (GDRO) framework, in which a learner aims to find a single hypothesis that
minimizes the maximum risk over a finite number of data
distributions. This minimax objective is often considered in
the context of fairness (Rawls, 1971; Williamson & Menon,
2019; Abernethy et al., 2022) when the distributions represent different demographic groups, or as a means to promote
robustness when they represent possible shifts in the data
distribution (Mohri et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020).

The minimax sample complexity of group distributionally robust optimization (GDRO) has been
determined up to a log(K) factor, where K is the
number of groups. In this work, we venture beyond the minimax perspective via a novel notion
of sparsity that we call (λ, β)-sparsity. In short,
this condition means that at any parameter θ, there
is a set of at most β groups whose risks at θ are all
at least λ larger than the risks of the other groups.
To find an ϵ-optimal θ, we show via a novel algorithm and analysis that the ϵ-dependent term in the
sample complexity can swap a linear dependence
on K for a linear dependence on the potentially
much smaller β. This improvement leverages recent progress in sleeping bandits, showing a fundamental connection between the two-player zerosum game optimization framework for GDRO and
per-action regret bounds in sleeping bandits. We
next show an adaptive algorithm which, up to
logarithmic factors, obtains a sample complexity
bound that adapts to the best (λ, β)-sparsity condition that holds. We also show how to obtain a
dimension-free semi-adaptive sample complexity
bound with a computationally efficient method.
Finally, we demonstrate the practicality of the
(λ, β)-sparsity condition and the improved sample efficiency of our algorithms on both synthetic
and real-life datasets.

More formally, given an n-dimensional hypothesis set Θ and
a group of K distributions Pi , the learner aims to solve the
optimization minθ∈Θ maxi∈{1,...,K} Ri (θ), where Ri (θ) is
the risk of the learner with respect to Pi . Intuitively, this
objective encourages the learner to find a model with good
balance in performance with respect to a finite number of
distributions of data, and avoid models that might perform
extremely well on one distribution but have significantly
worse performance on others. The GDRO framework assumes that the learner has access to a sampling oracle, which
returns an i.i.d sample from Pi upon receiving a request
i ∈ [K]. The sample complexity of the learner is the number
of samples needed to find an ϵ-optimal hypothesis θ̄ such
that the optimality gap maxi Ri (θ̄)−maxi Ri (θ∗ ) is smaller
than a target value ϵ, where θ∗ is an optimal hypothesis.
Throughout the paper, the Õ notation hides logarithmic
factors. Existing works (Soma et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2023) have shown a sample complexity 
lower bound
 of orG2 D 2 +K
G2 D 2 +K
der Ω( ϵ2
) and a near-matching Õ
worstϵ2
case upper bound, where D is the ℓ2 diameter of Θ and G
is the Lipschitz constant of the loss function. While these
existing results are useful for understanding worst-case scenarios, practical problems may have additional structure that
allows for significantly lower sample complexity. In partic2 2
ular, the Ω( G Dϵ2 +K ) lower bound construction in (Soma
et al., 2022) relies on having arbitrarily small gaps (i.e.,
difference in risks) between groups for all θ ∈ Θ. This
property rarely holds in practice, where most hypotheses

1. Introduction
Performing well across different data subpopulations and being robust to distribution-shift in testing are two of the most
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Victoria,
Canada 2 Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering, Faculty of Mathematics and School of Engineering, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile. Correspondence to: Quan Nguyen
<manhquan233@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

