TabSDS: a Lightweight, Fully Non-Parametric, and Model Free Approach for
Generating Synthetic Tabular Data

Elias Chaibub Neto 1

Abstract

tain heterogeneous relationships among distinct data types,
and usually tend to be considerably smaller than the large
scale datasets used to train computer vision and natural
language processing tasks.

The development of deep generative models for
tabular data is currently a very active research
area in machine learning. These models, however, tend to be computationally heavy and require careful tuning of multiple model parameters.
In this paper, we propose TabSDS - a lightweight,
non-parametric, and model free alternative to tabular deep generative models which leverages rank
and data shuffling transformations for generating
synthetic data which closely approximates the
joint probability distribution of the real data. We
evaluate TabSDS against multiple baselines implemented in the Synthcity Python library across
several datasets. TabSDS showed very competitive performance against all baselines (including
TabDDPM - a strong baseline model for tabular
data generation). Importantly, the execution time
of TabSDS is orders of magnitude faster than the
deep generative baselines, and also considerably
faster than other computationally efficient baselines such as adversarial random forests.

The generation of synthetic tabular data has been a research
topic in the statistical disclosure control field for over three
decades now (Drechsler and Haensch, 2023; Reiter, 2023).
More recently, the machine learning community has also
turned its attention to tabular data, and several sophisticated
deep generative modeling frameworks (including generative
adversarial networks, variational autoencoders, diffusion
models, normalizing flows, and large language models) have
also been adapted for the generation of tabular data (see
Bond-Taylor et al. 2021; Lu et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024
for a few recent reviews).
These deep learning based approaches, however, tend to
be computationally intensive and require extensive tuning
of multiple model parameters. This caveat has motivated
the development of more lightweight alternatives such as
adversarial random forests (Watson et al., 2023).
In this paper, we propose a lightweight alternative to deep
generative models as well. Building over sequential joint
probability preserving data shuffling (SJPPDS), a recently
proposed perturbative method for performing statistical disclosure control of numeric data (Chaibub Neto, 2024), we
develop a completely non-parametric and model free approach for synthetic tabular data generation.

1. Introduction
Easy access to data is fundamental for machine learning
research. Real-world data, however, often contains sensitive information, which precludes its unrestricted sharing
across the research community. As a result, synthetic data
has become an increasingly popular alternative for training
ML models. The goal is to create training datasets that
closely resemble real-world data, allowing models trained
on synthetic data to perform effectively on real data.

At a high level, our approach leverages rank and data shuffling transformations for the generation of synthetic data.
It represents a multi-step procedure involving the generation of (uncorrelated) synthetic marginal distributions which
are then rank-matched to shuffled versions of the real data.
The synthetic marginal distributions are generated using a
novel non-parametric approach which (in the asymptotic
case) draws samples from the same distribution as the real
data (see Theorem 1). The rank-matching step essentially
induces the association structure of the real data into the
synthetic marginal data. The result is the generation of the
synthetic data which closely approximates the joint probability distribution of the real data. Our main contributions
are the following.

However, generating high-quality synthetic data that accurately reflects the complexities of real-world data remains a
significant challenge for tabular datasets, which often con1

Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, Washington, United States
of America.
Correspondence to: Elias Chaibub Neto
<elias.chaibub.neto@sagebase.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

