Orthus: Autoregressive Interleaved Image-Text Generation with
Modality-Specific Heads

Siqi Kou 1 * Jiachun Jin 1 Zhihong Liu 1 Chang Liu 1 *
Ye Ma 2 Jian Jia 2 Quan Chen 2 Peng Jiang 2 Zhijie Deng 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Multimodal models have shown promise in image-to-text
and/or text-to-image generation, with LLaVA (Liu et al.,
2024d;c), Emu2 (Sun et al., 2024c), and NExT-GPT (Wu
et al., 2013) as popular examples. These abilities are essential for handling complex real-world understanding and generation problems. Yet, existing approaches can suffer from
significant modeling redundancy due to the trivial combination of specialized large models (e.g., CLIP-ViT (Radford
et al., 2021), Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), and
LlaMa (Touvron et al., 2023a;b)). Doing so also undermines
the benefits brought by cross-modal learning and introduces
considerable inefficiency for both training and inference.

We introduce Orthus, a unified multimodal model
that excels in generating interleaved images and
text from mixed-modality inputs by simultaneously handling discrete text tokens and continuous image features under the AR modeling principle. The continuous treatment of visual signals
minimizes the information loss while the fully AR
formulation renders the characterization of the
correlation between modalities straightforward.
Orthus leverages these advantages through its
modality-specific heads—one regular language
modeling (LM) head predicts discrete text tokens and one diffusion head generates continuous image features. We devise an efficient strategy for building Orthus—by substituting the Vector Quantization (VQ) operation in the existing
unified AR model with a soft alternative, introducing a diffusion head, and tuning the added
modules to reconstruct images, we can create an
Orthus-base model effortlessly (e.g., within 72
A100 GPU hours). Orthus-base can further embrace post-training to craft lengthy interleaved
image-text, reflecting the potential for handling
intricate real-world tasks. For visual understanding and generation, Orthus achieves a GenEval
score of 0.58 and an MME-P score of 1265.8
using 7B parameters, outperforming competing
baselines including Show-o and Chameleon. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
zhijie-group/Orthus.

There is ongoing interest in jointly modeling visual understanding and generation with a unified, compact model. One
strategy is to map both images and texts to discrete tokens
for simple autoregressive (AR) modeling (Liu et al., 2024f;
Team, 2024; Wang et al., 2024) (left of Figure 1). However,
the image tokenizer, often equipped with a vector quantization (VQ) bottleneck, can cause inevitable information
loss and easily lead to suboptimal performance on vision
tasks concerning high-frequency details (e.g., OCR and human face generation). Alternatively, recent works, including
Transfusion (Zhou et al., 2024) and Monoformer (Zhao
et al., 2024) (middle of Figure 1), propose to integrate AR
modeling on discrete text tokens and diffusion modeling
on continuous image features within a single transformer.
Nonetheless, the nature of diffusion modeling to process
noisy images (Ho et al., 2020) makes the joint modeling of
image-to-text, text-to-image, and more complicated interleaved image-text challenging.
This paper proposes Orthus1 to bridge the gap. Orthus conjoins lossless continuous image features and the unified,
cross-modal AR modeling by decoupling diffusion from
the transformer backbone. This circumvents the noise disturbance and renders the characterization of the correlation
between modalities straightforward, making it more suitable
for interleaved image-text modeling. Specifically, Orthus

*
Work done during an internship at Kuaishou Technology.
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Kuaishou Technology. Correspondence to: Zhijie Deng <zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Orthus is a loyal two-headed guard dog in Greek mythology.

