Settling the Maximin Share Fairness for Scheduling among Groups of Machines

Bo Li * 1 Fangxiao Wang * 1 Shiji Xing * 1

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on a job scheduling problem among
groups of machines, which was first introduced in (Li et al.,
2023). There are two layers of objects, where a number of
indivisible jobs need to be first allocated to n groups (viewed
as super-agents). Each group controls a number of machines
(which can be viewed as atomic agents). Upon receiving
a set of jobs, the group should further assign these jobs to
its machines with the objective of completing all assigned
jobs as early as possible. Equivalently, we can define a cost
function for each group that equals the minimum makespan
of completing all jobs assigned to it. This setting is natural in
practice; for instance, a group’s workday can only conclude
when all members have completed their assigned duties
(e.g., facilitating the departure of a shuttle bus).

We study the fair scheduling of jobs among groups
of (unrelated) machines and focus on the maximin
share (MMS) fairness at the group level. The problem was first introduced by Li et al. [NeurIPS
2023], where each group consists of a number
of identical machines (or identical up to different
speeds), and the cost of a group is determined by
the minimum makespan on completing all jobs
assigned to it. It is left as an open problem when
the machines within each group are unrelated. In
this paper, we first resolve this problem and design a polynomial-time algorithm that computes
a 2-approximate MMS allocation via linear programming techniques. We complement this result
with a hard instance, showing that no algorithm
can be better than (2 − n1 )-approximate MMS,
where n is the number of machines. Thus the approximation ratio 2 is asymptotically tight. When
the groups consist of identical machines, we improve the approximation ratio to 34 .

The fairness in this model is measured by the maximin
share (MMS), introduced by Budish (2011). The MMS
value of each group is the minimum cost it can ensure if the
group partitions all jobs into n bundles and always receives
the bundle with maximum cost. Li et al. (2023) proved
that if the machines in each group are identical (i.e., they
take the same time to complete a task), a 2-approximate
MMS allocation exists and can be found in polynomial time.
Although Li et al. (2023) extended their results to related
machines (i.e., the machines may have different speeds)
within groups, the general setting of unrelated machines
remains an open problem. In this work, we aim to resolve
this open problem and also improve the approximation ratio
for identical machines.

1. Introduction
Fairness has long been a fundamental concern in social and
economic environments. In the recent decade, it has drawn
increasingly more attention from artificial intelligence, machine learning, and computer science due to the algorithmic
and computation issues. One particularly noteworthy setting
within the fairness discourse is resource allocation, which
is not only theoretically intriguing but also holds practical
importance. For an in-depth understanding of fair resource
allocation, we recommend handbooks (Wooldridge, 2009;
Brandt et al., 2016) and surveys (Moulin, 2019; Amanatidis
et al., 2023) for a comprehensive overview.

The above problem aligns two separate lines of research in
the literature, namely MMS fair allocation of chores and job
scheduling problem. The majority of research in MMS fair
allocation assumes additive valuations, which is a special
case of the setting in the current paper when each group
consists of a single machine (Huang & Lu, 2021; Huang
& Segal-Halevi, 2023). As proved in (Li et al., 2023), if
agents have general subadditive valuations, MMS fairness
does not admit a better than n approximation. Our work
presents a noteworthy class of valuations between additive
and subadditive for which we can design (efficient) constant
approximation algorithms.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing, The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Bo Li <comp-bo.li@polyu.edu.hk>, Fangxiao
Wang <fangxiao.wang@connect.polyu.hk>, Shiji Xing <shiji.xing@connect.polyu.hk>.

On the other hand, the cost functions in our problem involve
solving the optimization problem of scheduling among unrelated machines – a well-known NP-hard problem. The

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

