Inverse Problem Sampling in Latent Space Using Sequential Monte Carlo

Idan Achituve 1 Hai Victor Habi 1 Amir Rosenfeld 1 Arnon Netzer 1 Idit Diamant * 1 Ethan Fetaya * 2

Abstract
In image processing, solving inverse problems is
the task of finding plausible reconstructions of
an image that was corrupted by some (usually
known) degradation operator. Commonly, this
process is done using a generative image model
that can guide the reconstruction towards solutions that appear natural. The success of diffusion
models over the last few years has made them
a leading candidate for this task. However, the
sequential nature of diffusion models makes this
conditional sampling process challenging. Furthermore, since diffusion models are often defined in the latent space of an autoencoder, the
encoder-decoder transformations introduce additional difficulties. To address these challenges,
we suggest a novel sampling method based on sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) in the latent space of
diffusion models. We name our method LD-SMC.
We define a generative model for the data using
additional auxiliary observations and perform posterior inference with SMC sampling based on a
reverse diffusion process. Empirical evaluations
on ImageNet and FFHQ show the benefits of LDSMC over competing methods in various inverse
problem tasks and especially in challenging inpainting tasks.

Figure 1: LD-SMC solves inverse problem tasks in the latent
space of autoencoders by utilizing auxiliary observations
y1:T initialized using the DDIM forward process. Then,
sampling z0 from the posterior distribution is done based on
the reverse diffusion process using sequential Monte Carlo.
In the figure, D and A denote the decoder and the corruption
operator respectively.

and Gaussian denoising. The broad applicability of inverse
problems makes them highly significant, as they encompass numerous real-world challenges, such as those found
in digital image processing (Blackledge, 2005), wireless
communication (Chen et al., 2021), seismology (Virieux &
Operto, 2009), medical imaging (Song et al., 2021c; Chung
et al., 2023c), and astronomy (Craig & Brown, 1986).

1. Introduction
Many important signal processing tasks can be viewed as
inverse problems (Song et al., 2021c; Moliner et al., 2023;
Daras et al., 2024; Chung et al., 2023b; Cardoso et al., 2023).
In inverse problems, the objective is to obtain a clean signal
x ∈ Rn from a degraded observation y = A(x) + ψ, where
A is usually a known irreversible mapping and ψ is a Gaussian noise vector. Common applications that fit this framework include image deblurring, super-resolution, inpainting,
Equal contribution 1 Sony Semiconductor Israel (SSI), Israel
Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Israel. Correspondence to: Idan Achituve <Idanachi@gmail.com>.

A major challenge in solving inverse problems is the existence of multiple plausible solutions. For example, in
image inpainting, the likelihood p(y|x) remains constant
regardless of how the absent pixels are filled. However,
the desired solution is one that not only fits the observation, but also appears natural, which corresponds to having
a high probability under a natural image prior p(x). This
insight naturally leads to the approach of sampling from
the posterior distribution p(x|y) ∝ p(y|x)p(x), combining
the data likelihood and the prior to achieve realistic and
data-consistent solutions.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

With the impressive recent advances in diffusion models
(Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021a), there has been a significant interest in leveraging

*

2

1

