Learning curves theory for hierarchically compositional data with power-law
distributed features
Francesco Cagnetta 1 Hyunmo Kang 2 Matthieu Wyart 3

Abstract

provement of test performance in the data-limited regime,
where model capacity and compute are unlimited, and performance is constrained primarily by the number of training
data. A simple approach, based on data memorisation, leads
to power-law learning curves under a Zipf, i.e. power-law,
distribution of the input data (Hutter, 2021; Michaud et al.,
2023). However, this view cannot explain how generalisation performance improves. Alternatively, power-law
learning curves appear in kernel regression when the spectrum of the target function in the kernel eigenbasis is itself
a power law (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007). Several theoretical studies of neural scaling laws are indeed based
on this result (Spigler et al., 2020; Bordelon et al., 2020;
Bahri et al., 2021; Favero et al., 2021; Maloney et al., 2022;
Cagnetta et al., 2023; Bordelon et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024).
However, these approaches are restricted to kernel-based
approximations of deep learning methods, whose limited
power cannot explain the successes of modern language and
vision models.

Recent theories suggest that Neural Scaling Laws
arise whenever the task is linearly decomposed
into power-law distributed units. Alternatively,
scaling laws also emerge when data exhibit a hierarchically compositional structure, as is thought
to occur in language and images. To unify these
views, we consider classification and next-token
prediction tasks based on probabilistic contextfree grammars—probabilistic models that generate data via a hierarchy of production rules. For
classification, we show that having power-law distributed production rules results in a power-law
learning curve with an exponent depending on
the rules’ distribution and a large multiplicative
constant that depends on the hierarchical structure. By contrast, for next-token prediction, the
distribution of production rules controls the local
details of the learning curve, but not the exponent
describing the large-scale behaviour.

In this respect, recent studies have identified hierarchical
generative models such as Probabilistic Context-Free Grammars (PCFGs) as model datasets to explain the difference
in performance between deep and kernels/shallow learning
methods methods, while still allowing for some analytical understanding (Malach & Shalev-Shwartz, 2018; 2020;
Cagnetta et al., 2024; Sclocchi et al., 2025; Mei, 2024;
Tomasini & Wyart, 2024; Cagnetta & Wyart, 2024; GarnierBrun et al., 2024; Sclocchi et al., 2024; Oko et al., 2025). In
this work, we combine one such data model—the Random
Hierarchy Model (RHM) of (Cagnetta et al., 2024)—with
the hypothesis that the features of real datasets (e.g. the
words in a text corpus) are Zipf distributed.

1. Introduction
The improvement in the performance of many machinelearning models with the amount of resources, including
the number of model parameters and training examples,
has been shown to follow a simple power-law behaviour
across several orders of magnitude (Hestness et al., 2017;
Kaplan et al., 2020). These power laws, known as neural
scaling laws, are used in practice as a guideline for scaling
up resources (Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023).
Among scaling laws, the learning curve describes the im-

1.1. Our contributions

1
Theoretical and Scientific Data Science, SISSA, Trieste, Italy 2 Department of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 3 Department of Physics &
Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, United
States.
On leave from EPFL, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Francesco Cagnetta <francesco.cagnetta@sissa.it>,
Hyunmo Kang <gusah1104@snu.ac.kr>, Matthieu Wyart <mwyart1@jh.edu>.

• We introduce (section 2) a family of synthetic datasets
based on the RHM (Cagnetta et al., 2024), where data
are generated from their class labels according to a hierarchy of production rules, mapping high-level features
to tuples of lower-level features. While in (Cagnetta
et al., 2024) all production rules have the same probability, we consider probabilities obeying Zipf’s law,
fk ∝ k −(1+a) . These datasets model both the hierar-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

