Can DBNNs Robust to Environmental Noise
for Resource-constrained Scenarios?
Wendong Zheng 1 Junyang Chen * 2 Husheng Guo 1 Wenjian Wang * 1

Abstract

putational resources, researchers often consider deploying
lightweight models. This implies that lightweight models
are typically trained on GPU servers, after which the welltrained models are deployed to edge devices for performing
downstream inference tasks. In particular, edge devices are
typically in environments with diverse forms of environmental noise (Yayla & Chen, 2022). If environmental noise
causes the lightweight model to output wrong results, it
can have serious consequences for safety-critical tasks. For
examples, the smart bracelet worn by the patient introduces
environmental noise perturbations, which is compounded
by the patient’s pain and other physiological conditions
(Roeder, 2022). Thus, we aim to support robust decisionmaking of lightweight models under environmental noise
perturbations, thereby assisting decision-makers.

Recently, the potential of lightweight models for
resource-constrained scenarios has garnered significant attention, particularly in safety-critical
tasks such as bio-electrical signal classification
and B-ultrasound-assisted diagnostic. These tasks
are frequently affected by environmental noise
due to patient movement artifacts and inherent
device noise, which pose significant challenges
for lightweight models (e.g., deep binary neural
networks (DBNNs)) to perform robust inference.
A pertinent question arises: can a well-trained
DBNN effectively resist environmental noise during inference? In this study, we find that the
DBNN’s robustness vulnerability comes from the
binary weights and scaling factors Drawing upon
theoretical insights, we propose L1-infinite norm
constraints for binary weights and scaling factors,
which yield a tighter upper bound compared to
existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Finally,
visualization studies show that our approach introduces minimal noise perturbations at the periphery of the feature maps. Our approach outperforms the SOTA method, as validated by several
experiments conducted on the bio-electrical and
image classification datasets. We hope our findings can raise awareness among researchers about
the environmental noise robustness of DBNNs.

Limitations: On Resource Limited Scenarios, the robustness of lightweight models with sparse property is compromised in environmental noise perturbations (Cai et al., 2022).
Empirically, several researches are focused on adversarial
learning schemes (Miyato et al., 2018; Gouk et al., 2021)
using spectral norm constraints to improve the robustness
of full-precision models. In theory, recent approaches extensively employ relaxation strategies based on the Lipschitz
continuity theorem to establish provable bounds for fullprecision convolutional neural networks (CNNs) against
adversarial attack (Gowal et al., 2018; Balunovic & Vechev,
2020; Zhang et al., 2020; 2021). However, this kind of
method mainly has the following three limitations. (1) These
relaxation-based methods (Gowal et al., 2018; Balunovic &
Vechev, 2020) improve the robustness of full-precision models when deployed on GPU servers, yet they introduce exponential computational overhead. Thus, the aforementioned
approaches (Gowal et al., 2018; Balunovic & Vechev, 2020)
present significant challenges for deployment in resourceconstrained environments. (2) The above method (Gowal
et al., 2018; Balunovic & Vechev, 2020; Zhang et al., 2020;
2021) exhibit effectiveness only against specific types of
noise perturbations, owing to their training with specific
adversarial samples. However, the nature of environmental
noise that poses challenges for safety-critical tasks is difficult to predict. For instance, a patient’s position change due
to discomfort can introduce random noise into the electrodes
collecting bio-electrical signals (Roeder, 2022). (3) The

1. Introduction
To enable safety-critical tasks (e.g., traffic flow control, bioelectrical monitoring, etc.) (Hsiao et al., 2022; Qiu et al.,
2025; Roeder, 2022) on edge devices with limited com*
Co-corresponding author 1 The School of Computer and
Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China
2
The College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence
to: Junyang Chen <junyangchen@szu.edu.cn>, Wenjian Wang
<wjwang@sxu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

