Improving Zero-Shot Adversarial Robustness in Vision-Language Models by
Closed-form Alignment of Adversarial Path Simplices

Junhao Dong ⋆ 1 2 Piotr Koniusz ⋆ 3 4 Yifei Zhang 1 Hao Zhu 3 Weiming Liu 5 Xinghua Qu 6 Yew-Soon Ong 1 2
TeCoA

Abstract

ImageNet
36.5

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) such as CLIP
excel at zero-shot classification due to large-scale
pre-training but are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Adversarial fine-tuning robustifies zeroshot models by aligning prediction scores of individual adversaries with their clean counterparts,
which typically overlooks intermediate adversarial samples along the adversarial trajectory crossing the decision boundary. Such intermediate
adversaries and their vicinity produce informative
representations capturing the decision boundary
in detail. They can be improved by sampling
adversarial candidates from simplices formed by
joining two consecutive vertices on the adversarial
trajectory and their clean counterpart. However,
sampling simplices for adversaries is very costly.
To train robust VLM, we overcome these limitations by Taylor expansion and formulating an
upper-bound of alignment loss that depends on
the Jacobian/Hessian obtained at clean samples.
As regions between clean and intermediate adversarial samples capture a larger decision landscape,
we robustify VLM by plausible adversaries from
simplices by our closed-form formulation equivalent to infinite uniform sampling of the simplex.
We obtain state-of-the-art robustness across 15
datasets and diverse vision-language tasks.

PMG

FARE

Caltech256
Caltech101
52.9
66.2

Ours

OxfordPet
56.1

STL10
79.7

PCAM
42.9

Nocaps
63.4

0.579
ChestXray14

58.7
Flickr30k
0.735
CheXpert

51.6
Flickr30k
0.563
PadChest

Evaluation
Image Recognition
Text Retrieval
Medical Diagnosis
Image Captioning
Image Retrieval

1 step

sample
align

adv. sample natural sample

(b) naive alignment

1 step

statistics
align

adv. sample natural sample

(c) closed-form alignment

(a) robust accuracy
Figure 1. Our AdvSimplex. Fig. 1a shows the zero-shot robust
performance of our method (against adversarial samples) vs. adversarial fine-tuning approaches (TeCoA (Mao et al., 2023), PMG
(Wang et al., 2024), and FARE (Schlarmann et al., 2024)) across
diverse downstream tasks. Fig. 1b shows the principle of sampling
simplices formed from vertex x and consecutive intermediate adversaries x+δ x,i and x+δ x,i+1 along the adversarial trajectory
obtained with several steps of gradient ascent. However, sampling
such simplices and aligning them individually with x is costly.
Fig. 1c shows our model which is much faster as it computes
closed-form Σx used in our alignment
formula based on Jacobian

and Hessian Jg (x), (Hg (x))c .

Goodfellow et al. (2015); Dong et al. (2024a) have shown
their vulnerability to adversarial examples, which are lowlevel perturbations added to legitimate samples to elicit
incorrect class predictions. Such adversarial vulnerabilities
also affect Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Zhang et al.,
2022a; Zhao et al., 2023a), posing concerns about deploying
VLMs in real-life applications (Dı́az-Rodrı́guez et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Despite significant advancements driven by Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) in various areas, Szegedy et al. (2014);

To counteract malicious adversaries, a growing body of research seeks to strengthen zero-shot adversarial robustness
of VLMs through adversarial fine-tuning (Mao et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2025), with a focus on CLIPbased architectures (Radford et al., 2021). These methods
predominantly align single adversarial predictions—derived
from feature-level image-text cosine similarity—with either their benign counterparts or the ground-truth labels.
However, such an alignment scheme overlooks the broader
spectrum of underlying adversaries, especially intermediate

1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore ⋄ 2 Centre
for Frontier AI Research, IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore ⋄
3
Data61 CSIRO, Australia ⋄ 4 Australian National University ⋄ 5 Zhejiang University, China ⋄ 6 Bytedance, Singapore.
⋆
JD/PK junior/senior leads. PK is also in charge of theory. Correspondence to: Piotr Koniusz <piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au>,
Yew-Soon Ong <asysong@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

