Satori: Reinforcement Learning with Chain-of-Action-Thought
Enhances LLM Reasoning via Autoregressive Search

Maohao Shen * 1 Guangtao Zeng * 2 Zhenting Qi * 3
Zhang-Wei Hong 1 Zhenfang Chen 4 Wei Lu 2 Gregory Wornell 1
Subhro Das 4 David Cox 4 Chuang Gan 4 5

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable reasoning capabilities across
diverse domains. Recent studies have shown that
increasing test-time computation enhances LLMs’
reasoning capabilities. This typically involves extensive sampling at inference time guided by an
external LLM verifier, resulting in a two-player
system. Despite external guidance, the effectiveness of this system demonstrates the potential of
a single LLM to tackle complex tasks. Thus, we
pose a new research problem: Can we internalize the searching capabilities to fundamentally
enhance the reasoning abilities of a single LLM?
This work explores an orthogonal direction focusing on post-training LLMs for autoregressive
searching (i.e., an extended reasoning process
with self-reflection and self-exploration of new
strategies). To achieve this, we propose the Chainof-Action-Thought (COAT) reasoning and a twostage training paradigm: 1) a small-scale format tuning stage to internalize the COAT reasoning format and 2) a large-scale self-improvement
stage leveraging reinforcement learning. Our approach results in Satori, a 7B LLM trained on
open-source models and data. Extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate that Satori achieves
state-of-the-art performance on mathematical reasoning benchmarks while exhibits strong generalization to out-of-domain tasks. Code, data, and
models are fully open-sourced1 .

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide range of reasoning
tasks, including mathematical problems (Cobbe et al., 2021;
Hendrycks et al., 2021a), programming (Chen et al., 2021;
Zhuo et al., 2024) and logical reasoning (Han et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2020). One of the key techniques enabling these
strong reasoning capabilities is Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
prompting (Wei et al., 2022), which allows LLMs to address complex tasks by generating a series of intermediate
reasoning steps. As a result, many early efforts focus on finetuning LLMs using large-scale, high-quality CoT reasoning
chains, either through human annotation (Hendrycks et al.,
2021a; Yue et al., 2024) or by distilling synthetic data from
more advanced models (Yu et al., 2024; Toshniwal et al.,
2024a; Ding et al., 2024). However, human annotation is
extremely labor intensive, and distillation often limits the
model’s reasoning capabilities to certain level.
Apart from scaling up training resources, more recent work
has focused on test-time scaling, i.e., allocating additional
inference-time compute to search for more accurate solutions. This often involves extensive sampling, either by
generating multiple complete solutions (Wang et al., 2023)
or by sampling multiple intermediate reasoning steps (Yao
et al., 2024; Wan et al., 2024). These methods typically
require external feedback to guide the search process, usually through training an auxiliary reward model to rate final
solutions or intermediate steps (Sun et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024a). However, such two-player frameworks incur more
model-deployment costs and do not internalize the search
capabilities into a single LLM.

* Core contributors of Satori team, contributed equally to this
work. Order determined by a dice roll.

Orthogonal to the above work, our study investigates a
new direction that enables LLMs with autoregressive search
capabilities, i.e., an extended reasoning process with selfreflection and self-exploration of new strategies. Specifically, we introduce the Chain-of-Action-Thought (COAT)
mechanism, which enables LLMs to take various metaactions during problem solving. Unlike conventional posttraining consisting of large-scale supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) and reinforcement learning from human feedback

1

MIT 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design 3 Harvard
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research 5 UMass Amherst.
Correspondence to: Maohao Shen <maohao@mit.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://satori-reasoning.github.io/

1

