Alberta Wells Dataset: Pinpointing Oil and Gas Wells from Satellite Imagery

Pratinav Seth * 1 2 Michelle Lin * 1 3 Brefo Dwamena Yaw 1 Jade Boutot 4 Mary Kang 4 David Rolnick 1 4 3

Abstract

wells (Williams et al., 2020), releasing over five million
metric tons of CO2 equivalent emissions per year. Despite
the small percentage, the high global warming potential of
methane underscores the need for improved monitoring and
management to reduce environmental impact. Abandoned
wells also pose health and safety concerns, in particular by
leaching toxic chemicals into the groundwater of surrounding communities (Cahill et al., 2019). It is possible to plug
abandoned wells to mitigate the harms associated with them
(with so-called “super-emitter” wells an especially high priority (Riddick et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2016)). However,
a significant fraction of abandoned wells remain unknown.
In Pennsylvania, as much as 90% of abandoned wells are
estimated to be unrecorded (Kang et al., 2016). In Canada,
abandoned wells have been described as the most uncertain source of methane emissions nationally due to the poor
quality of data surrounding them (Williams et al., 2020).

Millions of abandoned oil and gas wells are scattered across the world, leaching methane into the
atmosphere and toxic compounds into the groundwater. Many of these locations are unknown, preventing the wells from being plugged and their
polluting effects averted. Remote sensing is a relatively unexplored tool for pinpointing abandoned
wells at scale. We introduce the first large-scale
Benchmark Dataset for this problem, leveraging
high-resolution multi-spectral satellite imagery
from Planet Labs. Our curated Dataset comprises
over 213,000 wells (abandoned, suspended, and
active) from Alberta, a region with especially high
well density, sourced from the Alberta Energy
Regulator and verified by domain experts. We
evaluate baseline algorithms for well detection
and segmentation, showing the promise of computer vision approaches but also significant room
for improvement.

With the advent of large-scale remote sensing datasets and
powerful machine learning tools to process them, it has become possible to label and monitor the built environment
as never before (Rolf et al., 2024). Many such works have
focused on opportunities to use remote sensing to accelerate climate action and environmental protection, and oil
and gas infrastructure has increasingly been an object of
scrutiny (see e.g. Yang et al. (2013); Sheng et al. (2020)). In
this work, we present the first large-scale machine-learning
benchmark dataset for pinpointing onshore oil and gas wells,
encompassing abandoned, suspended, and active wells. Our
main contributions are as follows:

1. Introduction
Across the world, there are millions of abandoned oil and
gas wells left to degrade by the companies or individuals
that built them. No longer producing usable fossil fuels,
these wells nonetheless have a significant impact on the environment, with many of them leaking significant quantities
of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, into the atmosphere.
In aggregate, these emissions represent the equivalent of
millions of tons of carbon dioxide per year (Williams et al.,
2020). In Canada, an estimated 370,000 abandoned wells
produce methane equivalent to half a million metric tons of
CO2 annually (Williams et al., 2020; ECCC, 2024), while
in the U.S., there are an estimated 4 million abandoned

• We introduce the Alberta Wells Dataset, containing
information on over 200k abandoned, suspended, and
active onshore oil and gas wells with high-resolution
satellite imagery. Our Dataset available at: https:
//zenodo.org/records/13743323.
• We frame the problem of identification of wells as a
challenge for object detection and binary segmentation.

*

Equal contribution 1 Mila Quebec AI Institute, Montreal,
Canada 2 Department of Data Science & Computer Application,
Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India 3 Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Canada 4 McGill University, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: Pratinav Seth <seth.pratinav@gmail.com>.

• We evaluate a wide range of state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms, showing promising performance but
emphasizing the challenging nature of the task.
We hope that this work will represent a step towards scalable
identification of abandoned well sites and the reduction of
their deleterious effects on our climate and environment.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

