DiffMS: Diffusion Generation of Molecules Conditioned on Mass Spectra

Montgomery Bohde 1 2 Mrunali Manjrekar 1 Runzhong Wang 1 Shuiwang Ji 2 Connor W. Coley 1

Abstract

intensity

Mass spectrometry plays a fundamental role in
elucidating the structures of unknown molecules
and subsequent scientific discoveries. One formulation of the structure elucidation task is the
conditional de novo generation of molecular structure given a mass spectrum. Toward a more accurate and efficient scientific discovery pipeline for
small molecules, we present DiffMS, a formularestricted encoder-decoder generative network
that achieves state-of-the-art performance on this
task. The encoder utilizes a transformer architecture and models mass spectra domain knowledge such as peak formulae and neutral losses,
and the decoder is a discrete graph diffusion
model restricted by the heavy-atom composition
of a known chemical formula. To develop a robust decoder that bridges latent embeddings and
molecular structures, we pretrain the diffusion
decoder with fingerprint-structure pairs, which
are available in virtually infinite quantities, compared to structure-spectrum pairs that number in
the tens of thousands. Extensive experiments on
established benchmarks show that DiffMS outperforms existing models on de novo molecule generation. We provide several ablations to demonstrate the effectiveness of our diffusion and pretraining approaches and show consistent performance scaling with increasing pretraining dataset
size. DiffMS code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/coleygroup/DiffMS.

Isoleucine

Leucine

1.0

de novo
generation

O

OH

0.5

NH2

OR?

0.0
1.0
O
OH

0.5

0.0
0

NH2

20

40

60

80

100

120

m/z

Figure 1. De novo structure generation from LC-MS/MS faces
ambiguity when isobaric or isomeric compounds yield similar fragmentation spectra. In this case, the experimental spectra for leucine
and isoleucine from NIST (2023) are essentially indistinguishable.
It is one of many examples demonstrating that the identification of
the exact structure is desirable but challenging.

Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in combination with
liquid chromatography (LC) enables information-rich, highthroughput profiling of compounds, wherein complex experimental mixtures are separated in two dimensions, first by
retention time (from chromatography) and then by molecule
m/z (mass-to-charge ratio) in the first MS (MS1) stage. Each
“precursor” molecule is then individually passed through
the second MS stage (MS2) where it undergoes collisioninduced dissociation and is split into a set of charged molecular fragments, each with a corresponding m/z and an intensity. Modern LC-MS/MS has enabled the discovery of
many new compounds of interest, such as identifying novel
bile acids in microbiome study (Quinn et al., 2020), uncovering a tire rubber-derived chemical that is toxic to coho
salmon (Tian et al., 2021). There is also a growing interest in increased throughput with MS technologies, such
as a high-throughput analysis of chemical reactions (Hu
et al., 2024) and a systematic discovery pipeline for human
metabolites (Gentry et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a fundamental part of the analytical chemistry toolkit that can assist in the identification of
unknown compounds of interest collected from experiments.
1

From MS1 and MS2 data alone, elucidation of the chemical
structure(s) present in the original experimental sample remains challenging. Many yet-to-be-discovered metabolites
have structures that do not exist in standard virtual chemical libraries (PubChem, Human Metabolome Database,
etc.). The majority of observed spectra in MS-based

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
United States 2 Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United
States. Correspondence to: Connor W. Coley <ccoley@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

