Score-based Pullback Riemannian Geometry:
Extracting the Data Manifold Geometry using Anisotropic Flows

Willem Diepeveen * 1 Georgios Batzolis * 2 Zakhar Shumaylov 3 Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Data often reside near low-dimensional non-linear manifolds as illustrated in Figure 1. This manifold assumption
(Fefferman et al., 2016) has been popular since the early
work on non-linear dimension reduction (Belkin & Niyogi,
2001; Coifman & Lafon, 2006; Roweis & Saul, 2000; Sammon, 1969; Tenenbaum et al., 2000). Learning this nonlinear structure, or representation learning, from data has
proven to be highly successful (DeMers & Cottrell, 1992;
Kingma & Welling, 2013) and continues to be a recurring
theme in modern machine learning approaches and downstream applications (Chow et al., 2022; Gomari et al., 2022;
Ternes et al., 2022; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Zhong et al.,
2021).

Data-driven Riemannian geometry has emerged
as a powerful tool for interpretable representation
learning, offering improved efficiency in downstream tasks. Moving forward, it is crucial to
balance cheap manifold mappings with efficient
training algorithms. In this work, we integrate
concepts from pullback Riemannian geometry
and generative models to propose a framework
for data-driven Riemannian geometry that is scalable in both geometry and learning: score-based
pullback Riemannian geometry. Focusing on unimodal distributions as a first step, we propose
a score-based Riemannian structure with closedform geodesics that pass through the data probability density. With this structure, we construct
a Riemannian autoencoder (RAE) with error
bounds for discovering the correct data manifold
dimension. This framework can naturally be used
with anisotropic normalizing flows by adopting
isometry regularization during training. Through
numerical experiments on diverse datasets, including image data, we demonstrate that the proposed
framework produces high-quality geodesics passing through the data support, reliably estimates
the intrinsic dimension of the data manifold, and
provides a global chart of the manifold. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first scalable
framework for extracting the complete geometry
of the data manifold.

Recent advances in data-driven Riemannian geometry have
demonstrated its suitability for learning representations. In
this context, these representations are elements residing in
a learned geodesic subspace of the data space, governed
by a non-trivial Riemannian structure1 across the entire
ambient space (Arvanitidis et al., 2016; Diepeveen, 2024;
Hauberg et al., 2012; Peltonen et al., 2004; Scarvelis &
Solomon, 2023; Sorrenson et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024).
Among these contributions, it is worth highlighting that
Sorrenson et al. (2024) are the first and only ones so far
to use information from the full data distribution obtained
though generative models (Dinh et al., 2017; Song et al.,
2020), even though this seems a natural approach given
recent studies such as Horvat & Pfister (2022); Tempczyk
et al. (2022); Sakamoto et al. (2024); Stanczuk et al. (2024).
A possible explanation for the limited use of generative
models in constructing Riemannian geometry could lie in
challenges regarding scalability of the manifold mappings.
Indeed, even though the generative models can be trained
efficiently, Sorrenson et al. (2024) also mention themselves
that it can be numerically challenging to work with their
induced Riemannian geometry.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK 3 Faculty of Mathematics, University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Willem
Diepeveen <wdiepeveen@math.ucla.edu>, Georgios Batzolis
<gb511@cam.ac.uk>.

If the manifold mapping scalability challenges were to be
overcome, the combined power of Riemannian geometry
and state of the art generative modelling could have profound implications on how to handle data in general. In-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

rather than the standard ℓ2 -inner product

