Evolving Prompts In-Context: An Open-ended, Self-replicating Perspective

Jianyu Wang 1 2 Zhiqiang Hu 1 2 Lidong Bing 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Prompting large language models (LLMs) has become
the de facto standard for numerous applications, shifting
the community focus to designing prompts that maximize
model performance. However, this task is inherently complex due to the nuanced and often unpredictable behavior
of LLMs (Lu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023). Subtle changes
in phrasing, structure, or context can dramatically affect
outputs (Jiang et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2023). Consequently,
prompt engineering relies heavily on iterative experimentation and evaluation. On the other hand, automatic prompt
optimization (Liu et al., 2023) explores to minimize the
human involvement by leveraging computations to refine
prompts iteratively. The conventional wisdom (Zhao et al.,
2021; Lu et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Wan et al., 2024) suggests that well-specified task instruction, combined with a
few tuned demonstrations for ICL, yields the best results.

We propose a novel prompt design paradigm
that challenges conventional wisdom in large
language model (LLM) prompting. While conventional wisdom prioritizes well-crafted instructions and demonstrations for in-context learning
(ICL), we show that pruning random demonstrations into seemingly incoherent “gibberish” can
remarkably improve performance across diverse
tasks. Notably, the “gibberish” always matches
or surpasses state-of-the-art automatic prompt
optimization techniques, achieving substantial
gains regardless of LLM alignment. Nevertheless, discovering an effective pruning strategy is
non-trivial, as existing attribution methods and
prompt compression algorithms fail to deliver robust results, let alone human intuition. In terms
of this, we propose a self-discover prompt optimization framework, P ROMPT Q UINE, an evolutionary search framework that automatically
searches for the pruning strategy by itself using
only low-data regimes. Much like the emergent
complexity in nature—such as symbiosis and selforganization—arising in response to resource constraints, our framework evolves and refines unconventional yet highly effective prompts by leveraging only the tokens present within the context. We
demonstrate its effectiveness across classification,
multi-choice question answering, generation and
math reasoning tasks across LLMs, while achieving decent runtime efficiency. We hope our findings can guide mechanistic studies on in-context
learning, and provide a call to action, to pave the
way for more open-ended search algorithms for
more effective LLM prompting.

This paper presents a study that challenges conventional wisdom by showing that pruning clear, detailed demonstrations
into seemingly incoherent “gibberish” (both syntactically
and semantically strange) can, counterintuitively, improve
performance across various tasks. Notably, this effect generalizes across models, regardless of alignment (Shen et al.,
2023b), suggesting a broader misspecification of unnatural language in current LLMs. Even more surprisingly, we
find that this “gibberish” consistently matches or surpasses
the performance of state-of-the-art automatic prompt optimization results in several tasks. Consequently, we propose
a novel conceptual framework that reframes prompt compression as guided prompt search, enhancing both serving
efficiency and task performance. We further explore algorithms to achieve these improvements.
To derive effective pruning strategies, one might expect
existing instance attribution (Li et al., 2016a; Yin & Neubig, 2022) or prompt compression methods (Li et al., 2023;
Jiang et al., 2023c;d; Pan et al., 2024) to provide guidance.
However, we find that none of these methods can reliably
produce accurate token importance scores to guide the pruning, let alone human intuition according to word semantics.
A more practical idea is to ask algorithms to discover the
pruning strategies by themselves. We thus develop a selfdiscover prompt optimization framework, Genetic PromptQuine (P ROMPT Q UINE), an evolutionary search framework

This work was partially done when Lidong Bing was at DAMO
Academy, Alibaba Group. 1 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Hupan Lab 3 MiroMind. Correspondence to: Jianyu Wang
<jiw102@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

