AdvAgent: Controllable Blackbox Red-teaming on Web Agents

Chejian Xu 1 Mintong Kang 1 Jiawei Zhang 2 Zeyi Liao 3 Lingbo Mo 3 Mengqi Yuan 1 Huan Sun 3 Bo Li 1 2

Abstract

by leveraging tools, APIs, and complex website interactions,
hold tremendous potential for enhancing human productivity across various domains including high-stakes ones such
as finance, healthcare, and e-commerce. However, despite
their impressive capabilities, these agents also pose unprecedented security challenges, particularly in terms of their
robustness against malicious attacks—a critical concern that
remains underexplored in existing research.

Foundation model-based agents are increasingly
used to automate complex tasks, enhancing efficiency and productivity. However, their access
to sensitive resources and autonomous decisionmaking also introduce significant security risks,
where successful attacks could lead to severe
consequences. To systematically uncover these
vulnerabilities, we propose AdvAgent, a blackbox red-teaming framework for attacking web
agents. Unlike existing approaches, AdvAgent
employs a reinforcement learning-based pipeline
to train an adversarial prompter model that optimizes adversarial prompts using feedback from
the black-box agent. With careful attack design, these prompts effectively exploit agent weaknesses while maintaining stealthiness and controllability. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that
AdvAgent achieves high success rates against
state-of-the-art GPT-4-based web agents across
diverse web tasks. Furthermore, we find that existing prompt-based defenses provide only limited protection, leaving agents vulnerable to our
framework. These findings highlight critical vulnerabilities in current web agents and emphasize
the urgent need for stronger defense mechanisms.
We release our code at https://ai-secure.
github.io/AdvAgent/.

Recent efforts have introduced adversarial attacks against
generalist web agents to expose vulnerabilities prior to realworld deployment (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2025). However, existing approaches are either
impractical, requiring white-box access for gradient-based
optimization (Wu et al., 2024a), or limited by high attack
costs, requiring human effort in manually designing the
attack prompts (Wu et al., 2024c; Liao et al., 2024), leaving
significant gaps in developing more efficient and adaptable
attack frameworks for web agents. While adversarial attacks
have been proposed for LLMs and VLMs to optimize attack
prompts automatically (Guo et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024),
these methods lack the flexibility to target LLM and VLM
agents (Zou et al., 2023) and struggle to achieve effective
transferability in black-box settings (Liu et al., 2024c).
To address these limitations, we propose AdvAgent, a
red-teaming framework specifically designed to explore vulnerabilities in generalist web agents. Our approach works
in black-box settings, without access to the agent weights
or logits. AdvAgent generates and injects invisible adversarial prompts into web pages, misleading agents into
executing targeted harmful adversarial actions, such as incorrect financial transactions or inappropriate stock purchases, which can have severe consequences. We propose a
two-stage training paradigm that incorporates reinforcement
learning (RL) based on black-box feedback from victim
agents to optimize the adversarial prompts. By employing
Direct Policy Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024),
AdvAgent learns from both successful and unsuccessful
attack attempts against the black-box web agent, enabling
flexible and efficient attacks. Besides, AdvAgent allows
attackers to easily control and modify generated successful
injection prompts without requiring re-optimization, making it easy to achieve different attack goals for the same user
query, such as targeting different companies or actions, with
minimal additional effort.

1. Introduction
The rapid evolution of large foundation models, including
Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Language Models (VLMs), has facilitated the development of generalist
web agents, which are capable of autonomously interacting
with real-world websites and performing tasks (Zhou et al.,
2023; Deng et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024). These agents,
Work done while Mengqi Yuan was an intern at UIUC.
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 University of Chicago
3
The Ohio State University. Correspondence to: Chejian Xu
<chejian2@illinois.edu>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

