Rethinking the Bias of Foundation Model under Long-tailed Distribution

Jiahao Chen * 1 2 3 Bin Qin * 4 5 Jiangmeng Li * 4 5 Hao Chen 6 Bing Su 1 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Real-world data often follows a long-tailed distribution,
where the majority of instances are concentrated in head
classes, leaving only a small number of instances for each
tail class. This scarcity of samples makes generalization
on them challenging, and naive learning on such data tends
to introduce an undesirable bias toward dominant labels.
Recently, with the advent of foundation models, downstream
performance can be significantly improved by fine-tuning
these models on labeled data, often yielding superior results
compared to training from scratch, while also minimizing
training costs (Wang et al., 2022b;a). Consequently, there
has been considerable interest in exploring how to fine-tune
foundation models and leverage their strong generalization
capabilities to enhance learning at downstream tasks.

Long-tailed learning has garnered increasing attention due to its practical significance. Among
the various approaches, the fine-tuning paradigm
has gained considerable interest with the advent
of foundation models. However, most existing
methods primarily focus on leveraging knowledge
from these models, overlooking the inherent biases introduced by the imbalanced training data
they rely on. In this paper, we examine how such
imbalances from pre-training affect long-tailed
downstream tasks. Specifically, we find the imbalance biases inherited in foundation models on
downstream tasks as parameter imbalance and
data imbalance. During fine-tuning, we observe
that parameter imbalance plays a more critical
role, while data imbalance can be mitigated using existing re-balancing strategies. Moreover,
we find that parameter imbalance cannot be effectively addressed by current re-balancing techniques, such as adjusting the logits, during training, unlike data imbalance. To tackle both imbalances simultaneously, we build our method on
causal learning and view the incomplete semantic
factor as the confounder, which brings spurious
correlations between input samples and labels. To
resolve the negative effects of this, we propose a
novel backdoor adjustment method that learns the
true causal effect between input samples and labels, rather than merely fitting the correlations in
the data. Notably, we achieve an average performance increase of about 1.67% on each dataset.

Recent works such as LIFT (Shi et al., 2024), LPT (Dong
et al., 2022), and VL-LTR (Tian et al., 2022) demonstrate
that properly fine-tuning foundation models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) can significantly enhance long-tail learning
performance. VL-LTR improves visual recognition, particularly for tail classes, by collecting class descriptions from
the internet and jointly learning both visual and text representations. LIFT, on the other hand, reveals that heavy finetuning hurts and Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (Chen
et al., 2022a; Jia et al., 2022) (PEFT) based methods can
preserve as much information from the foundation model as
possible, which is important for the downstream imbalanced
learning. However, these methods tend to overemphasize
the use of foundation models to solve downstream data imbalance while overlooking their inherent biases, as shown in
Fig. 1. Large-scale datasets used to train foundation models,
such as LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2021), also follow a
long-tailed distribution, which can negatively impact downstream tasks (Zhu et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2024). Therefore,
fine-tuned models are influenced by dual long-tailed distributions (upstream and downstream), and only considering
data imbalance is insufficient.

*
Equal contribution 1 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Renmin University of China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research
on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 3 Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE 4 Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 6 Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Bing Su <subingats@gmail.com>.

In this paper, we explore how the imbalance of foundation
models impacts downstream imbalanced tasks in PEFTbased methods. Since the pre-training data is often inaccessible, its influence is primarily reflected in the pre-trained
weights, or parameters, which we refer to as parameter
imbalance. In contrast, downstream data is accessible and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

