MindAligner: Explicit Brain Functional Alignment for Cross-Subject Visual
Decoding from Limited fMRI Data
Yuqin Dai∗2,1,4 Zhouheng Yao∗1 Chunfeng Song1 Qihao Zheng1 Weijian Mai1
Kunyu Peng5 Shuai Lu4 Wanli Ouyang1,3 Jian Yang†2 Jiamin Wu†1,3
https://github.com/Da1yuqin/MindAligner

Abstract

demic significance (Naselaris et al., 2011). To investigate
the brain’s perceptual mechanisms, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Naselaris et al., 2011) has been
widely used due to its noninvasive acquisition and precise
localization of the functional regions. The advances in fMRI
facilitate the research on brain visual decoding, which aims
to recover visual stimuli seen by humans from their brain
activity, contributing to the progress of cognitive science
research and Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) (Qian et al.,
2020; Horikawa & Kamitani, 2017).

Brain decoding aims to reconstruct visual perception of human subject from fMRI signals, which
is crucial for understanding brain’s perception
mechanisms. Existing methods are confined to
the single-subject paradigm due to substantial
brain variability, which leads to weak generalization across individuals and incurs high training costs, exacerbated by limited availability of
fMRI data. To address these challenges, we propose MindAligner, an explicit functional alignment framework for cross-subject brain decoding from limited fMRI data. The proposed MindAligner enjoys several merits. First, we learn
a Brain Transfer Matrix (BTM) that projects the
brain signals of an arbitrary new subject to one of
the known subjects, enabling seamless use of pretrained decoding models. Second, to facilitate reliable BTM learning, a Brain Functional Alignment
module is proposed to perform soft cross-subject
brain alignment under different visual stimuli with
a multi-level brain alignment loss, uncovering
fine-grained functional correspondences with high
interpretability. Experiments indicate that MindAligner not only outperforms existing methods
in visual decoding under data-limited conditions,
but also provides valuable neuroscience insights
in cross-subject functional analysis.

Despite the success in fMRI-based visual decoding, the majority methods (Seeliger et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2023; Ozcelik
& VanRullen, 2023) are confined to the less practical singlesubject paradigm, where a customized decoding model is
trained for each person subject. Due to substantial brain
differences among subjects, the decoding model trained on
one subject cannot be effectively transferred to others, limiting its practicality in BCI and clinical applications. In
fact, variations in individual cognitive patterns and brain
structures, result in significant fMRI differences (Naselaris
et al., 2011). Moreover, the high acquisition cost of fMRI
limits the data availability for new subjects. Thus, adapting
brain decoding models to new subjects with limited data is
crucial.
To address the cross-subject issue, several methods (Scotti
et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024) adopt brain
alignment techniques in an implicit manner. They align
fMRI signals from different subjects to a latent space that
is assumed to capture common cognition patterns across
subjects by learning subject-specific parameters. However,
this implicit alignment approach has two limitations. (1) Insufficient brain alignment: learning a shared space that
effectively aligns all subjects remains challenging due to
noisy and limited fMRI data. As individuals have vast brain
differences even when viewing identical stimuli, enforcing
all subjects to be simultaneously aligned to a single latent
space is prone to suboptimal alignment and compromised
representation. Even with extensive multi-subject fMRI
training, the shared latent space shows limited generalizability to unseen subjects. For instance, Unibrain (Lei et al.,
2023) shows 50% performance drop when transferring the

1. Introduction
The brain serves as the center of human cognition and unraveling its underlying mechanisms holds profound aca*
1
Equal contribution.
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Tsinghua University 5 Karlsruher Institut für Technologie. Correspondence
to: Jian Yang <csjyang@njust.edu.cn>, Jiamin Wu
<jiaminwu@cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright
2025 by the author(s).

1

