Heavy-Tailed Linear Bandits: Huber Regression with One-Pass Update

Jing Wang 1 2 Yu-Jie Zhang 3 Peng Zhao 1 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1 2

Abstract

However, in many real-world scenarios, the noise in data
may follow a heavy-tailed distribution, such as in financial
markets (Hull, 2012) and online advertising (Jebarajakirthy
et al., 2021). This motivates the study of heavy-tailed linear
bandits (HvtLB) (Medina & Yang, 2016; Shao et al., 2018;
Xue et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2023), where the noise ηt
in (1) satisfies that for some ε ∈ (0, 1], ν > 0,

We study the stochastic linear bandits with heavytailed noise. Two principled strategies for handling heavy-tailed noise, truncation and medianof-means, have been introduced to heavy-tailed
bandits. Nonetheless, these methods rely on specific noise assumptions or bandit structures, limiting their applicability to general settings. The
recent work (Huang et al., 2023) develops a soft
truncation method via the adaptive Huber regression to address these limitations. However, their
method suffers undesired computational costs: it
requires storing all historical data and performing
a full pass over these data at each round. In this
paper, we propose a one-pass algorithm based
on the online mirror descent framework. Our
method updates using only current data at each
round, reducing the per-round computational cost
from O(t log T ) to O(1) with respect to current
round t and the time horizon T , and achieves a
near-optimalqand variance-aware regret of order
1−ε
1−ε 
e dT 2(1+ε) PT νt2 + dT 2(1+ε) where d is
O

E[ηt ] = 0,

] ≤ ν 1+ε .

(2)

To address heavy-tailed noise, statistical methods in estimation and regression often rely on two key principles: truncation and median-of-means (MOM) (Lugosi & Mendelson,
2019). Truncation methods handle outliers by directly removing extreme data points. Soft version truncation, such as
Catoni’s M-estimator (Catoni, 2012), reduces the impact of
outliers by assigning them lower weights. This ensures robust estimates while maintaining potentially valuable information from extreme data points. Median-of-means (MOM)
methods take a different approach by dividing the dataset
into several groups, calculating the mean within each group,
and then using the median of these group means as the final
estimate. This method limits the influence of outliers to only
a few groups, preventing impact on the overall dataset.

t=1

the dimension and νt1+ε is the (1 + ε)-th central
moment of reward at round t.

For HvtLB, Shao et al. (2018) developed algorithms using truncation and MOM-based least squares approach for
1 
e dT 1+ε
parameter estimation, and achieved an O
regret
bound which is proven to be optimal. However, these approaches have some notable issues: truncation methods
require the assumption of bounded absolute moments for
rewards, which cannot vanish in deterministic case, making them suboptimal in noiseless scenarios; MOM methods
rely on repeated arm pulling and assumption of a fixed arm
set, which makes them difficult to extend to more general
settings. These limitations reveal that methods based on
truncation and MOM heavily depend on specific assumptions or the bandit structure. For broad decision-making
scenarios, such as online MDPs and adaptive control, where
the state or context may vary dynamically, these assumptions no longer hold. A more detailed discussion of these
challenges is provided in Section 6.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Linear Bandits (SLB) models sequential decisionmaking process with linear structured reward distributions,
which has been extensively studied in the literature (Dani
et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Li et al., 2021b).
Specifically, in SLB the observed reward at time t is the
inner product of the arm’s feature vector Xt and an unknown
parameter θ∗ , corrupted by sub-Gaussian noise ηt , namely,
rt = Xt⊤ θ∗ + ηt .

1+ε

E[|ηt |

(1)

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 3 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan. Correspondence to: Peng Zhao
<zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Recently, Sun et al. (2020) made remarkable progress in
the study of heavy-tailed statistics by proposing adaptive
Huber regression, which leverages the Huber loss (Huber, 1964) to achieve non-asymptotic guarantees. Li &

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

