Scalable Non-Equivariant 3D Molecule Generation via Rotational Alignment

Yuhui Ding 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract

language (von Rütte et al., 2025), molecules (Hoogeboom
et al., 2022), proteins (Yim et al., 2023).

Equivariant diffusion models have achieved impressive performance in 3D molecule generation.
These models incorporate Euclidean symmetries
of 3D molecules by utilizing an SE(3)-equivariant
denoising network. However, specialized equivariant architectures limit the scalability and efficiency of diffusion models. In this paper, we propose an approach that relaxes such equivariance
constraints. Specifically, our approach learns a
sample-dependent SO(3) transformation for each
molecule to construct an aligned latent space. A
non-equivariant diffusion model is then trained
over the aligned representations. Experimental
results demonstrate that our approach performs
significantly better than previously reported nonequivariant models. It yields sample quality comparable to state-of-the-art equivariant diffusion
models and offers improved training and sampling efficiency. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/skeletondyh/RADM.

In this paper, we focus on the task of 3D molecule generation, which has been an important and active topic in drug
discovery. Specifically, our goal is to generate the 3D atomic
coordinates and atom types of a molecule from scratch. Different from data with grid-like structures (e.g., images and
text sequences), 3D molecules pose unique challenges to
generative modeling due to the Euclidean symmetry group
of R3 , i.e., SE(3). Particularly, the chemical properties of a
molecule remain unchanged no matter how the molecule is
translated or rotated in the three-dimensional space. To incorporate the Euclidean symmetries into the model, Hoogeboom et al. (2022) proposed an equivariant diffusion model
EDM that aims to learn an SO(3)-invariant distribution,
which requires the score function of the diffusion model to
be SO(3)-equivariant (Köhler et al., 2020; Garcia Satorras
et al., 2021). To satisfy such a constraint, EDM utilized an
EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021) to parameterize the denoising
network. The impressive performance of EDM on the 3D
molecule generation task has inspired a series of follow-up
works (Wu et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023; Vignac et al., 2023b)
that build equivariance into diffusion models. Consequently,
equivariant diffusion models have become the dominant
approach for tasks related to 3D molecules.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based generative models (Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021) have achieved rapid and significant progress in
recent years. These models feature a forward process and
a reverse process. The forward process is a fixed Markov
process that gradually adds noise to each data sample until
the original information is totally corrupted. The reverse
process is parameterized by a denoising neural network that
is trained to reverse the forward process step by step and
recover the original data from noise. Once trained, new
samples can be generated by performing the reverse process
starting from non-informative noise. Motivated by the success of diffusion models in vision tasks (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Rombach et al., 2022), researchers have sought to
extend them to broader areas beyond vision, such as natural

While equivariant diffusion models account for the symmetries of 3D molecules, an important question arises naturally:
Is equivariance necessary for an effective molecular generative model? We argue that it is not, as the probability of
a molecule is determined by the total probability of all its
possible 3D positions, regardless of whether each position
has an equal probability. Furthermore, equivariant architectures have drawbacks. Compared with their non-equivariant
counterparts, they have more complex parametrization and
lack standardized implementations. Additionally, equivariant architectures tend to be less efficient and less scalable
than non-equivariant ones. In contrast to the vision and text
domains which have been unified by transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), irregular data from
scientific domains, with equivariant models being the mainstream choice, have benefited less from recent advances in
architectural optimization (Dao et al., 2022; Peebles & Xie,
2023).

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Yuhui Ding <yuhui.ding@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

