Guided Search Strategies in Non-Serializable Environments with Applications to
Software Engineering Agents

Karina Zainullina * 1 Alexander Golubev * 1 Maria Trofimova * 1 Sergei Polezhaev 1 Ibragim Badertdinov 1
Daria Litvintseva 1 Simon Karasik 1 Filipp Fisin 1 Sergei Skvortsov 1 Maksim Nekrashevich 1 Anton Shevtsov 1
Boris Yangel 1

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have recently
achieved remarkable results in complex multistep tasks, such as mathematical reasoning and
agentic software engineering. However, they often struggle to maintain consistent performance
across multiple solution attempts. One effective
approach to narrow the gap between average-case
and best-case performance is guided test-time
search, which explores multiple solution paths to
identify the most promising one. Unfortunately,
effective search techniques (e.g. MCTS) are often
unsuitable for non-serializable RL environments,
such as Docker containers, where intermediate
environment states cannot be easily saved and restored. We investigate two complementary search
strategies applicable to such environments: 1-step
lookahead and trajectory selection, both guided
by a learned action-value function estimator. On
the SWE-bench Verified benchmark, a key testbed
for agentic software engineering, we find these
methods to double the average success rate of a
fine-tuned Qwen-72B model, achieving 40.8%,
the new state-of-the-art for open-weights models. Additionally, we show that these techniques
are transferable to more advanced closed models,
yielding similar improvements with GPT-4o.

Figure 1. The comparison of two evaluation protocols for a GPT4o-based agent: Pass@N and random sampling. The x-axis
shows the number of attempts, the y-axis shows the average success
rate (i.e. the percentage of correct solutions).

formance often falls short of their demonstrated potential.
To illustrate this challenge, Figure 1 depicts the performance
of a reasonably capable GPT-4o-based agent (Yang et al.,
2024) on SWE-bench Verified (Jimenez et al., 2024) under
two evaluation protocols:
• Pass@N : the agent makes N attempts to solve each
problem instance, and a problem is considered solved
if at least one attempt succeeds. This protocol demonstrates the model’s potential capability ceiling.

1. Introduction
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has driven significant advancements across multiple domains. However,
when it comes to tasks requiring heavy reasoning or agentic
capabilities, a major challenge persists: while the models
occasionally achieve exceptional results, their average per-

• Random sampling: a problem is considered solved
if a randomly selected solution from N attempts is
correct.
This example highlights that LLMs exhibit high variance
in success rate across different attempts. It is common for
sequential tasks where multiple correct decisions must be
chained together: even if a model makes 80% of individual
decisions correctly, the probability of sampling a complete
successful trajectory can decrease exponentially with the

*

Equal contribution 1 Nebius. Correspondence to: Boris Yangel
<byangel@nebius.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

