On the Training Convergence of Transformers for
In-Context Classification of Gaussian Mixtures
Wei Shen * 1 Ruida Zhou * 2 Jing Yang 1 Cong Shen 1

Abstract

abilities of transformers. A more comprehensive literature
review can be found in Appendix A. Garg et al. (2022) was
the first to study the ICL abilities of transformers for various
function classes. They empirically showed that transformers
can learn linear regression models in context. Later on, a
line of research was developed to theoretically explain how
transformers perform in-context linear regression. For example, Akyürek et al. (2022); Von Oswald et al. (2023); Bai
et al. (2024); Fu et al. (2023); Giannou et al. (2024) showed
by construction that, some specially-designed transformers
can perform linear regression in context. Moreover, some recent works such as Zhang et al. (2023a); Huang et al. (2023);
Chen et al. (2024) studied the training dynamics of a singlelayer transformer for in-context linear regression. They
proved the convergence of certain single-layer transformers
during training and showed that the trained transformers are
able to perform linear regression in context.

Although transformers have demonstrated impressive capabilities for in-context learning (ICL) in
practice, theoretical understanding of the underlying mechanism that allows transformers to perform ICL is still in its infancy. This work aims to
theoretically study the training dynamics of transformers for in-context classification tasks. We
demonstrate that, for in-context classification of
Gaussian mixtures under certain assumptions, a
single-layer transformer trained via gradient descent converges to a globally optimal model at
a linear rate. We further quantify the impact of
the training and testing prompt lengths on the ICL
inference error of the trained transformer. We
show that when the lengths of training and testing prompts are sufficiently large, the prediction
of the trained transformer approaches the ground
truth distribution of the labels. Experimental results corroborate the theoretical findings.

Building on the earlier works that largely focus on linear
regression problems, several recent papers have started to
investigate the ICL capabilities of transformers for classification problems. For instance, Bai et al. (2024) showed
that, by construction, multi-layer transformers can be approximately viewed as multiple steps of gradient descents
for logistic regression. Giannou et al. (2024) further showcased that the constructed transformers can approximately
perform Newton’s method for logistic regression. Lin &
Lee (2024) studied the dual operating modes for in-context
classification of Gaussian mixtures. However, their analyses were based on the idealized Bayes-optimal next-token
predictor for ICL tasks and did not consider the training
dynamics of transformer models. Some recent works have
started to study the training dynamics of transformers for certain classification problems. For example, Li et al. (2024b)
proved that a single-layer transformer can be trained to
learn one-nearest neighbor in context. Li et al. (2024a)
studied the training dynamics of a single-layer transformer
for some binary classification tasks with finite, pairwise
orthogonal patterns. Frei & Vardi (2024) analyzed a linear
transformer model for in-context classification of Gaussian
mixtures, assuming additional conditions such as a sufficiently large signal-to-noise ratio. However, all these works
(Li et al., 2024a;b; Frei & Vardi, 2024) only considered
the binary classification problems. The training dynamics

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) based on the transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) have demonstrated remarkable in-context learning (ICL) abilities (Brown et al.,
2020). When given a prompt consisting of examples of a
learning task, these models can learn to solve this task for
new test examples without any parameter updating. This behavior has been empirically demonstrated in state-of-the-art
models on real-world tasks (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023).
This impressive capacity of transformer-based models has
inspired many recent works aiming to understand the ICL
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Cong Shen
<cong@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

