On Understanding Attention-Based In-Context Learning for Categorical Data

Aaron T. Wang 1 William Convertino 1 Xiang Cheng 1 Ricardo Henao 1 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract

predicts the corresponding output. Early work in this direction concentrated on simple function classes, like linear
regression (von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024; Schlag et al., 2021), with extensions to nonlinear, kernel-based regression (Cheng et al., 2024) emerging
more recently. These studies have successfully linked the inference performed by the Transformer to functional gradient
descent (GD) on the latent function.

In-context learning based on attention models
is examined for data with categorical outcomes,
with inference in such models viewed from the
perspective of functional gradient descent (GD).
We develop a network composed of attention
blocks, with each block employing a self-attention
layer followed by a cross-attention layer, with associated skip connections. This model can exactly
perform multi-step functional GD inference for
in-context inference with categorical observations.
We perform a theoretical analysis of this setup,
generalizing many prior assumptions in this line
of work, including the class of attention mechanisms for which it is appropriate. We demonstrate
the framework empirically on synthetic data, image classification and language generation.

These analyses have primarily focused on functions with
real-valued outputs, a significant departure from the categorical nature of language data, where outcomes are discrete
tokens. This paper bridges this gap, extending the functional
GD framework to handle categorical observations. This extension is crucial for bringing the analysis closer to the
complexities of language models. Furthermore, while prior
work has largely relied on simulated data, we demonstrate
the applicability of our framework to real-world problems,
including in-context image classification and, importantly,
language modeling. For the latter, we leverage recent advances in targeted datasets designed to illuminate Transformer mechanisms (Eldan & Li, 2023), connecting this line
of research with the functional data analysis perspective.
1.1. Summary of Contributions
1. We analyze in-context learning with categorical observations, offering new insights into language model behavior.
Specifically:

1. Introduction
The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has
revolutionized natural language processing, achieving remarkable success in tasks like language generation (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; DeepSeek, 2025). This
success has spurred significant interest in understanding
the underlying mechanisms driving Transformer inference,
particularly for in-context learning, where the model is presented with a “prompt” of input-output examples and tasked
with predicting outputs for new inputs (Liu et al., 2022).

(a) We demonstrate that encoding categorical data (e.g.,
tokens) as learned embedding vectors arises naturally
from a GD perspective on inference (Section 2).
(b) We introduce a new attention-based architecture, employing self-attention and cross-attention blocks, that
enables exact implementation of multi-step GD with
categorical data (Section 3).
(c) We show that next-word-generation can be modelled
as a in-context learning problem over categorical observations (see Section 3.6).
(d) We provide a theoretical analysis showing that, for incontext learning with categorical observations, our
GD-based representation is a stationary point of
attention-based inference models (Section 5). This
theory addresses softmax-based attention, widely used
in language models.

A fruitful line of research has emerged, focusing on a simplified yet insightful paradigm: predicting outputs for a
context-dependent hidden function. In this setup, the prompt
consists of input-output pairs from this function, and the
Transformer is queried with a new input. Crucially, the
Transformer is not explicitly trained to learn this function;
instead, it infers the function from the provided context and
1

Electrical & Computer Engineering Dept., Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Lawrence Carin
<lcarin@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2. We empirically validate our framework through experi1

