Correlation Clustering Beyond the Pivot Algorithm

Soheil Behnezhad * 1 Moses Charikar * 2 Vincent Cohen-Addad * 3 Alma Ghafari * 1 Weiyun Ma * 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

We study the classic correlation clustering problem. Given n objects and a complete labeling of
the object-pairs as either “similar” or “dissimilar”,
the goal is to partition the objects into arbitrarily
many clusters while minimizing disagreements
with the labels.

Correlation clustering is a quintessential problem in data
analysis, machine learning, and network science, where the
task is to cluster a set of objects based on pairwise relationships. Each pair of objects is labeled as either “similar”
or “dissimilar,” and the goal is to produce clusters that best
align with these labels. Formally, given n vertices and their
pairwise labels, the task is to partition them into arbitrarily
many clusters so as to minimize the number of dissimilar
labels inside clusters plus the number of similar labels that
go across clusters. This problem has applications for various
tasks such as image segmentation (Kim et al., 2014), community detection (Shi et al., 2021), disambiguation tasks
(Kalashnikov et al., 2008), automated labeling (Agrawal
et al., 2009; Chakrabarti et al., 2008), and document clustering (Bansal et al., 2002), among others.

A classic P IVOT algorithm for this problem,
due to Ailon et al. (STOC’05), obtains a 3approximation for this problem. Over the years,
this algorithm has been successfully implemented
in various settings. The downside of the P IVOT
algorithm is that the approximation analysis of
3 is tight for it. While better approximations
have been achieved in some settings, these algorithms are often hard to implement in various settings. For example, Behnezhad et al. (FOCS’19)
showed that the output of P IVOT can be maintained in polylog time per update in a dynamic
setting, a bound that was improved to constant by
Dalirrooyfard et al. (ICML’24). But obtaining a
better approximation remains open.

The correlation clustering problem was introduced by
Bansal, Blum, and Chawla (2002; 2004), who showed that
a (large) constant approximation can be achieved in polynomial time. There has been a series of polynomial-time algorithms improving the approximation ratio (Charikar et al.,
2003; Ailon et al., 2005; 2008; Chawla et al., 2014; CohenAddad et al., 2022; 2023), with the current best known being
the 1.437-approximation by Cao, Cohen-Addad, Lee, Li,
Newman, and Vogl (2024). It is also known that the problem
is APX-hard (Charikar et al., 2003).

In this paper, we present M ODIFIED P IVOT, an algorithm that locally improves the output of P IVOT.
Our M ODIFIED P IVOT algorithm can be implemented just as efficiently as P IVOT in various
settings. Our experiments show that the output
of M ODIFIED P IVOT on average makes less than
77% of the mistakes made by P IVOT. More surprisingly, we prove theoretically that M ODIFIED P IVOT has approximation ratio 3 − ε0 for some
absolute constant ε0 > 0. This, e.g., leads to a
better than 3 approximation in the dynamic setting
in polylog time, improving the 3-approximation
obtained by Behnezhad et al. (FOCS’19).

The 3-Approximation Barrier
A particularly simple and influential algorithm for correlation clustering is the P IVOT algorithm of Ailon, Charikar,
and Newman (2005). The P IVOT algorithm is remarkably
simple: it picks a random vertex v, clusters it with vertices
that are similar to v, then removes this cluster and recurses
on the remaining vertices.
In (Ailon et al., 2005), it was shown that P IVOT obtains a
3-approximation for correlation clustering. Thanks to its
simplicity, variants of the P IVOT algorithm have been efficiently implemented in various models, leading to 3- or
almost 3-approximations. Examples include the fully dynamic model with polylogarithmic (Behnezhad et al., 2019)
or constant Dalirrooyfard, Makarychev, and Mitrovic (2024)
update-time, constant rounds of the strictly sublinear massively parallel computations (MPC) model (Cohen-Addad

*

Equal contribution 1 Northeastern University 2 Stanford
University 3 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Soheil Behnezhad <s.behnezhad@northeastern.edu>, Moses
Charikar < moses@cs.stanford.edu>, Vincent CohenAddad <vcohenad@gmail.com>, Alma Ghafari <ghafari.m@northeastern.edu>, Weiyun Ma < wyma@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

