DEFAME: Dynamic Evidence-based FAct-checking with Multimodal Experts

Tobias Braun * 1 Mark Rothermel * 1 Marcus Rohrbach 1 Anna Rohrbach 1

Abstract
Fact-Check Report

The proliferation of disinformation demands reliable and scalable fact-checking solutions. We
present Dynamic Evidence-based FAct-checking
with Multimodal Experts (DEFAME), a modular, zero-shot MLLM pipeline for open-domain,
text-image claim verification. DEFAME operates in a six-stage process, dynamically selecting
the tools and search depth to extract and evaluate textual and visual evidence. Unlike prior approaches that are text-only, lack explainability, or
rely solely on parametric knowledge, DEFAME
performs end-to-end verification, accounting for
images in claims and evidence while generating
structured, multimodal reports. Evaluation on
the popular benchmarks VERITE, AV ERI T E C,
and MOCHEG shows that DEFAME surpasses
all previous methods, establishing itself as the new
general state-of-the-art fact-checking system for
uni- and multimodal fact-checking. Moreover, we
introduce a new multimodal benchmark, C LAIM R EVIEW 2024+, featuring claims after the knowledge cutoff of GPT-4 O, avoiding data leakage.
Here, DEFAME drastically outperforms the GPT4 O baselines, showing temporal generalizability
and the potential for real-time fact-checking2 .

Claim
"Image shows
grounds covered
with garbage after
the end of Glastonbury Music Festival
in 2015."

Multimodal
Claim

T

Text & Image(s)
Actions

⊷ Reverse Image Search,

Web Search

Evidence
The Glastonbury Music Festival in 2015 involved extensive cleanup […]. Articles from
Huffington Post, […]

Multimodal External
Knowledge
Web Search etc.

Elaboration
Verdict

Supported

Actions
Justification

The image accurately depicts the aftermath of the Glastonbury Music
Festival in 2015, confirmed by a reverse image search and multiple credible sources, including
BBC
News and
The Huffington Post.

Figure 1: DEFAME in a nutshell: It fact-checks multimodal
claims using multimodal evidence and returns a detailed,
human-friendly report document.

reaches a broader audience, and causes greater harm (Li &
Xie, 2020; Zannettou et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020; Chen
& Shu, 2024). Humans perceive multimodal information as
more credible (Newman et al., 2012; Hameleers et al., 2020),
often interpreting visuals as “evidence” (Greifeneder et al.,
2021), making it particularly persuasive. Approximately
80% of the claims checked by professional fact-checkers
are multimodal (Dufour et al., 2024)—signifying a strong
priority for checking multimodal content.

1. Introduction
In recent years, misinformation has been growing in scale
and quality (Chen & Shu, 2024) beyond human capacity to
fact-check. “Fake news” has evolved from a lighthearted
term into a serious global threat (World Economic Forum,
2024). Driven by higher engagement rates on social media
and the increase in AI use, misinformation spreads faster,

Unfortunately, Automated Fact-Checking (AFC) systems
are mostly text-only (Dmonte et al., 2024; Vykopal et al.,
2024). Only a few works venture into visual claim verification (Khaliq et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2023), but none can
handle both multimodal claims and multimodal evidence at
once. Most multimodal claim verification systems cannot
retrieve the evidence needed to verify a claim (Fu et al.,
2024; Vo-Hoang et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024). The majority of AFC works focus on a specific aspect of AFC such as
evidence retrieval (Cheung & Lam, 2023), evidence summarization (Chen et al., 2024), or evidence ranking (Tahmasebi

*
Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Darmstadt &
hessian.AI, Germany. Correspondence to: Mark Rothermel
<mark.rothermel@tu-darmstadt.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
2
We released the code and benchmark dataset publicly at:
https://github.com/multimodal-ai-lab/
DEFAME/tree/icml

1

