Towards characterizing the value of edge
embeddings in Graph Neural Networks

Dhruv Rohatgi 1 Tanya Marwah 2 Zachary Chase Lipton 2 Jianfeng Lu 3 Ankur Moitra 1 Andrej Risteski 2

Abstract

on characterizing the representational limitations stemming
from the symmetry-preserving properties of GNNs when the
node features are not informative (also called “anonymous
GNNs”) — in particular, relating GNNs to the WeisfeilerLehman graph isomorphism test (Leman & Weisfeiler,
1968). Another line of work (Oono & Suzuki, 2020) focuses
on the potential pitfalls of the (over)smoothing effect of
deep GNN architectures, with particular choices of weights
and non-linearities, in an effort to explain the difficulties of
training deep GNN models. Yet another (Black et al., 2023)
focuses on training difficulties akin to vanishing introduced
by “bottlenecks” in the graph topology.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are the dominant
approach to solving machine learning problems
defined over graphs. Despite much theoretical
and empirical work in recent years, our understanding of finer-grained aspects of architectural
design for GNNs remains impoverished. In this
paper, we consider the benefits of architectures
that maintain and update edge embeddings. On
the theoretical front, under a suitable computational abstraction for a layer in the model, as
well as memory constraints on the embeddings,
we show that there are natural tasks on graphical models for which architectures leveraging
edge embeddings can be much shallower. Our
techniques are inspired by results on time-space
tradeoffs in theoretical computer science. Empirically, we show architectures that maintain edge
embeddings almost always improve on their nodebased counterparts—frequently significantly so in
topologies that have “hub” nodes.

In this paper, we focus on the benefits of maintaining and updating edge embeddings over the course of the computation
of the GNN. More concretely, a typical GNN maintains a
node embedding hv at each node v of the underlying graph.
In each layer of the GNN, the embedding at node v is updated based on the embeddings at its neighbors. But an
alternative paradigm is to maintain data at each edge e of
the graph, and to update this edge embedding based on the
embeddings of the edges that share a node with e.
Intuitively, this paradigm seems at least as expressive as
maintaining node embeddings, since in principle each edge
could maintain the embeddings of its incident nodes. Additionally, there may be tasks where initial features are most
naturally associated with edges (e.g., attributes of the relationship between two nodes) — or the final predictions of
the network are most naturally associated with edges (e.g.,
in link prediction, where we want to decide which potential
links are true links).

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as the dominant approach for solving machine learning tasks on graphs.
Over the span of the last decade, many different architectures have been proposed, both in order to improve different
notions of efficiency, and to improve performance on a variety of benchmarks. Nevertheless, theoretical and empirical
understanding of the impact of different architectural design
choices remains elusive.

GNNs that fall in the general edge-based paradigm have
been used for various applications – including link prediction (Cai et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2025) as well as
reasoning about relations between objects (Battaglia et al.,
2016), molecular property prediction (Gilmer et al., 2017;
Choudhary & DeCost, 2021), and detecting clusters of communities in graphs (Chen et al., 2019) – with robust empirical benefits. These approaches instantiate the edge-based
paradigm in a plethora of ways. However, it is difficult
to disentangle to what degree performance improvements
come from added information from domain-specific initial
edge embeddings, versus properties of other particular archi-

One previous line of work (Xu et al., 2019) has focused
1
Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Department of Machine Learning,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 3 Department
of Mathematics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Dhruv Rohatgi <drohatgi@mit.edu>, Andrej Risteski
<aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

