DVI: A Derivative-based Vision Network for INR
Runzhao Yang 1 Xiaolong Wu 2 Zhihong Zhang 1 3 Fabian Zhang 4 Tingxiong Xiao 1 Zongren Li 5
Kunlun He 5 Jinli Suo 1 6 7

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recent advancements in computer vision have
seen Implicit Neural Representations (INR) becoming a dominant representation form for data
due to their compactness and expressive power.
To solve various vision tasks with INR data, vision networks can either be purely INR-based, but
are thereby limited by simplistic operations and
performance constraints, or include raster-based
methods, which then tend to lose crucial structural
features and important information of the INR
during the conversion process. To address these
issues, we propose DVI, a novel Derivative-based
Vision network for INR, capable of handling a
variety of vision tasks across various data modalities, while achieving the best performance among
the existing methods by incorporating state of the
art raster-based methods into a INR based architecture. DVI excels by leveraging the valuable
features captured in the high order derivative map
of the INR, then seamlessly fusing them into a
pre-existing raster-based vision network, enhancing its performance with additional, task-relevant
structural information. Extensive experiments
on five vision tasks across three data modalities
demonstrate DVI’s superiority over existing methods. Additionally, our study encompasses comprehensive ablation studies to affirm the efficacy
of each element of DVI, the influence of different
derivative computation techniques and the impact
of derivative orders. Reproducible codes are provided in the supplementary materials.

Implicit Neural Representation (INR) is a novel form of
data representation that models data through a mapping
from coordinates to values. Unlike traditional raster representations, INR has the capability to model complex structural patterns and relationships within the data (Xu et al.,
2022; Costain et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023a; De Luigi
et al., 2023; Ramirez et al., 2023; Navon et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023b), making it extensively applicable in various
vision data representations such as images (Strümpler et al.,
2022), 3D volumes (Wu et al., 2021), and videos (Sitzmann
et al., 2020). This enhanced capacity to model complex
structural features makes INR particularly suited for tasks
where traditional pixel or voxel representations are limited
by resolution and scalability.
For performing specific vision tasks on the data in INR
form, vision networks are required. These can be seperated
into two categories, depending on the necessity to convert
the data into raster form or not. Raster-based methods utilize pre-existing vision networks, on the other hand purely
INR-based approaches operate solely in the INR domain.
Raster-based methods involve converting INR back to raster
form, subsequently employing a pre-existing vision network to execute the vision tasks. This approach effectively
leverages the vast repository of existing algorithms. In contrast, standalone INR-based methods extract the structural
information directly from the INR for visual tasks without converting it back to the raster form, which can save
memory and hard disk bandwidth.
Currently, both approaches have significant drawbacks.
Raster-based methods tend to lose crucial structural information modeled in the INR during the conversion process,
limiting their performance in vision tasks. On the other hand,
INR-based methods also face challenges due to their relative
novelty, resulting in fewer existing vision networks that can
serve as references. This often confines INR approaches
to simpler architectures, compared to the vast array of sophisticated methods developed for raster-based processing,
potentially hindering their adaptability and effectiveness for
a broader range of complex vision tasks. Consequently, this
can lead to limitations such as applicability to primarily
simpler vision tasks and the reliance on structure-specific
INR models that may not generalize well. These issues will

1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China 2 Institute of Advanced Technology, University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei, China 3 Xiaomi Corporation,
Shanghai, China 4 Department of Computer Science, ETH, Zurich,
Switzerland 5 The People’s Liberation Army General Hospital,
Beijing, China 6 Institute of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 7 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Jinli Suo <jlsuo@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

