An Augmentation-Aware Theory for Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning

Jingyi Cui 1 Hongwei Wen 2 Yisen Wang 1 3

Abstract

to encode useful features that capture semantic similarities
between different instances in the data, leading to improved
performance on downstream tasks like classification, detection, or segmentation.

Self-supervised contrastive learning has emerged
as a powerful tool in machine learning and computer vision to learn meaningful representations
from unlabeled data. Meanwhile, its empirical
success has encouraged many theoretical studies to reveal the learning mechanisms. However,
in the existing theoretical research, the role of
data augmentation is still under-exploited, especially the effects of specific augmentation types.
To fill in the blank, we for the first time propose an augmentation-aware error bound for selfsupervised contrastive learning, showing that the
supervised risk is bounded not only by the unsupervised risk, but also explicitly by a trade-off induced by data augmentation. Then, under a novel
semantic label assumption, we discuss how certain augmentation methods affect the error bound.
Lastly, we conduct both pixel- and representationlevel experiments to verify our proposed theoretical results.

Aside from the empirical success of self-supervised contrastive learning, many theoretical works aim to explain
its underlying working mechanisms. The main theoretical
framework branches into two categories. The first category
directly builds a relationship between the unsupervised contrastive risk and supervised risks via statistical modelings
(Arora et al., 2019; Nozawa & Sato, 2021; Ash et al., 2022;
Bao et al., 2022; Lei et al., 2023). However, these works
assume that the anchor and positive samples are conditionally independent, which contradicts the practical selection
procedure of positive samples therefore being unrealistic.
The second category depends on the assumption of augmentation graph and borrow mathematical tools from unsupervised spectral clustering (HaoChen et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2023a; Zhuo et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a;b). However,
the augmentation graph assumption is relatively abstract
and typically hard to verify. Wang et al. (2021) proposed a
similar assumption called augmentation overlap, but it still
fails to explain the impacts of specific kinds of data augmentations. Huang et al. (2023) proposed a (σ, δ)-measure
to mathematically quantify the data augmentation, whereas
there still remains a gap between this measure and realworld data augmentation methods.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised contrastive learning has shown great empirical success in learning representations for computer vision
(Chen et al., 2020a;b; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021;
Grill et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021) and multi-modal tasks
(Radford et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a). Typically, a contrastive learning model learns to distinguish between similar
and dissimilar pairs of data points by drawing near the positive samples (data augmentations of the same instance),
while pushing away the negative samples (data augmentations of different instances) (Chen et al., 2020a;b; He et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2021). This process encourages the model

Aside from these two major categories, there are also other
explanatory works of contrastive learning from aspects of
feature geometric (Wang & Isola, 2020; Zhang et al., 2023b),
information theory (Tian et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020;
Ouyang et al., 2025), independent component analysis (Zimmermann et al., 2021), neighborhood component analysis
(Ko et al., 2022), stochastic neighbor embedding (Hu et al.,
2023), message passing (Wang et al., 2023), distributionally robust optimization (Wu et al., 2024), etc. Nonetheless,
the role of data augmentation is still under-exploited in the
existing theoretical frameworks, especially without mathematically analyzing specific data augmentation methods.

1
State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School
of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer
Science, University of Twente 3 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. Correspondence to: Yisen Wang
<yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.

Under such background, in this paper, we propose an
augmentation-aware theory for self-supervised contrastive
learning. Specifically, we derive a novel decomposition of
the unsupervised contrastive risk with respect to the number

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

