I Think, Therefore I Diffuse:
Enabling Multimodal In-Context Reasoning in Diffusion Models

Zhenxing Mi 1 2 Kuan-Chieh Wang 3 Guocheng Qian 3 Hanrong Ye 1 Runtao Liu 1
Sergey Tulyakov 3 Kfir Aberman 3 Dan Xu 1
(b) Multimodal composing

(a) Multimodal in-context reasoning generation
Predict what the next image is:

+
monkey +

+ cat +

+ zebra

+
Ground truth reasoning answer: flying zebra

"The girl holds a
board showing
'Stop copy & paste.
Let's Think
DIFFERENT.'."

Figure 1. (a) Our ThinkDiff reasons over interleaved images (a flying monkey and a flying cat) and text prompts (monkey,
cat, and zebra) to generate a logically correct and high-quality image (a flying zebra). The ground truth reasoning answer is
provided as a reference for readers. (b) ThinkDiff composes images and texts into a coherent and reasonable image.

Abstract

coder. Without complex training and datasets,
ThinkDiff effectively unleashes understanding,
reasoning, and composing capabilities in diffusion
models. Experiments demonstrate that ThinkDiff
significantly improves accuracy from 19.2% to
46.3% on the challenging CoBSAT benchmark
for multimodal in-context reasoning generation,
with only 5 hours of training on 4 A100 GPUs.
Additionally, ThinkDiff demonstrates exceptional
performance in composing multiple images and
texts into logically coherent images. Project page:
https://mizhenxing.github.io/ThinkDiff .

This paper presents ThinkDiff, a novel alignment
paradigm that empowers text-to-image diffusion
models with multimodal in-context understanding and reasoning capabilities by integrating the
strengths of vision-language models (VLMs). Existing multimodal diffusion finetuning methods
largely focus on pixel-level reconstruction rather
than in-context reasoning, and are constrained
by the complexity and limited availability of
reasoning-based datasets. ThinkDiff addresses
these challenges by leveraging vision-language
training as a proxy task, aligning VLMs with the
decoder of an encoder-decoder large language
model (LLM) instead of a diffusion decoder. This
proxy task builds on the observation that the LLM
decoder shares the same input feature space with
diffusion decoders that use the corresponding
LLM encoder for prompt embedding. As a result, aligning VLMs with diffusion decoders can
be simplified through alignment with the LLM de-

1. Introduction
Can diffusion models take “IQ tests”? Figure 1a presents
an example of a visual analogy IQ test. The model is provided with images of a flying monkey and a flying cat, along
with text prompts of monkey, cat, and zebra, and asked to
generate the next image. A reasonable output image should
be an image of a flying zebra, requiring the model’s ability
to reason and recognize implicit patterns in context, such as
the shared attribute of the flying action in this example.

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE),
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST).
2
This work was partially done while interning at Snap. 3 Snap Inc.
Correspondence to: Zhenxing Mi <zmiaa@connect.ust.hk>.

The concept of enabling diffusion models to think and then
generate is compelling yet underexplored. Current text-toimage diffusion models (AI, 2024c; Forest, 2024a) excel at
generating high-quality images by strictly following explicit
prompts, while typically lacking multimodal in-context rea-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

