Robust Autonomy Emerges from Self-Play

Marco Cusumano-Towner * 1 David Hafner * 1 Alex Hertzberg * 1 Brody Huval * 1 Aleksei Petrenko * 1
Eugene Vinitsky * 1 Erik Wijmans * 1 Taylor Killian 1 Stuart Bowers 1 Ozan Sener 1
Philipp Krähenbühl 1 Vladlen Koltun 1

Abstract

and robustness emerge when self-play training is taken to
unprecedented scale – orders of magnitude beyond prior
experiments (Feng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). This
discovery is enabled by G IGAFLOW, a batched simulator
architected from the ground up for self-play reinforcement
learning on a massive scale. G IGAFLOW is capable of simulating and learning from 4.4 billion state transitions (7.2
million km of driving, or 42 years of continuous driving
experience) per hour on a single 8-GPU node. It simulates
urban environments with up to 150 densely interacting traffic participants 360 000 times faster than real time at a cost
of under $5 per million km driven (based on public cloud
rates). A full training run simulates over one trillion state
transitions, 1.6 billion km driven, or 9500 years of subjective driving experience, and completes in under 10 days on
one 8-GPU node.

Self-play has powered breakthroughs in twoplayer and multi-player games. Here we show
that self-play is a surprisingly effective strategy
in another domain. We show that robust and naturalistic driving emerges entirely from self-play
in simulation at unprecedented scale – 1.6 billion km of driving. This is enabled by G IGAFLOW,
a batched simulator that can synthesize and train
on 42 years of subjective driving experience per
hour on a single 8-GPU node. The resulting policy
achieves state-of-the-art performance on three independent autonomous driving benchmarks. The
policy outperforms the prior state of the art when
tested on recorded real-world scenarios, amidst
human drivers, without ever seeing human data
during training. The policy is realistic when assessed against human references and achieves unprecedented robustness, averaging 17.5 years of
continuous driving between incidents in simulation.

We use G IGAFLOW to train a parameterized family of driving policies. The parameters specify the type of traffic participant controlled by the policy (passenger vehicle, large
truck, bicyclist, or even a pedestrian) and the driving style
(e.g., aggressive vs. cautious). These parameters can be
modified at test time with no additional training (Dosovitskiy & Koltun, 2017), such that a single trained policy can
be used to control a variety of traffic participants, with a variety of behavioral styles. During training, this parameterized
policy architecture enables all simulated traffic participants
to be collecting experience in parallel, all flowing through a
single neural network. This supports self-play simulations
where more than a hundred agents are all controlled by a
single neural network, which is learning from all of their
experiences, yet the agents exhibit diverse outward manifestations (truck vs. bicycle), functional characteristics (turning
radius), and behavioral styles (adherence to traffic laws).

1. Introduction
Self-play has been an effective strategy for training policies
for board games, card games, 3D multiplayer games, realtime strategy games, robotic manipulation, and even bioengineering (Silver et al., 2017; 2018; Jaderberg et al., 2019;
Berner et al., 2019; Brown & Sandholm, 2019; Vinyals et al.,
2019; Plappert et al., 2021; Perolat et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023a). In this work, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
self-play in another domain. We show that simulated selfplay yields naturalistic and robust driving policies, while
using only a minimalistic reward function and never seeing
human data during training.

The result is a robust and naturalistic driving policy
that achieves state-of-the-art performance when tested in
recorded real-world scenarios, amidst recorded human
drivers, without ever seeing human data during training.
We test the G IGAFLOW policy in three leading independent
third-party benchmarks: CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017),
nuPlan (Caesar et al., 2022), and the Waymo Open Motion
Dataset (Ettinger et al., 2021) (through the Waymax simulator (Gulino et al., 2023)). State-of-the-art performance

We demonstrate that qualitatively new levels of realism
*
Equal contribution, alphabetical order. 1 Apple. Correspondence to: Philipp Krähenbühl <philkr@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

