xLSTM 7B: A Recurrent LLM for Fast and Efficient Inference
Maximilian Beck * 1 2 Korbinian Pöppel * 1 2 Phillip Lippe * 1 3 Richard Kurle 1 Patrick M. Blies 1
Günter Klambauer 1 2 Sebastian Böck 1 Sepp Hochreiter 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recent breakthroughs in solving reasoning, math
and coding problems with Large Language Models (LLMs) have been enabled by investing substantial computation budgets at inference time.
Therefore, inference speed is one of the most critical properties of LLM architectures, and there is
a growing need for LLMs that are efficient and
fast at inference. Recently, LLMs built on the
xLSTM architecture have emerged as a powerful
alternative to Transformers, offering linear compute scaling with sequence length and constant
memory usage, both highly desirable properties
for efficient inference. However, such xLSTMbased LLMs have yet to be scaled to larger models and assessed and compared with respect to
inference speed and efficiency. In this work,
we introduce xLSTM 7B, a 7-billion-parameter
LLM that combines xLSTM’s architectural benefits with targeted optimizations for fast and efficient inference. Our experiments demonstrate
that xLSTM 7B achieves performance on downstream tasks comparable to other similar-sized
LLMs, while providing significantly faster inference speeds and greater efficiency compared to
Llama- and Mamba-based LLMs. These results
establish xLSTM 7B as the fastest and most efficient 7B LLM, offering a solution for tasks that require large amounts of test-time computation. Our
work highlights xLSTM’s potential as a foundational architecture for methods building on heavy
use of LLM inference. Our model weights, model
code and training code are open-source.

Recent breakthroughs in test-time compute scaling have
unlocked significant improvements in solving complex reasoning and math problems. By sampling multiple promising
solutions, the best answers can be provided to the user or
used as training targets (Yao et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2023;
Guan et al., 2025). However, as state-of-the-art models
such as OpenAI o11 and DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al.,
2025) leverage these methods to push the capabilities of
language models to new heights, the significantly increased
computational overhead of test-time compute methods requires more efficient architectures that provide greater inference speeds. A promising path involves linear recurrent
neural networks with gating mechanisms, including GLA
(Yang et al., 2024b), Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2024; Dao & Gu,
2024), RWKV (Peng et al., 2023; 2024), RetNet (Sun et al.,
2023), and xLSTM (Beck et al., 2024). Compared to Transformers, these models offer a parallel mode for efficient
training (e.g. Yang et al., 2024b) and a recurrent generation
mode that both scale linearly with context length. The increased compute efficiency combined with constant memory
usage during inference allows spending more compute at
test-time, but also enables running models locally on edge
devices acting as an interface to the user with fast response
times.
xLSTM has shown competitive performance compared to
alternative recurrent models and even Transformers in a
controlled experimental setting using the same data and similar parameter counts (Beck et al., 2024). Moreover, this
architecture also excelled in other domains, such as computer vision (Alkin et al., 2025), robotics (Schmied et al.,
2024), molecular biology (Schmidinger et al., 2025), and
time series (Kraus et al., 2024). However, so far, xLSTM
has not been scaled to datasets beyond 300B tokens and
1.3B parameters. It therefore remains uncertain whether this
architecture can match the Transformer’s ability to scale
effectively with larger model sizes and extract meaningful
patterns from ever-larger datasets.

Model: https://huggingface.co/NX-AI/xLSTM-7b
Code:
https://github.com/NX-AI/xlstm and
https://github.com/NX-AI/xlstm-jax.
*

Equal contribution 1 NXAI GmbH, Linz, Austria 2 Johannes
Kepler University, Linz, Austria 3 Now at Google Deepmind. Correspondence to: Maximilian Beck <maximilian.beck@nx-ai.com>,
Korbinian Pöppel <korbinian.poeppel@nx-ai.com>, Sebastian
Böck <sebastian.boeck@nx-ai.com>.

In this work, we scale the xLSTM to 7B parameters and
present our xLSTM 7B, a large language model trained on
2.3T tokens from the DCLM dataset (Li et al., 2024) with

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

https://openai.com/index/introducing-openai-o1-preview/

