Representation Shattering in Transformers:
A Synthetic Study with Knowledge Editing

Kento Nishi 1 2 3 Rahul Ramesh 4 Maya Okawa 2 3 Mikail Khona 5
Hidenori Tanaka* 2 3 Ekdeep Singh Lubana* 2 3
(a)

Abstract
Knowledge Editing (KE) algorithms alter models’
weights to perform targeted updates to incorrect,
outdated, or otherwise unwanted factual associations. However, recent work has shown that applying KE can adversely affect models’ broader
factual recall accuracy and diminish their reasoning abilities. Although these studies give insights
into the potential harms of KE algorithms, e.g.,
performance evaluations on benchmarks, little is
understood about why such destructive failures
occur. Motivated by this, we define a novel synthetic task in which a Transformer is trained from
scratch to internalize a “structured” knowledge
graph. The structure enforces relationships between entities of the graph, such that editing a
factual association has “trickling effects” on other
entities (e.g., altering X’s parent is Y to Z affects
who X’s siblings’ parent is). Through evaluations
of edited models on this task, we show that KE
inadvertently affects representations of entities
beyond the targeted one, distorting relevant structures that allow a model to infer unseen knowledge about an entity. We call this phenomenon
representation shattering and demonstrate that it
degrades models’ factual recall and reasoning performance. We further corroborate our findings in
naturalistic settings with pre-trained Llama and
Mamba models as well. Overall, our work yields
a precise mechanistic hypothesis to explain why
KE has adverse effects on model abilities.

(b)

Which entity is to the right of #123?
Before Editing

After Editing
Model
Editing

Performance Before Editing
Performance After Editing

1.0
0.8

0.59

0.60

0.72

0.6

0.4
0.2
0
Entity #125
Entity #124

Entity #125

Direct
Recall

Entity #124

A

B

?

Logical
Inference

Compositional
Inference

A

A

B

?

B

C

?

Figure 1. Representation shattering as a mechanistic hypothesis
for why knowledge editing has adverse effects on models’ general capabilities. (a) Prior works find that editing facts, e.g., the
president of the US, can harm general abilities of LLMs (figure
reproduced from Gu et al. (2024)). (b) We introduce a synthetic
data generation process (DGP) defined by a knowledge graph containing ring-shaped geometries. Training a model on this data, we
observe that the model’s internal representations mirror the ring
structure of the underlying DGP. We explain the post-edit degradation of the model’s capabilities by uncovering the “shattering”
of latent representations. E.g., in the provided illustration, while
the edit successfully changes the fact (Entity #124 is to the right
of Entity #123), it also degrades model’s broader performance.

1. Introduction

*
Equal contribution 1 Harvard College 2 CBS-NTT Program
in Physics of Intelligence, Harvard University 3 Physics and Informatics Lab, NTT Research Inc. 4 Computer and Information
Science, University of Pennsylvania 5 Department of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Kento Nishi <kentonishi@college.harvard.edu>, Ekdeep Singh
Lubana <ekdeeplubana@fas.harvard.edu>, Hidenori Tanaka <hidenori tanaka@fas.harvard.edu>.

Large language models (LLMs) have led to unprecedented
advances in several domains (Gemini Team, 2023; Bubeck
et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Thoppilan et al., 2022;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2021;
Ahn et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023). However, the static
nature of their training pipelines implies that as our world
evolves, models’ internalized knowledge can become incorrect or outdated. To address this, recent work has proposed
several protocols for knowledge editing (KE), wherein the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

