Federated Oriented Learning: A Practical One-Shot Personalized Federated
Learning Framework

Guan Huang 1 Tao Shu 1

Abstract

et al., 2024) when the model is used at local clients with heterogeneous (i.e., non-IID) datasets (Huang et al., 2023; Ye
et al., 2023). Benefiting from the shared knowledge of the
global model, PFL adapts it to form personalized local models at each client, which perform better than both the global
model and those local models trained independently on each
client’s data. (Tan et al., 2022a; Deng et al., 2020; Collins
et al., 2021). Existing works in PFL can be broadly categorized into two groups: (1) Parameter decoupling approaches,
which divide the model into shared and personalized components. The shared backbone (feature extractor) captures
generalizable knowledge across clients, while the personalized head (classifier) is specifically adapted to each client’s
unique data distribution (Liang et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2021;
Tan et al., 2022b; Su et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2024). (2)
Optimization-based approaches, which employ advanced
optimization techniques, such as regularization-based methods, dynamic aggregation, and second-order optimization,
to constrain local models and adjust aggregation weights,
thereby balancing global collaboration with local personalization (T Dinh et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023a; Yang et al., 2024c).

Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) has become a promising learning paradigm, enabling
the training of high-quality personalized models
through multiple communication rounds between
clients and a central server. However, directly applying traditional PFL in real-world environments
where communication is expensive, limited, or infeasible is challenging, as seen in Low Earth Orbit
(LEO) satellite constellations, which face severe
communication constraints due to their high mobility, limited contact windows.To address these
issues, we introduce Federated Oriented Learning
(FOL), a novel four-stage one-shot PFL algorithm
designed to enhance local model performance
by leveraging neighboring models within stringent communication constraints. FOL comprises
model pretraining, model collection, model alignment (via fine-tuning, pruning, post fine-tuning,
and ensemble refinement), and knowledge distillation stages. We establish two theoretical guarantees on empirical risk discrepancy between student and teacher models and the convergence of
the distillation process. Extensive experiments on
datasets Wildfire, Hurricane, CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, and SVHN demonstrate that FOL consistently outperforms state-of-the-art one-shot Federated Learning (OFL) methods; for example, it
achieves accuracy improvements of up to 39.24%
over the baselines on the Wildfire dataset.

However, as today’s model becomes larger and larger (e.g.,
the number of parameters of a state-of-the-art transformerbased models ranges from tens to hundreds of billions (Devlin et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Huang & Shu,
2024), a notable limitation of existing PFL methods is their
dependence on multiple communication rounds to update
models while in each round the amount of data that needs
to be communicated is massive. While iterative communication is essential for progressively refining personalized
models and improving accuracy, it becomes impracticable
in many real-world scenarios where communication opportunities are expensive, limited, or infeasible. For instance,
in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite constellations, such as
Starlink (SpaceX, 2020), OneWeb (OneWeb, 2021), and
Kuiper (Amazon, 2022), satellites are strategically deployed
in different orbits for distinct observational tasks (e.g., some
predominantly monitor polar regions, while others focus on
oceans or landmasses) (Doe & Smith, 2019). This specialized deployment makes multi-round communication with
the same peer satellites untenable due to their high mobility
and limited contact windows (Brown & Green, 2021). A

1. Introduction
Recently, Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) has been
proposed as an effective means to address the sub-optimal
performance of the global model produced by federated
learning (FL) (Li et al., 2020b; Yang et al., 2019; Huang
1
Department of CSSE, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849,
USA. Correspondence to: Tao Shu <tshu@auburn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

