Counterfactual Effect Decomposition in
Multi-Agent Sequential Decision Making

Stelios Triantafyllou 1 Aleksa Sukovic 1 Yasaman Zolfimoselo 1 Goran Radanovic 1

Abstract

scenarios is fundamental for accountability. For instance,
counterfactual reasoning can be employed to identify actual causes (Halpern, 2016; Triantafyllou et al., 2022), attribute responsibility (Chockler & Halpern, 2004; Friedenberg & Halpern, 2019), generate explanations (Madumal
et al., 2020), evaluate fairness (Kusner et al., 2017; Huang
et al., 2022) and measure harm (Richens et al., 2022; Beckers et al., 2022). To achieve such objectives, many studies
often rely on the notion of total counterfactual effects, which
quantifies the extent to which an alternative action would
have affected the outcome of a realized scenario.

We address the challenge of explaining counterfactual outcomes in multi-agent Markov decision
processes. In particular, we aim to explain the total counterfactual effect of an agent’s action on the
outcome of a realized scenario through its influence on the environment dynamics and the agents’
behavior. To achieve this, we introduce a novel
causal explanation formula that decomposes the
counterfactual effect by attributing to each agent
and state variable a score reflecting their respective contributions to the effect. First, we show that
the total counterfactual effect of an agent’s action
can be decomposed into two components: one
measuring the effect that propagates through all
subsequent agents’ actions and another related
to the effect that propagates through the state
transitions. Building on recent advancements in
causal contribution analysis, we further decompose these two effects as follows. For the former,
we consider agent-specific effects – a causal concept that quantifies the counterfactual effect of an
agent’s action that propagates through a subset
of agents. Based on this notion, we use Shapley
value to attribute the effect to individual agents.
For the latter, we consider the concept of structurepreserving interventions and attribute the effect
to state variables based on their “intrinsic” contributions. Through extensive experimentation, we
demonstrate the interpretability of our approach
in a Gridworld environment with LLM-assisted
agents and a sepsis management simulator.

In multi-agent sequential decision making, an agent’s action typically affects the outcome indirectly. To illustrate
this, consider the problem of AI-assisted decision making
in healthcare (Lynn, 2019), where a clinician and their AI
assistant treat a patient over a period of time. Fig. 1a depicts a specific example, where treatment fails. We estimate
that if the clinician had not followed the AI’s recommendation at step 10 and administered vasopressors (V) instead of
mechanical ventilation (E), the treatment would have been
successful with an 82% likelihood. Therefore, the considered alternative action admits a high total counterfactual
effect. This effect, however, propagates through all subsequent actions of the clinician and the AI, as well as all the
changes in the patient’s state. This makes the interpretability of the effect more nuanced, as the change from action
to outcome can be transmitted by multiple distinct causal
mechanisms. In this work, we ask:
How to explain an action’s total counterfactual effect in
multi-agent sequential decision making?
Much prior work in causality has focused on decomposing
causal effects (Pearl, 2001; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018a;b)
under the rubric of mediation analysis (Imai et al., 2010;
2011; Hicks & Tingley, 2011; VanderWeele, 2016), which
aims to understand how effects propagate through causal
paths. However, such an approach would not yield interpretability in multi-agent sequential decision making. There
can be exponentially many paths connecting an action to
the outcome, and not all of them have a clear operational
meaning to help explain the effect intuitively. We instead
posit that it is more natural to interpret the effect of an action in terms of its influence on the agents’ behavior and the

1. Introduction
Applying counterfactual reasoning to retrospectively analyze the impact of different actions in decision making
1
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Germany. Correspondence to: Stelios Triantafyllou <strianta@mpi-sws.org>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

