Explicit Discovery of Nonlinear Symmetries from Dynamic Data

Lexiang Hu 1 Yikang Li 1 Zhouchen Lin 1 2 3

Abstract

2000; Bluman & Anco, 2008; Bluman, 2010). Equivariant
networks embed symmetries into their structure, achieving
better performance on specific tasks (Zaheer et al., 2017;
Weiler et al., 2018b;a; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Wang et al.,
2021; Finzi et al., 2021; Satorras et al., 2021). Furthermore,
symmetries can guide the discovery of governing equations
from data (Yang et al., 2024b). However, these methods all
require prior knowledge of symmetries, which is challenging when dealing with complex tasks and messy datasets.
Therefore, automatically discovering symmetries from data
has become an important topic.

Symmetry is widely applied in problems such as
the design of equivariant networks and the discovery of governing equations, but in complex
scenarios, it is not known in advance. Most previous symmetry discovery methods are limited
to linear symmetries, and recent attempts to discover nonlinear symmetries fail to explicitly get
the Lie algebra subspace. In this paper, we propose LieNLSD, which is, to our knowledge, the
first method capable of determining the number of
infinitesimal generators with nonlinear terms and
their explicit expressions. We specify a function
library for the infinitesimal group action and aim
to solve for its coefficient matrix, proving that its
prolongation formula for differential equations,
which governs dynamic data, is also linear with
respect to the coefficient matrix. By substituting
the central differences of the data and the Jacobian matrix of the trained neural network into the
infinitesimal criterion, we get a system of linear
equations for the coefficient matrix, which can
then be solved using SVD. On top quark tagging
and a series of dynamic systems, LieNLSD shows
qualitative advantages over existing methods and
improves the long rollout accuracy of neural PDE
solvers by over 20% while applying to guide data
augmentation. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/hulx2002/LieNLSD.

Most existing symmetry discovery methods can successfully
identify linear symmetries in the observation space (Zhou
et al., 2021; Dehmamy et al., 2021; Moskalev et al., 2022;
Yang et al., 2023). However, they are unable to discover
nonlinear symmetries, which are common in dynamical
systems. For example, in the case of the wave equation
utt = uxx + uyy , these methods can only find Lorentz
symmetry and scaling symmetry, while missing translation
symmetry and special conformal symmetry.
Recent works have attempted to explore nonlinear symmetries. LaLiGAN (Yang et al., 2024a) uses an encoderdecoder architecture to map the observation space to a latent space, making nonlinear symmetries in the observation
space appear as linear symmetries in the latent space. However, since the encoder and decoder are black boxes, they
cannot explicitly discover the nonlinear symmetries in the
observation space. Ko et al. (2024) and Shaw et al. (2024)
propose methods to directly find non-affine symmetries from
observed data. Nevertheless, Ko et al. (2024) use an MLP to
model the infinitesimal generators, which suffers from the
same interpretability issues as LaLiGAN, while Shaw et al.
(2024) are limited to one-parameter group symmetries.

1. Introduction
From traditional mathematical physics to deep learning,
symmetry plays an important role. In differential equations,
symmetries can assist in integration by reducing the order
(Olver, 1993; McLachlan, 1995; Ibragimov, 1999; Hydon,

In this paper, we propose the Lie algebra based NonLinear
Symmetry Discovery method (LieNLSD), which can determine the number of infinitesimal generators and explicitly
provide their expressions containing nonlinear terms. Our
setting assumes that the dataset originates from a dynamic
system governed by differential equations, with common
forms including first-order dynamic systems ut = f (u′ )
and second-order dynamical systems utt = f (u′ ), where u′
represents u and its spatial derivatives. This is a general setting, as static systems governed by algebraic equations are

1

State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University 3 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Correspondence to: Zhouchen
Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

