STAIR: Improving Safety Alignment with Introspective Reasoning

Yichi Zhang * 1 2 Siyuan Zhang * 1 Yao Huang 3 2 Zeyu Xia 1 Zhengwei Fang 1 Xiao Yang 1 Ranjie Duan 1 4
Dong Yan 5 Yinpeng Dong 1 Jun Zhu 1 2

Abstract
Ensuring the safety and harmlessness of Large
Language Models (LLMs) has become equally
critical as their performance in applications. However, existing safety alignment methods typically
suffer from safety-performance trade-offs and
susceptibility to jailbreak attacks, primarily due
to their reliance on direct refusals for malicious
queries. In this paper, we propose STAIR, a novel
framework that integrates SafeTy Alignment with
Itrospective Reasoning. We enable LLMs to identify safety risks through step-by-step analysis by
self-improving chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning with safety awareness. STAIR first equips
the model with a structured reasoning capability
and then advances safety alignment via iterative
preference optimization on step-level reasoning
data generated using our newly proposed SafetyInformed Monte Carlo Tree Search (SI-MCTS).
Specifically, we design a theoretically grounded
reward for outcome evaluation to seek balance between helpfulness and safety. We further train
a process reward model on this data to guide
test-time searches for improved responses. Extensive experiments show that STAIR effectively
mitigates harmful outputs while better preserving
helpfulness, compared to instinctive alignment
strategies. With test-time scaling, STAIR achieves
a safety performance comparable to Claude-3.5
against popular jailbreak attacks. We have opensourced our code, datasets and models at https:
//github.com/thu-ml/STAIR.

Figure 1. Although the existing safety alignment methods enable
LLMs to refuse queries with apparent risks directly, they often fail
to resist jailbreak attacks that manage to avoid the initial tokens for
refusal. The instinctive responses correspond to System 1 thinking.
In this paper, we propose to improve safety alignment with introspective reasoning, encouraging LLMs to scrutinize the underlying
risks with safety-aware System 2 thinking before making refusals.

1. Introduction
The versatility of Large Language Models (LLMs) across a
wide range of tasks (Achiam et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023;
Dubey et al., 2024), from fluid conversation (Dubois et al.,
2024) to complex reasoning in mathematics (Cobbe et al.,
2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021) and code (Chen et al., 2021;
Nam et al., 2024), has facilitated their integration into numerous AI-assisted applications. These include high-stakes
domains such as medical diagnostics (Ullah et al., 2024),
educational tools (Zhang et al., 2024e), and legal consulting (Nigam et al., 2024), where LLMs frequently interact directly with humans. However, the widespread usage has also
exposed their potential to generate harmful content (Dong
et al., 2023; 2024), such as deception, violence, and discrimination, raising serious concerns about their trustworthiness (Liu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023) as well as an
urgent need for techniques to ensure their safe use.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, College of AI, Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint
ML Center, THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China. 2 RealAI 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China 4 Alibaba
Group 5 Baichuan AI. Correspondence to: Yinpeng Dong <dongyinpeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Safety alignment (Bai et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2024) has
become a critical solution to enhance the safety and harmlessness of LLMs, enabling them to identify harmful queries
and mitigate risks with direct refusals. Typical approaches
of aligning model behaviors with human values involve Su-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

