A Simple Model of Inference Scaling Laws

Noam Levi 1

Abstract

While the scaling laws literature focuses on test performance induced by pre-training, scaling during inference—the
process by which a trained model makes predictions on new
data—has received less attention.

Neural scaling laws have garnered significant interest due to their ability to predict model performance as a function of increasing parameters,
data, and compute. In this work, we propose a
simple statistical ansatz based on memorization
to study scaling laws in the context of inference.
Specifically, how performance improves with multiple inference attempts. We explore the coverage,
or pass@k metric, which measures the chance of
success over repeated attempts and provide a motivation for the observed functional form of the
inference scaling behavior of the coverage in large
language models (LLMs) on reasoning tasks. We
then define an "inference loss", which exhibits a
power law decay as the number of trials increases,
and connect this result with prompting costs. We
further test the universality of our construction
by conducting experiments on a simple generative model, and find that our predictions are in
agreement with the empirical coverage curves in a
controlled setting. Our simple framework sets the
ground for incorporating inference scaling with
other known scaling laws.

Recent works have shown empirically that LLMs can gain
substantial benefits from repeated prompts to perform better
on difficult tasks such as coding and formal proofs, where
verification of the correct answer can be done (Brown et al.,
2024; Snell et al., 2024; Bansal et al., 2024). These works
demonstrate that the performance of weaker models can be
amplified without further training by repeating inference
trials, giving rise to a natural question:
Can we interpret, or predict the inference scaling behavior
of a model with repeated attempts?
To answer this question, we propose a simple toy model that
isolates the inference scaling laws which dictate how certain
performance metrics improve as a function of the number
of inference attempts.
Inspired by the work of Hutter (2021), which introduced
a model to study scaling behavior for memorization and
generalization capabilities, we devise a simple setting to
capture the effect of repeated inference attempts, focusing
on the coverage metric, also known as pass@k.
In this work, we present analytical predictions for coverage from a probabilistic perspective and demonstrate how
inference improves with the number of repeated trials in
a predictable way, which matches the observed behavior
in (Brown et al., 2024) and (Snell et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Advancements in deep learning have demonstrated that the
performance of neural networks scales predictably as a
function of model size, dataset size, and computational resources (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020a; Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020a). These trends,
known colloquially as neural scaling laws, have motivated
research into understanding how scaling influences model
performance in a wide range of domains, but in particular Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022).

We use two different approaches to obtain the predicted
pass@k, and highlight the connection between coverage
and total inference cost. Additionally, we define a simple
"inference loss", similar to the familiar test loss, but allowing for repeated trials, and predict its scaling.
Our main predictions are verified by empirical results on
mathematical reasoning tasks for several LLMs, following Brown et al. (2024).

1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Noam Levi
<noam.levi@epfl.ch>.

Lastly, we test the universality of our theory on an entirely
different generative model. We train a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2022) to generate reconstructions of its training data by sampling from a latent

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

