A Meta-learner for Heterogeneous Effects in Difference-in-Differences

Hui Lan 1 Haoge Chang 2 Eleanor Dillon 3 Vasilis Syrgkanis 4

Abstract

estimating the causal effect of a treatment or intervention
in observational studies often requires strong assumptions,
such as conditional exogeneity, which rules out unobserved
confounding. Panel data consist of repeated observations of
the same units over time, which allows researchers to control
for certain types of unobserved, time-invariant characteristics. Due to its flexibility and robustness in handling nonexperimental data, the DiD approach has gained significant
traction in empirical research, especially in the evaluation
of policy interventions (e.g. Thome et al., 2024, etc.), labor
market changes (e.g. Card & Krueger, 1994; Rossin-Slater
et al., 2013; Pierce & Schott, 2016, etc.), environmental
regulations (e.g. Gao et al., 2020, etc.), and public health
(e.g. Finkelstein et al., 2012; Dimick & Ryan, 2014, etc.).

We address the problem of estimating heterogeneous treatment effects in panel data, adopting the
popular Difference-in-Differences (DiD) framework under the conditional parallel trends assumption. We propose a novel doubly robust metalearner for the Conditional Average Treatment
Effect on the Treated (CATT), reducing the estimation to a convex risk minimization problem involving a set of auxiliary models. Our framework
allows for the flexible estimation of the CATT,
when conditioning on any subset of variables of
interest using generic machine learning. Leveraging Neyman orthogonality, our proposed approach
is robust to estimation errors in the auxiliary models. As a generalization to our main result, we
develop a meta-learning approach for the estimation of general conditional functionals under covariate shift. We also provide an extension to the
instrumented DiD setting with non-compliance.
Empirical results demonstrate the superiority of
our approach over existing baselines.

Despite several recent methodological advances in the DiD
literature (Roth et al., 2023; Chiu et al., 2023), most stateof-the-art approaches are still only able to generate average causal effects, or at best group average causal effects
for predefined subpopulations. On the contrary, in many
empirical applications, especially on large-scale datasets
that stem from digital platforms, practitioners are interested
in treatment effect heterogeneity for personalized decision
making. The estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects
has gained considerable attention in recent years due to its
potential to uncover variation in how different subpopulations respond to an intervention. Motivated by the success
of machine learning techniques in learning complex tasks,
many studies have employed them in learning heterogeneous treatment effects, see for instance Shalit et al., 2017;
Shi et al., 2019; Künzel et al., 2019; Nie & Wager, 2021;
Oprescu et al., 2019; Kennedy, 2023, etc. However, estimating heterogeneous treatment effects for panel data remains
relatively unexplored in literature.

1. Introduction
Difference-in-Differences estimators have become a foundational tool for causal inference in economics (Roth et al.,
2023), social sciences (Chiu et al., 2023) and healthcare
(Wang et al., 2024) for evaluating causal effects of policy interventions or treatments when both pre- and post-treatment
outcomes are observed. In contrast to cross-sectional data,
having panel data enables researchers to work with different
assumptions that are often considered more plausible in application. Due to the non-random assignment of treatments,

In this paper, we explore the estimation of heterogeneous
treatment effects of a binary treatment using panel data
under the canonical parallel trends condition used in DiD
setups (e.g. Ashenfelter & Card, 1984; Card & Krueger,
1994, etc.). The parallel trends assumption posits that, in the
absence of treatment, the treated and control units would
have followed similar trends over time. Recent research
has explored different approaches in addressing limitations
of traditional methods (e.g. Roth et al., 2023). One line of
work focuses on relaxing the unconditional parallel trends
assumption by taking into account systematic differences

*Part of this work is done during an internship at Microsoft
Research. **Vasilis Syrgkanis and Hui Lan are Supported by NSF
Award IIS-2337916. 1 Institute of Computational and Mathematical
Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, USA 2 Department
of Economics, Columbia University 3 Microsoft Research, New
England 4 Department of Management Science and Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Hui Lan
<huilan@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

