Exploring Invariance in Images through One-way Wave Equations

Yinpeng Chen † 1 Dongdong Chen 2 Xiyang Dai 2 Mengchen Liu † 3 Yinan Feng 4 Youzuo Lin 4 Lu Yuan † 3
Zicheng Liu † 5

Abstract

one-way wave equations
𝜕𝜻
𝜕𝜻
=𝚲
𝜕𝑥
𝜕𝑦
𝚲 = diag(λ! , … , 𝜆' )

In this paper, we empirically demonstrate that
natural images can be reconstructed with high fidelity from compressed representations using a
simple first-order norm-plus-linear autoregressive
(FINOLA) process—without relying on explicit
positional information. Through systematic analysis, we observe that the learned coefficient matrices (A and B) in FINOLA are typically invertible,
and their product, AB−1 , is diagonalizable across
training runs. This structure enables a striking interpretation: FINOLA’s latent dynamics resemble
a system of one-way wave equations evolving in
a compressed latent space. Under this framework,
each image corresponds to a unique solution of
these equations. This offers a new perspective on
image invariance, suggesting that the underlying
structure of images may be governed by simple,
invariant dynamic laws. Our findings shed light
on a novel avenue for understanding and modeling visual data through the lens of latent-space
dynamics and wave propagation.

encoder

𝑊 𝐻
𝜻( , )
2 2
initial condition

solution
𝜻(𝑥, 𝑦)

conv
+
upsample

FINOLA decoder
solution: 𝜻 = 𝝍! + ⋯ + 𝝍" s.t.

𝜕𝝍#
𝜕𝝍#
= 𝑯$ )
𝝍# ,
= 𝑯% )
𝝍# , 𝑯$ 𝑯&!
% =𝚲
𝜕𝑥
𝜕𝑦

Figure 1: Exploring invariance through one-way wave
equations. Our empirical findings suggest that images may
∂ζ
share a set of one-way wave equations ∂x
= Λ ∂ζ
∂y (or transportation equations). Each image corresponds (to a good
approximation) to a unique solution with an initial condition
H
ζ( W
2 , 2 ) derived from the original image. The solution
ζ(x, y) is a feature map (with resolutions of 14 or 12 or full
resolution of the original image) facilitates image reconstruction using a few upsampling and convolutional layers.
The wave speeds, λ1 , . . . , λC , are latent and learnable.
often through deep Transformer architectures. Motivated
by their success, we ask: can autoregressive modeling be
simplified to a first-order process, while still retaining its
expressive power?

1. Introduction
Motivation: Autoregressive language models, such as GPT
(Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020), have
achieved remarkable success in Natural Language Processing (NLP) by predicting each token based on its preceding
context. This paradigm has also influenced Computer Vision, inspiring models like iGPT (Chen et al., 2020a) for
unsupervised representation learning, PixelCNN (van den
Oord et al., 2016a; Salimans et al., 2017) for autoregressive
image generation, and DALL·E (Ramesh et al., 2021) for
text-to-image synthesis. These approaches typically rely on
capturing high-order dependencies among multiple tokens,

First-order norm+linear autoregression (FINOLA): We
propose a simplified first-order autoregressive process for
image reconstruction, which we term FINOLA (First-Order
Norm+Linear Autoregression). Our key insight is that, with
appropriate encoding, images can be autoregressed linearly
after normalization. As illustrated in Figure 2, the process begins by encoding an image into a compact vector
q ∈ RC . This vector is placed at the center of a latent
H
feature map z ∈ RW ×H×C , i.e., z( W
2 , 2 ) = q. We
then recursively propagate values across the x and y axes
using: ∆x z = z(x + 1, y) − z(x, y) = Aẑ(x, y), and
∆y z = z(x, y + 1) − z(x, y) = B ẑ(x, y), where A, B ∈
RC×C are learnable matrices, and ẑ(x, y) is the channelz
wise normalized version of z(x, y): ẑ(x, y) = z(x,y)−µ
,
σz
pP
P
1
2 /C. FI(z
−
µ
)
µz = C k zk (x, y), σz =
z
k k
NOLA can generate high-resolution feature maps (e.g., 14 ,
1
2 , or full resolution of the original image). The final image
is reconstructed using a lightweight decoder composed of a

†
1
Work done while working at Microsoft.
Google
DeepMind 2 Microsoft 3 Meta 4 University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill 5 AMD. Correspondence to: Yinpeng Chen <yinpengc@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

