DSBRouter: End-to-end Global Routing via Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge

Liangliang Shi * 1 Shenhui Zhang * 2 Xingbo Du 2 Nianzu Yang 2 Junchi Yan † 2

Abstract
Global routing (GR) is a fundamental task in modern chip design and various learning techniques
have been devised. However, a persistent challenge is the inherent lack of a mechanism to guarantee the routing connectivity in network’s prediction results, necessitating post-processing search
or reinforcement learning (RL) to enforce the connectivity. In this paper, we propose a neural GR
solver called DSBRouter, leveraging the Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge (DSB) model for GR.
During training, unlike previous works that learn
the mapping from noise to routes, we establish
a bridge between the initial pins and the routing
via DSB, which learns the forward and backward
mapping between them. For inference, based on
the evaluation metric (e.g. low overflow), we further introduce a sampling scheme with evaluationbased guidance to enhance the routing predictions.
Note that DSBRouter is an end-to-end model that
does not require a post-step to ensure connectivity. Empirical results show that it achieves SOTA
performance on the overflow reduction in ISPD98
and part of ISPD07. In some cases, DSBRouter
can even generate routes with zero overflow.

Figure 1. Global routing in chip design via different methods. (a) a
real chip canvas from ISPD07. (b) The raw data is fed into DPM in
HubRouter. The red stripe represents the congestion in the existing
chip, while the green stripe is the stripe mask. (c) predicted hubs.
(d) generated routes by RL or other post-processing algorithms.
(e) Input pins of DSBRouter. (f) generated routes by DSBRouter.

2022a), placement (Hao et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2023c),
etc. With VLSI netlists containing millions or billions of
nets, global routers must interconnect pins while minimizing
wirelength and avoiding overflow in a limited area. However,
even in the simplified ‘2-pin’ scenario that connects each
net with only two pins under specific constraints, has proven
to be NP-complete (Paulus et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

Traditional works (Cho et al., 2007; Kastner et al., 2002)
often rely on heuristics to solve greedily. However, the diversity and scale in the modern chip design industry, introduce
new challenges for classical algorithms, requiring continuous updates and improvements by human experts. To reduce
reliance on manual efforts and enhance overall design automation and quality, learning-based methods have been
introduced, yet these methods suffer from notable limitations as shown in Tab. 1. For instance, approaches like (Liao
et al., 2020) leverage deep reinforcement learning (RL) to
obtain solutions but require substantial time for route generation. Others, e.g. HubRouter (Du et al., 2023) produce
solutions directly via generative methods (Li et al., 2022b;
Yan et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021). However, the generated results often rely on second-stage heuristics or RL techniques
to ensure global connectivity. This raises a natural question:
Can we directly generate high-quality, connected routes in

Global routing (GR) (McMurchie et al., 1995; Liao et al.,
2020; Cheng et al., 2022) has emerged as one of the most
intricate and time-consuming phases in the modern design
flow of Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) (Kramer &
Van Leeuwen, 1984), distinct from other stages such as
logic synthesis (Neto et al., 2021), floorplannning (Li et al.,
*

Equal contribution† Correspondence author 1 Shanghai Institute for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Shanghai,
China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence and School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>. This work is
supported by NSFC (92370201, 62222607). Code available at
https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/EDA-AI.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

