N EUROT REE: Hierarchical Functional Brain Pathway Decoding for Mental
Health Disorders
Jun-En Ding 1 Dongsheng Luo 2 Chenwei Wu 3 Feng Liu 1

Abstract
Mental disorders are among the most widespread
diseases globally. Analyzing functional brain
networks through functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) is crucial for understanding mental disorder behaviors. Although existing fMRIbased graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated significant potential in brain network feature extraction, they often fail to characterize complex relationships between brain regions and demographic information in mental disorders. To
overcome these limitations, we propose a learnable NeuroTree framework that integrates a k-hop
AGE-GCN with neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and contrastive masked functional
connectivity (CMFC) to enhance similarities and
dissimilarities of brain region distance. Furthermore, NeuroTree effectively decodes fMRI network features into tree structures, which improves
the capture of high-order brain regional pathway
features and enables the identification of hierarchical neural behavioral patterns essential for understanding disease-related brain subnetworks. Our
empirical evaluations demonstrate that NeuroTree
achieves state-of-the-art performance across two
distinct mental disorder datasets. It provides valuable insights into age-related deterioration patterns, elucidating their underlying neural mechanisms. The code and datasets are available at
https://github.com/Ding1119/NeuroTree.

Figure 1. Overview of N EUROT REE framework.

1. Introduction
In recent years, neuropsychiatric disorders and addiction
have emerged as substantial public health challenges, with
their impact on brain function becoming a critical research
focus in neuroscience (Sahakian et al., 2015; Hollander
et al., 2020; Borumandnia et al., 2022). Substance use
disorder (SUD) is widely studied in the field of mental disorders, enabling the investigation of structural brain alterations
among SUD users across various factors (e.g., age or gender) (Niklason et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2024b). The development of brain imaging modalities, such functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), which measures blood oxygen
level-dependent (BOLD) signals, and electroencephalogram
(EEG), which measures the electrical potentials of the brain
(Jiao et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Yang & Liu, 2024)
has provided a means to analyze brain network activities in
mental disorders (Zhang et al., 2016; Li et al., 2022a; Niklason et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2025). Moreover, research on
the clustering of connectivity in brain regions using fMRI
has demonstrated that the brain does not operate statically
but instead exhibits a dynamic, multi-level hierarchical organization (Meunier et al., 2009; Betzel et al., 2023). In
particular, hierarchical network analysis has been shown to
effectively distinguish these abnormal patterns and identify
brain regions associated with specific pathological mechanisms in psychiatric disorders (Boisvert et al., 2024; Segal
et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2023b).

1

Department of Systems Engineering, Stevens Institute of
Technology, New Jersey, USA 2 Department of Computing and
Information Sciences, Florida International University, USA
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Michigan, USA. Correspondence to: Feng Liu
<fliu22@stevens.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Currently, traditional brain network analysis has success1

