Exact Upper and Lower Bounds for the Output Distribution
of Neural Networks with Random Inputs

Andrey Kofnov 1 Daniel Kapla 1 Ezio Bartocci 2 Efstathia Bura 1

Abstract

where Y is the output and X the input (typically multivariate), and f is a known function modeling the relationship between X and Y parametrized by Θ. Model (1) incorporates
uncertainty neither in Y nor in X and NN fitting is a numerical algorithm for minimizing a loss function. Lack of uncertainty quantification, such as assessment mechanisms for
prediction accuracy beyond the training data, prevents neural networks, despite their potential, from being deployed in
safety-critical applications ranging from medical diagnostic
systems (e.g., (Hafiz & Bhat, 2020)) to cyber-physical systems such as autonomous vehicles, robots or drones (e.g.,
(Yurtsever et al., 2020)). Also, the deterministic nature of
NNs renders them highly vulnerable to not only adversarial
noise but also to even small perturbations in inputs ((Bibi
et al., 2018; Fawzi et al., 2018; Goodfellow et al., 2014;
2015; Hosseini et al., 2017)).

We derive exact upper and lower bounds for the
cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the output of a neural network (NN) over its entire support subject to noisy (stochastic) inputs. The upper and lower bounds converge to the true cdf
over its domain as the resolution increases. Our
method applies to any feedforward NN using continuous monotonic piecewise twice continuously
differentiable activation functions (e.g., ReLU,
tanh and softmax) and convolutional NNs, which
were beyond the scope of competing approaches.
The novelty and instrumental tool of our approach
is to bound general NNs with ReLU NNs. The
ReLU NN-based bounds are then used to derive
the upper and lower bounds of the cdf of the NN
output. Experiments demonstrate that our method
delivers guaranteed bounds of the predictive output distribution over its support, thus providing
exact error guarantees, in contrast to competing
approaches.

Uncertainty in modeling is typically classified as epistemic
or systematic, which derives from lack of knowledge of
the model, and aleatoric or statistical, which reflects the
inherent randomness in the underlying process being modeled (see, e.g., (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021)). The
universal approximation theorem (UAT) (Cybenko, 1989;
Hornik et al., 1989) states that a NN with one hidden layer
can approximate any continuous function for inputs within
a specific range by increasing the number of neurons. In
the context of NNs, epistemic uncertainty is of secondary
importance to aleatoric uncertainty. Herein, we focus on
studying the effect of random inputs on the output distribution of NNs and derive uniform upper and lower bounds for
the cdf of the outputs of a NN subject to noisy (stochastic)
input data.

1. Introduction
Increased computational power, availability of large
datasets, and the rapid development of new NN architectures contribute to the ongoing success of NN based learning
in image recognition, natural language processing, speech
recognition, robotics, strategic games, etc. A limitation of
NN machine learning (ML) approaches is that they lack a
built-in mechanism to assess the uncertainty or trustworthiness of their predictions, especially on unseen or out-ofdistribution data. A NN is a model of the form:
Y = f (X, Θ),

We evaluate our proposed framework on four benchmark
datasets (Iris (Fisher, 1936), Wine (Aeberhard & Forina,
1992), Diabetes (Efron et al., 2004), and Banana (Jaichandaran, 2017)), and demonstrate the efficacy of our approach
to bound the cdf of the NN output subject to Gaussian and
Gaussian mixture inputs. We demonstrate that our bounds
cover the true underlying cdf over its entire support. In
contrast, the similar but approximate approach of Krapf
et al. (2024), as well as high-sample Monte-Carlo simulations, produce estimates outside the bounds over areas of
the output range where the bounds are tight.

(1)

1
Faculty of Mathematics and Geoinformation, TU Wien,
Vienna, Austria 2 Faculty of Informatics, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to: Andrey Kofnov <andrey.kofnov@tuwien.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

