Activation Space Interventions Can Be Transferred Between Large Language
Models
Narmeen Fatimah Oozeer * 1 Dhruv Nathawani * 2 Nirmalendu Prakash 3 Michael Lan 4 Abir Harrasse 1
Amir Abdullah 5 6

Abstract

marks (Klabunde et al., 2023; Baek et al., 2024). For example, Lan et al. (2025) investigate similarity in representations among models of varying sizes, while Kissane et al.
(2024) compare the internal representations of fine-tuned
LLMs variants. However, these prior studies have primarily
focused on analyzing representational similarities without
leveraging them for practical intervention.

The study of representation universality in AI
models reveals growing convergence across domains, modalities, and architectures. However,
the practical applications of representation universality remain largely unexplored. We bridge
this gap by demonstrating that safety interventions can be transferred between models through
learned mappings of their shared activation spaces.
We demonstrate this approach on two wellestablished AI safety tasks: backdoor removal and
refusal of harmful prompts, showing successful
transfer of steering vectors that alter the models’
outputs in a predictable way. Additionally, we
propose a new task, corrupted capabilities, where
models are fine-tuned to embed knowledge tied
to a backdoor. This tests their ability to separate useful skills from backdoors, reflecting realworld challenges. Extensive experiments across
Llama, Qwen and Gemma model families show
that our method enables using smaller models
to efficiently align larger ones. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that autoencoder mappings between
base and fine-tuned models can serve as reliable
“lightweight safety switches”, allowing dynamic
toggling between model behaviors.

In this work, we extend representational similarity insights
into practical techniques by investigating whether explicit
mappings can be constructed between the activation spaces
of different models to enable the ‘behavioral transfer’—
harnessing the learned activations of source model A to directly influence the activations of a target model B, thereby
inducing desired behavior in B without explicitly analyzing B’s activations. Specifically, we ask: Can a behavior
exhibited by a model A be ‘transferred’ to a model B while
preserving its language modeling?
Mechanistic interpretability, a field that seeks to reverseengineer neural networks by uncovering the internal mechanisms behind their outputs, provides a complementary backdrop to our investigation. This field typically explores individual neuron activations (Gurnee et al., 2023), activation
vectors (Vig et al., 2020b), subsets of connections within the
network (Wang et al., 2022), or sparse autoencoder (SAE)
features (Marks et al., 2024b). While these approaches have
provided valuable insights, they often face challenges in
scaling to larger models due to model complexity (McGrath
et al., 2023) and computational demands (Fiotto-Kaufman
et al., 2025). We propose that our behavior-transfer framework can complement mechanistic interpretability research
by enabling focused exploration on smaller models.

1. Introduction
Representations in AI models have been shown to be converging across multiple domains, data modalities and architectures (Huh et al., 2024). The recent proliferation of
highly capable LLMs has spurred research into representational similarities beyond traditional performance bench-

We leverage two well-known AI safety tasks to study behavior transfer in LLMs: backdoor removal (Hubinger et al.,
2024; Zhao et al., 2024) and harmful prompt refusal (Arditi
et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2024). We also introduce a novel
task: corrupted capabilities, where models are finetuned
to introduce new knowledge tightly coupled with a backdoor. The objective of this task is to remove the backdoor
while preserving knowledge. Beyond cross-model behavior
transfer, we explore the transferability of behaviors between
a base model and its fine-tuned counterpart by leveraging

*

Equal contribution 1 Martian Learning; 2 Nvidia; 3 Singapore
University of Technology and Design; 4 Independent; 5 Senior
author; Martian Learning; 6 Thoughtworks. Correspondence to:
Narmeen Fatimah Oozeer <narmeen@withmartian.com>, Amir
Abdullah <amir.abdullah@thoughtworks.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

