LaRA: Benchmarking Retrieval-Augmented Generation
and Long-Context LLMs — No Silver Bullet for LC or RAG Routing

Kuan Li 1 Liwen Zhang 2 Yong Jiang 2 Pengjun Xie 2 Fei Huang 2 Shuai Wang 1 Minhao Cheng 3

Abstract

documents, knowledge bases, or websites. However, recent
advancements in LLMs, such as GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024),
Llama 3.2 (Meta, 2024a), Claude 3.5 (Anthropic, 2024),
and Qwen 2.5 (Yang et al., 2024), now support input lengths
of up to 128k tokens, offering an alternative by directly
feeding the full context of relevant information into the
model. This raises questions about the continued necessity
of RAG, which was initially crucial for handling long texts,
since these models can now potentially access and process
the necessary information directly. Therefore, it is essential
to systematically compare the strengths and weaknesses of
RAG and long-context (LC) LLMs.

As Large Language Model (LLM) context
windows expand, the necessity of RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) for integrating
external knowledge is debated. Existing RAG
vs.
long-context (LC) LLM comparisons
are often inconclusive due to benchmark
limitations.
We introduce LaRA, a novel
benchmark with 2326 test cases across four
QA tasks and three long context types, for
rigorous evaluation. Our analysis of eleven
LLMs reveals the optimal choice between RAG
and LC depends on a complex interplay of
model capabilities, context length, task type,
and retrieval characteristics, offering actionable
guidelines for practitioners. Our code and dataset
is provided at: https://github.com/AlibabaNLP/LaRA.

Numerous studies have investigated the performance
differences between RAG and providing LLMs with full
long contexts. For example, Xu et al. find that RAG
outperforms LC on several traditional QA datasets. More
recently, Li et al. argued that LC consistently outperforms
RAG in almost all settings. However, Yu et al. subsequently
conducted experiments demonstrating that RAG is not
inherently weaker than LC. This lack of consensus likely
stems from several flaws in the evaluation pipeline design
of existing benchmarks, including issues with the corpus
(e.g., excessively short text lengths, failed replacements),
evaluation metrics, and impractical task design.

1. Introducion
While large language models (LLMs) excel across various
domains, the dynamic nature of information poses
significant challenges to their ability to acquire new
knowledge effectively. Current studies reveal several
limitations of LLMs, including high computational costs
when processing long texts, a tendency to produce factual
errors and hallucinations, difficulty adapting to specialized
domains, and a propensity for generating overly generic
responses (Gao et al., 2023). To address these limitations,
researchers have explored retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) (Guu et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020). RAG
enables LLMs to efficiently utilize external knowledge
by retrieving the most relevant fragments from uploaded

To address these issues and facilitate a robust comparison
between RAG and LC, we propose LaRA, a benchmark
for evaluating Long-context LLMs competing againt RAG.
In constructing LaRA, we adhere to the following criteria:
(1) Context length should be maximized within the LLMs’
input limits to avoid truncation that could obscure the true
capabilities of the models. (2) The context should consist
of naturally occurring long text, rather than artificially
constructed examples, to reflect real-world usage scenarios.
(3) Answering questions should require information from
the provided context, ensuring the LLM cannot answer them
based solely on its internal knowledge. (4) Questions should
have definitive answers to facilitate an accurate evaluation
using LLMs. (5) The questions should reflect practical
queries that humans are likely to ask in real-world LLM usage
scenarios. LaRA is designed to serve as a guidebook for
designing effective RAG-or-LC planning systems, therefore,
it is crucial that all included questions are meaningful,

The project was done during Kuan Li’s internship at Tongyi
Lab, Alibaba Group. 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology 2 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group 3 Penn State University.
Correspondence to:
Yong Jiang <yongjiang.jy@alibabainc.com>, Shuai Wang <shuaiw@cse.ust.hk>, Minhao Cheng
<mmc7149@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

