Neighbour-Driven Gaussian Process Variational Autoencoders
for Scalable Structured Latent Modelling

Xinxing Shi 1 Xiaoyu Jiang 1 Mauricio A. Álvarez 1

Abstract
Gaussian Process (GP) Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) extend standard VAEs by replacing the
fully factorised Gaussian prior with a GP prior,
thereby capturing richer correlations among latent variables. However, performing exact GP
inference in large-scale GPVAEs is computationally prohibitive, often forcing existing approaches
to rely on restrictive kernel assumptions or large
sets of inducing points. In this work, we propose a neighbour-driven approximation strategy
that exploits local adjacencies in the latent space
to achieve scalable GPVAE inference. By confining computations to the nearest neighbours of
each data point, our method preserves essential
latent dependencies, allowing more flexible kernel choices and mitigating the need for numerous inducing points. Through extensive experiments on tasks including representation learning,
data imputation, and conditional generation, we
demonstrate that our approach outperforms other
GPVAE variants in both predictive performance
and computational efficiency.

Figure 1: GPVAE places GP prior over the latent variables
Z to model correlations in the structured data (xi , yi ). Our
approach is to approximate the dense GP prior
 by leveraging
the associated neighbourhood xn(i) , yn(i) .

sequential, spatial, or other structured data. In these cases,
it is crucial to model correlations among latent variables.
A natural way to introduce such correlations is to adopt a
Gaussian Process (GP) prior over the latent representations,
resulting in Gaussian Process Variational Autoencoders (GPVAEs) (Casale et al., 2018). By encoding the latent variables as realisations from a GP, GPVAEs enforce structured
dependencies through kernels (as shown in Fig. 1). Unfortunately, the direct application of GPs leads to an O(N 3 )
computational overhead (N is the number of training samples), making naive approaches prohibitively expensive in
large-scale settings.

1. Introduction
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2014) have achieved remarkable success in a variety of tasks
ranging from representation learning (Higgins et al., 2017;
Kim & Mnih, 2018) to generative modelling (Sønderby
et al., 2016; Razavi et al., 2019). While a conventional VAE
assumes a fully factorised Gaussian prior over the latent
variables to enable amortised inference, this assumption can
be overly restrictive in many real-world scenarios involving

To address this limitation, one line of research explores
specific kernel structures, such as certain Matérn families
(Zhu et al., 2023) and low-rank kernels (Casale et al., 2018).
While effective in addressing scalability challenges, these
approaches are constrained by their narrow kernel choices.
Other scalable GPVAE variants have been proposed, notably
using inducing points (Ashman et al., 2020; Jazbec et al.,
2021), a small set of pseudo-points that approximates the GP
posterior. These methods, however, may require numerous
inducing points in rapidly varying data or encounter difficulties in optimising the inducing points (Wu et al., 2022).
Moreover, fully Bayesian extensions using sampling-based
methods offer good uncertainty calibration but often require
longer runtime for sufficient samples (Tran et al., 2023).

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. Correspondence to: Xinxing Shi
<xinxing.shi@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk>, Xiaoyu Jiang <xiaoyu.jiang@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk>, Mauricio A. Álvarez
<mauricio.alvarezlopez@manchester.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

