OneForecast: A Universal Framework for Global and Regional
Weather Forecasting
Yuan Gao * 1 Hao Wu * 1 2 3 Ruiqi Shu * 1 Huanshuo Dong 3 Fan Xu 3 Rui Ray Chen 4 Yibo Yan 5 6
Qingsong Wen 7 Xuming Hu 5 6 Kun Wang 8 Jiahao Wu 9 Qing Li 9 Hui Xiong 5 6 Xiaomeng Huang 1

Abstract
Accurate weather forecasts are important for disaster prevention, agricultural planning, etc. Traditional numerical weather prediction (NWP) methods offer physically interpretable high-accuracy
predictions but are computationally expensive and
fail to fully leverage rapidly growing historical
data. In recent years, deep learning models have
made significant progress in weather forecasting,
but challenges remain, such as balancing global
and regional high-resolution forecasts, excessive
smoothing in extreme event predictions, and insufficient dynamic system modeling. To address
these issues, this paper proposes a global-regional
nested weather forecasting framework (OneForecast) based on graph neural networks. By combining a dynamic system perspective with multi-grid
theory, we construct a multi-scale graph structure and densify the target region to capture local high-frequency features. We introduce an
adaptive messaging mechanism, using dynamic
gating units to deeply integrate node and edge
features for more accurate extreme event forecasting. For high-resolution regional forecasts,
we propose a neural nested grid method to mitigate boundary information loss. Experimental results show that OneForecast performs excellently
across global to regional scales and short-term to
long-term forecasts, especially in extreme event
predictions. Codes link: https://github.
com/YuanGao-YG/OneForecast.

Figure 1. Forecast results of extreme typhoons. (a) OneForecast’s
predicted wind speed for Typhoon Molva (2020) at 850 hPa pressure level with a 60-hour lead time. (b)–(c) the predicted cyclone
tracks of Typhoon Yagi (2018) and Typhoon Molva (2020) using
different models

1. Introduction
Accurate weather forecasting is crucial for disaster prevention, optimizing agriculture and energy planning, and ensuring water resource management (Chen et al., 2023a; Pathak
et al., 2022; Ahmed et al., 2021). Traditional Numerical
Weather Prediction (NWP) methods (Bauer et al., 2015) rely
on the numerical solution of atmospheric dynamic equations (Achatz et al., 2023; Buzzicotti et al., 2023), ensuring
consistency across spatiotemporal scales from a physical
perspective. However, with the growing volume of observational and historical data, and the increasing demand for
high-resolution and long-term forecasts, NWP methods often struggle with computational costs and fail to fully leverage the potential value of vast data.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Earth System Science,
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Earth System Modeling, Institute for Global Change Studies, Tsinghua University
2
TEG, Tencent 3 Department and Computer and Science, University of Science and Technology of China 4 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 5 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, The HongKong University of
Science and Technology 6 AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 7 Squirrel Ai Learning
8
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University 9 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University. Correspondence to: Xiaomeng Huang
<hxm@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Recent developments in deep learning (DL) models offer
new perspectives for weather forecasting. Early spatiotemporal prediction algorithms (Wu et al., 2024a), such
as ConvLSTM (Shi et al., 2015) and PredRNN (Wang
et al., 2022), focus on regional precipitation. Recent largescale scientific computing models, like Pangu-weather (Bi
et al., 2023), GraphCast (Lam et al., 2023), and NowcastNet (Zhang et al., 2023), achieve significant results in
medium- and short-term forecasts and show high potential
in extreme event prediction (e.g., precipitation and Typhoon
track prediction) (Chen et al., 2024; Espeholt et al., 2022;
Gong et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024b). However, pure AI

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

