GrokFormer: Graph Fourier Kolmogorov-Arnold Transformers

Guoguo Ai 1 * Guansong Pang 2 Hezhe Qiao 2 Yuan Gao 1 Hui Yan 1 †

Abstract

ness, popular GNNs are often limited by issues like oversmoothing (Oono & Suzuki, 2020) and over-squashing (Topping et al., 2022). On the other hand, graph Transformers
(GTs) use a Transformer-based architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) to learn graph representations. Due to its strong capability in capturing long-range dependencies among graph
nodes, it offers a potential solution to address the issues in
popular GNNs.

Graph Transformers (GTs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in graph representation
learning over popular graph neural networks
(GNNs). However, self–attention, the core module of GTs, preserves only low-frequency signals in graph features, leading to ineffectiveness
in capturing other important signals like highfrequency ones. Some recent GT models help
alleviate this issue, but their flexibility and expressiveness are still limited since the filters they learn
are fixed on predefined graph spectrum or spectral order. To tackle this challenge, we propose a
Graph Fourier Kolmogorov-Arnold Transformer
(GrokFormer), a novel GT model that learns
highly expressive spectral filters with adaptive
graph spectrum and spectral order through a
Fourier series modeling over learnable activation functions. We demonstrate theoretically and
empirically that the proposed GrokFormer filter offers better expressiveness than other spectral methods. Comprehensive experiments on
11 real-world node classification datasets across
various domains, scales, and graph properties,
as well as 5 graph classification datasets, show
that GrokFormer outperforms state-of-the-art GTs
and GNNs. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/GGA23/GrokFormer.

One key ingredient to successful GTs is to effectively integrate topological structure information into the Transformer
network. This may be achieved by various position encoding methods such as Laplacian vectors and random walks
(Zhang et al., 2020; Dwivedi & Bresson, 2020; Kreuzer
et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021). Other information such as graph distances and path embeddings can
also be incorporated into GTs through their attention mechanism to improve the performance (Maziarka et al., 2020;
Ying et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Choromanski et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2024). However, despite the remarkable
success in graph representation learning, their performance
can be severely limited by the inherent low-pass nature
of the self-attention module, since it only preserves lowfrequency signals that highlight similarity between nodes
(Bastos et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022). This
prevents GTs from capturing other important frequency signals, e.g., high-frequency signals that highlight difference
between nodes, which can be crucial for learning complex
relationships of nodes in diverse graphs.
To address this issue, inspired by polynomial GNNs (e.g.,
ChebyNet (Defferrard et al., 2016), GPRGNN(Chien et al.,
2021), BernNet(He et al., 2021),JacobiConv (Wang &
Zhang, 2022)) and A2GCN (Ai et al., 2024), some recent
methods are dedicated to capturing various frequency signals by order-K polynomial approximation. For example,
FeTA (Bastos et al., 2022) and PolyFormer (Ma et al., 2024)
learn the coefficients for order-K polynomial bases (e.g.,
Chebyshev, Monomial, or Bernstein basis) through the selfattention mechanism. However, these polynomial filters are
typically approximated via K predefined bases with specific
frequency responses as illustrated in Figure 1(a), and thus,
they have a receptive field of size K in information passing,
leading to a locality modeling and limited flexibility and
expressivity. Consequently, they are often unable to fit complicated graph filters well, as shown by the failure of the

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), which jointly encode graph
structures and node features, have been emerging as an effective generic tool for graph-structured learning problems
(Yi et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2024). Despite their effective*
The work was partly done when Guoguo Ai visited Singapore
Management University. 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
China 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore
Management University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Hui Yan
<yanhui@njust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

