NETS: A Non-Equilibrium Transport Sampler

Michael S. Albergo 1 2 Eric Vanden-Eijnden 3 4

Abstract

to Bayesian inference (Neal, 1993), becomes particularly
challenging for non-log-concave targets. In such cases, traditional ergodic sampling methods based on Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) or Langevin dynamics often exhibit
prohibitively slow convergence rates.

We introduce the Non-Equilibrium Transport
Sampler (NETS), an algorithm for sampling from
unnormalized probability distributions. NETS
builds on non-equilibrium sampling strategies that
transport a simple base distribution into the target distribution in finite time, as pioneered in
Neal’s annealed importance sampling (AIS). In
the continuous-time setting, this transport is accomplished by evolving walkers using Langevin
dynamics with a time-dependent potential, while
simultaneously evolving importance weights to
debias their solutions following Jarzynski’s equality. The key innovation of NETS is to add to
the dynamics a learned drift term that offsets the
need for these corrective weights by minimizing
their variance through an objective that can be
estimated without backpropagation and provably
bounds the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
the estimated and target distributions. NETS provides unbiased samples and features a tunable
diffusion coefficient that can be adjusted after
training to maximize the effective sample size.
In experiments on standard benchmarks, highdimensional Gaussian mixtures, and statistical lattice field theory models, NETS shows compelling
performances.

An alternative approach offered by non-equilibrium sampling strategies is to transport samples on non-stationary
distributions that evolve from a simple base distribution
(e.g., a normal distribution) to the target in finite time. Methods like Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS) (Neal, 2001),
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) (Del Moral, 1997; Doucet
et al., 2001), and their continuous-time variants based on
Jarzynski’s equality (Hartmann et al., 2018) achieve this
transport through a dynamical quench, using importance
weights to correct for the bias arising when the walkers’
distribution lags behind their evolving target. However,
these methods can fail when the lag is too strong, leading to
high-variance weights.
We address this limitation by modifying the dynamics via
some additional transport learned to guide toward the target.
In the context of quenches performed via Langevin dynamics on an evolving potential, we show that an optimal drift
can be added to eliminate the need for importance weights
entirely, and can be characterized as the minimizer of objective functions amenable to empirical estimation. This leads
to an unbiased sampling strategy where importance weights,
while still available for exact correction, have substantially
reduced variance due to the improved transport.

1. Introduction

In sum, our work makes the following main contributions:

The aim of this paper is to sample probability distributions
on Rd known only up to normalization. This problem,
central to applications from statistical physics (Faulkner
& Livingstone, 2023; Wilson, 1974; Hénin et al., 2022)

• We introduce the Non-Equilibrium Transport Sampler
(NETS), which augments Langevin dynamics on an
evolving potential with learned transport. We show that
the method remains unbiased through a generalization
of Jarzynski’s equality, and that it can be used in concert
with sequential Monte-Carlo (SMC) strategies.

1

Society of Fellows, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Machine Learning Lab, Capital
Fund Management, Paris, France 4 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Michael
S. Albergo <malbergo@fas.harvard.edu>, Eric Vanden-Eijnden
<eve2@cims.nyu.edu>.
2

• We demonstrate that the optimal drift for this additional
transport minimizes an objective function, based on
physics-informed neural networks (PINN), whose gradient can be estimated without backpropagating through
the sampling equations.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We show that the PINN objective has two key properties:
1

