Anytime-Constrained Equilibria in Polynomial Time

Jeremy McMahan 1

Abstract

2022; Wiering, 2000). Despite their relevance, anytime constraints have yet to be studied in the multi-agent setting,
which we remedy in this work.

We extend anytime constraints to the Markov
game setting and the corresponding solution concept of anytime-constrained equilibrium (ACE).
Then, we present a comprehensive theory of
anytime-constrained equilibria that includes (1)
a computational characterization of feasible policies, (2) a fixed-parameter tractable algorithm for
computing ACE, and (3) a polynomial-time algorithm for approximately computing ACE. Since
computing a feasible policy is NP-hard even
for two-player zero-sum games, our approximation guarantees are the best possible so long as
P ̸= N P . We also develop the first theory of efficient computation for action-constrained Markov
games, which may be of independent interest.

Formally, we consider a constrained Markov game (cMG)
G with a budget vector B. A joint policy π satisfies an
anytime constraint if every player i’s accumulated cost is at
Ph
most Bi at all times: PπG [∀h ∈ [H],
t=1 ci,t ≤ Bi ] = 1.
Given such a constraint, the natural solution concept is the
anytime-constrained equilibrium (ACE). At a high level, an
ACE is a feasible joint policy π for which no player can
gain a higher value from any feasible deviation. Our main
question is as follows:
For what class of cMGs can ACE be computed
(approximately) in polynomial time?
Already in the single-agent setting, McMahan and Zhu
(2024) showed computing optimal anytime-constrained
policies is NP-hard. The situation for games is even
worse: we show that even for simple two-player zero-sum
anytime-constrained MGs, computing a feasible policy is
NP-hard. Furthermore, as shown in (McMahan and Zhu,
2024), expectation-constrained policies can arbitrarily violate anytime constraints, implying that standard expectationconstrained approaches fail. Moreover, even for expectationconstrained MGs, efficient algorithms are unknown outside
of regret settings (Chen et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2023),
which have different constraint requirements. Lastly, typical distributed learning and self-play approaches fail since
the feasibility of a player’s action generally depends on the
choices of others.

1. Introduction
Although multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
made many breakthroughs in game-playing, the literature
has long since advocated the importance of constraints in
real-world applications (Gu et al., 2023b). Despite their importance, the literature on constrained MARL is far behind
the state-of-the-art in the single-agent setting. Most recently,
almost-sure (Castellano et al., 2022) and anytime (McMahan
and Zhu, 2024; McMahan, 2024) constraints have emerged
in the single-agent setting to capture real-world scenarios,
such as medical applications (Coronato et al., 2020; Paragliola et al., 2018; Kolesar, 1970), disaster relief scenarios (Fan
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2019; Tsai et al., 2019), and resource management (Mao et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018; Peng
and Shen, 2021; Bhatia et al., 2021). However, many of
these motivating applications are actually multi-agent problems. Most obviously, anytime-compliant autonomous vehicles (McMahan and Zhu, 2024; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016;
Wu et al., 2019) must interact with other vehicles, which is
a key aspect of MARL (Chu et al., 2020; Dinneweth et al.,

Past Work. The only known efficient algorithms for anytime constraints also fail to generalize to the multi-agent
setting. The approach designed in (McMahan, 2024) only
applies to one constraint. On the other hand, the approach
from (McMahan and Zhu, 2024) requires state augmentation and state-dependent action spaces. Although simple in
the single-agent setting, the coupled nature of the players’
constraints induces state-dependent action spaces that do
not form product spaces. Consequently, each stage game becomes a non-normal-form game for which efficient solvers
are unknown. Moreover, their approach utilizes a relaxed
augmented-state space that relies on −∞ to identify infeasible states. However, the non-uniqueness of equilibria in

1

Department of Computer Science, University of WisconsinMadison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to: Jeremy McMahan
<jmcmahan@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

