Beyond CVaR: Leveraging Static Spectral Risk Measures for Enhanced
Decision-Making in Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Mehrdad Moghimi 1 Hyejin Ku 1

Abstract

can stem from changing the objective from expectation to
other risk measures such as the Conditional Value-at-Risk
(Bäuerle & Ott, 2011), coherent risk measures (Tamar et al.,
2017), convex risk measures (Coache & Jaimungal, 2023),
and Entropic-VaR (Ni & Lai, 2022). Another approach is
limiting the worst-case scenarios by using constraints such
as variance (Tamar et al., 2012) or dynamic risk measures
(Chow & Pavone, 2013) in the optimization problem.

In domains such as finance, healthcare, and
robotics, managing worst-case scenarios is critical, as failure to do so can lead to catastrophic
outcomes. Distributional Reinforcement Learning (DRL) provides a natural framework to incorporate risk sensitivity into decision-making processes. However, existing approaches face two
key limitations: (1) the use of fixed risk measures
at each decision step often results in overly conservative policies, and (2) the interpretation and
theoretical properties of the learned policies remain unclear. While optimizing a static risk measure addresses these issues, its use in the DRL
framework has been limited to the simple static
CVaR risk measure. In this paper, we present a
novel DRL algorithm with convergence guarantees that optimizes for a broader class of static
Spectral Risk Measures (SRM). Additionally, we
provide a clear interpretation of the learned policy
by leveraging the distribution of returns in DRL
and the decomposition of static coherent risk measures. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our model learns policies aligned with the SRM
objective, and outperforms existing risk-neutral
and risk-sensitive DRL models in various settings.

Another area of research that has gained attention for risksensitive RL (RSRL) is Distributional RL (DRL) (Morimura
et al., 2010; Bellemare et al., 2017). This paradigm diverges
from the traditional RL by estimating the return distribution instead of its expected value. DRL algorithms not
only demonstrate notable improvements compared to conventional RL methods but also enable a variety of new approaches to risk mitigation. In this context, a few risk measures such as CVaR (Stanko & Macek, 2019; Keramati et al.,
2020), distortion risk measure (Dabney et al., 2018a), Entropic risk measure (Liang & Luo, 2024), or static Lipschitz
risk measure (Chen et al., 2024) have been explored.
In the DRL framework, applying a fixed risk measure at each
step leads to policies that are optimized for neither static
nor dynamic risk measures (Lim & Malik, 2022). In this
case, action selection at different states are not necessarily
aligned with each other, which can lead to policies that are
sub-optimal with respect to the agent’s risk preference. This
issue, known as time inconsistency, is a common challenge
in risk-sensitive decision-making (Shapiro et al., 2014). Intuitively, this misalignment can be understood as the fact
that finding optimal policies starting from different states
can yield different and inconsistent policies. To mitigate
this, dynamic risk measures were introduced (Ruszczyński,
2010), which evaluate risk at each time step, unlike static
risk measures that assess risk over entire episodes. However,
dynamic risk measures are difficult to interpret, limiting
their practical applicability (Majumdar & Pavone, 2020;
Gagne & Dayan, 2022).

1. Introduction
In traditional Reinforcement Learning (RL), the goal is to
find a policy that maximizes the expected return (Sutton
& Barto, 2018). However, considering the variations in
rewards and addressing the worst-case scenarios are critical
in some fields such as healthcare or finance. A risk-averse
policy can help address the reward uncertainty arising from
the stochasticity of the environment. This risk aversion
1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, York University, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Hyejin Ku
<hku@yorku.ca>.

Optimizing static risk measures is more interpretable since it
can be described as finding the policy that gives the best possible outcome in the worst-case scenario. However, unlike
dynamic risk measures, the risk preference that the policy
optimizes for at later stages is unclear. Traditionally, calcu-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

