Diverse Prototypical Ensembles Improve Robustness to Subpopulation Shift

Minh Nguyen Nhat To 1 2 Paul F R Wilson 3 Viet Nguyen 4 Mohamed Harmanani 3 Michael Cooper 4
Fahimeh Fooladgar 1 Purang Abolmaesumi 1 Parvin Mousavi 3 2 Rahul G. Krishnan 4 2

Abstract

tween training and target distributions. The study quantitatively categorized subpopulation shifts into four fundamental types: (1) Spurious Correlations – non-causal features
mistakenly influence predictions; (2) Attribute Imbalance
– certain attribute values appear more frequently than others; (3) Class Imbalance – some labels are significantly
underrepresented; and (4) Attribute Generalization – models encounter previously unseen attribute values at test time.
These distinct shift types highlight the diverse challenges of
subpopulation robustness and motivate approaches aimed at
improving worst-group performance.

Subpopulation shift, characterized by a disparity
in subpopulation distribution between the training
and target datasets, can significantly degrade the
performance of machine learning models. Current
solutions to subpopulation shift involve modifying empirical risk minimization with re-weighting
strategies to improve generalization. This strategy
relies on assumptions about the number and nature of subpopulations and annotations on group
membership, which are unavailable for many realworld datasets. Instead, we propose using an ensemble of diverse classifiers to adaptively capture
risk associated with subpopulations. Given a feature extractor network, we replace its standard
linear classification layer with a mixture of prototypical classifiers, where each member is trained
to classify the data while focusing on different
features and samples from other members. In
empirical evaluation on nine real-world datasets,
covering diverse domains and kinds of subpopulation shift, our method of Diverse Prototypical
Ensembles (DPEs) often outperforms the prior
state-of-the-art in worst-group accuracy. The
code is available at https://github.com/
minhto2802/dpe4subpop.

Naı̈ve training using empirical risk minimization (ERM)
can result in classifiers achieving good training loss but
not generalizing, performing poorly in challenging or underrepresented subpopulations (Sagawa et al., 2019; Santurkar et al., 2021). Such failures can be catastrophic in
performance-critical real-world applications such as medical
diagnostics (Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020), autonomous driving (Yu et al., 2020), and insurance risk assessment (Boodhun & Jayabalan, 2018). A commonly cited example is networks that learn to recognize pneumonia relying on hospitalspecific meta-tokens on X-ray scans due to their common
co-occurrence in training data (Zech et al., 2018), thus struggling to generalize to new data without the tags.
Methods to mitigate subpopulation shift focus on samplingbased (Idrissi et al., 2022; Kirichenko et al., 2022) or lossbased (Michel et al., 2022; Han et al., 2022; Sagawa et al.,
2020) re-weighting strategies, such as up-weighting minority subpopulations to encourage the model to learn decision boundaries that adequately classify each subpopulation
group. But these often require subgroup annotations (Rudner et al., 2024; Kirichenko et al., 2022), which are rarely
available or sufficiently granular in real-world datasets, or
explicit identification of minority groups (Liu et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022), which significantly increases complexity and training time while struggling to generalize to unseen
subgroups (Yang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The performance of machine learning models is known to
degrade substantially in the presence of distribution shifts between training and deployment (Koh et al., 2021). One common form of distribution shift is subpopulation shift (Yang
et al., 2023), where the proportions of subgroups vary be1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 School of Computing, Queen’s University,
Kingston, Canada 4 Department of Computer Science, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Minh Nguyen
Nhat To <mtrcl@student.ubc.ca>.

We propose Diversified Prototypical Ensembles (DPE). Subpopulation shifts results in model degradation because a
single classifier typically focuses on the majority classes or
subgroups over the minority ones. By turning to ensembles
we can capture multiple different decision boundaries. But

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

