Simple and Critical Iterative Denoising:
A Recasting of Discrete Diffusion in Graph Generation

Yoann Boget 1 2

Abstract

diffusion, where the noising process progressively masks
elements of an instance. The problem has been observed
in discrete sequence modeling, where techniques such as
corrector sampling have been proposed to mitigate it.

Discrete Diffusion and Flow Matching models
have significantly advanced generative modeling
for discrete structures, including graphs. However,
the dependencies between intermediate noisy
states lead to error accumulation and propagation during the reverse denoising process—a phenomenon known as compounding denoising errors. To address this problem, we propose a
novel framework called Simple Iterative Denoising, which simplifies discrete diffusion and circumvents the issue by assuming conditional independence between intermediate states. Additionally, we enhance our model by incorporating a
Critic. During generation, the Critic selectively retains or corrupts elements in an instance based on
their likelihood under the data distribution. Our
empirical evaluations demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms existing
discrete diffusion baselines in graph generation
tasks.

Figure 1: Validity rate (without correction) of generated
molecules trained on Zinc250k as a function of the Number of Function Evaluations (NFE) for three models: Discrete Diffusion (baseline), Simple Iterative Denoising (ours),
and Critical Iterative Denoising (ours).

1. Introduction
Denoising models such as Discrete Diffusion and Discrete
Flow Matching have significantly advanced generative modeling for discrete structures (Austin et al., 2021; Campbell
et al., 2022; 2024; Gat et al., 2024), including graphs (Haefeli et al., 2022; Vignac et al., 2023). Despite their success,
these models suffer from a key limitation caused by the
dependencies between intermediate noisy states in the noising and denoising processes. Errors introduced early in the
process accumulate and propagate, degrading generative
performance. This issue is particularly pronounced in mask

In graph modeling, marginal distributions over node and
edge attributes have proven to be a more suitable noise distribution than the mask distribution, as corroborated by our
experiments. However, we show both theoretically and empirically that compounding denoising errors also affects discrete diffusion and flow matching models when the marginal
distributions are used as the noise.
To address this challenge, we introduce a novel framework
called Iterative Denoising, which simplifies discrete diffusion by assuming that intermediate noisy states depend only
on the clean data, making them conditionally independent
of one another. By removing direct dependence on partially
denoised instances from previous steps, our framework facilitates error correction and substantially improves generative
performance.

1

Data Mining and Machine Learning group, School for Business Administration (HEG-Geneva), University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Western Switzerland 2 Computer Science Department, University of Geneva, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Yoann Boget <yoann.boget@hesge.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Furthermore, we show that our model can be interpreted as
selectively corrupting certain elements while leaving others
1

