GraphCL: Graph-based Clustering for Semi-Supervised Medical Image
Segmentation

Mengzhu Wang 1 Houcheng Su 2 Jiao Li 3 Chuan Li 4 Nan Yin 2 Li Shen 5 Jingcai Guo 6

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has made notable advancements in medical image segmentation (MIS), particularly in scenarios with limited labeled data and significantly enhancing data
utilization efficiency. Previous methods primarily focus on complex training strategies to utilize unlabeled data but neglect the importance
of graph structural information. Different from
existing methods, we propose a graph-based clustering for semi-supervised medical image segmentation (GraphCL) by jointly modeling graph
data structure in a unified deep model. The proposed GraphCL model enjoys several advantages.
Firstly, to the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work to model the data structure information for semi-supervised medical image segmentation (SSMIS). Secondly, to get the clustered features across different graphs, we integrate both pairwise affinities between local image
features and raw features as inputs. Extensive experimental results on three standard benchmarks
show that the proposed GraphCL algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art semi-supervised medical image segmentation methods. The source
code is available at https://github.com/
dreamkily/GraphCL

(a) Data Structure

(b) GNN Clustering

(c) Clustered Graph

Figure 1. We apply graph neural networks (GNN) to address SSMIS challenges. Specifically, we create a graph representation to
capture the data structure, and then use GNN-based clustering to
group the graphs.

However, obtaining large medical datasets with precise labels for training segmentation models is challenging, as a
substantial amount of labeled images can only be provided
by experts. This significantly limits the development of
medical image segmentation algorithms and poses substantial challenges for further research due to the scarcity of
labeled data. To address these challenges, semi-supervised
medical image segmentation (SSMIS) (Bai et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2021) has emerged as an effective
approach, enabling segmentation models to learn from a
small set of labeled examples in conjunction with easily
accessible unlabeled data.

1. Introduction

In the field of SSMIS, although labeled and unlabeled data
are theoretically expected to come from the same distribution, in practice, due to the extremely limited availability
of labeled data, it is challenging to accurately infer the true
distribution of the data. This often leads to the issue of distribution mismatch between the large amount of unlabeled
data and the small set of labeled data (Wang et al., 2019). To
address this challenge, several SSMIS techniques have been
developed. For example, BCP (Bai et al., 2023) enhances
data consistency by randomly cropping regions in labeled
images (as foreground) and pasting them onto unlabeled
images (as background), and vice versa. TI-ST (Ghamsarian et al., 2023) proposes a semi-supervised learning
strategy called transformation-invariant self-training, which

Medical image segmentation derives from computed tomography (CT) (Buzug, 2011) or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) (Glover, 2011), plays a crucial role in various clinical
applications (Tang et al., 2021a;b; Wang et al., 2024b;c;a).
1
Hebei University of Technology 2 Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology 3 University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China 4 National University of Defense Technology
5
Sun Yat-Sen University 6 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
Correspondence to: Nan Yin <yinnan8911@gmail.com>, Jingcai
Guo <jc-jingcai.guo@polyu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

