Discovering Symbolic Cognitive Models from Human and Animal Behavior

Pablo Samuel Castro 1 Nenad Tomasev 1 Ankit Anand 1 Navodita Sharma 1 Rishika Mohanta 2 3 Aparna Dev 2
Kuba Perlin 1 Siddhant Jain 1 Kyle Levin 1 Noémi Éltető 1 4 Will Dabney 1 Alexander Novikov 1
Glenn C Turner 2 Maria K Eckstein 1 Nathaniel D Daw 1 5 Kevin J Miller * 1 6 Kimberly L Stachenfeld * 1 7

Abstract
Symbolic models play a key role in cognitive science, expressing computationally precise hypotheses about how the brain implements a cognitive
process. Identifying an appropriate model typically requires a great deal of effort and ingenuity
on the part of a human scientist. Here, we adapt
FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), a recently developed tool that uses Large Language
Models (LLMs) in an evolutionary algorithm, to
automatically discover symbolic cognitive models that accurately capture human and animal behavior. We consider datasets from three species
performing a classic reward-learning task that
has been the focus of substantial modeling effort,
and find that the discovered programs outperform
state-of-the-art cognitive models for each. The
discovered programs can readily be interpreted
as hypotheses about human and animal cognition, instantiating interpretable symbolic learning
and decision-making algorithms. Broadly, these
results demonstrate the viability of using LLMpowered program synthesis to propose novel scientific hypotheses regarding mechanisms of human and animal cognition.

Figure 1. Discovered models outperform human-designed models. We evaluate the best program discovered by CogFunSearch for
each dataset, using average normalized likelihood of the choices
made by held-out test subjects, and it to the best existing model
from the neuroscience and psychology literature (all p < 0.002,
signed-rank test) Left: Human dataset and model from Eckstein
et al. (2024) Center: Rat dataset and model from Miller et al.
(2021) Right: Fruit fly dataset from (Mohanta, 2022; Rajagopalan
et al., 2023), model from Ito & Doya (2009).

1. Introduction
Symbolic cognitive models are used in neuroscience and
psychology to instantiate precise, mechanistic hypotheses
about the processes used by the brain to control behavior
(Daw et al., 2011; Corrado & Doya, 2007; O’Doherty et al.,
2007). These models readily afford interpretation: internal variables like “prediction error” or “forgetting rate” are
meaningful in their own right, and suggest possible implementations in the brain. This ease of interpretation has made
symbolic models a key tool in understanding how brains
produce behavior.

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA,
USA 3 Laboratory of Neurophysiology and Behavior, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA 4 Max Planck Institute
for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Gernamy 5 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
6
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London, United
Kingdom 7 Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Kevin Miller <kevinjmiller@deepmind.com>, Kimberly Stachenfeld <stachenfeld@deepmind.com>.

The development of such models has historically been a
hypothesis-first process, in which researchers draw on inspiration from the literature and individual human creativity
to specify a model, and then refine it to match the idiosyncrasies of behavior. A limitation of this approach is that
the space of symbolic models is vast, and it is far from certain that the best possible model for a dataset is one that
researchers will have considered (Daw et al., 2011; Wilson
& Collins, 2019). Indeed, recent work has used comparisons
to flexible recurrent neural networks (RNNs; Dezfouli et al.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

