Physics-Informed Generative Modeling of Wireless Channels

Benedikt Böck 1 Andreas Oeldemann 2 Timo Mayer 2 Francesco Rossetto 2 Wolfgang Utschick 1
(Meinilä et al., 2009) families are physically oriented and
combine physics with statistical channel properties. These
models use the laws of electromagnetic wave propagation
to describe channels as a function of the corresponding
physical parameters (directions of arrival (DoAs), delays,
etc.), which in turn are characterized statistically. These
characteristics are calibrated and evaluated by real-world
measurement campaigns in different propagation scenarios
such as indoor, outdoor, urban, and rural (Yin & Cheng,
2016). While these models characterize channels in generic
scenarios and are widely accepted in the communication
community, they also exhibit considerable drawbacks.

Abstract
Learning the site-specific distribution of the wireless channel within a particular environment of
interest is essential to exploit the full potential of
machine learning (ML) for wireless communications and radar applications. Generative modeling offers a promising framework to address this
problem. However, existing approaches pose unresolved challenges, including the need for highquality training data, limited generalizability, and
a lack of physical interpretability. To address
these issues, we combine the physics-related compressibility of wireless channels with generative
modeling, in particular, sparse Bayesian generative modeling (SBGM), to learn the distribution of
the underlying physical channel parameters. By
leveraging the sparsity-inducing characteristics of
SBGM, our methods can learn from compressed
observations received by an access point (AP) during default online operation. Moreover, they are
physically interpretable and generalize over system configurations without requiring retraining.

Due to their broad categorization into generic scenario types,
such as indoor and outdoor, these channel models cannot
represent the site-specific characteristics of particular environments. This limits their use in ML-aided wireless communications, where site-specific channel realizations are
critical for training (Kim et al., 2023). The emerging variety
of use cases in communications, such as millimeter wave,
unmanned aerial vehicles, high-speed train, ultra-massive
multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO), joint communications and sensing, and Internet of Things communications,
all exhibit their own unique requirements for accurate channel modeling and impose open challenges for measurement
campaigns and channel sounders (Wang et al., 2020). Additionally, the improved accuracy of physically oriented
channel models over time made it more difficult to directly
use them in real-time processing tasks, resulting in an undesired accuracy-simplicity trade-off (Imoize et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The accurate modeling of wireless channels is critical for
system design, network optimization, and performance evaluation in wireless communications and radar (Wang et al.,
2018; 2020; Yin & Cheng, 2016). There are two approaches
to wireless channel modeling: physically and analytically
oriented (Almers et al., 2007). The former integrates the
underlying physics in the description of wireless channels
and focuses on their accuracy and realism. In contrast, the
latter captures channel statistics, ignoring the underlying
physics, and provides an easy-to-use framework for evaluation and system design schemes (Almers et al., 2007; Imoize
et al., 2021). Standardized channel models such as the
3GPP (3GPP, 2024a), COST (Liu et al., 2012) or WINNER

One physically oriented alternative is ray tracing, which
models the channel purely deterministically. Ray tracing
is a technique to simulate the electromagnetic wave propagation in specific scenarios (Hofmann, 1990). Ray tracing
for channel modeling requires a 3D digital replica of the
scenario and an accurate characterization of the materials
within the scene (Geok et al., 2018; McKown & Hamilton,
1991; Yun & Iskander, 2015). Commercial ray tracing tools
like WirelessInside (Remcom) use databases to determine
the material properties, requiring full environmental knowledge. To address this limitation, differentiable ray tracing is
studied in (Gan et al., 2014; Hoydis et al., 2024; Orekondy
et al., 2023), enabling the learning of material properties
from data. On the downside, high-quality channel state
information (CSI) must be acquired for training in each

1

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 2 Rohde &
Schwarz, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Benedikt Böck
<benedikt.boeck@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

