SAeUron: Interpretable Concept Unlearning in Diffusion Models with
Sparse Autoencoders

Bartosz Cywiński 1 Kamil Deja 1 2 3

Abstract

„Flowers in
Cartoon style”

Diffusion models, while powerful, can inadvertently generate harmful or undesirable content,
raising significant ethical and safety concerns. Recent machine unlearning approaches offer potential solutions but often lack transparency, making
it difficult to understand the changes they introduce to the base model. In this work, we introduce SAeUron, a novel method leveraging features learned by sparse autoencoders (SAEs) to
remove unwanted concepts in text-to-image diffusion models. First, we demonstrate that SAEs,
trained in an unsupervised manner on activations
from multiple denoising timesteps of the diffusion
model, capture sparse and interpretable features
corresponding to specific concepts. Building on
this, we propose a feature selection method that
enables precise interventions on model activations
to block targeted content while preserving overall
performance. Our evaluation shows that SAeUron outperforms existing approaches on the UnlearnCanvas benchmark for concepts and style unlearning, and effectively eliminates nudity when
evaluated with I2P. Moreover, we show that with
a single SAE, we can remove multiple concepts
simultaneously and that in contrast to other methods, SAeUron mitigates the possibility of generating unwanted content under adversarial attack.
Code and checkpoints are available at GitHub.

„Flowers in
Magic Cube style”

SAE Encoder

Cartoon features shall not pass!

SAE Decoder

„Flowers in
Cartoon style”

„Flowers in
Magic Cube style”

Figure 1. Concept unlearning in SAeUron. We localize and remove SAE features corresponding to the unwanted concept (Cartoon) while preserving the overall performance of the diffusion
model.

2022; Schramowski et al., 2023) or copyrighted images
e.g. cloning the artistic styles without consent (Andersen,
2024). The straightforward solution to this problem is to
retrain the model from scratch with curated data. However,
such an approach, due to the enormous sizes of the training datasets is both costly and impractical. As a result, a
growing number of works focus on removing the influence
of unwanted data from already pre-trained text-to-image
diffusion models through machine unlearning (MU).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020) have revolutionized generative modeling, enabling the creation of highly realistic images. Despite
their success, these models can inadvertently generate undesirable and harmful content, pornography (Rando et al.,
1

Warsaw University of Technology 2 IDEAS NCBR 3 IDEAS
Research Institute. Correspondence to: Bartosz Cywiński <bcywinski11@gmail.com>.

Most existing methods build on the basic idea of fine-tuning
the model while using negative gradients for selected unwanted samples (Wu et al., 2024; Gandikota et al., 2023;
Heng & Soh, 2024; Kumari et al., 2023). To minimize degradation in the overall model’s performance, recent techniques

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

