Instruction-Following Pruning for Large Language Models

Bairu Hou 1 2 ⋆ Qibin Chen 1 Jianyu Wang 1 Guoli Yin 1 Chong Wang 1 Nan Du 1
Ruoming Pang 1 Shiyu Chang 2 Tao Lei 1

Abstract

Once the mask is optimized, the resulting mask is fixed,
allowing deployment of a smaller, pruned model. However,
the fixed nature of the pruned model poses challenges in realworld inference scenarios, where tasks can vary significantly,
for instance, coding, mathematics, or domain-specific requirements, each demanding distinct skills and knowledge
from the original language model. A static pruned model
may struggle to balance inference efficiency with high performance across diverse tasks.

With the rapid scaling of large language models
(LLMs), structured pruning has become a widely
used technique to learn efficient, smaller models from larger ones, delivering superior performance compared to training similarly sized models from scratch. In this paper, we move beyond
the traditional static pruning approach of determining a fixed pruning mask for a model, and
propose a dynamic approach to structured pruning. In our method, the pruning mask is inputdependent and adapts dynamically based on the
information described in a user instruction. Our
approach, termed “instruction-following pruning”,
introduces a sparse mask predictor that takes the
user instruction as input and dynamically selects
the most relevant model parameters for the given
task. To identify and activate effective parameters,
we jointly optimize the sparse mask predictor and
the LLM, leveraging both instruction-following
data and the pre-training corpus. Experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a wide range of evaluation benchmarks.
For example, our 3B activated model improves
over the 3B dense model by 5-8 points of absolute
margin on domains such as math and coding, and
rivals the performance of a 9B model.

Given this, we explore a paradigm shift from static pruning
masks to dynamic ones, addressing the central question:
Can LLMs learn to select the most suited parameters
based on the task description?
We aim to automatically generate input-specific pruning
masks tailored to the tasks described in user prompts. This
dynamic, context-aware pruning mechanism enables the
language model to perform inference using only the parameters necessary for the task, offering a compelling balance
between efficiency and expressivity compared to using a
static dense model. Moreover, because the parameters are
selected and fixed, our method avoids reloading new parameters during the decoding process. This design choice
contrasts with other dynamic methods such as contextual
sparsity (Liu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024) and mixture-ofexperts (Lepikhin et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2022; Dai et al.,
2024), which load different parameters at each decoding
step, leading to significant weight loading costs. Our design
is particularly suited for on-device models (e.g. smartphones
and laptops), where the inference typically samples a few responses given the same user query (or the same task). In this
case, the same activated parameters are selected and cached
as a dense model, therefore achieving the same speedup as
the static pruning.

1. Introduction
Structured pruning techniques have become a widely
adopted method for reducing the inference cost of large language models (Wang et al., 2020; Sreenivas et al., 2024; Muralidharan et al., 2024; Meta AI, 2024). These methods typically optimize a binary mask over language model parameters to minimize either language modeling or task-specific
loss (Xia et al., 2024; Sreenivas et al., 2024; Meta AI, 2024).

To address the central question, we present InstructionFollowing Pruning (IFP RUNING), a method that integrates
a sparsity predictor with the language model to dynamically
generate input-dependent pruning masks, as illustrated in
Figure 1. Specifically, we focus on structured pruning of
the feed-forward neural network layers, where entire rows
or columns of the weight matrices are pruned (Xia et al.,
2024; Gunter et al., 2024; Sreenivas et al., 2024). The user

⋆

Work done while interning at Apple. 1 Apple AI/ML 2 UC Santa
Barbara. Correspondence to: Bairu Hou <bairu@ucsb.edu>, Tao
Lei <tao lei2@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

