Near-Optimal Decision Trees in a SPLIT Second

Varun Babbar * 1 Hayden McTavish * 1 Cynthia Rudin 1 Margo Seltzer 2

Abstract
Decision tree optimization is fundamental to interpretable machine learning. The most popular
approach is to greedily search for the best feature
at every decision point, which is fast but provably
suboptimal. Recent approaches find the global
optimum using branch and bound with dynamic
programming, showing substantial improvements
in accuracy and sparsity at great cost to scalability. An ideal solution would have the accuracy of an optimal method and the scalability of
a greedy method. We introduce a family of algorithms called SPLIT (SParse Lookahead for Interpretable Trees) that moves us significantly forward in achieving this ideal balance. We demonstrate that not all sub-problems need to be solved
to optimality to find high quality trees; greediness
suffices near the leaves. Since each depth adds an
exponential number of possible trees, this change
makes our algorithms orders of magnitude faster
than existing optimal methods, with negligible
loss in performance. We extend this algorithm to
allow scalable computation of sets of near-optimal
trees (i.e., the Rashomon set).

Figure 1. An illustration of the power of our optimization algorithm. We train 3 decision trees on the Bike dataset, with the
aim of predicting bike rentals in Washington DC in a given time
period. A greedy tree is fast but suboptimal. An optimal tree is
well performing but very slow. Our algorithm strikes the perfect
balance, providing well performing trees in a SPLIT second, orders
of magnitude faster than optimal approaches seen in literature.

Optimizing the performance of decision trees while preserving their simplicity presents a significant challenge. Traditional greedy methods scale linearly with both dataset size
and the number of features (Breiman, 1984; Quinlan, 2014).
However, these methods tend to yield suboptimal results,
lacking general guarantees on either sparsity or accuracy.
Recent advances in decision tree algorithms use dynamic
programming techniques combined with branch-and-bound
strategies, offering solutions that are faster than brute-force
approaches and provably optimal (Lin et al., 2020; Aglin
et al., 2020; Demirović et al., 2022; McTavish et al., 2022).
In fact, Demirović et al. (2022) and van der Linden et al.
(2024) reveal an average gap of 1-2 percentage points between greedy and optimal trees, with Demirović et al. (2022)
showing that some datasets can exhibit gaps as large as 10
percentage points. These algorithms struggle to scale to
datasets with hundreds or thousands of features or to deeper
trees. It seems that we should return to greedy methods
for larger-scale problems, but this would come at a loss of
performance. Ideally, we should leverage greed only when
it does not significantly deviate from optimality and use
dynamic programming otherwise. Dynamic programming

1. Introduction
Decision tree optimization is core to interpretable machine
learning (Rudin et al., 2022). Simple decision trees present
the entire model reasoning process transparently, directly
allowing faithful interpretations of the model (Arrieta et al.,
2020). This helps users choose whether to trust the model
and to critically examine any perceived flaws.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Duke
University, Durham, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to: Varun <varun.babbar@duke.edu>, Hayden <hayden.mctavish@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
Code for our algorithms and experiments can be found at
https://github.com/VarunBabbar/SPLIT-ICML.

1

