Position: Supervised Classifiers Answer the Wrong Questions for OOD Detection

Yucen Lily Li 1 Daohan Lu 1 Polina Kirichenko 1 Shikai Qiu 1 Tim G. J. Rudner 1 C. Bayan Bruss 2
Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

accents (Amodei et al., 2016; Jung et al., 2021; Niu et al.,
2016; Zhou et al., 2022; Koh et al., 2021). These settings
highlight the importance of building models which are robust to natural transformations (Hendrycks and Dietterich,
2018; Mintun et al., 2021; Benton et al., 2020).

To detect distribution shifts and improve model
safety, many out-of-distribution (OOD) detection methods rely on the predictive uncertainty
or features of supervised models trained on indistribution data. In this position paper, we critically re-examine this popular family of OOD detection procedures, and we argue that these methods are fundamentally answering the wrong questions for OOD detection. There is no simple fix to
this misalignment, since a classifier trained only
on in-distribution classes cannot be expected to
identify OOD points; for instance, a cat-dog classifier may confidently misclassify an airplane if it
contains features that distinguish cats from dogs,
despite generally appearing nothing alike. We
find that uncertainty-based methods incorrectly
conflate high uncertainty with being OOD, while
feature-based methods incorrectly conflate far
feature-space distance with being OOD. We show
how these pathologies manifest as irreducible errors in OOD detection and identify common settings where these methods are ineffective. Additionally, interventions to improve OOD detection
such as feature-logit hybrid methods, scaling of
model and data size, epistemic uncertainty representation, and outlier exposure also fail to address
this fundamental misalignment in objectives.

1

However, rather than generalizing to natural distribution
shifts, it has become popular to detect out-of-distribution
(OOD) data by training a supervised predictive model on
in-distribution data and examining the model’s uncertainty,
logits, or features. A proliferation of works develop such
procedures for detection improvements on known benchmarks (e.g., Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016; Lee et al., 2018;
Ren et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2019a; Liang et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2021), or propose new benchmarks (e.g.,
Hendrycks et al., 2019a; Yang et al., 2024b; Wang et al.,
2022; Bitterwolf et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2021).
Although various limitations of OOD detection methods
have been noted, these critiques typically focus on specialized concerns in three distinct categories: (1) issues which
motivate minor modifications to existing procedures, such
as replacing max softmax with max logit (Hendrycks et al.,
2019a), or interventions like Bayesian uncertainty and ensembling (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), and outlier exposure (Papadopoulos et al., 2021); (2) criticism of the benchmarks used for detection, such as the conflation of semantic
and covariate shift (Yang et al., 2024b)); (3) limitations of
specialized models, such inductive biases of coupling layers
in normalizing flows (Kirichenko et al., 2020).
By contrast, we do not claim that OOD detection can be
solved with better scoring rules, datasets, or models. Instead,
we argue that the entire premise of using supervised models trained on in-distribution data for out-of-distribution
detection is fundamentally flawed — a wholly misspecified enterprise, with no easy fix. We demonstrate that essentially all known OOD detection procedures are answering a
fundamentally different question than “is this point drawn
from a different distribution?”, and so there is a conceptual
misalignment which prevents effective OOD detection.

Introduction

In the real world, distribution shifts are the norm rather than
the exception. Predictive models are commonly deployed
on test data which are drawn from distributions which differ from the training data, such as images acquired from
different machines and hospitals, lane boundary detection
in different cities, and speech recognition with different
1

New York University 2 Capital One. Correspondence to: Yucen
Lily Li <yucenli@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson
<andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.

This mismatch becomes especially apparent when detecting
the semantic shifts associated with previously unseen classes
(Yang et al., 2024b). In these cases, supervised models
should not be expected to have the necessary information for

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

