Progressively Label Enhancement for Large Language Model Alignment

Biao Liu 1 2 Ning Xu 1 2 Xin Geng 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models, such as the LLama series (Touvron
et al., 2023) and OpenAI’s GPT series (Floridi & Chiriatti,
2020; OpenAI, 2023), have demonstrated their powerful
capabilities across various language tasks, including translation (Zhang et al., 2023), summarization (Pilault et al.,
2020), and conversational interaction (Wang et al., 2023a).
In certain scenarios, they have even exhibited performance
that matches that of human experts (Ouyang et al., 2022).

Large Language Models (LLM) alignment aims to
prevent models from producing content that misaligns with human expectations, which can lead
to ethical and legal concerns. In the last few years,
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) has been the most prominent method for
achieving alignment. Due to challenges in stability and scalability with RLHF stages, which
arise from the complex interactions between multiple models, researchers are exploring alternative
methods to achieve effects comparable to those
of RLHF. However, these methods often rely on
large high-quality datasets. Despite some methods considering the generation of additional data
to expand datasets, they often treat model training
and data generation as separate and static processes, overlooking the fact that these processes
are highly interdependent, leading to inefficient
utilization of the generated data. To deal with
this problem, we propose P LE, i.e., Progressively
Label Enhancement for LLM Alignment, a framework that dynamically adjusts the model’s training process based on the evolving quality of the
generated data. Specifically, we prompt the model
to generate responses for both the original query
and a set of carefully designed principle-guided
query, and then utilize a dynamic threshold to
determine the appropriate training approach for
both responses based on their corresponding reward scores. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of P LE compared to existing LLM
alignment methods.

However, these language models may not always generate
responses as expected by humans and can even produce
content that violates human ethics or legal boundaries (Bai
et al., 2022a; Askell et al., 2021). Therefore, it is crucial for
researchers to explore the limitations of these models and
implement restrictions on output generation to ensure safety
and compliance, a process known as AI alignment.
The most prominent method for achieving AI alignment is
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
(Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022). RLHF employs Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) to
guide models using human instructions (Wang et al., 2023b;
Taori et al., 2023), followed by training a Reward Model on
human-rated outputs (Ouyang et al., 2022), and optimizing
the model with Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms
like Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al.,
2017; Askell et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022b). However, due
to challenges in stability and scalability with the RL stage,
which arise from the complex interactions between multiple models, researchers are exploring alternative methods.
For instance, LIMA (Zhou et al., 2023) has experimentally
demonstrated that when the pre-trained model’s capabilities
are sufficiently strong and the quality of the SFT data is
high, it can achieve results comparable to those of RLHF.
RAFT (Dong et al., 2023) expands the SFT dataset by generating additional samples and selecting those with high
reward scores to enhance the SFT dataset. RRHF (Yuan
et al., 2023) simplifies the RLHF process by integrating the
subsequent RL steps into the SFT phase as a regularization
term.

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. E-mail: {liubiao01, xning,
xgeng}@seu.edu.cn. 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Ning Xu <xning@seu.edu.cn>.

However, these methods are highly dependent on large
amounts of high-quality data, which is impractical in certain
applications, such as the medical field (Yang et al., 2024b;
Li et al., 2023) or chip design (Liu et al., 2023b; 2024a).

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

