Closed-loop Long-horizon Robotic Planning via Equilibrium Sequence Modeling

Jinghan Li 1 Zhicheng Sun 1 Yadong Mu 1

Abstract

poses a high-level task into mid-level actions. While this
problem requires long-horizon planning as well as consideration of environmental feedback, LLMs are often limited
by: (1) unidirectional dependency: due to autoregressive
generation, previous tokens cannot attend to future tokens,
resulting in limited ability to plan ahead (Wu et al., 2024);
(2) lack of error correction for existing outputs, unless with
a heavy system 2; (3) fixed forward process hindering the
allocation of more inference computation to further improve
planning performance. These inherent limitations of LLMs
inhibit closed-loop long-horizon robotic planning.

In the endeavor to make autonomous robots take
actions, task planning is a major challenge that
requires translating high-level task descriptions
to long-horizon action sequences. Despite recent
advances in language model agents, they remain
prone to planning errors and limited in their
ability to plan ahead. To address these limitations
in robotic planning, we advocate a self-refining
scheme that iteratively refines a draft plan until
an equilibrium is reached. Remarkably, this
process can be optimized end-to-end from an
analytical perspective without the need to curate
additional verifiers or reward models, allowing
us to train self-refining planners in a simple
supervised learning fashion. Meanwhile, a
nested equilibrium sequence modeling procedure
is devised for efficient closed-loop planning
that incorporates useful feedback from the
environment (or an internal world model). Our
method is evaluated on the VirtualHome-Env
benchmark, showing advanced performance
with improved scaling w.r.t. inference-time
computation. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Singularity0104/
equilibrium-planner.

To address the above challenges of LLM planners in closedloop long-horizon planning, we advocate the approach of
self-refinement (Welleck et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023;
Kim et al., 2023b; Madaan et al., 2023) that iteratively improves a previously generated plan. The reasons behind are
threefold: (1) bidirectional dependency: since the output
is conditioned on a previous draft plan, it can attend to all
tokens in the plan (from an old version), thus improving its
ability to plan ahead; (2) internal error correction which
allows implicit self-correction in a forward pass without
an explicit, heavy system 2; (3) dynamic computation allocation by iterating through a self-refinement process until
convergence. However, such a self-refining strategy imposes
significant training difficulties because it requires backpropagation through infinite self-refining steps (Werbos, 1990).
This may be seen as an extreme case that reflects some
of the general challenges in teaching LLMs to plan and
reason. Existing solutions include curating process supervision (Uesato et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2024) or applying
reinforcement learning (Zelikman et al., 2024; Jaech et al.,
2024; Kumar et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025), but they are
considerably more complex than supervised training and
remain unproven in the absence of efficient verifiers.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have
spurred tremendous progress in robotic planning (Huang
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2023; Driess et al.,
2023; Ahn et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023;
Hu et al., 2024). Based on their extensive world knowledge,
LLM agents seem close to autonomously performing robotic
tasks, such as in household scenarios. However, growing
evidence shows that existing LLM agents struggle with task
planning (Kaelbling & Lozano-Pérez, 2011) that decom-

This work proposes a simple supervised learning framework
for planning via self-refinement. Specifically, we formulate the self-refining process as a fixed-point problem that
recursively refines the plan until the equilibrium point, as
illustrated in Figure 1. While the forward process of this
fixed-point problem could be solved efficiently using rootfinding methods, more interestingly, its backpropagation
can be skipped since its gradient is explicated by the implicit function theorem (Krantz & Parks, 2002) as in deep
equilibrium models (Bai et al., 2019; Geng & Kolter, 2023).

1
Peking Unviersity, China. Correspondence to: Yadong Mu
<myd@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

