Linear Contextual Bandits With Interference
Yang Xu 1 Wenbin Lu 1 Rui Song 1

Abstract

is common in causal inference literature. However, in many
real-world situations, this assumption is frequently violated
due to interference, where an individual’s outcome is influenced by the actions of others (Rosenbaum, 2007).

Interference, a key concept in causal inference,
extends the reward modeling process by accounting for the impact of one unit’s actions on the rewards of others. In contextual bandit (CB) settings
where multiple units are present in the same round,
interference can significantly affect the estimation
of expected rewards for different arms, thereby influencing the decision-making process. Although
some prior work has explored multi-agent and
adversarial bandits in interference-aware settings,
how to model interference in CB remains significantly underexplored. In this paper, we introduce
a systematic framework to address interference
in Linear CB (LinCB), bridging the gap between
causal inference and online decision-making. We
propose a series of algorithms that explicitly quantify the interference effect in the reward modeling
process and provide comprehensive theoretical
guarantees, including sublinear regret bounds, finite sample upper bounds, and asymptotic properties. The effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated through simulations and synthetic data generated based on MovieLens data.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, local governments have
sought optimal personalized quarantine policies over extended periods. Here, each local government acts as an
agent capable of making decisions over time. The observed
reward, such as the number of infected individuals, reflects
the community’s health status following the application of a
specific policy. Over time, governments adjust their policies
based on the latest health status to mitigate virus spread. In
this case, one community’s health outcomes can be influenced by the quarantine policies of neighboring communities due to population movement and the nature of virus
spread, illustrating the presence of interference.
Another example is in advertising markets, where advertisers manage multiple ad lines targeting overlapping audiences through different channels. The overlap in target
consumers and the similarity between ad lines can cause
the Return on Investment (ROI) of one ad to be influenced
by the impression status of another. For instance, if one
ad targets students interested in Nike shoes and another in
Adidas shoes, the ROI of the Nike ad might be affected by
whether customers have already seen the Adidas ad due to
the shared audience and similar products.

1. Introduction

In classical causal inference literature, the issue of interference has been extensively explored in both experimental design (Aronow & Samii, 2017; Viviano, 2020; Leung,
2022a;b; Viviano, 2024) and observational studies (Su et al.,
2019; Bargagli-Stoffi et al., 2020; Forastiere et al., 2021; Qu
et al., 2021). However, interference within online sequential decision-making frameworks, such as bandits, remains
relatively underexplored.

Decision making widely exists in various real-world settings, such as advertising (Zhou et al., 2023), clinical trials
(Tsiatis et al., 2008), and transportation (Wang et al., 2024).
The core of decision-making problems lies in selecting the
optimal action from a set of possible options to maximize
an outcome or reward that is valuable to the decision-maker.
To simplify decision-making involving multiple individuals
(or agents/units), it is often assumed that an individual’s
outcome depends only on the action applied to them and is
unaffected by actions taken on others. This assumption, part
of the Stable unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA),

When multiple agents, each capable of sequential decisionmaking, are involved, the problem is often known as the
multi-agent multi-armed bandits (MAMAB). However, existing work in MAMAB faces limitations in incorporating
agent-specific information that can enhance personalized
decision-making. For example, in the COVID-19 spread scenario, communities (treated as agents) are not static; there
may be population flows, new communities joining, and
existing communities dissolving, each with unique charac-

1
Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University,
USA. Correspondence to: Rui Song <songray@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

