A Generic Family of Graphical Models:
Diversity, Efficiency, and Heterogeneity

Yufei Huang * 1 Changhu Wang * 2 3 Junjie Tang 2 3 Weichi Wu 4 Ruibin Xi 2 3

Abstract

ingly focused on high-dimensional settings, commonly encountered in applications such as microarray experiments
(Amaratunga et al., 2014) and single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) studies. However, parameter estimation in
such settings poses significant challenges due to the computational intractability of high-dimensional integrals, limiting
the efficiency of existing methods. This highlights the critical need for developing efficient estimation frameworks
tailored to high-dimensional graphical models.

Traditional network inference methods, such as
Gaussian Graphical Models, which are built
on continuity and homogeneity, face challenges
when modeling discrete data and heterogeneous frameworks. Furthermore, under highdimensionality, the parameter estimation of such
models can be hindered by the notorious intractability of high-dimensional integrals. In this
paper, we introduce a new and flexible device
for graphical models, which accommodates diverse data types, including Gaussian, Poisson
log-normal, and latent Gaussian copula models.
The new device is driven by a new marginally
recoverable parametric family, which can be effectively estimated without evaluating the highdimensional integration in high-dimensional settings thanks to the marginal recoverability. We
further introduce a mixture of marginally recoverable models to capture ubiquitous heterogeneous
structures. We show the validity of the desirable
properties of the models and the effective estimation methods, and demonstrate their advantages over the state-of-the-art network inference
methods via extensive simulation studies and a
gene regulatory network analysis of real singlecell RNA sequencing data.

Due to well-established theoretical properties and high interpretability, Gaussian graphical model (GGM) (Meinshausen
& Bühlmann, 2006) has been extensively studied in recent
years. Notable methods include L1 -penalized log-likelihood
maximization (Yuan & Lin, 2007; Banerjee et al., 2008;
Friedman et al., 2008), penalized regression (Meinshausen
& Bühlmann, 2006; Peng et al., 2009), adaptive thresholding
(Cai & Liu, 2011), and D-trace loss (a smooth convex loss
function) (Zhang & Zou, 2014), among others. To address
the limitations of the Gaussian assumption, semiparametric
Gaussian copula models (Liu et al., 2009; Xue & Zou, 2012;
Liu et al., 2012) have been developed to handle continuous
data, using monotonic univariate transformations. These
methods, based on Gaussian and Gaussian copula models,
are usually efficient but are only applicable to continuous
data and cannot handle discrete data.
In many applications, particularly in genomics studies, discrete data are ubiquitous. The observed data are considered
to be generated from the discretization of underlying latent variables (Skrondal & Rabe-Hesketh, 2007), which
naturally leads to the use of hierarchical models for data
modeling. For example, in scRNA-seq data, gene expression levels are count data, often featuring numerous zero
values (Islam et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2017). To effectively
model the underlying dependencies in count data, the multivariate Poisson log-normal (PLN) distribution (Aitchison
& Ho, 1989) is plausible and popular, since it can capture
the conditional dependencies while accommodating overdispersion in the marginal distributions. However, compared
to GGM, maximizing the likelihood of the PLN model is
more challenging due to the high-dimensional integrals involved, without a known closed-form solution. To address
this issue, Choi et al. (2017) used Laplace’s method for

1. Introduction
Graphical models (Lauritzen, 1996) are widely used to explore network structures and identify complex interactions
between random variables. Recent research has increas*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 Center for Statistical Science, Peking
University, Beijing, China 4 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Ruibin Xi <ruibinxi@math.pku.edu.cn>, Weichi Wu <wuweichi@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

