Policy Filtration for RLHF to Mitigate Noise in Reward Models

Chuheng Zhang * 1 Wei Shen * 2 Li Zhao 1 Xuyun Zhang 3 Xiaolong Xu 4 Wanchun Dou 5 Jiang Bian 1

Abstract
While direct policy optimization methods exist,
pioneering LLMs are fine-tuned with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) to
generate better responses under the supervision
of a reward model learned from preference data.
One major challenge of RLHF is the inaccuracy
of the intermediate reward model, especially in
the tasks that requires complex reasoning for the
reward model to score a response. We find that
the reliability of the reward model varies across
responses assigned with different rewards. This
motivates us to filter the samples whose rewards
may be unreliable to improve the signal-to-noise
ratio during policy learning, resulting in Policy
Filtration for Proximal Policy Optimization (PFPPO). To choose a proper policy filtering strategy,
we use the coefficient of determination (R2 ) between the rewards and actual scores on filtered
samples as the metrics to help us find promising strategies since it measures how well the rewards filtered by PF-PPO indicate real performance. We provide extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of PF-PPO in code generation and math reasoning tasks. In code generation, PF-PPO achieves the state-of-the-art performance of 7-billion-parameter models on HumanEval (+7.9%), MBPP (+0.7%), and LeetCode
Contest (+10.0%) which is a more challenging
benchmark created by us. In math reasoning,
PF-PPO yields performance increase using different reward models and benchmarks (Ape210K
and CMATH). Code is available on https://
github.com/swtheing/PF-PPO-RLHF.

Figure 1. The reward model can be inaccurate, i.e., the actual score
of the response does not align well with the reward given by the
reward model. However, the reward model in specific regions (e.g.,
when it gives rewards higher than 0.8) is more reliable, i.e., the
responses with similar rewards result in consistent performance.
We use a fine-tuned policy to generate 10 responses for each of
the 164 prompts in the HumanEval dataset and use a reward model
trained with the common recipe to generate their rewards. We
group the responses with similar rewards and calculate the average
of their actual scores (i.e., the average correctness), indicating each
group by one point. To evaluate the reliability of the reward model,
we repeat the process ten times corresponding to the ten lines.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
is a key technique to align large language models (LLMs)
with human values and preferences (Christiano et al., 2017;
Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022). RLHF has been
proven to be an essential process for LLMs to produce more
helpful, harmless, and honest responses (Bai et al., 2022).
Despite various non-RL algorithms such as DPO (Rafailov
et al., 2024) are proposed, state-of-the-art applications such
as ChatGPT/GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Claude (Anthropic,
2023), and Gemini (Team et al., 2023) adopt the RL algorithm (e.g., PPO) for policy optimization. The key challenge
of RLHF is the inaccuracy of the intermediate reward model.
While there are researchers investigate how to learn reliable
reward models (see e.g., Wang et al., 2024), we focus on how
to learn better policy under the guidance of such inaccurate
reward models.

*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research 2 Independent Researcher 3 Macquarie University 4 Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology 5 State Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology, Nanjing University. Correspondence
to: Chuheng Zhang <zhangchuheng123@live.com>, Wei Shen
<shenwei0917@126.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We observe that, though the reward model gives inaccurate
1

