On the Dynamic Regret of Following the Regularized Leader:
Optimism with History Pruning

Naram Mhaisen 1 George Iosifidis 1
ft : X ⊂ Rn → R, and the learner incurs ft (xt ). The objective is finding a set of actions {xt }Tt=1 , for some horizon T ,
that perform well under the functions {ft (·)}Tt=1 , which is
non-trivial since xt is committed before ft (·) is revealed.
Under the most stringent criteria, the learner’s performance
is measured by the dynamic regret RT :

Abstract
We revisit the Follow the Regularized Leader
(FTRL) framework for Online Convex Optimization (OCO) over compact sets, focusing on achieving dynamic regret guarantees. Prior work has
highlighted the framework’s limitations in dynamic environments due to its tendency to produce “lazy” iterates. However, building on insights showing FTRL’s ability to produce “agile”
iterates, we show that it can indeed recover known
dynamic regret bounds through optimistic composition of future costs and careful linearization
of past costs, which can lead to pruning some
of them. This new analysis of FTRL against dynamic comparators yields a principled way to interpolate between greedy and agile updates and
offers several benefits, including refined control
over regret terms, optimism without cyclic dependence, and the application of minimal recursive
regularization akin to AdaFTRL. More broadly,
we show that it is not the “lazy” projection style
of FTRL that hinders (optimistic) dynamic regret, but the decoupling of the algorithm’s state
(linearized history) from its iterates, allowing the
state to grow arbitrarily. Instead, pruning synchronizes these two when necessary.

T

. X
RT =
ft (xt ) − ft (ut ),
t=1

where {ut }Tt=1 ∈ X is any set of comparators with desirable

costs that we wish to benchmark against. The dynamic regret is thus simply the performance gap between the learner
and the comparator sequence. A key complexity measure
associated with the comparators is its path length PT ,
T −1

. X
PT =
∥ut+1 − ut ∥.

(1)

t=1

The path length quantifies the variation in the comparator
sequence, with larger values indicating a more dynamic
environment and a more challenging learning setting.
1.1. Background and Motivation
Algorithms with a sub-linear regret guarantee have been
behind recent state-of-art advances not only in classical
computer science problems such as caching (Mhaisen et al.,
2022), portfolio management (Tsai et al., 2024), and generalized assignment (Aslan et al., 2024), but also in machine
learning problems such as the design of (enhanced) ADAM
optimizer (Ahn et al., 2024), sub-modular optimization (SiSalem et al., 2024), and supervised learning with shifting
labels (Bai et al., 2022) among others. However, even in the
static settings where the comparator is fixed: ut = u, ∀t,
the strategy of minimizing witnessed costs at each t admits linear regret, indicating a failure in learning (ShalevShwartz, 2012, Sec 2.2). Hence, careful regularization is
needed to avoid overfitting past data, which is the fundamental idea behind the two main algorithmic families for OCO:
Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL) and Online Mirror
Descent (OMD). It is known that both frameworks
achieve
√
an order optimal static regret bound of O( T ) (Orabona,
2022, Sec. 5). Further, it has been shown that when the regularization is made data-dependent, the regret bounds will

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the Online Convex Optimization
(OCO) problem (Zinkevich, 2003; Shalev-Shwartz, 2012;
Hazan, 2022), a popular paradigm for sequential decision
making under uncertainty. OCO is regarded as a timeslotted game between a learner and a potentially adversarial
environment. At slot t, the learner selects an action xt
from a convex set X . Then, the environment reveals a cost
1

Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science, TU Delft, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Naram
Mhaisen <n.mhaisen@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

