Contextual Online Decision Making with Infinite-Dimensional Functional
Regression

Haichen Hu 1 2 Rui Ai 3 Stephen Bates 4 David Simchi-Levi 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Contextual sequential online experimentation has been overwhelmingly important for online platforms, healthcare companies, and other businesses (Tewari & Murphy, 2017; Saha
et al., 2020; Beygelzimer et al., 2011; Avadhanula et al.,
2022). A decision maker (DM) might face a wide range
of tasks, and different tasks lead to various adaptive algorithm designs. For example, for maximizing the total reward,
there are all kinds of contextual bandit algorithms (Chu et al.,
2011). For minimizing the total hypothesis testing error, we
have online hypothesis testing algorithms (Wei et al., 2007).
To rectify a pre-trained machine learning model, many online calibration algorithms have been developed (Fasiolo
et al., 2021).

Contextual sequential decision-making is fundamental to machine learning, with applications in
bandits, sequential hypothesis testing, and online
risk control. These tasks often rely on statistical
measures like expectation, variance, and quantiles.
In this paper, we propose a universal algorithmic
framework that learns the full underlying distribution, enabling a unified approach to all contextual
online decision-making problems. The challenge
lies in the uncountably infinite-dimensional regression, where existing contextual bandit algorithms all yield infinite regret. We innovatively
propose an efficient infinite-dimensional functional regression oracle for contextual cumulative
distribution functions (CDFs) and model every datum as a combination of context-dependent CDF
basis functions. Our analysis reveals that the decay rate of the eigenvalue sequence of the design
integral operator governs the regression error rate,
and consequently, the utility regret rate. Specifically, when the eigenvalue sequence exhibits a
polynomial decay of order γ1 ≥ 1, the utility re 3γ+2 
e T 2(γ+2) . The case that
gret is bounded by O

Some common structures appear to be obscured behind
these examples. At each round, the DM first receives some
context, such as past consumption records or symptoms in a
healthcare setting. Then, the DM chooses an action to apply
according to this context and his objective. For example,
in online hypothesis testing, the actions could be “reject”
and “accept”, while in contextual bandits, the action is to
choose and pull an arm. Commonly, there is an underlying
distribution Px,a associated with every context x and action
a. The DM makes decisions based on the estimation of
its various statistics. In the context of bandits, the primary
statistic of interest is the expectation, whereas in risk control,
attention is directed toward variance (Li et al., 2022; Füss
et al., 2024). Please refer to Ayala-Romero et al. (2024);
Bouneffouf (2016); Sun et al. (2016); Li et al. (2019); Han
et al. (2021); Kong (2024) for more examples.

γ = 0 can recover the existing optimal rate in contextual bandits literature with finite-dimensional
regression and so as exponential decay. We also
provide a numerical method to compute the eigenvalue sequence of integral operators, enabling the
practical implementation of our framework.

The essential difficulty behind all these online decisionmaking examples is the uncertainty of the outcomes under
different actions. In revenue management, the decision
maker is not sure about the mean reward, while in financial
portfolio management, he is mostly uncertain about both
mean and variance (Gupta et al., 2021). Moreover, in online
quantile calibration, the key concern turns to the unknown
quantile function (Bastani et al., 2022).

1

Center for Computational Science and Engineering, MIT,
Cambridge, United States 2 Department of CEE, MIT, Cambridge,
United States 3 Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, MIT, Cambridge, United States 4 Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge,
United States. Correspondence to: Haichen Hu <huhc@mit.edu>.

Note that no matter what kind of statistic we aim to know,
as long as we learn the distribution Px,a , the decision maker
knows exactly how to make the decision. Therefore, it raises

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

