Mechanistic PDE Networks for Discovery of Governing Equations

Adeel Pervez 1 Efstratios Gavves 2 Francesco Locatello 1

Abstract

tions (Brunton et al., 2020). In spite of progress (Brunton
et al., 2016; Raissi et al., 2019; d’Ascoli et al., 2023), the
development of machine learning discovery models that
are flexible, handle complex nonlinear data and account for
missing physics, while being robust to noise and missing
data, is very much an open problem.

We present Mechanistic PDE Networks – a model
for discovery of governing partial differential
equations from data. Mechanistic PDE Networks represent spatiotemporal data as spacetime dependent linear partial differential equations in neural network hidden representations.
The represented PDEs are then solved and decoded for specific tasks. The learned PDE representations naturally express the spatiotemporal dynamics in data in neural network hidden
space, enabling increased power for dynamical
modeling. Solving the PDE representations in a
compute and memory-efficient way, however, is a
significant challenge. We develop a native, GPUcapable, parallel, sparse, and differentiable multigrid solver specialized for linear partial differential equations that acts as a module in Mechanistic
PDE Networks. Leveraging the PDE solver, we
propose a discovery architecture that can discover
nonlinear PDEs in complex settings while also being robust to noise. We validate PDE discovery on
a number of PDEs, including reaction-diffusion
and Navier-Stokes equations. Source code will be
made available at: https://github.com/
alpz/mech-nn-discovery-pde

A recent discovery architecture for ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) was demonstrated by Mechanistic Neural
Networks (MechNN) (Pervez et al., 2024), enabling a flexible and expressive network design for modeling explicit, interpretable nonlinear ODEs. MechNNs embed a specialized,
parallel ODE solver in the network, allowing explicit differential equation representations in neural networks, which
can be employed for ODE discovery and prediction, both
relevant in applications including general time series and
numerical simulations (Pervez et al., 2024) and in climate
science (Chen et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2024).
In this paper we focus on governing equation discovery and
demonstrate Mechanistic Neural Networks for discovery
of partial differential equations from data. We develop a
PDE solver, NeuRLP-PDE, for parallel native differentiable
solution of linear partial differential equations over multiple
spatial dimensions (in addition to the time dimension). In
contrast to ODEs, scaling is significantly more difficult in
PDE solving, with memory requirements increasing exponentially with dimension and quickly becoming excessive
even for mid-sized grids. With NeuRLP-PDE, sparse computation in all phases of the PDE solver ensures that the
memory requirement of the solver over batches of PDEs
remains limited for sizeable grids. We build the solver using
constrained optimization and a sparse multigrid preconditioned iterative linear solver (Saad, 2003) for solving the
large and sparse linear systems that appear in the constrained
optimization. The NeuRLP-PDE solver is then incorporated
into the PDE discovery architecture enabling the learning
of governing PDEs directly from data.

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) enjoy widespread use
as interpretable, analytical models of spatio-temporal dynamics in all areas of science (Temam, 2024; Turing, 1952).
The development of PDE models still, however, is largely a
manual task that is performed by domain experts examining
experimental data. The modern explosion of experimental
and simulation data has underscored the need for data-driven
machine learning models for discovery of governing equa-

The MechNN-PDE discovery architecture couples the
NeuRLP-PDE solver with deep neural networks that parameterize partial differential equations. Two natural constraints on discovered differential equations are that they
should be 1) simple: i.e., built from elementary functions
and 2) concise: containing as few terms as possible. The
MechNN-PDE architecture enables simplicity and concise-

1

Institute of Science and Technology, Klosterneuburg, Austria 2 Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Adeel Pervez
<Adeel.Pervez@ist.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

