Token Coordinated Prompt Attention is Needed for Visual Prompting

Zichen Liu 1 Xu Zou 2 Gang Hua 3 Jiahuan Zhou * 1

Abstract

Attention Map
of CLS Token

Row 9, Column 8

+TCPA

VPT

Visual prompting techniques are widely used
to efficiently fine-tune pretrained Vision Transformers (ViT) by learning a small set of shared
prompts for all tokens. However, existing methods overlook the unique roles of different tokens
in conveying discriminative information and
interact with all tokens using the same prompts,
thereby limiting the representational capacity
of ViT. This often leads to indistinguishable
and biased prompt-extracted features, hindering
performance. To address this issue, we propose
a plug-and-play Token Coordinated Prompt
Attention (TCPA) module, which assigns specific
coordinated prompts to different tokens for
attention-based interactions. Firstly, recognizing
the distinct functions of CLS and image tokensglobal information aggregation and local feature
extraction, we disentangle the prompts into CLS
Prompts and Image Prompts, which interact
exclusively with CLS tokens and image tokens
through attention mechanisms. This enhances
their respective discriminative abilities. Furthermore, as different image tokens correspond
to distinct image patches and contain diverse
information, we employ a matching function
to automatically assign coordinated prompts to
individual tokens. This enables more precise
attention interactions, improving the diversity
and representational capacity of the extracted
features. Extensive experiments across various
benchmarks demonstrate that TCPA significantly
enhances the diversity and discriminative power
of the extracted features. The code is available at
https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/ICML2025TCPA.

Attention Map of Image Tokens
Row 8, Column 11 Row 4, Column 6

On HTA Benchmark

On VTAB Benchmark

Figure 1. Above: Visualization of the attention map. The existing
visual prompting method VPT (Jia et al., 2022) learns the same
prompts for all tokens, resulting in extracted information that
lacks distinguishability and comprehensiveness. Our TCPA selects
corresponding prompts for different tokens and performs attention
interaction, thereby enhancing the diversity and discriminability of
the extracted information. Below: Comparison of time overhead
and performance.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the pretraining-finetuning strategy has become a foundational paradigm in the deep learning field,
significantly advancing the progress of various multi-media
technologies (Jang et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2019; Iofinova
et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2025; Li & Zhou, 2025; Yao et al.,
2025). However, as the sizes of models and datasets have
rapidly exploded, such a popular paradigm has faced critical challenges due to its high storage and computational
costs (Jia et al., 2022). Addressing this, recent research (He
et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Han et al.,
2023) has focused on efficiently adapting pretrained models
to specific downstream tasks. Among them, visual prompt-

1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China 3 Amazon.com, Inc, Bellevue, WA, USA. Correspondence
to: Jiahuan Zhou <jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

