Local Identifying Causal Relations in the Presence of Latent Variables

Zheng Li * 1 Zeyu Liu * 1 Feng Xie 1 Hao Zhang 2 Chunchen Liu 3 Zhi Geng 1

Abstract

Hypoxia
in O2

We tackle the problem of identifying whether a
variable is the cause of a specified target using observational data. State-of-the-art causal learning
algorithms that handle latent variables typically
rely on identifying the global causal structure, often represented as a partial ancestral graph (PAG),
to infer causal relationships. Although effective,
these approaches are often redundant and computationally expensive when the focus is limited
to a specific causal relationship. In this work,
we introduce novel local characterizations that
are necessary and sufficient for various types of
causal relationships between two variables, enabling us to bypass the need for global structure
learning. Leveraging these local insights, we develop efficient and fully localized algorithms that
accurately identify causal relationships from observational data. We theoretically demonstrate
the soundness and completeness of our approach.
Extensive experiments on benchmark networks
and two real-world datasets further validate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our method.

Cardiac
Mixing

Duct flow
Hypoxia
distribution

Hypoxia
in O2

Duct flow

Hypoxia
distribution

Lower body O2

Lower body O2

(a) Underlying graph

(b) DAG

Hypoxia
in O2

Duct flow

Hypoxia
distribution
Lower body O2

(c) MAG

Figure 1. (a) The underlying graph from (Spiegelhalter et al., 1993)
(CHILD network), where Cardiac Mixing is a latent variable and
the other variables are observed. (b) A DAG over the observed
variables in (a). (c) A MAG characterizing the causal relations
over the observed variables in (a).

opment of effective treatment plans. Such insights enable
healthcare professionals to efficiently identify root causes
and deliver targeted interventions.
The causal graphical model is one of the most widely
used models for graphically representing causal relations
among observed variables, which consists of vertices denoting variables and edges denoting causal relations (Pearl,
2009; Spirtes et al., 2000). Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
are widely used to represent causal relationships among
observed variables under the assumption of causal sufficiency (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2000), i.e. , the absence
of unobserved latent variables between observed variables.
However, when latent variables are present, DAGs may fail
to represent the causal relationships among observed variables(Richardson & Spirtes, 2002). As shown in Figure 1
(b), the DAG incorrectly depicts Hypoxia in O2 as a cause
of Hypoxia distribution, but there is no directed path from
Hypoxia in O2 to Hypoxia distribution in the underlying
graph. Therefore, directly employing methods that do not
account for the influence of latent variables (when the system contains latent variables), such as those in Fang et al.
(2022); Zuo et al. (2022); Zheng et al. (2024), may result in
incorrect inferences about the causal relationships among
the observed variables.

1. Introduction
Identifying causal relationships, known as causal discovery,
plays a crucial role in various fields, including computer science (Jonas et al., 2017; Pearl, 2018; Schölkopf, 2022),
sociology (Spirtes et al., 2000), epidemiology (Hernán
& Robins, 2010), and neuroscience (Smith et al., 2011;
Sanchez-Romero et al., 2019). A key challenge in causal
discovery is determining whether one variable causes another (Pearl, 2009). For instance, in medical diagnosis,
understanding the causal relationships between symptoms
and diseases is crucial for accurate diagnoses and the devel*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Statistics, Beijing
Technology and Business University, Beijing, China 2 SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China 3 LingYang Co.Ltd,
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Feng Xie
<fengxie@btbu.edu.cn>.

Maximal Ancestral Graphs (MAGs), whose main advantage
is that, without explicitly including latent variables, they can
represent conditional independence and causal relationships
among observed variables (Richardson & Spirtes, 2002;
Zhang, 2008). In a MAG, a vertex X is an ancestor (cause)
of a vertex Y and Y is a descendant (effect) of X if there is
a directed path from X to Y (Zhang, 2006). As shown in

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

