Automated Benchmark Generation for Repository-Level Coding Tasks

Konstantinos Vergopoulos 1 * Mark Niklas Müller 1 * Martin Vechev 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Code Agent development is an extremely active
research area, where a reliable performance metric is critical for tracking progress and guiding
new developments. This demand is underscored
by the meteoric rise in popularity of SWE-Bench–
a benchmark that challenges code agents to generate patches addressing GitHub issues given the
full repository as context. The correctness of generated patches is then evaluated by executing a
human-written test suite extracted from the repository after the issue’s resolution.

Code Agents are quickly becoming one of the most promising and actively researched applications of Large Language
Models (LLMs); partly due to their potential to revolutionize the 700 billion dollar software industry (Statista). To
measure progress and more importantly steer further developments in this field, high-quality datasets and benchmarks are crucial. In particular, it is essential that they are
representative of real-world use cases, sufficiently large to
allow meaningful statistical analysis, and diverse and recent
enough to avoid unintentional overfitting and contamination.

However, constructing benchmarks like SWEBench requires substantial manual effort to set up
historically accurate execution environments for
testing. Crucially, this severely limits the number of considered repositories, e.g., just 12 for
SWE-Bench. Considering so few repositories, selected for their popularity runs the risk of leading
to a distributional mismatch, i.e., the measured
performance may not be representative of realworld scenarios running the riks of misguiding
development efforts.

Existing Benchmarks However, function-level benchmarks like HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), popular for
evaluating LLM’s coding performance, are unrepresentative
of real-world use, lack diversity, and are becoming saturated. To address these limitations, SWE-Bench (Jimenez
et al., 2024) was proposed as the first repository-level coding benchmark based on real-world tasks, i.e., resolving
GitHub issues. Yet, it still suffers from several limitations.
(i) It is limited to few repositories, potentially leading to
overfitting to these specific codebases. (ii) Its sole focus on
libraries in contrast to applications raises generalizability
questions. (iii) Its focus on popular repositories not only
makes it less representative but also increases the chances
of contamination with general codebase knowledge. (iv)
Its static nature leads to most or even all instances being
created before recent models’ knowledge cutoff, allowing
even the exact instances to be present in the training data.

In this work, we address this challenge and introduce S ETUPAGENT, a fully automated system capable of historically accurate dependency
setup, test execution, and result parsing. Using
S ETUPAGENT, we generate two new datasets:
(i) SWEE-Bench an extended version of SWEBench encompassing hundreds of repositories,
and (ii) SWA-Bench a benchmark focusing on applications rather than libraries. Comparing these
datasets to SWE-Bench with respect to their characteristics and code agent performance, we find
significant distributional differences, including
lower issue description quality and detail level,
higher fix complexity, and most importantly up to
60% lower agent success rates.

Creating Repository-Level Benchmarks To address
these challenges, we would like to create more diverse
benchmarks and update them frequently with new tasks.
However, while the GitHub Issues and Pull Requests (PRs),
serving as task descriptions and reference solutions, respectively, for SWE-Bench-like benchmarks can be scraped
automatically, evaluating the correctness of a solution, requires the repository’s test suite to be executed. This, in turn,
requires setting up historically accurate execution environments, identifying the correct test commands, and parsing
the results. Prior work addressed this problem either manually (Jimenez et al., 2024) or by aggressively filtering out
instances where default commands were unsuccessful (Jain
et al., 2024c). However, both approaches yield limited diversity and don’t lend themselves to frequent updates.

*

Equal contribution 1 LogicStar AI 2 Department of Computer
Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Mark Niklas Müller
<mark@logicstar.ai>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

