LOGO — Long cOntext aliGnment via efficient preference Optimization

Zecheng Tang 1 2 Zechen Sun 1 2 Juntao Li 1 2 Qiaoming Zhu 1 2 Min Zhang 1 2

Abstract

video understanding (Weng et al., 2025). Additionally, longcontext models (LCMs) eliminate the need for complex
toolchains and intricate workflows, e.g., RAG (Yu et al.,
2024), that were previously required to address contextlength constraints (Ravaut et al., 2024), facilitating tasks
such as long-document summarization (Laban et al., 2024)
and project code analysis (Zhu et al., 2024).

Long-context models (LCMs) have shown great
potential in processing long sequences, with research showing they can accurately locate tokenlevel salient information. Yet, the generation performance of these LCMs is far from satisfactory
and might result in misaligned responses, such as
hallucinations. To enhance the generation capability, existing works have investigated the effects of
data size and quality for both pre-training and instruction tuning stages. Though achieving meaningful improvement, previous methods fall short
in either effectiveness or efficiency. In this paper,
we introduce LOGO, an efficient and effective
training strategy that first introduces preference
optimization for long-context alignment. LOGO
consists of a reference-free preference optimization strategy and a corresponding efficient data
synthesis process. By training with only 0.3B
data on a single 8×A800 GPU machine for 16
hours, LOGO allows the Llama-3-8B-Instruct80K model to achieve comparable performance
with GPT-4 in real-world long-context tasks while
preserving the model’s original capabilities on
other tasks, e.g., language modeling and MMLU.
Besides, LOGO can also scale the models’ context
window size while enhancing their performance.

Yet, recent studies have pointed out that open-source LCMs
failed to achieve satisfactory performance in real-world or
complex synthetic long-context tasks, where LCMs might
produce misaligned results, such as instruction unfollowing
and hallucinations (Tang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a).
To mitigate the above issues, the open-source community
has made significant strides, primarily focusing on building
and scaling up high-quality synthetic data to post-tune the
models (Wu et al., 2024a; Bai et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2024). These efforts, as shown in figure 1, have led
to notable improvements but still fall short in terms of either
effectiveness or efficiency. For instance, the Llama-3.1-8B128K model (AI@Meta, 2024a), trained on over 800B longinstruction data, still underperforms the Llama-3-8B-80K
model (Zhang et al., 2024b), which was post-trained with
only 1.5B high-quality data. However, the Llama-3-8B-80K
model shows only slight improvement over the backbone
and still lags far behind closed-source models like GPT-4.
To investigate the reasons behind LCMs generating misaligned outputs, we visualized the information retrieval capability (reflected by Retrieval Score) and the generation
capability (reflected by Recall Score) of different LCMs
on a synthetic retrieval task1 . As shown in figure 1(b), we
can observe a minimal difference among the retrieval scores
of various LCMs, but a large difference in their generation
performance. This suggests that while LCMs are adept at
identifying key information within long contexts, they
struggle to effectively utilize the retrieval information for
generation. The underlying cause might stem from the fact
that these methods primarily focus on optimizing the training data for the Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) stage, which
aims to enhance the adherence of LCMs to long instructions

1. Introduction
Processing long input sequences is a fundamental capability for Large Language Models (LLMs) nowadays, with a
few models being able to process context lengths exceeding millions of tokens (Team et al., 2024; MiniMax et al.,
2025). This capability unlocks the potential of LLMs for
novel tasks and cutting-edge applications, such as highresolution image processing (Tian et al., 2024) and long
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University 2 Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Soochow University. Correspondence to: Juntao Li
<ljt@suda.edu.cn>.

1

Retrieval capability is reflected through the recall score of
salient tokens located by retrieval heads (Wu et al., 2024b). We
calculate the average recall score across the top-10 retrieval heads.
A higher retrieval score indicates that the LCM can retrieve more
critical information. Details are shown in Appendix A.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

