The Panaceas for Improving Low-Rank Decomposition in
Communication-Efficient Federated Learning

Shiwei Li 1 2 * Xiandi Luo 1 * Haozhao Wang 1 Xing Tang 2 Shijie Xu 3 Weihong Luo 3 Yuhua Li 1
Xiuqiang He 2 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract

using its local data; (3) after local training, each client sends
the model updates (i.e., changes to model parameters) back
to the server; and (4) the server aggregates the model updates from all clients to generate a new global model. These
steps together constitute one training round in FL.

To improve the training efficiency of federated
learning (FL), previous research has employed
low-rank decomposition techniques to reduce
communication overhead. In this paper, we seek
to enhance the performance of these low-rank
decomposition methods. Specifically, we focus
on three key issues related to decomposition in
FL: what to decompose, how to decompose, and
how to aggregate. Subsequently, we introduce
three novel techniques: Model Update Decomposition (MUD), Block-wise Kronecker Decomposition (BKD), and Aggregation-Aware Decomposition (AAD), each targeting a specific issue.
These techniques are complementary and can be
applied simultaneously to achieve optimal performance. Additionally, we provide a rigorous
theoretical analysis to ensure the convergence of
the proposed MUD. Extensive experimental results show that our approach achieves faster convergence and superior accuracy compared to relevant baseline methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/Leopold1423/
fedmud-icml25.

However, FL generally requires multiple training rounds
to achieve convergence, leading to considerable communication overhead. Specifically, communication occurs in
two phases: the uplink, where clients transmit local model
updates to the server, and the downlink, where the server
sends global model parameters to the clients. Latency in
both phases can significantly reduce training efficiency, especially in scenarios with limited bandwidth or large model
sizes (Hönig et al., 2022). To mitigate this issue, various
strategies have been proposed to compress either the uplink
(Li et al., 2024a;b; Reisizadeh et al., 2020) or the bidirectional (Tang et al., 2019; Dorfman et al., 2023) communication. This paper focuses on investigating bidirectional
compression methods for better training efficiency.
Low-rank decomposition (Sainath et al., 2013) is an effective technique for parameter compression, which approximates a matrix by the product of smaller sub-matrices. It
has been widely employed in FL for bidirectional communication compression (Yao et al., 2021; Hyeon-Woo et al.,
2022). In these approaches, the server transmits a low-rank
model to the clients for training and subsequently receives
the optimized models from them. For example, FedHM
(Yao et al., 2021) generates a low-rank model by applying
truncated singular value decomposition (SVD) to the global
model. However, the SVD process introduces approximation errors, causing the low-rank model to deviate from the
global model. In contrast, FedLMT (Liu et al., 2024) directly trains a pre-decomposed global model, eliminating
the need for SVD. Similarly, FedPara (Hyeon-Woo et al.,
2022) trains a pre-decomposed model and enhances the rank
of the recovered matrices using the Hadamard product. (Mei
et al., 2022) further improves compression by sharing lowrank matrices across multiple layers. These methods have
laid the foundation for low-rank decomposition techniques
in communication-efficient FL (CEFL). Nevertheless, several challenges remain. In this paper, we address three key

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed training framework
that preserves data privacy by exchanging model parameters
instead of sharing decentralized data (McMahan et al., 2017).
In an FL system, a central server manages the training process across multiple distributed clients, typically involving
the following steps: (1) the server broadcasts the global
model to the clients; (2) each client optimizes the model
*
Equal contribution. 1 Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China 2 Shenzhen Technology University,
Shenzhen, China 3 FiT, Tencent, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence
to: Ruixuan Li <rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

