SHIELD: Multi-task Multi-distribution Vehicle Routing Solver
with Sparsity and Hierarchy

Yong Liang Goh 1 2 3 4 Zhiguang Cao 5 Yining Ma 6 Jianan Zhou 7 Mohammed Haroon Dupty 1 Wee Sun Lee 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) appear in
many real-world applications, such as logistics (Cattaruzza
et al., 2017) and DNA sequencing (Caserta & Voß, 2014),
and have historically attracted significant attention (Bengio
et al., 2021). A key example of COPs is the Vehicle Routing
Problem (VRP), which asks: Given a set of customers, what
is the optimal set of routes for a fleet of vehicles to minimize
overall costs while satisfying all constraints? Traditionally,
they are solved with exact or approximate solvers. However,
these solvers rely heavily on expert-designed heuristic rules
which limit its efficiency. Recently, the emerging Neural
Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) community has been
increasingly focused on developing novel neural solvers for
VRPs based on deep (reinforcement) learning (Kool et al.,
2018; Kwon et al., 2020; Bogyrbayeva et al., 2024). These
solvers learn to construct solutions autoregressively, improving efficiency and reducing the need for domain knowledge.

Recent advances toward foundation models for
routing problems have shown great potential of
a unified deep model for various VRP variants.
However, they overlook the complex real-world
customer distributions. In this work, we advance
the Multi-Task VRP (MTVRP) setting to the
more realistic yet challenging Multi-Task MultiDistribution VRP (MTMDVRP) setting, and introduce SHIELD, a novel model that leverages
both sparsity and hierarchy principles. Building on a deeper decoder architecture, we first
incorporate the Mixture-of-Depths (MoD) technique to enforce sparsity. This improves both efficiency and generalization by allowing the model
to dynamically select nodes to use or skip each
decoder layer, providing the needed capacity to
adaptively allocate computation for learning the
task/distribution specific and shared representations. We also develop a context-based clustering
layer that exploits the presence of hierarchical
structures in the problems to produce better local
representations. These two designs inductively
bias the network to identify key features that are
common across tasks and distributions, leading to
significantly improved generalization on unseen
ones. Our empirical results demonstrate the superiority of our approach over existing methods on
9 real-world maps with 16 VRP variants each.

Motivated by the recent breakthroughs in foundation models (Floridi & Chiriatti, 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Achiam
et al., 2023), a notable trend in the NCO community is the
push towards developing a unified neural solver for handling multiple VRP variants, known as the Multi-Task VRP
(MTVRP) setting (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Berto
et al., 2024). These solvers are trained on multiple VRP
variants and show impressive zero-shot generalization to
new tasks. Compared to single-task solvers, unified solvers
offer a key advantage: there is no longer a need to construct
different solvers or heuristics for each specific problem variant. However, despite the importance of the MTVRP setup,
it does not fully capture real-world industrial applications,
as the underlying distributions are assumed to be uniform,
lacking the structural properties of real-world data.

1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 3 Grabtaxi Holdings Pte Ltd, Singapore 4 Grab-NUS
AI Lab, Singapore 5 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 6 Laboratory
for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge MA, United States 7 College of Computing
and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Yong Liang Goh <gyl@u.nus.edu>.

This work extends the MTVRP framework to real-world
scenarios by incorporating realistic distributions (Goh et al.,
2024). Consider a logistics company operating across multiple cities/countries, each with a fixed set of M locations
governed by its geographical layout. When a subset of V
orders arises, the problem is reduced to serving only those
customers. To model this, we generate realistic distributions by selecting smaller subsets of V from the fixed set
of M locations such that the geographical characteristics

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

