Drug-TTA: Test-Time Adaptation for Drug Virtual Screening via Multi-task
Meta-Auxiliary Learning

Ao Shen * 1 2 Mingzhi Yuan * 1 2 Yingfan Ma 1 2 Jie Du 1 2 Qiao Huang 1 2 Manning Wang 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Virtual screening is a critical step in drug discovery, aiming at identifying potential drugs that
bind to a specific protein pocket from a large
database of molecules. Traditional docking methods are time-consuming, while learning-based approaches supervised by high-precision conformational or affinity labels are limited by the scarcity
of training data. Recently, a paradigm of feature alignment through contrastive learning has
gained widespread attention. This method does
not require explicit binding affinity scores, but it
suffers from the issue of overly simplistic construction of negative samples, which limits their
generalization to more difficult test cases. In
this paper, we propose Drug-TTA, which leverages a large number of self-supervised auxiliary
tasks to adapt the model to each test instance.
Specifically, we incorporate the auxiliary tasks
into both the training and the inference process
via meta-learning to improve the performance
of the primary task of virtual screening. Additionally, we design a multi-scale feature based
Auxiliary Loss Balance Module (ALBM) to balance the auxiliary tasks to improve their efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
Drug-TTA achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in all five virtual screening tasks under
a zero-shot setting, showing an average improvement of 9.86% in AUROC metric compared to
the baseline without test-time adaptation. The
code is available at https://github.com/
ShenAoAO/Drug-TTA.git.

Virtual screening plays a crucial role in early drug discovery by enabling the rapid identification of potential drug
candidates from vast small molecule libraries for further
validation (Patel et al., 2021; Schneider, 2010). The number of molecules in these libraries is increasing very fast,
with recent ones reaching billions of molecules (Zhou et al.,
2024). As a result, there is an urgent need for fast and
efficient virtual screening methods to keep pace with the
growing size of molecule libraries (Sadybekov & Katritch,
2023; Shen et al., 2024a).
Traditional virtual screening methods (Halgren et al., 2004;
Trott & Olson, 2010; Spitzer & Jain, 2012; Combs et al.,
2013) primarily rely on molecular docking software to predict binding conformations and estimate binding affinity by
calculating the binding energy. However, these methods
are often computationally expensive and time-consuming,
as they require sampling a large number of conformations
and evaluating each through complex scoring calculations
(Kitchen et al., 2004). With the advancement of deep learning(Yuan et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024c), the majority of
current methods focus on using deep models to predict docking conformations (Cai et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023b) and
binding affinity (Zhang et al., 2023a; Kimber et al., 2021),
which significantly accelerates the screening process. However, these models are typically trained on positive pairs,
i.e., binding protein-molecule pairs, with available conformational or binding affinity labels (Wang et al., 2005). As a
result, the scarcity of high-quality labeled data limits their
generalization ability. Furthermore, the absence of negative
pairs, i.e., non-binding protein-molecule pairs, makes the
training data have a large disparity with the inference data,
which requires the model to identify active molecules that
form positive pairs with the target protein from a large number of inactive molecules. Recently, a new structure-based
feature alignment paradigm (e.g., DrugCLIP (Gao et al.,
2024)) of virtual screening has emerged, which is free of
complex docking simulation and high-quality affinity labels. Similar to other feature alignment approaches (e.g.,
CLIP (Hafner et al., 2021)), this paradigm maps molecules
and pockets into a shared feature space using deep neural networks and employs contrastive learning for training,

*
Equal contribution 1 Digital Medical Research Center, School
of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, 131 Dong’an Road,
200032, Shanghai, China 2 Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical
Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Fudan
University, 131 Dong’an Road, 200032, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Manning Wang <mnwang@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

