Solving Zero-Sum Convex Markov Games

Fivos Kalogiannis 1 Emmanouil-Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis 2 Ian Gemp 3 Georgios Piliouras 3

Abstract

1994)—studies how multiple agents interact within a shared,
dynamic environment to optimize their individual cumulative rewards (Silver et al., 2017; Lanctot et al., 2019).
However, many real-world applications require a more expressive formulation of agent preferences that do not simply
decompose additively over time (Puterman, 2014; Zahavy
et al., 2021). To address this limitation, the emerging framework of convex Markov games (cMGs) (Gemp et al., 2024)
has been proposed as a principled yet flexible model for
capturing complex multi-agent interactions in dynamic environments. Unlike traditional MGs, cMGs allow for convex
utility functions over the state-action occupancy measure,
enabling a richer set of players’ preferences that better reflect practical applications. In this context, the occupancy
measure of each player reflects the frequency of visiting
any particular state of their corresponding Markov decision
processes (MDPs), over a potentially infinite time horizon.

We contribute the first provable guarantees of
global convergence to Nash equilibria (NE)
in two-player zero-sum convex Markov games
(cMGs) by using independent policy gradient
methods. Convex Markov games, recently defined by Gemp et al. (2024), extend Markov decision processes to multi-agent settings with preferences that are convex over occupancy measures,
offering a broad framework for modeling generic
strategic interactions. However, even the fundamental min-max case of cMGs presents significant challenges, including inherent nonconvexity,
the absence of Bellman consistency, and the complexity of the infinite horizon. Our results follow
a two-step approach. First, leveraging properties of hidden-convex–hidden-concave functions,
we show that a simple nonconvex regularization
transforms the min-max optimization problem
into a nonconvex–proximal Polyak-Łojasiewicz
(NC-pPL) objective. Crucially, this regularization can stabilize the iterates of independent policy gradient methods and ultimately lead them to
converge to equilibria. Second, building on this
reduction, we address the general constrained minmax problems under NC-pPL and two-sided pPL
conditions, providing the first global convergence
guarantees for stochastic nested and alternating
gradient descent-ascent methods, which we believe may be of independent interest.

In practice, cMGs are useful for modeling a variety of
challenging multi-agent settings, including:
(i) Fostering creativity in machine gameplay, such as discovering novel strategies in chess (Zahavy et al., 2022; 2023;
Bakhtin et al., 2022), (ii) multi-step language model alignment (Wu et al., 2025), (iii) enhancing multi-agent exploration in robotic systems (Burgard et al., 2000; Rogers et al.,
2013; Tan et al., 2022), (iv) ensuring safety in autonomous
driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016), (v) enabling imitation
learning from expert demonstrations, and (vi) promoting
robustness and fairness, in multi-agent decision-making
(Hughes et al., 2018). While the former (i-iii) are direct
instantiations of cMGs, the latter (iv-vi) will profit when
from a cMG formulation.

1. Introduction

In general, the authoritative desirable outcome of a multiagent scenario is some sort of game theoretic equilibrium.
Given the plethora of cMG applications, a natural question
arises: are there algorithmic solutions for provable equilibrium computation in these games already? Surprisingly,
this is not the case! Notwithstanding the model’s appeal, an
array of technical challenges arise that impede a straightforward algorithmic solution. Yet, empirical results suggest
that variants of policy gradient methods (Williams, 1992)
can actually lead to favorable outcomes.

The field of multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL)—often framed as Markov games (MGs) (Littman,
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA 2 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI,
USA and Archimedes, Athena Reaserch Center, Greece 3 Google
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Fivos Kalogiannis
<fkalogiannis@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Following this thread, we consider the simplest reasonable setting, competition between two agents, and pose our
1

