Provably Efficient RL for Linear MDPs under
Instantaneous Safety Constraints in Non-Convex Feature Spaces

Amirhossein Roknilamouki 1 Arnob Ghosh 2 Ming Shi 3 Fatemeh Nourzad 1 Eylem Ekici 1 Ness B. Shroff 1 4

Abstract

LSVI), which first reduces uncertainty about the
safe set by playing a known safe policy. After that,
it carefully balances exploration and exploitation
to achieve the regret bound. Finally, numerical
simulations on an autonomous driving scenario
demonstrate the effectiveness of NCS-LSVI.

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), tasks with instantaneous hard constraints present significant
challenges, particularly when the decision space
is non-convex or non-star-convex. This issue is
especially relevant in domains like autonomous
vehicles and robotics, where constraints such
as collision avoidance often take a non-convex
form, and the state-space may be large. In this
paper, we establish a regret bound of Õ 1 +
q


1
log τ1 d3 H 4 K , applicable to both starτ
convex and non-star-convex cases, where d is the
feature dimension, H the episode length, K the
number of episodes, and τ the safety threshold for
a linear MDP setting. Moreover, the violation of
safety constraints is zero with a high probability
throughout the learning process. A key technical
challenge in these settings is bounding the covering number of the value-function class, which is
essential for achieving value-aware uniform concentration in model-free function approximation.
For the star-convex setting, we develop a novel
technique called Objective–Constraint Decomposition (OCD) to properly bound the covering number, and resolves an error in a previous work on
the constrained RL. In non-star-convex scenarios,
where the covering number can become infinitely
large, we propose a two-phase algorithm, NonConvex Safe Least Squares Value Iteration (NCS-

1. Introduction
Safe Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful framework for safe online learning, enabling agents
to learn autonomously from their environments while respecting safety constraints (Tessler et al., 2018; Ghosh et al.,
2022b). In many safety-critical applications—such as autonomous driving, healthcare, and financial planning—it
is imperative that the agent not only maximizes cumulative rewards but also maintains safety at every step of the
decision-making process (Shi et al., 2023; Amani et al.,
2021). These applications often feature instantaneous hard
constraints, which must be satisfied at each time step to prevent catastrophic outcomes (e.g., avoiding collisions in autonomous driving). Unlike constraints that allow violations
in expectation or across an entire trajectory, instantaneous
hard constraints demand adherence strictly at every decision
point, highlighting the need for RL methods that can explore
and exploit without compromising immediate safety.
Amani et al. (2021) tackled this challenge by introducing
a strategy for Safe RL with instantaneous hard constraints
in star-convex decision spaces within linear MDPs. Amani
et al. (2021) assume that at every state, there exists an initial
safe action that is known to the RL agent. The agent begins
interacting with the environment using this initial safe action, subsequently constructing and refining an estimated
safe set of actions that remain within the actual safe set
of actions. However, as described below, their analysis to
prove sublinear regret is not correct (with further details
provided in Section 5.1). The key issue arises in bounding
the covering number for the value function, a crucial step for
achieving value-aware uniform concentration in model-free
function approximation. Their Theorem 2 relies on results
from unconstrained RL (Lemma D.6 in Jin et al. (2020)),
where the value function is obtained by maximizing the

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey Institute
of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA 3 Department of Electrical
Engineering University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA 4 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA,. Correspondence to: Amirhossein
Roknilamouki <roknilamouki.1@osu.edu>, Arnob Ghosh
<arnob.ghosh@njit.edu>, Ming Shi <mshi24@buffalo.edu>,
Fatemeh Nourzad <nourzad.1@osu.edu>, Eylem Ekici
<ekici.2@osu.edu>, Ness B. Shroff <shroff.11@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

