Is Noise Conditioning Necessary for Denoising Generative Models?

Qiao Sun * 1 Zhicheng Jiang * 1 Hanhong Zhao * 1 Kaiming He 1

Abstract
It is widely believed that noise conditioning is
indispensable for denoising diffusion models to
work successfully. This work challenges this belief. Motivated by research on blind image denoising, we investigate a variety of denoising-based
generative models in the absence of noise conditioning. To our surprise, most models exhibit
graceful degradation, and in some cases, they even
perform better without noise conditioning. We
provide a theoretical analysis of the error caused
by removing noise conditioning and demonstrate
that our analysis aligns with empirical observations. We further introduce a noise-unconditional
model that achieves a competitive FID of 2.23
on CIFAR-10, significantly narrowing the gap to
leading noise-conditional models. We hope our
findings will inspire the community to revisit the
foundations and formulations of denoising generative models.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) A denoising generative model takes a noisy
data z and a noise level indexed by t (such as σt ) as the
inputs to the neural network NNθ . (b) This work investigates
the scenario of removing noise conditioning in the network.
estimated from corrupted data, making blind denoising (i.e.,
without knowing the noise level) a feasible task. Notably,
noise-level estimation and blind image denoising have been
active research topics for decades (Stahl et al., 2000; Salmeri
et al., 2001; Rabie, 2005), with neural networks offering
effective solutions (Chen et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2023). This raises an intriguing question:
can related research on image denoising be generalized to
denoising-based generative models?

1. Introduction
At the core of denoising diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015) lies the idea of corrupting clean data with
various levels of noise and learning to reverse this process.
The remarkable success of these models has been partially
underpinned by the concept of “noise conditioning” (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020):
a single neural network is trained to perform denoising
across all noise levels, with the noise level provided as a
conditioning input. The concept of noise conditioning has
been predominantly incorporated in diffusion models and is
widely regarded as a critical component.

Motivated by this, in this work, we systematically compare a variety of denoising-based generative models —
with and without noise conditioning. Contrary to common
belief, we find that many denoising generative models perform robustly even in the absence of noise conditioning. In
this scenario, most methods exhibit only a modest degradation in generation performance. More surprisingly, we find
that some relevant methods—particularly flow-based ones
(Lipman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023), which originated
from different perspectives—can even produce improved
generation results without noise conditioning. Among all
the popular methods we studied, only one variant fails disastrously. Overall, our empirical results reveal that noise
conditioning may not be necessary for denoising generative
models to function properly.

In this work, we examine the necessity of noise conditioning
in denoising-based generative models. Our intuition is that,
in natural data such as images, the noise level can be reliably
*
Equal contribution. Listing order is random. 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Qiao Sun <sqa24@mit.edu>, Zhicheng Jiang
<jzc 2007@mit.edu>, Hanhong Zhao <zhh24@mit.edu>, Kaiming He <kaiming@mit.edu>.

We present a theoretical analysis of the behavior of these
models in the absence of noise conditioning. Specifically,
we investigate the inherent uncertainty in the noise level distribution, the error caused by denoising without noise condi-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

