Portable Reward Tuning:
Towards Reusable Fine-Tuning across Different Pretrained Models

Daiki Chijiwa * 1 Taku Hasegawa * 2 Kyosuke Nishida 2 Kuniko Saito 2 Susumu Takeuchi 1

Abstract

gence (Bommasani et al., 2021). They are typically largescale neural networks pretrained on massive amounts of data
from the Internet, which makes them generalizable to various downstream tasks, such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
for visual recognition and L LAMA-series (Touvron et al.,
2023a;b) for language generation. Even though foundation
models are somewhat already capable of handling downstream tasks, we can further bring out their potential ability
by fine-tuning for each task, i.e., additional optimization
of the foundation models on supervised data. Furthermore,
fine-tuning can also be used for aligning the behavior of
foundation models to follow human instructions or preferences, by instruction tuning or reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF; Christiano et al. (2017)).

While foundation models have been exploited for
various expert tasks through fine-tuning, any foundation model will become outdated due to its old
knowledge or limited capability. Thus the underlying foundation model should be eventually
replaced by new ones, which leads to repeated
cost of fine-tuning these new models. Existing
work addresses this problem by inference-time
tuning, i.e., modifying the output probabilities
from the new foundation model with the outputs
from the old foundation model and its fine-tuned
model, which involves an additional overhead in
inference by the latter two models. In this paper,
we propose a new fine-tuning principle, Portable
Reward Tuning (PRT), that reduces the inference
overhead by its nature, based on the reformulation
of fine-tuning as the reward maximization. Specifically, instead of fine-tuning parameters of the
foundation models, PRT trains the reward model
explicitly through the same loss function as in
fine-tuning. During inference, the reward model
can be used with any foundation model (with the
same set of vocabularies or labels) through the formulation of reward maximization. Experimental
results, covering both vision and language models, demonstrate that the PRT-trained model can
achieve comparable accuracy to the existing work
of inference-time tuning, with less inference cost.

Although fine-tuning has been the standard principle for
tuning foundation models, there still remains an overlooked
problem in the long term: the underlying foundation models
should be eventually replaced by other (often newer) foundation models for various reasons, such as their outdated
knowledge or limited capability, which requires the new
foundation models to be fine-tuned on every task again. For
example, (i) in the case of open-source CLIP models (Schuhmann et al., 2021; 2022), an early model was initially trained
on a dataset with 400 million image-text pairs, but later it
was replaced by new versions trained on 2 billion and 5 billion pairs; (ii) in the case of the L LAMA series, both major
updates (e.g., L LAMA-2 to L LAMA-3) and minor updates
(e.g., L LAMA-3.1 to L LAMA-3.2) have occurred. Every time
such an update occurs, one may have to fine-tune the new
foundation model again, which poses an important issue of
the repeated training cost.

1. Introduction

One promising approach for this challenge is inference-time
tuning (Mitchell et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a), which emulates fine-tuning of the new foundation model even with
a possibly different architecture, by mixing three output
probabilities from the old foundation model, its fine-tuned
model, and the new foundation model. More specifically,
the approach first defines an implicit reward for each task
as the logarithmic density ratio of the output probabilities
from the (old) foundation and its fine-tuned models. Then,
it reinterprets fine-tuning as maximization of the implicit
reward with penalizing the deviation from the foundation

Foundation models, or simply pretrained models, play a
central role in the recent development of artificial intelli*

1
Equal contribution
NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation 2 NTT Human Informatics Laboratories, NTT Corporation.
Correspondence
to: Daiki Chijiwa <daiki.chijiwa@ntt.com>, Taku Hasegawa
<taku.hasegawa@ntt.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

