Adversarial Reasoning at Jailbreaking Time

Mahdi Sabbaghi 1 Paul Kassianik 2 George Pappas 1 Amin Karbasi 1 Hamed Hassani 1

Abstract

level modifications of the input to minimize some loss value,
often using gradient-based heuristics (Zou et al., 2023) or
random searches (Andriushchenko et al., 2024a). Such
methods view jailbreaking as an optimization problem over
sequences of tokens and use the loss information to inform their navigation through the optimization landscape.
As a consequence, token-level methods produce semantically meaningless input prompts that can be mitigated by
perplexity-based or smoothing-based filters (Alon & Kamfonas, 2023; Robey et al., 2024b).

As large language models (LLMs) are becoming
more capable and widespread, the study of their
failure cases is becoming increasingly important.
Recent advances in standardizing, measuring, and
scaling test-time compute suggest new methodologies for optimizing models to achieve high performance on hard tasks. In this paper, we apply
these advances to the task of “model jailbreaking”:
eliciting harmful responses from aligned LLMs.
We develop an adversarial reasoning approach to
automatic jailbreaking that leverages a loss signal
to guide the test-time compute, achieving SOTA
attack success rates against many aligned LLMs,
even those that aim to trade inference-time compute for adversarial robustness. Our approach introduces a new paradigm in understanding LLM
vulnerabilities, laying the foundation for the development of more robust and trustworthy AI systems. Code is available at Github.

In contrast, semantic-space attacks generate semantically
coherent adversarial prompts using techniques like multiround LLM interactions or fine-tuning for crafted outputs
(Chao et al., 2024b; Ge et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b; Mehrotra et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024; Samvelyan et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2024a). A notable subset deploys chain-of-thought
reasoning (Wei et al., 2023b; Nye et al., 2021) to guide the interaction with the target LLM and better navigate the prompt
search space (Chao et al., 2024b; Mehrotra et al., 2024).
These methods are designed to exploit binary feedback from
the target LLM of the form “has the current prompt jailbroken the target LLM or not?”. Binary feedback effectively
quantifies attack success on black-box models, but it provides limited information for the intermediate stages. This
sparsity hampers search effectiveness in the prompt space to
exploit the safety vulnerabilities of the target LLM, particularly against adversarially trained models (Zou et al., 2024;
Sheshadri et al., 2024; Xhonneux et al., 2024). An extensive
search through the prompt space requires a more granular
signal—e.g., loss values—to efficiently traverse the prompt
landscape and identify the target LLM weaknesses.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed
with various safety techniques to ensure alignment with human values. Common strategies include RLHF (Christiano
et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022), DPO (Rafailov et al.,
2024), and the usage of dedicated guardrail models (Inan
et al., 2023; Rebedea et al., 2023). In nominal use cases,
alignment methods typically refuse to generate objectionable content, but adversarially designed prompts can bypass
these guardrails. A challenge known as jailbreaking consists of finding prompts that circumvent safety measures
and elicit undesirable behaviors.

In this paper, we present Adversarial Reasoning: a framework that uses reasoning to effectively exploit the feedback
signals provided by the target LLM to bypass its guardrails.
Adversarial Reasoning consists of three key steps: reason,
verify, and search. We utilize a loss function derived from
the target’s response to guide the process. The reasoning
step constructs chain-of-thought (CoT) paths aiming to reduce the loss values. The verifier assigns a score based on
loss values to each intermediate step of the reasoning paths.
Finally, the search step, informed by the verifier, prunes the
CoT paths and sometimes backtracks to obtain a minimalloss solution. To realize the adversarial reasoning steps,
we employ three LLM-based modules: (1) Attacker, which

Current jailbreaking methods fall into two categories: tokenspace and semantic-space attacks. Token-space attacks
(Shin et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023; Hayase
et al., 2024; Andriushchenko et al., 2024a) focus on token1 University of Pennsylvania 2 Robust Intelligence @ Cisco.
Correspondence to: Mahdi Sabagghi <smahdi@seas.upenn.edu>,
Paul Kassianik <paulkass@cisco.com>.

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

