Attention-Level Speculation

Jack Cai 1 2 Ammar Vora 1 2 Randolph Zhang 3 Mark O’Connor 2 Mark C. Jeffrey 1

Abstract

As model sizes and context lengths increase (Chitty-Venkata
et al., 2024; Shoeybi et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019), a single accelerator can no longer meet the memory and compute
demands. Tensor parallelism (splitting the model weights
across devices) and data parallelism (replicating the model
weights on each device) have been widely used for largescale LLM inference. Despite their adoption, these techniques exhibit the following problems during the causal
decode phase, hurting token-generation latency:

As Large Language Models (LLMs) grow in size
and context length, efficient inference strategies
are essential to maintain low-latency token generation. Unfortunately, conventional tensor and
data parallelism face diminishing returns when
scaling across multiple devices. We propose
a novel form—attention-level speculative parallelism (ALSpec)—that predicts self-attention outputs to execute subsequent operations early on
separate devices. Our approach overlaps attention and non-attention computations, reducing
the attention latency overhead at 128K context
length by up to 5× and improving end-to-end decode latency by up to 1.65×, all without sacrificing quality. We establish the fundamental pillars
for speculative execution and provide an execution paradigm that simplifies implementation. We
show that existing attention-approximation methods perform well on simple information retrieval
tasks, but they fail in advanced reasoning and
math. Combined with speculative execution, we
can approximate up to 90% of self-attention without harming model correctness. Demonstrated on
Tenstorrent’s NPU devices,1 we scale up LLM
inference beyond current techniques, paving the
way for faster inference in transformer models.

1. Tensor parallelism suffers from communication overhead.
Latency for operations like all-gather grows with more
devices, yielding diminishing returns with device scaling.
2. Data parallelism improves throughput with large batch
sizes but does not improve latency.
3. As the key-value (KV) caches grow with context length,
self-attention becomes a bottleneck and increases overall
latency (see Section 5.1 and Appendix D for details).
We observe in Figure 1(left) that during token generation at
small context length, the majority of latency comes from the
non-self-attention operations, particularly the feed-forward
networks. The self-attention latency grows linearly with
context length. In contrast, the non-self-attention latency
stays constant. This motivates our question: Can we overlap
attention with other operations to hide the increasing cost
without compromising model correctness?
We propose attention-level speculation (ALSpec), replacing some full self-attentions with cheaper approximations
(e.g., windowed attention with attention sink (Xiao et al.,
2024)) and verifying the approximation against the true attention in parallel. When the approximation is accurate, ALSpec commits and skips expensive calculations. This form
of speculation, when successful, allows non-self-attention
operations to overlap in time with the self-attention operations. We find that up to 90% of the self-attention operations can be safely speculated without harming output
quality. In contrast to decode-level speculation (Leviathan
et al., 2023), ALSpec can be applied to emerging model
architectures with recurrent hidden states, such as layerlooping (Eyuboglu et al., 2024) and continuous chain-ofthoughts (Hao et al., 2024). When computing resources are
abundant, ALSpec could be coupled with tensor parallelism
and decode-level speculation to deliver even lower latency.
Figure 1 shows that ALSpec delivers up to 5× reduction in

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art Large Language Models (LLMs) for token
generation often rely on decoder-only transformer architectures (Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024; Jiang
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Almazrouei et al., 2023).
These models stack repetitive layers of self-attention and
feed-forward operations, allowing efficient scaling across
layers (Tay et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023).
1

University of Toronto 2 Tenstorrent 3 University of Waterloo.
Correspondence to: Mark C. Jeffrey <mcj@ece.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is at github.com/mcj-group/alspec

1

