Novelty Detection in Reinforcement Learning with World Models

Geigh Zollicoffer 1 Kenneth Eaton 2 Jonathan Balloch 3 Julia Kim 3 Wei Zhou 3 Robert Wright 2 Mark Riedl 3

Abstract

can undergo distributional shifts in the underlying transition
dynamics. In this paper, we address novelty detection, a
form of anomaly detection, which is relatively unexplored in
reinforcement learning (Müller et al., 2022; Nasvytis et al.,
2024). Novelties are sudden changes to the observation
space or environment state transition dynamics that occur
at inference time that are unanticipated (or unanticipatable)
by the agent during training (Balloch et al., 2022). Novelties represent a permanent shift in observation space or
environment state transition dynamics, as opposed to oneoff sensory or transition errors; when a novelty occurs it
may not be encountered immediately by an agent, and because transition dynamics may be uncertain, only become
apparent after several actions (Balloch et al., 2022).

Reinforcement learning (RL) using world models has found significant recent successes. However, when a sudden change to world mechanics
or properties occurs then agent performance and
reliability can dramatically decline. We refer to
the sudden change in visual properties or state
transitions as novelties. Implementing novelty detection within generated world model frameworks
is a crucial task for protecting the agent when
deployed. In this paper, we propose straightforward bounding approaches to incorporate novelty
detection into world model RL agents by utilizing the misalignment of the world model’s hallucinated states and the true observed states as a
novelty score. We provide effective approaches
to detecting novelties in a distribution of transitions learned by an agent in a world model. Finally, we show the advantage of our work in MiniGrid, Atari, and DeepMind Control environments
compared to traditional machine learning novelty
detection methods as well as currently accepted
RL-focused novelty detection algorithms.

To motivate the work, consider Table 1. The top row shows
what an agent sees when training, when a novelty is introduced at inference time, and post-novelty. The bottom row
shows the reconstructed image from the world model’s prediction of the next state. Post-novelty, the world model’s
predicted state begins differing radically from the ground
truth. In cases where there is a novel change, the RL agent’s
converged policy is no longer reliable, and the agent can
make catastrophic mistakes. The agent may flounder ineffectually, or, worse, the agent can mistakenly take action
that put itself or others in harms way.

1. Introduction

There are several ways of addressing inference-time novelty
depending on the nature of the agent’s task. One may halt
execution because continuing to run the policy has become
potentially dangerous, for example in the case of a robotic
platform or agent interacting with people, financial systems,
or other high-stakes situations. Once halted, an operator figures out the best way to retrain the agent. Alternatively, one
may attempt novelty adaptation where the agent attempts
to update its own policy during online inference time (Zhao
et al., 2019; Wilson & Cook, 2020).

Reinforcement learning (RL) using world models has found
significant recent successes due to its strength in sampling
efficiency and ability to incorporate well-studied Markov
Decision Process techniques (Moerland et al., 2020; Robine
et al., 2021). A world model (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018b)
is a model that predicts the world state given a current state
and the execution that was executed (or will be executed).
While RL agents are often trained and evaluated in environments with stationary transition functions, the real world
1
Department of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, United States of America 2 Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, United States of America 3 Department of Computer
Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, United States of
America. Correspondence to: Mark Riedl <riedl@cc.gatech.edu>,
Geigh Zollicoffer <gzollicoffer3@gatech.edu>.

In either case, one must detect that novelty has occurred
prior to halting or adapting. The standard approach—
as exemplified by Recurrent Implicit Quantile Networks
(RIQN)1 (Danesh & Fern, 2021)—is to treat novelty as a
distribution shift in either the observation space or the stateaction transition probability. This is traditionally accom-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
RIQN is the baseline method used in Out-of-Distribution Dynamics Detection: RL-Relevant Benchmarks and Results.

1

