Isolated Causal Effects of Natural Language

Victoria Lin 1 Louis-Philippe Morency 1 Eli Ben-Michael 1

Abstract
As language technologies become widespread, it
is important to understand how changes in language affect reader perceptions and behaviors.
These relationships may be formalized as the
isolated causal effect of some focal languageencoded intervention (e.g., factual inaccuracies)
on an external outcome (e.g., readers’ beliefs).
In this paper, we introduce a formal estimation
framework for isolated causal effects of language.
We show that a core challenge of estimating isolated effects is the need to approximate all nonfocal language outside of the intervention. Drawing on the principle of omitted variable bias, we
provide measures for evaluating the quality of
both non-focal language approximations and isolated effect estimates themselves. We find that
poor approximation of non-focal language can
lead to bias in the corresponding isolated effect
estimates due to omission of relevant variables,
and we show how to assess the sensitivity of effect estimates to such bias along the two key axes
of fidelity and overlap. In experiments on semisynthetic and real-world data, we validate the ability of our framework to correctly recover isolated
effects and demonstrate the utility of our proposed
measures.

(a) The isolated causal effect of a language attribute like netspeak
can be learned by decomposing a text X into focal language a(X)
and non-focal language ac (X).

(b) Non-focal language cannot be measured directly and instead
must be approximated. Due to potential omitted variable bias,
which approximation we choose can significantly affect the isolated effect estimate.
Figure 1. Isolated causal effects allow us to understand how
changes in language affect reader perceptions and behaviors.

1. Introduction
(e.g., profanity) cause readers to perceive a passage of text
as hateful? Does use of rapport-building language by therapists help to improve patients’ mental health outcomes? Do
factual inaccuracies propagated in machine-generated texts
have negative impacts on readers’ beliefs or behaviors?

The widespread use of language technologies has given
rise to an ever-expanding amount of human- and machinegenerated text data. From this vast body of data emerges
the opportunity to understand how information contained in
language relates to real-world outcomes. Elucidating these
relationships can help answer scientifically interesting questions and provide interpretability to texts and the models
that generate them. For instance, what language attributes

The way in which language choices affect reader perceptions
can be formalized as the causal effect of some languageencoded intervention—often a linguistic attribute—on an
external outcome (Lin et al., 2023). However, because language is highly aliased (i.e., correlated with itself), the effect
of such an intervention may be influenced by the surrounding linguistic context (Fong & Grimmer, 2023). For instance, machine-generated texts with factual inaccuracies
may also contain other undesirable attributes likely to in-

1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Victoria Lin <vlin2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

