Towards Robust Influence Functions with Flat Validation Minima
Xichen Ye 1 Yifan Wu 1 Weizhong Zhang 1 2 Cheng Jin 1 3 Yifan Chen 4

Abstract

𝑅

The Influence Function (IF) is a widely used technique for assessing the impact of individual training samples on model predictions. However, existing IF methods often fail to provide reliable
influence estimates in deep neural networks, particularly when applied to noisy training data. This
issue does not stem from inaccuracies in parameter change estimation, which has been the primary
focus of prior research, but rather from deficiencies in loss change estimation, specifically due
to the sharpness of validation risk. In this work,
we establish a theoretical connection between influence estimation error, validation set risk, and
its sharpness, underscoring the importance of flat
validation minima for accurate influence estimation. Furthermore, we introduce a novel estimation form of Influence Function specifically designed for flat validation minima. Experimental
results across various tasks validate the superiority
of our approach.

𝑅

Sharp Minima

Flat Minima

Large
Gap

Δ𝜃

(a) Sharp Minima

𝜃

Small
Gap
Δ𝜃

𝜃

(b) Flat Minima

Figure 1. Illustration of flat minima. R-axis indicates the risk,
while Î and I denote the estimated and actual influence (increase
in empirical risk after deviating from minima), respectively. θ
refers to the model parameters, and ∆θ represents the parameter
change. The orange arrows indicate the first-order or secondorder approximation used to estimate the influence. As shown, the
estimation gap is smaller in flat minima, leading to more reliable
influence (marginal increase in risk) estimation.

2020). These issues degrade model performance, making
it crucial to understand how training data and trained models interact (Hammoudeh & Lowd, 2024). One key aspect
of this interaction is assessing the influence of individual
training samples on model predictions (Koh & Liang, 2017).

1. Introduction

A widely used approach for this purpose is the Influence
Function (IF) (Koh & Liang, 2017), which provides insights
into the predictions of Deep Neural Networks by estimating
the impact of individual training samples. Specifically, IF
estimates the change in the empirical risk on the validation
set (or loss on a specific validation sample) resulting from
small perturbations to the training set (e.g., the removal
of a single training sample), using an estimated parameter
change as a proxy. By serving as an efficient surrogate
for the computationally expensive leave-one-out (LOO) retraining approach (Cook & Weisberg, 1982), IF enables the
identification of the most influential samples in the training
set of deep networks without retraining for each sample. Recent studies have successfully leveraged IF across various
tasks, demonstrating its strong potential in practice (Pruthi
et al., 2020; Han et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2022; Kim et al.,
2023; Kwon et al., 2024).

Training data is the fundamental component of machine
learning, and its quality is critical for ensuring accurate
and reliable predictions (Algan & Ulusoy, 2021; de Vargas
et al., 2023). As large-scale foundation models, such as
large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020) and
text-to-image generative models (Rombach et al., 2022), become more prevalent, the demand for vast amounts of data
to achieve high performance has grown exponentially. However, datasets—especially those sourced from the internet or
generated by models—are often uncurated and may contain
quite a few anomalous or mislabeled samples (Pleiss et al.,
1
Fudan University 2 Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing 3 Innovation Center of Calligraphy and Painting Creation Technology, MCT, China 4 Hong
Kong Baptist University.
Correspondence to: Weizhong
Zhang < weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn>, Yifan Chen <yifanc@hkbu.edu.hk>.

Despite its broad applicability, existing Influence Functions often struggle when applied to noisy training data,
posing a significant challenge since IF is supposed to distinguish high-quality data from noisy or anomalous sam-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

