How Transformers Learn Regular Language Recognition: A Theoretical Study
on Training Dynamics and Implicit Bias

Ruiquan Huang 1 Yingbin Liang 2 Jing Yang 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become foundational in modern machine learning, revolutionizing natural
language processing (NLP) tasks such as language modeling (Devlin et al., 2018), translation (Wang et al., 2019),
and text generation (Radford et al., 2019). Among these,
language recognition tasks are fundamental to NLP and
are widely used to benchmark the empirical performance of
large language models (LLMs) (Bhattamishra et al., 2020;
Deletang et al., 2023). Beyond their practical applications,
these tasks hold significant potential for uncovering the underlying working mechanism of transformers. A growing
body of research has explored the expressiveness and learnability of transformers in these settings (Strobl et al., 2024;
Hahn & Rofin, 2024; Chiang & Cholak, 2022; Merrill &
Sabharwal, 2023; Hahn, 2020). Despite this, there has been
little effort to understand transformers’ training dynamics
in language recognition tasks.

Language recognition tasks are fundamental in
natural language processing (NLP) and have been
widely used to benchmark the performance of
large language models (LLMs). These tasks also
play a crucial role in explaining the working mechanisms of transformers. In this work, we focus on
two representative tasks in the category of regular
language recognition, known as ‘even pairs’ and
‘parity check’, the aim of which is to determine
whether the occurrences of certain subsequences
in a given sequence are even. Our goal is to explore how a one-layer transformer, consisting of
an attention layer followed by a linear layer, learns
to solve these tasks by theoretically analyzing its
training dynamics under gradient descent. While
even pairs can be solved directly by a one-layer
transformer, parity check need to be solved by
integrating Chain-of-Thought (CoT), either into
the inference stage of a transformer well-trained
for the even pairs task, or into the training of a
one-layer transformer. For both problems, our
analysis shows that the joint training of attention
and linear layers exhibits two distinct phases. In
the first phase, the attention layer grows rapidly,
mapping data sequences into separable vectors.
In the second phase, the attention layer becomes
stable, while the linear layer grows logarithmically and approaches in direction to a max-margin
hyperplane that correctly separates the attention
layer outputs into positive and negative samples,
and the loss decreases at a rate of O(1/t). Our
experiments validate those theoretical results.

In this work, we take the first step towards bridging this gap
by focusing on two fundamental pattern recognition tasks
in formal language recognition, known as ‘even pairs’ and
‘parity check’ problems, and explore how transformers can
be trained to learn these tasks from a theoretical perspective.
Specifically, the objective of the ‘even pairs’ problem is to
determine whether the total number of specific subsequences
in a binary sequence is even, and the objective of the ‘parity
check’ problem is to determine whether the total occurrence
of a single pattern is even. These tasks are particularly
compelling for studying transformers because they require
the model to recognize parity constraints and capture global
dependencies across long sequences, which are essential
for real-world applications such as syntax parsing and error
detection in communication systems.
For the two problems of our interest, the even pairs problem has not been studied before theoretically. The parity
check problem has recently been studied in Kim & Suzuki
(2024b); Wen et al. (2024), which characterized the training dynamics of CoT for learning parity. However, Kim &
Suzuki (2024b) analyzed the training of an attention layer
only, leaving more general characterization of joint training of feed-forward and attention layers yet to be studied.
Wen et al. (2024) analyzed three iteration steps in training

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State
University, State College, PA 16801, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904,
USA. Correspondence to: Jing Yang <yangjing@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

