BRIDGE: Bootstrapping Text to Control Time-Series Generation
via Multi-Agent Iterative Optimization and Diffusion Modeling

Hao Li * 1 2 Yu-Hao Huang * 1 3 Chang Xu 1 Viktor Schlegel 2 4
Renhe Jiang 5 Riza Batista-Navarro 2 Goran Nenadic 2 Jiang Bian 1

Abstract

2020), healthcare (Li et al., 2023) and environmental science
(Hasnain et al., 2022). For example, realistic synthetic medical electrocardiogram (ECG) patterns can be used to train
medical residents (Pöhl et al., 2025; Hong & Chun, 2023),
while simulating regional electricity usage can be used to
stress test the power grid (Westgaard et al., 2021). Although
some remarkable works (Huang & Deng, 2023; Bao et al.,
2024) have been done for TSG, showing promising results
in generating realistic and coherent time series (TS), most
of them focus on the basic setting—unconditional single
domain generation. However, in real application scenarios,
there are specific constraints or requirements for the generated TS to be met, such as specifying domain-specific characteristics, incorporating prior knowledge (Yuan & Qiao,
2024), or satisfying operational constraints (Coletta et al.,
2023). For instance, it may be necessary to generate ECG
patterns that respect individual patient profiles or capture
specific disease conditions (Schlegel et al., 2023). Therefore, the current status in TSG, while demonstrating strong
foundational performance, leaves a significant gap for addressing more complex, constrained generation tasks that
are crucial for real-world applications.

Time-series Generation (TSG) is a prominent
research area with broad applications in simulations, data augmentation, and counterfactual
analysis. While existing methods have shown
promise in unconditional single-domain TSG,
real-world applications demand for cross-domain
approaches capable of controlled generation tailored to domain-specific constraints and instancelevel requirements. In this paper, we argue that
text can provide semantic insights, domain information and instance-specific temporal patterns,
to guide and improve TSG. We introduce “TextControlled TSG”, a task focused on generating realistic time series by incorporating textual descriptions. To address data scarcity in this setting, we
propose a novel LLM-based Multi-Agent framework that synthesizes diverse, realistic text-to-TS
datasets. Furthermore, we introduce B RIDGE, a
hybrid text-controlled TSG framework that integrates semantic prototypes with text description
for supporting domain-level guidance. This approach achieves state-of-the-art generation fidelity
on 11 of 12 datasets, and improves controllability
by up to 12% on MSE and 6% MAE compared to
no text input generation, highlighting its potential
for generating tailored time-series data. Our code
is available at: Microsoft/TimeCraft1 .

Some prior work on cross-domain TSG has explored various ways to meet specific generation needs, with most
focusing on leveraging domain information to control the
generation process. Some approaches rely on explicit domain labels during training (Huang et al., 2024; Kollovieh
et al., 2024), treating the task as a conditional generation
problem. This allows users to specify the domain during
inference. However, this method is limited as it struggles
with unseen domains and becomes inefficient when the number of domains is large. Other methods incorporate specific
information through natural language (Zhou et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024d), but they operate at the domain level, thus
failing to provide detailed fine-grained and instance-specific
control, which is essential for more accurate and tailored
TSG, highlighting a significant gap in the field.

1. Introduction
High-quality Time Series Generation (TSG) is an important task in various domains, including finance (Sezer et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research 2 The University
of Manchester, UK 3 Nanjing University, China 4 Imperial College London, Imperial Global Singapore, Singapore 5 The University of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Chang Xu
<chanx@microsoft.com>.

In this work, we investigate the challenging yet practical research problem of achieving instance-level controlled TSG
capable of generalising to unseen domains. Inspired by the
recent success of controlled content generation in images

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Work done during Hao Li and Yu-Hao Huang’s research internship at Microsoft Research.

1

