Generative Point Cloud Registration

Haobo Jiang 1 Jin Xie 2 Jian Yang 3 Liang Yu 4 Jianmin Zheng 1
Generative 3D Registration

Geometry-only Matching
& Pose Estimation

Match-ControlNet

Source

In this paper, we propose a novel 3D registration paradigm, Generative Point Cloud Registration, which bridges advanced 2D generative models with 3D matching tasks to enhance registration performance. Our key idea is to generate
cross-view consistent image pairs that are wellaligned with the source and target point clouds,
enabling geometry-color feature fusion to facilitate robust matching. To ensure high-quality
matching, the generated image pair should feature both 2D-3D geometric consistency and crossview texture consistency. To achieve this, we introduce Match-ControlNet, a matching-specific,
controllable 2D generative model. Specifically,
it leverages the depth-conditioned generation capability of ControlNet to produce images that
are geometrically aligned with depth maps derived from point clouds, ensuring 2D-3D geometric consistency. Additionally, by incorporating a
coupled conditional denoising scheme and coupled prompt guidance, Match-ControlNet further
promotes cross-view feature interaction, guiding
texture consistency generation. Our generative
3D registration paradigm is general and could
be seamlessly integrated into various registration
methods to enhance their performance. Extensive
experiments on 3DMatch and ScanNet datasets
verify the effectiveness of our approach. [Code]

Target

Color-Geometric Matching
& Pose Estimation

Conventional 3D Registration

Abstract

Generated Images

Figure 1. Paradigm comparison of our generative point cloud
registration with conventional methods. Unlike geometry-only
matching in previous methods, our approach introduces MatchControlNet, a matching-specific 2D generative model that generates cross-view images pairs from point cloud data, providing rich
color cues for enhanced geometric matching and pose estimation.

challenges like low overlap and noisy points still hinder its
adoption in broader real-world scenarios.
Existing 3D registration methods can be roughly categorized into traditional approaches and data-driven deep methods. The traditional approaches include optimization-based
fine alignment methods (Besl & McKay, 1992; Yang et al.,
2013), which iteratively perform least-squares pose optimization for precise alignment, and handcrafted descriptorbased coarse alignment methods (Rusu et al., 2008; 2009),
which capture local geometry to establish correspondences
for hypothesize-and-verify registration. Deep registration
methods, whether end-to-end (Yew & Lee, 2020; 2022) or
descriptor-based (Huang et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022; Jiang
et al., 2023a), exploit the power of deep neural networks to
learn discriminative deep 3D features for robust matching.
These deep methods significantly enhance the quality of estimated correspondences and improve registration accuracy.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a problem of finding the optimal
rigid transformation, comprising a 3D rotation and a 3D
translation, which aligns the source and target point clouds
precisely. It plays an important role in various downstream
computer vision applications, such as 3D reconstruction, LiDAR SLAM, and object localization. However, real-world

Despite the impressive performance achieved by current
point cloud registration methods, their robustness remains
limited in challenging scenarios that contain low overlap,
repetitive patterns, or noisy points. Recent RGB-D registration studies (Yuan et al., 2023; Mu et al., 2024) have shown
that incorporating rich texture and semantic cues from RGB
images would significantly enhance the distinctiveness of
point cloud descriptors, leading to improved matching accuracy. However, in geometry-only point cloud registration,
the RGB images corresponding to the point clouds are unavailable, and existing methods rely solely on 3D geometric
information for correspondence estimation and pose calcu-

1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Nanjing University, China 3 Nankai University, China 4 Alibaba Group, China.
Correspondence to: Jianmin Zheng <ASJMZheng@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

