Towards Black-Box Membership Inference Attack for Diffusion Models

Jingwei Li 1 2 Jing Dong 3 Tianxing He 1 2 Jingzhao Zhang 1 2

Abstract

generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Nichol
et al., 2021) and image-to-image generation (Saharia et al.,
2022a). This surge has given rise to powerful AI art models
such as DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), and Imagen (Saharia et al.,
2022b). AI-generated art has a promising future and is
expected to have widespread impact.

Given the rising popularity of AI-generated art
and the associated copyright concerns, identifying whether an artwork was used to train a diffusion model is an important research topic. The
work approaches this problem from the membership inference attack (MIA) perspective. We first
identify the limitation of applying existing MIA
methods for proprietary diffusion models: the
required access of internal U-nets. To address
the above problem, we introduce a novel membership inference attack method that uses only
the image-to-image variation API and operates
without access to the model’s internal U-net. Our
method is based on the intuition that the model
can more easily obtain an unbiased noise prediction estimate for images from the training set. By
applying the API multiple times to the target image, averaging the outputs, and comparing the
result to the original image, our approach can
classify whether a sample was part of the training
set. We validate our method using DDIM and
Stable Diffusion setups and further extend both
our approach and existing algorithms to the Diffusion Transformer architecture. Our experimental
results consistently outperform previous methods.

Effective training of diffusion models requires high-quality
data. It is thus crucial to design an algorithm that can identify whether a specific artwork has been used during the
training of a model, thereby providing protection for these
artworks and detecting misuse of data. This is especially
important due to the rapid growth of generative models,
which has raised concerns over intellectual property (IP)
rights, data privacy, and the ethical implications of training
on copyrighted or proprietary content without consent. As
these models are increasingly deployed across industries,
detecting whether a specific piece of content was used in
training can help prevent unauthorized use of artistic works,
protecting creators’ copyrights and ownership rights. This
is a classic problem in the field of machine learning, first
introduced by Shokri et al. (2017) and named “membership
inference attack”.
A series of studies have been conducted on membership
inference attacks against diffusion models. Hu & Pang
(2023) was the first to examine this issue, utilizing the loss
function values of diffusion models to determine whether
an image is in the training set. Duan et al. (2023) and Kong
et al. (2023) extended this work by relaxing assumptions
about the access requirements of the model.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a surge in the popularity of generative models, with diffusion models in particular, gaining
huge attention within the AI community (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020b).
These models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities
across various tasks, including unconditional image generation (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a), text-to-image

Despite great progress, previous methods are not yet ready
for MIA in proprietary diffusion models. Most existing
approaches heavily rely on checking whether the U-net of
the model predicts noise accurately, which is not practical
since most commercial diffusion models available today
offer only API access, while the U-net remains hidden.

1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qizhi Institute 3 The Chinese
University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Jingwei Li <ljw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jingzhao Zhang
<jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

To address the above issue, we propose a membership inference attack method that relies on the variation API and does
not require access to the denoise model (e.g., U-net). We
observe that if we alter an image using the target diffusion
model’s variation API, the sampling process will be captured by “a region of attraction” if the model has seen this
image during training (illustrated in Figure 2). Based on the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

