All-atom inverse protein folding through discrete flow matching

Kai Yi * 1 Kiarash Jamali * 1 Sjors H. W. Scheres 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The introduction of AlphaFold2 (Jumper et al., 2021) represented a breakthrough in the prediction of three-dimensional
protein structures from amino acid sequence. AlphaFold2
also catalysed advances in de novo protein design, where
one aims to design an amino acid sequence that adopts a
given three-dimensional structure, in a process called inverse protein folding (Dauparas et al., 2022). Combined
with diffusion-based methods to generate protein structures
(Watson et al., 2023), inverse folding methods have opened
new frontiers in the design of proteins with specific structural and functional properties, with profound implications
for enzyme engineering (Lauko et al., 2024), antibody development (Bennett et al., 2024), and therapeutic interventions
(Glögl et al., 2024).

The recent breakthrough of AlphaFold3 in modeling complex biomolecular interactions, including
those between proteins and ligands, nucleotides,
or metal ions, creates new opportunities for protein design. In so-called inverse protein folding, the objective is to find a sequence of amino
acids that adopts a target protein structure. Many
inverse folding methods struggle to predict sequences for complexes that contain non-protein
components, and perform poorly with complexes
that adopt multiple structural states. To address
these challenges, we present ADFLIP (All-atom
Discrete FLow matching Inverse Protein folding), a generative model based on discrete flowmatching for designing protein sequences conditioned on all-atom structural contexts. ADFLIP
progressively incorporates predicted amino acid
side chains as structural context during sequence
generation and enables the design of dynamic protein complexes through ensemble sampling across
multiple structural states. Furthermore, ADFLIP
implements training-free classifier guidance sampling, which allows the incorporation of arbitrary
pre-trained models to optimise the designed sequence for desired protein properties. We evaluated the performance of ADFLIP on protein complexes with small-molecule ligands, nucleotides,
or metal ions, including dynamic complexes for
which structure ensembles were determined by
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Our model
achieves state-of-the-art performance in singlestructure and multi-structure inverse folding tasks,
demonstrating excellent potential for all-atom protein design. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ykiiiiii/ADFLIP.

Because AlphaFold2 only considered proteins, most protein design efforts to date have also focused on structures
that exclusively comprise proteins. However, many biological reactions that are necessary to sustain life employ
a much wider range of chemistry. For example, chemical
modification of the amino acids that make up proteins may
be used to signal distinct functional states; the binding of
small-molecule ligands in specific protein pockets often affects function; many proteins interact with nucleic acids
that carry genetic information; and many chemical reactions
are catalysed by metal ions that are bound to enzymes. Recently, AlphaFold3 (Abramson et al., 2024) expanded the
prediction of biological structures beyond proteins by modelling complex assemblies that also include nucleic acids,
small molecules, metal ions, and chemical modifications
of amino acids. This advance in structure prediction again
created parallel opportunities for inverse folding (Dauparas
et al., 2023), but the design of amino acid sequences for
biomolecular complexes that contain a wide range of chemical entities remains more challenging than the design of
proteins only.
An additional complication in protein design is that many
biomolecular complexes are also structurally dynamic.
Much like machines in daily life, the functional cycle of
such complexes involves multiple structural states, even
though their amino acid sequence is fixed. Although current
models for inverse folding perform relatively well on static
protein structures, they often struggle with complexes that

*

Equal contribution 1 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Sjors H. W. Scheres
<scheres@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

