Learning Utilities from Demonstrations in Markov Decision Processes

Filippo Lazzati 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

Abstract

vides the most popular and powerful models of the behavior of the observed agent, named “expert”. IRL models
assume the existence of a reward function that rationalizes
the expert’s behavior and differ from each other based on
the specific assumption of how the expert behaves based
on the given reward. For instance, Ng & Russell (2000)
considers the expert as playing an optimal policy, Poiani
et al. (2024) considers an ϵ-optimal policy, Malik et al.
(2021) considers an optimal policy satisfying some constraints, Ziebart (2010); Fu et al. (2017) assume that the expert plays actions proportionally to their (soft) Q-functions,
and Ramachandran & Amir (2007) assumes this probability to depend on the optimal advantage function.

Although it is well-known that humans commonly engage in risk-sensitive behaviors in the
presence of stochasticity, most Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) models assume a riskneutral agent. As such, beyond piq introducing
model misspecification, piiq they do not permit
direct inference of the risk attitude of the observed agent, which can be useful in many applications. In this paper, we propose a novel
model of behavior to cope with these issues. By
allowing for risk sensitivity, our model alleviates piq, and by explicitly representing risk attitudes through (learnable) utility functions, it
solves piiq. Then, we characterize the partial
identifiability of an agent’s utility under the new
model and note that demonstrations from multiple environments mitigate the problem. We devise two provably-efficient algorithms for learning utilities in a finite-data regime, and we conclude with some proof-of-concept experiments to
validate both our model and our algorithms.

These IRL models represent the expert as a risk-neutral
agent, i.e., an agent interested in maximizing the expected
return. However, there are many scenarios in which rational agents and humans adopt risk-sensitive strategies in the
presence of stochasticity, like finance (Föllmer & Schied,
2016), revenue management (Barz, 2007), driving (Bernhard et al., 2019), and many other choice problems (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Kreps, 1988). In these settings,
agents are not only interested in the expected return, but
in its full distribution (Bellemare et al., 2023). Thus, IRL
models incur in misspecification, that can crucially affect
the descriptive, predictive, and normative power of the inferred reward function (Skalse & Abate, 2024).

1. Introduction
The ultimate goal of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is to construct artificial rational autonomous agents (Russell &
Norvig, 2010). Such agents will interact with each other
and with human beings to achieve the tasks that we assign
to them. In this vision, a crucial feature is being able to correctly model the observed behavior of other agents. This
allows a variety of applications: descriptive, to understand
the intent of the observed agent (Russell, 1998), predictive,
to anticipate the behavior of the observed agent (potentially
in new scenarios) (Arora & Doshi, 2021), and normative,
to imitate the observed agent because they are behaving in
the “right way” (Osa et al., 2018).

In this context, in addition to misspecification, another issue of IRL models is that they do not explicitly represent
the risk attitude of the expert, which is only indirectly captured by the reward function. We desire two different representations for the task of the expert (through a reward)
and for its risk attitude (e.g., through a utility function),
analogously to what is done in Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) (Malik et al., 2021). Here, the
behavior of the expert is described by two parameters, a reward for modelling the task, and a cost for modelling the
constraints. In this way, the reward is more easily interpretable since it does not have to capture both the task and
the constraints, and, also, we can use the learned cost for
performing new tasks safely (Kim et al., 2023). For these
reasons, if we were able to directly learn the risk attitude
of the expert separately from its reward function, then we
could more easily understand its intent and anticipate its
choices in new, unseen, scenarios (Kreps, 1988).

Nowadays, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) pro1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Filippo Lazzati <filippo.lazzati@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

