Learning to Quantize for Training Vector-Quantized Networks

Peijia Qin 1 Jianguo Zhang 1 2

Abstract

Train quantizer
min ℒ(𝜙𝜙 ∗ 𝜓𝜓 , 𝜃𝜃 ∗ 𝜓𝜓 , 𝜓𝜓)
𝜙𝜙 ∗ 𝜓𝜓

𝒞𝒞 = 𝐻𝐻𝜓𝜓 (𝐸𝐸)

𝜓𝜓

Deep neural networks incorporating discrete latent variables have shown significant potential
in sequence modeling. A notable approach is
to leverage vector quantization (VQ) to generate
discrete representations within a codebook. However, its discrete nature prevents the use of standard backpropagation, which has led to challenges
in efficient codebook training. In this work, we introduce Meta-Quantization (MQ), a novel vector
quantization training framework inspired by metalearning. Our method separates the optimization
of the codebook and the auto-encoder into two
levels. Furthermore, we introduce a hyper-net to
replace the embedding-parameterized codebook,
enabling the codebook to be dynamically generated based on the feedback from the auto-encoder.
Different from previous VQ objectives, our innovation results in a meta-objective that makes
the codebook training task-aware. We validate
the effectiveness of MQ with VQVAE and VQGAN architecture on image reconstruction and
generation tasks. Experimental results showcase
the superior generative performance of MQ, underscoring its potential as a robust alternative to
existing VQ methods.

𝜃𝜃 ∗ 𝜓𝜓

Train encoder-decoder pair
min ℒ(𝜙𝜙, 𝜃𝜃, 𝜓𝜓)
𝜙𝜙,𝜃𝜃

Hyper-net: 𝐻𝐻𝜓𝜓
Learnable embedding: 𝐸𝐸𝜓𝜓

𝑒𝑒
𝑒𝑒12

𝑒𝑒𝐾𝐾

𝐻𝐻𝜓𝜓

𝐸𝐸𝜓𝜓

Encoder: 𝐹𝐹𝜙𝜙
Decoder: 𝐺𝐺𝜃𝜃

Figure 1. Our framework is based on bi-level optimization.
Meta-quantization learns the codebook and encoder-decoder pair
using a bi-level optimization framework. At the lower level, the
encoder-decoder pair is trained to converge while keeping the
codebook fixed. At the upper level, the codebook is optimized via
hyper-gradient descent using the optimal encoder-decoder pair.

learning latent variables through vector quantization (VQ,
Gray (1984)), a process that quantizes features into clusters
referred to as codes. The concept of VQNs was first introduced with the vector-quantized variational autoencoder
(VQVAE, van den Oord et al. (2017)) in the context of generative models. Subsequent research has demonstrated that
training autoregressive priors on discrete representations obtained via vector quantization yields highly effective models
for image generation (Razavi et al., 2019; Roy et al., 2018;
Ramesh et al., 2021; Esser et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2023).
Beyond image generation, VQNs have achieved notable
success in speech generation (Dhariwal et al., 2020) and
have extended their utility to other domains, such as image representation learning (Caron et al., 2020) and speech
representation learning (Chung et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Learning discrete latent variables is favorable for tasks naturally modeled as sequences of discrete symbols, including
language and speech (Vinyals et al., 2015). Vector-quantized
networks (VQNs) provide an effective approach for this by
1
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems and
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen
518055, China, and also with the Pengcheng Laboratory. Correspondence to: Jianguo Zhang <zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn>.

The training approach for vector-quantized networks
(VQNs), as implemented in VQVAE, involves learning a
codebook C to represent compressed semantic data. The
encoder Fϕ maps input data to an embedding, which is subsequently quantized by selecting the nearest neighbor in
C. The selected code replaces the embedding and is then
passed to the decoder Gθ to produce the output. Since the
quantization operation introduces a non-differentiable bottleneck, a straight-through estimator (STE, Bengio et al.
(2013)) is employed to enable gradient flow through the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

