On the Convergence of Continuous Single-timescale Actor-critic

Xuyang Chen 1 Lin Zhao 1

Abstract

to simplify the analysis, including the double-loop updates
and the two-timescale updates. The double-loop updates
perform multiple critic updates for a fixed actor (Yang et al.,
2019; Kumar et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2021; Xu et al.,
2020b). This facilitates more accurate value function estimation, which in turn enables a more precise policy gradient
estimation for the fixed actor. It allows a simple decoupled analysis of the actor and the critic. However, such
an implementation is impractical due to the high sampling
complexity. Another variant is the two-timescale actor-critic
method (Wu et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020c; Chen et al., 2023;
Shen et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2023), which assigns a smaller
step size for the actor than that of the critic, with their ratio
converging to zero as the number of iterations approaches infinity (i.e., limt→∞ αt /βt = 0). It allows an asymptotically
decoupling of the actor and the critic in the convergence
analysis, similar to performing multiple critic updates at a
fixed actor. However, such artificial slowing down of the
critic update is often not desired in practice.

Actor-critic algorithms have been instrumental
in boosting the performance of numerous challenging applications involving continuous control,
such as highly robust and agile robot motion control. However, their theoretical understanding remains largely underdeveloped. Existing analyses
mostly focus on finite state-action spaces and on
simplified variants of actor-critic, such as doubleloop updates with i.i.d. sampling, which are often impractical for real-world applications. We
consider the canonical and widely adopted singletimescale updates with Markovian sampling in
continuous state-action space. Specifically, we
establish finite-time convergence by introducing
a novel Lyapunov analysis framework, which provides a unified convergence characterization of
both the actor and the critic. Our approach is
less conservative than previous methods and offers new insights into the coupled dynamics of
actor-critic updates.

The canonical and more practical implementation of actorcritic is the single-timescale update, where the actor and
the critic are updated simultaneously with proportional step
sizes at each iteration (i.e., αt /βt = c). However, analyzing its convergence is significantly more challenging than
for the aforementioned simplified variants, as the actor and
critic updates are strongly coupled. The aforementioned decoupled analysis is over-conservative and cannot establish
the convergence of the single-timescale actor-critic. Recent efforts to study the convergence of the single-timescale
actor-critic algorithm include Chen et al. (2021), Olshevsky
& Gharesifard (2023), and Chen & Zhao (2024). However,
these works are limited to finite action spaces with i.i.d. sampling and do not extend to the more practical yet complex
setting of Markovian sampling in continuous state-action
spaces under the single-timescale update scheme (See the
comparison in Table 1). In particular, Chen et al. (2021)
and Olshevsky & Gharesifard (2023) assume i.i.d. sampling
directly from the stationary distribution for the critic and
from the discounted state visitation distribution for the actor. However, both of these distributions are unknown for
real-time online learning and hence are impractical. Additionally, Chen & Zhao (2024) considers the simpler undiscounted time-average reward setting rather than the widely
adopted discounted reward setting. The key difference is

1. Introduction
Actor-critic methods have achieved substantial success in
many challenging applications (Mnih et al., 2016; Silver
et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Lazaridis et al., 2020).
In particular, it becomes instrumental in enabling highly
robust and agile robot motion control involving continuous state-action spaces, such as quadruped locomotion
control (Hoeller et al., 2024), humanoid whole-body control (Radosavovic et al., 2024), drone racing (Kaufmann
et al., 2023), etc.
Despite substantial empirical success, the theoretical analysis of actor-critic is significantly behind. Most prior theoretical studies of actor-critic methods consider only finite
state-action spaces and focus on their impractical variants
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Lin Zhao
<elezhli@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

