Leveraging Online Olympiad-Level Math Problems for LLMs
Training and Contamination-Resistant Evaluation

Sadegh Mahdavi * 1 Muchen Li * 1 Kaiwen Liu 1 Christos Thrampoulidis 1 Leonid Sigal 1 2 3 4 Renjie Liao 1 2 3

Abstract

LLMs in this domain. Our benchmark and code
is available at https://livemathbench.
github.io/leaderboard.html

Advances in Large Language Models (LLMs)
have sparked interest in their ability to solve
Olympiad-level math problems. However, the
training and evaluation of these models are constrained by the limited size and quality of available datasets, as creating large-scale data for
such advanced problems requires extensive effort from human experts. In addition, current
benchmarks are prone to contamination, leading to unreliable evaluations. In this paper, we
present an automated pipeline that leverages the
rich resources of the Art of Problem Solving
(AoPS) forum, which predominantly features
Olympiad-level problems and community-driven
solutions. Using open-source LLMs, we develop a method to extract question-answer pairs
from the forum, resulting in AoPS-Instruct, a
dataset of more than 600,000 high-quality QA
pairs. Our experiments demonstrate that finetuning LLMs on AoPS-Instruct improves their
reasoning abilities across various benchmarks.
Moreover, we build an automatic pipeline that
introduces LiveAoPSBench, an evolving evaluation set with timestamps, derived from the latest
forum data, providing a contamination-resistant
benchmark for assessing LLM performance. Notably, we observe a significant decline in LLM
performance over time, suggesting their success
on older examples may stem from pre-training
exposure rather than true reasoning ability. Our
work presents a scalable approach to creating
and maintaining large-scale, high-quality datasets
for advanced math reasoning, offering valuable
insights into the capabilities and limitations of

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have shown tremendous
success in solving various tasks such as code generation (Li
et al., 2022), math reasoning (Shao et al., 2024), and commonsense reasoning (Zellers et al., 2019; Achiam et al.,
2023), suggesting that current models may show signs of
artificial general intelligence (AGI) (Bubeck et al., 2023).
Math reasoning is perhaps one of the most challenging tasks
for the LLMs, since mathematics is inherently structured,
requiring not just recall of facts but also rigorous logical inference, abstraction, and understanding of formal symbolic
systems. As such, there have been grand challenges (Selsam
et al., 2019) and million-dollar prizes AIMO (2023) established for a model capable of solving Olympiad-level math
problems.
On the training side, despite significant progress in certain
areas, such as geometry, particularly with the assistance of
symbolic methods (Trinh et al., 2024), the performance of
LLMs remains limited on Olympiad-level problems (He
et al., 2024). One of the key challenges in advancing
competition-level math reasoning, compared to other domains like coding or grade-school math, is the scarcity of
large-scale data. Creating valid and challenging math questions, along with providing correct solutions, is costly. This
is especially true for Olympiad-level problems, which can
be time-consuming even for experts. This highlights the
need for scalable and automated methods to collect highquality data for Olympiad-level problems to facilitate further
advancements in this field.
On the evaluation side, in contrast to the rapid advancements
in LLMs, the evaluation of their math reasoning capabilities remains relatively underdeveloped. First, as aforementioned, the cost of creating and annotating advanced
math problems is high. Second, popular datasets such as
MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al.,
2021) have been saturated by both open-source and closedsource models (Achiam et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b).

*

Equal Contribution, order decided by a coin flip 1 University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Vector Institute for AI,
Toronto, Canada 3 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 4 NSERC CRC Chair.
Correspondence to: Sadegh Mahdavi <smahdavi@ece.ubc.ca>,
Muchen Li <muchenli@cs.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

