Adjusting Model Size in Continual Gaussian Processes:
How Big is Big Enough?

Guiomar Pescador-Barrios 1 Sarah Filippi 1 Mark van der Wilk 2

Abstract

since if the model is too small, predictive performance will
suffer. One solution could be to simply make all continual
learning models so large, that they will always have enough
capacity, regardless of what dataset and what amount of data
they will be given. However, this “worst-case” strategy is
wasteful of computational resources.

Many machine learning models require setting
a parameter that controls their size before training, e.g. number of neurons in DNNs, or inducing
points in GPs. Increasing capacity typically improves performance until all the information from
the dataset is captured. After this point, computational cost keeps increasing, without improved
performance. This leads to the question “How big
is big enough?” We investigate this problem for
Gaussian processes (single-layer neural networks)
in continual learning. Here, data becomes available incrementally, and the final dataset size will
therefore not be known before training, preventing the use of heuristics for setting a fixed model
size. We develop a method to automatically adjust model size while maintaining near-optimal
performance. Our experimental procedure follows the constraint that any hyperparameters must
be set without seeing dataset properties, and we
show that our method performs well across diverse datasets without the need to adjust its hyperparameter, showing it requires less tuning than
others.

A more elegant solution would be to grow the size of the
model adaptively as data arrives, according to the needs of
the problem (see Figure 1 for an illustration). For example, if data were only ever gathered from the same region,
there would be diminishing novelty in every new batch. In
this case, one would want the model size to stabilise, with
growth resuming once data arrives from new regions. In
this paper, we investigate a principle for determining how
to select the size of a model so that it is sufficient to obtain
near-optimal performance, while otherwise wasting a minimal amount of computation. In other words, we seek to
answer the question of “how big is big enough?” for setting
the size of models throughout continual learning.
We investigate this question for Gaussian processes, since
excellent continual learning methods exist that perform very
similarly to full-batch methods, but which assume a fixed
model capacity that is large enough. We provide a criterion
for determining the number of inducing variables (analogous to neurons) that are needed whenever a new batch of
data arrives. We show that our method is better able to
maintain performance close to optimal full-batch methods,
with a slower growth of computational resources compared
to other continual methods, which either make models too
small and perform poorly, or too large and waste computation. One hyperparameter needs to be tuned to control the
balance between computational cost and accuracy. However,
a single value works similarly across datasets with different properties, allowing all modelling decisions to be made
before seeing any data.

1. Introduction
Continual learning aims to train models when the data arrives in a stream of batches, without storing data after it has
been processed, and while obtaining predictive performance
that is as high as possible at each point in time (Ring, 1997).
Selecting the size of the model is challenging in this setting, since typical non-continual training procedures do this
by trial-and-error (cross-validation) using repeated training
runs, which is not possible under our requirement of not
storing any data. This is a crucial parameter to set well,

Our approach benefits from Bayesian nonparametric perspectives, by separating the specification of the capacity of
the model, which should be able to learn from an unbounded
amount of data, from the specification of the approximation,
which determines how much computational effort is needed
to represent the solution for the current finite dataset. Our
approach relies on the variational inducing variable approx-

1

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK.
Correspondence to: Guiomar Pescador-Barrios <glp22@ic.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

