Robust Consensus Anchor Learning for Efficient
Multi-view Subspace Clustering

Yalan Qin 1 Nan Pu 2 Guorui Feng 1 Nicu Sebe 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Clustering is an important field in artificial intelligence and
machine learning (Jain, 2008). As the information technology develops, large amounts of data from multiple views
or channels (Liu et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2023d) can be collected in real-world scenarios. This type of data is termed
as multi-view data and it widely exists in the world. For
instance, we can depict an image by multiple representations, such as local binary pattern (LBP), histogram of
oriented gradient (HOG) and Gabor feature representation.
For dealing with the multi-view data in clustering tasks,
various multi-view clustering approaches have been presented in the literature. As opposed to clustering for the
data with single view (Qin et al., 2023e;a; 2021; 2022b;
2025b; Pu et al., 2024), multi-view clustering can achieve
more reasonable performance in practice (Qin et al., 2022a;
Liu et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2023b; Qin
et al., 2023c; Sun et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024a; Liu et al.,
2022a; Qin et al., 2024d; Liu et al., 2023a; Qin et al., 2025c;
Liu et al., 2022b; Qin et al., 2025e). It is able to integrate
diverse feature representations of an object obtained by different views and provide more comprehensive object information. Among the existing multi-view clustering works,
methods based on the graph have gained significant attention in recent years.

As a leading unsupervised classification algorithm in artificial intelligence, multi-view subspace clustering segments unlabeled data from
different subspaces. Recent works based on the
anchor have been proposed to decrease the computation complexity for the datasets with large
scales in multi-view clustering. The major differences among these methods lie on the objective functions they define. Despite considerable
success, these works pay few attention to guaranting the robustness of learned consensus anchors via effective manner for efficient multiview clustering and investigating the specific local distribution of cluster in the affine subspace.
Besides, the robust consensus anchors as well
as the common cluster structure shared by different views are not able to be simultaneously
learned. In this paper, we propose Robust Consensus anchors learning for efficient multi-view
Subspace Clustering (RCSC). We first show that
if the data are sufficiently sampled from independent subspaces, and the objective function meets
some conditions, the achieved anchor graph has
the block-diagonal structure. As a special case,
we provide a model based on Frobenius norm,
non-negative and affine constraints in consensus
anchors learning, which guarantees the robustness of learned consensus anchors for efficient
multi-view clustering and investigates the specific local distribution of cluster in the affine subspace. Experiments performed on eight multiview datasets confirm the superiority of RCSC
based on the effectiveness and efficiency.

The graph-based methods for multi-view clustering (Nie
et al., 2017b; Zhan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020) can reflect the relationships among samples in multi-view data
by constructing graph structures. Then the final results can
be achieved based on the partiton of the obtained graph.
These methods usually adopt an n × n adjacent graph to
formulate the relationships among data points. Cao et al.
(Cao et al., 2015) presented a multi-view clustering method
based on diversity and smoothness, which investigates the
complementarity among different representations. Wang et
al. (Wang et al., 2020) learned the unified global graph
and view-specific graphs by adopting the mutual reinforcement technique. Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2020) simultaneously learned the global self-representation, latent embedding space and cluster structure for subspace learning on
multi-view data. Liang et al. (Liang et al., 2020) utilized
the multi-view graph learning to learn a unified graph and

1

School of Communication and Information Engineering,
Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China 2 Department of
Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of
Trento, Trento 40128, Italy. Correspondence to: Guorui Feng
<fgr2082@aliyun.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

