Efficient Optimization with Orthogonality Constraint:
a Randomized Riemannian Submanifold Method
Andi Han 1 2 Pierre-Louis Poirion 1 Akiko Takeda 1 3

Abstract

Figure 1: Proposed random submanifold method on 2-sphere.
Each iteration restricts the update
to a 1-dimensional randomly selected submanifold, i.e., a circle.

Optimization with orthogonality constraints frequently arises in various fields such as machine
learning. Riemannian optimization offers a powerful framework for solving these problems by
equipping the constraint set with a Riemannian
manifold structure and performing optimization
intrinsically on the manifold. This approach typically involves computing a search direction in
the tangent space and updating variables via a retraction operation. However, as the size of the
variables increases, the computational cost of the
retraction can become prohibitively high, limiting
the applicability of Riemannian optimization to
large-scale problems. To address this challenge
and enhance scalability, we propose a novel approach that restricts each update on a random
submanifold, thereby significantly reducing the
per-iteration complexity. We introduce two sampling strategies for selecting the random submanifolds and theoretically analyze the convergence of
the proposed methods. We provide convergence
results for general nonconvex functions and functions that satisfy Riemannian Polyak–Łojasiewicz
condition as well as for stochastic optimization
settings. Additionally, we demonstrate how our
approach can be generalized to quotient manifolds
derived from the orthogonal manifold. Extensive
experiments verify the benefits of the proposed
method, across a wide variety of problems.

where the matrix variable X ∈ Rn×p with n ≥ p is column
orthonormal and F : Rn×p → R. Optimization with orthogonality constraint arises naturally in various domains of applications because it is crucial for achieving certain desired
properties, such as linear independence, numerical stability
and geometry preserving. Examples of applications include
principal component analysis (Hotelling, 1933), independent component analysis (Theis et al., 2009), multi-view
clustering (Khan & Maji, 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2022), low-rank matrix completion (Vandereycken, 2013;
Mishra et al., 2014), robust optimal transport (Lin et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2021), training of deep neural networks
(Helfrich et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020),
continual learning (Chaudhry et al., 2020) and fine-tuning
large foundation models (Qiu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024),
among many others.
Riemannian optimization (Absil et al., 2008; Boumal, 2023;
Han et al., 2024b) provides a powerful framework for solving (1) by leveraging the geometry of the orthogonality
constraint. Indeed, the set of orthogonal constraint forms a
smooth manifold known as the Stiefel manifold, denoted by
St(n, p) := {X ∈ Rn×p : X ⊤ X = Ip }. By equipping the
manifold with a suitable Riemannian metric, optimization
can be performed intrinsically on the manifold. A crucial
step in this process is the retraction operation, which ensures
that iterates remain on the manifold after each update. Various retractions have been proposed for the Stiefel manifold,
such as those based on QR factorization (Absil et al., 2008),
polar decomposition (Absil & Malick, 2012), the Cayley
transform (Wen & Yin, 2013), and the matrix exponential
(Edelman et al., 1998). All these retractions require nonstandard linear algebra operations with a complexity of at
least O(np2 ) (see Section 2 for details). As a result, the
retraction step becomes the primary bottleneck for Riemannian optimization solvers as n and p increase.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider optimization problems with orthogonality constraint, i.e.,
min

X∈Rn×p :X ⊤ X=Ip

F (X)

(1)

1
RIKEN AIP 2 University of Sydney 3 University of Tokyo.
Correspondence to: Andi Han <andi.han@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

