Parametric Scaling Law of Tuning Bias in Conformal Prediction

Hao Zeng * 1 Kangdao Liu * 1 2 Bingyi Jing 1 Hongxin Wei 1

Abstract

due to the inherent characteristics of the data or its usage
in practice, such as time series analysis, domain shifts, and
parameter tuning (Barber et al., 2023; Oliveira et al., 2024).
Therefore, it is essential to understand and quantify the coverage gap that arises from the violation of exchangeability.

Conformal prediction is a popular framework of
uncertainty quantification that constructs prediction sets with coverage guarantees. To uphold
the exchangeability assumption, many conformal
prediction methods necessitate an additional holdout set for parameter tuning. Yet, the impact of
violating this principle on coverage remains underexplored, making it ambiguous in practical applications. In this work, we empirically find that
the tuning bias - the coverage gap introduced by
leveraging the same dataset for tuning and calibration, is negligible for simple parameter tuning in
many conformal prediction methods. In particular,
we observe the scaling law of the tuning bias: this
bias increases with parameter space complexity
and decreases with calibration set size. Formally,
we establish a theoretical framework to quantify
the tuning bias and provide rigorous proof for the
scaling law of the tuning bias by deriving its upper
bound. In the end, we discuss how to reduce the
tuning bias, guided by the theories we developed.

Many conformal prediction methods utilize a hold-out set
for parameter tuning, in addition to the calibration set.
For example, (1) RAPS (Angelopoulos et al., 2021) and
SAPS (Huang et al., 2024) search their parameters on the
hold-out set; (2) score aggregation methods (Fan et al., 2024;
Luo & Zhou, 2024; Yang & Kuchibhotla, 2024) optimize
the selection or weights for candidate scores; (3) confidence
calibration methods (Dabah & Tirer, 2024; Guo et al., 2017;
Xi et al., 2024) tune the scale parameters for better calibration; (4) training methods (Liu et al., 2025; Stutz et al.,
2022) fine-tune models on the hold-out set. Previous works
claim that leveraging the same hold-out set for tuning and
calibration will destroy the exchangeability (Angelopoulos
et al., 2021; Dabah & Tirer, 2024; Xi et al., 2024; Yang &
Kuchibhotla, 2024), but they did not provide a formal quantification on the coverage gap introduced by the violation of
exchangeability systematically. This prompts us to investigate the influence of parameter tuning on the coverage gap
in the absence of a hold-out set.

1. Introduction

In this work, we reveal a previously unrecognized phenomenon: the tuning bias - the coverage gap introduced
by using the same dataset for tuning and calibration, is negligible for simple parameter tuning in conformal prediction
methods. Empirically, we find that most methods maintain
their coverage rates, except for vector scaling (Guo et al.,
2017) and the fine-tuning version of ConfTr (Stutz et al.,
2022). Furthermore, we observe the parametric scaling
law of the tuning bias: this bias increases with parameter
space complexity and decreases with calibration set size.
An intuitive explanation for this phenomenon is that models
with more complex parameter space require more data to
tune for the optimal parameters.1

Quantifying uncertainty in predictions is crucial for the safe
deployment of machine learning, particularly in high-risk
domains such as financial decision-making and medical diagnostics. Conformal prediction stands out as a promising
statistical framework for quantifying uncertainty in the predictions of any predictive algorithm (Papadopoulos, 2008;
Vovk, 2012; Vovk et al., 2005). It transforms point predictions into prediction sets guaranteed to contain ground
truths with a user-specified coverage rate. Under the assumption of data exchangeability, these prediction sets offer
non-asymptotic coverage guarantees without distributional
assumptions. However, the assumption may not always hold
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 Department of
Computer and Information Science, University of Macau . Correspondence to: Hongxin Wei <weihx@sustech.edu.cn>.

Formally, we propose a theoretical framework to quantify
the tuning bias, which is formulated as a specifically designed constrained ERM problem (Bai et al., 2022). In
particular, we measure the tuning bias using the classical

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Code: https://github.com/ml-stat-Sustech/
Parametric-Scaling-Law-CP-Tuning.

1

