Analytical Lyapunov Function Discovery: An RL-based Generative Approach

Haohan Zou * 1 Jie Feng * 1 Hao Zhao 2 Yuanyuan Shi 1

Abstract

system trajectories. Lyapunov functions also play a central
role in controller design, providing formal guarantees of
closed-loop stability and robustness Khalil (2002). However, designing a Lyapunov function for nonlinear systems
has long been considered more of an ‘art’ than a science,
even for stable dynamics, due to its inherent complexities.
Motivated by this challenge, we have witnessed great interest in the development of computational algorithms for
Lyapunov function construction. McGough et al. (2010)
employed an evolutionary algorithm for the symbolic computation of Lyapunov functions, but the exponential growth
search space impedes its scalability. Alternatively, sum-ofsquares (SOS) methods reformulate the task as a semidefinite program (SDP) that certifies stability with polynomial
candidates (Papachristodoulou & Prajna, 2005a;b; Ahmadi
& Majumdar, 2016; Dai & Permenter, 2023). However,
handling local constraints or non-polynomial dynamics requires auxiliary variables and extra (in)equality constraints
(Papachristodoulou & Prajna, 2005a;b), which leads to scalability issues of the SOS methods for real-world problems.
Moreover, the theoretical result Ahmadi et al. (2011) on
asymptotic Lyapunov stability shows that even some very
simple globally asymptotically stable dynamics may not
agree with a polynomial Lyapunov function of any degree.

Despite advances in learning-based methods, finding valid Lyapunov functions for nonlinear dynamical systems remains challenging. Current
neural network approaches face two main issues:
challenges in scalable verification and limited
interpretability. To address these, we propose
an end-to-end framework using transformers to
construct analytical Lyapunov functions (local),
which simplifies formal verification, enhances interpretability, and provides valuable insights for
control engineers. Our framework consists of
a transformer-based trainer that generates candidate Lyapunov functions and a falsifier that verifies candidate expressions and refines the model
via risk-seeking policy gradient. Unlike Alfarano
et al. (2024), which utilizes pre-training and seeks
global Lyapunov functions for low-dimensional
systems, our model is trained from scratch via reinforcement learning (RL) and succeeds in finding
local Lyapunov functions for high-dimensional
and non-polynomial systems. Given the symbolic
nature of the Lyapunov function candidates, we
employ efficient optimization methods for falsification during training and formal verification
tools for the final verification. We demonstrate the
efficiency of our approach on a range of nonlinear
dynamical systems with up to ten dimensions and
show that it can discover Lyapunov functions not
previously identified in the control literature. Full
implementation is available on Github.

Recent advances in deep learning have enabled data-driven
neural Lyapunov function with formal verification (Chang
et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Dawson
et al., 2023b; Edwards et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2024). However, these methods face two key challenges: 1) lack of interpretability and 2) high verification
costs (Dawson et al., 2023b). Neural networks’ black-box
nature limits insights into the system’s dynamical behavior.
Additionally, over-parameterization and nonlinear activations complicate formal verification, leading to scalability
issues. Tools like SMT Chang et al. (2019), MIP Wu et al.
(2023), and α, β-CROWN Yang et al. (2024) require small,
specialized networks to ensure feasible verification times.

1. Introduction
A Lyapunov function is an energy-like function used to certify stability of dynamical systems. A sufficient condition
for stability is that the Lyapunov function decreases along

Compared with neural Lyapunov functions, analytical Lyapunov functions offer two distinct advantages. First, their
symbolic nature offers interpretability, and provides insights
for designing stability-guaranteed control policy (Sontag,
1989; Feng et al., 2023a;b; 2024b; Cui et al., 2023b). Second, analytical functions enable efficient verification due to
their simplicity and symbolic structure, which seamlessly

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, UC San Diego, La Jolla, United States 2 Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology in Lausanne. Correspondence to: Haohan
Zou <hazou@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

