Revisiting the Predictability of Performative, Social Events

Juan Carlos Perdomo 1

Abstract

the predictability of social events. Motivated by these issues,
we revisit the following question:

Social predictions do not passively describe the
future; they actively shape it. They inform actions
and change individual expectations in ways that
influence the likelihood of the predicted outcome.
Given these dynamics, to what extent can social
events be predicted? This question was discussed
throughout the 20th century by authors like Merton, Morgenstern, Simon, and others who considered it a central issue in social science methodology. In this work, we provide a modern answer
to this old problem. Using recent ideas from performative prediction and outcome indistinguishability, we establish that one can always efficiently
predict social events accurately, regardless of how
predictions influence data. While achievable, we
also show that these predictions are often undesirable, highlighting the limitations of previous
desiderata. We end with a discussion of various
avenues forward.

Is it possible to efficiently find a predictor that actively
influences the likelihood of observed events, yet still
produces valid predictions?
During the 20th century, multiple researchers recognized
that social predictions shape social patterns and posed this
question in their work. To give a few examples, in his 1928
thesis, Oskar Morgenstern argued that accurate economic
forecasts are generally impossible since public predictions
can be self-negating (Morgenstern, 1928). Later, Simon
(1954), as well as Grunberg & Modigliani (1954), used
recently popularized fixed point theorems from topology to
make progress on this problem and proved the existence of
predictions that influence outcomes and are simultaneously
calibrated. However, they did not address the algorithmic
question of how one might actually find these predictors
efficiently (both computationally and statistically speaking).
In this work, we revisit this question using modern mathematical tools. Framing our analysis in the language of
performative prediction – a recent learning-theoretic framework introduced by Perdomo et al. (2020) that formalizes
the causal aspects of social prediction – we establish the
following result. One can always efficiently find predictions that actively shape the data distribution over outcomes
and simultaneously satisfy rigorous validity guarantees like
multi-calibration (Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018) or outcome
indistinguishability (Dwork et al., 2021). Moreover, the
statistical and computational complexity of finding these
predictors is, in many cases, just as easy as in supervised
learning, where the distribution is static.

1. Introduction
Social predictions do not passively describe the future; they
actively shape it. They inform actions and change expectations in ways that influence the likelihood of predicted
events. For instance, economic forecasts influence market
prices, election predictions influence voter turnout, and climate forecasts shape policies that impact weather patterns.
This dynamic, where predictions are performative and shape
data distributions, is pervasive throughout social prediction.
It is also a feature, not a bug. The overarching goal of
building systems that make predictions about people is to
inform actions that drive positive changes in the world. For
example, we predict health outcomes to cure disease and
poverty to alleviate it. While desirable, this dynamic also
introduces methodological challenges and casts doubt on

However, while these rigorously calibrated predictions are
always achievable, they are not always desirable. The fact
that predictions are performative and influence the likelihood of future events invalidates traditional solution concepts inherited from supervised learning like calibration.
Through simple examples, we show that these prediction
rules can lead to poor equilibria where predictions exactly
match the conditional distribution over outcomes – and
hence are perfectly multicalibrated – while simultaneously
explaining none of the variance in outcomes.

1

Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Boston
MA, USA. Correspondence to: Juan Carlos Perdomo <jcperdomo@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

