In-Context Denoising with One-Layer Transformers:
Connections between Attention and Associative Memory Retrieval

Matthew Smart 1 Alberto Bietti 2 Anirvan M. Sengupta 2 3 4

Abstract

derstanding the mechanisms behind transformer-based networks remains an open challenge. This challenge is exacerbated by the growing scale and complexity of modern large
networks. Toward addressing this, researchers studying simplified architectures have identified connections between the
attention operation that is central to transformers and associative memory models (Ramsauer et al., 2021), providing
not only an avenue for understanding how such architectures
encode and retrieve information but also potentially ways to
improve them further.

We introduce in-context denoising, a task that
refines the connection between attention-based architectures and dense associative memory (DAM)
networks, also known as modern Hopfield networks. Using a Bayesian framework, we show theoretically and empirically that certain restricted
denoising problems can be solved optimally even
by a single-layer transformer. We demonstrate
that a trained attention layer processes each denoising prompt by performing a single gradient
descent update on a context-aware DAM energy
landscape, where context tokens serve as associative memories and the query token acts as an
initial state. This one-step update yields better
solutions than exact retrieval of either a context
token or a spurious local minimum, providing a
concrete example of DAM networks extending
beyond the standard retrieval paradigm. Overall,
this work solidifies the link between associative
memory and attention mechanisms first identified
by Ramsauer et al., and demonstrates the relevance of associative memory models in the study
of in-context learning.

The most celebrated model for associative memories in systems neuroscience is the so-called Hopfield model (Amari,
1972; Nakano, 1972; Little, 1974; Hopfield, 1982). This
model has a capacity to store “memories” (stable fixed
points of a recurrent update rule) proportional to the number
of nodes (Hopfield, 1982; Amit et al., 1985). In the last
decade, new energy functions (Krotov & Hopfield, 2016;
Demircigil et al., 2017) were proposed for dense associative
memories with much higher capacities. These energy functions are often referred to as modern Hopfield models. Ramsauer et al. (2021) pointed out the similarity between the
one-step update rule of a certain modern Hopfield network
(Demircigil et al., 2017) and the softmax attention layer of
transformers, generating interest in the statistical physics
and systems neuroscience communities (Krotov & Hopfield,
2021; Krotov, 2023; Lucibello & Mézard, 2024; Millidge
et al., 2022). Recent work has extended this concept to
improve retrieval by incorporating sparsity (Hu et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2024b; Santos et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024a), while
others have leveraged associative memory principles to design new energy-based transformer architectures (Hoover
et al., 2023). However, these extensions and the foundational construction in Ramsauer et al. (2021) primarily focus
on the specific task of exact retrieval (converging to a fixed
point), while in practice transformers may tackle many other
tasks.

1. Introduction
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has
achieved remarkable success across diverse domains, from
natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) to computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Despite their practical success, un1
Center for Computational Biology, Flatiron Institute, New
York, NY, USA 2 Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA 3 Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY,
USA 4 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Matthew Smart
<msmart@flatironinstitute.org>, Anirvan M. Sengupta <anirvans.physics@gmail.com>.

To explore this connection beyond retrieval, we introduce in-context denoising, a task that bridges the behavior of trained transformers and associative memory networks through the lens of in-context learning (ICL). In
standard ICL, a sequence model is trained to infer an unknown function g from contextual examples, predicting

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

