Measuring In-Context Computation Complexity via Hidden State Prediction

Vincent Herrmann 1 Róbert Csordás 2 Jürgen Schmidhuber 3 1

Abstract
10
PHi Loss

Detecting when a neural sequence model does “interesting” computation is an open problem. The
next token prediction loss is a poor indicator: Low
loss can stem from trivially predictable sequences
that are uninteresting, while high loss may reflect
unpredictable but also irrelevant information that
can be ignored by the model. We propose a better
metric: measuring the model’s ability to predict
its own future hidden states. We show empirically
that this metric—in contrast to the next token prediction loss—correlates with the intuitive interestingness of the task. To measure predictability,
we introduce the architecture-agnostic “prediction of hidden states” (PHi) layer that serves as
an information bottleneck on the main pathway
of the network (e.g., the residual stream in Transformers). We propose a novel learned predictive
prior that enables us to measure the novel information gained in each computation step, which
serves as our metric. We show empirically that
our metric predicts the description length of formal languages learned in-context, the complexity
of mathematical reasoning problems, and the correctness of self-generated reasoning chains.

8
6

In-Context Literature
Learning
Code

Interesting
Tasks
Memorized
Boring
Programs
Tasks
Memorized
Trivial Sequences

4
2

Specialized Model
Pre-trained LLM

600

Random

400

Memorized
Random

100
Next Token Loss

500

300
101

Figure 1. Interesting tasks, like in-context learning, or modeling
of code and literature, exhibit high hidden state prediction (PHi)
loss, while boring or trivial tasks, such as retrieving memorized
sequences or modeling random structureless data, show low PHi
loss. Next token loss provides no meaningful insight into task
complexity. Results for a specialized transformer model (blue) and
a pre-trained LLM (green), with PHi loss scales differing due to
hidden state size. See Sections 3.1.1 and 3.2.1 for details.

n-gram mechanisms (Akyürek et al., 2024) that capture nontrivial aspects of the underlying computation. Nevertheless,
quantifying in a general way when and how much truly
interesting or complex computation is happening within a
model remains challenging.

1. Introduction

A natural first instinct is to use next-token prediction loss
to gauge complexity: Computations that yield high loss
might appear “hard,” whereas those with low loss might be
“easy”. However, this notion of hardness does not necessarily reflect the complexity or “interestingness” of underlying
computation, see e.g., Schmidhuber (1991a;b). For example,
a random sequence has a high next token prediction loss,
but at the same time, the model does not have to compute
anything because there is nothing that it can do to help the
predictions. Hence, next-token prediction alone fails to capture the complexity of in-context computation performed by
the model.

Neural sequence models—especially large language models
(LLMs)—have demonstrated remarkable capabilities, such
as solving complex reasoning tasks (Lewkowycz et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022) and performing incontext learning (Brown et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2022; Kirsch et al., 2022). Recent progress in
mechanistic interpretability has offered glimpses into how
these models process information internally: for instance, by
identifying specific induction heads (Olsson et al., 2022) or
1

IDSIA/USI/SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland 2 Stanford University,
Stanford, USA 3 KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi-Arabia. Correspondence
to: Vincent Herrmann <vincent.herrmann@idsia.ch>.

We therefore propose a new metric: hidden-state predictability. Concretely, we measure how well the model can predict
its own future hidden states, rather than future tokens. To
achieve this, we introduce a PHi (“Prediction of Hidden

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

