Zero shot Generalization of Vision-Based RL Without Data Augmentation

Sumeet Batra 1 Gaurav Sukhatme 1

Abstract
Generalizing vision-based reinforcement learning (RL) agents to novel environments remains
a difficult and open challenge. Current trends
are to collect large-scale datasets or use data augmentation techniques to prevent overfitting and
improve downstream generalization. However,
the computational and data collection costs increase exponentially with the number of task variations and can destabilize the already difficult task
of training RL agents. In this work, we take inspiration from recent advances in computational
neuroscience and propose a model, Associative
Latent DisentAnglement (ALDA), that builds on
standard off-policy RL towards zero-shot generalization. Specifically, we revisit the role of latent
disentanglement in RL and show how combining
it with a model of associative memory achieves
zero-shot generalization on difficult task variations without relying on data augmentation. Finally, we formally show that data augmentation
techniques are a form of weak disentanglement
and discuss the implications of this insight.

Figure 1. Disentanglement + association. A disentangled representation is learned using the original training data (top). When
encountering an OOD sample (bottom), individual latents can be
compared and mapped back to known values (colored green). Latent dimensions that are more OOD (colored red) can be mapped
back without affecting other latent dimensions.

generalize. However, a significant drawback of these approaches is, intuitively, that they require larger models, more
training data, longer training times, and have greater training instability that must be dealt with care when training RL
agents.
Yet when we examine biological agents, we find that humans
and, indeed, many other primates are able to quickly adapt
to task variations and environment perturbations (DiCarlo
et al., 2012; Friston, 2010). While all aspects of biological intelligence that contribute to generalization have yet
to be understood, there is some understanding in the recent
neuroscience literature of aspects related to representation
learning that we look to for inspiration. Many parts of the
brain in human and non-human primates contain neurons
that represent single factors of variation within the environment, such as grid cells (Hafting et al., 2005), object-vector
cells (Høydal et al., 2019), and border cells (Solstad et al.,
2008) that represent euclidean spaces, distance to objects,
and distance to borders, respectively. Such disentangled
representations have been theorized to facilitate compositional generalization (Higgins et al., 2018) and have been
studied with curated datasets where the factors of variation are known (Higgins et al., 2017a; Whittington et al.,
2023), and even within the context of RL (Higgins et al.,
2017b). It is then to our surprise, with limited exceptions
(Dunion et al., 2023; Sax et al., 2018), that disentangled
representation learning has not garnered much attention
within robot learning or RL more generally. One potential
reason for this is that learning disentangled representations
while simultaneously learning an RL policy is extremely
difficult. Indeed, Higgins et al. (2017b) required a two-stage

1. Introduction
Training generalist agents that can adapt to novel environments and unseen task variations is a longstanding goal
for vision-based RL. RL generalization benchmarks have
focused on data augmentation to increase the amount of
training data available to the agent while preventing model
overfitting and increasing robustness to environment perturbations (Yarats et al., 2021a; Almuzairee et al., 2024;
Hansen et al., 2021). This follows the current trend in the
broader robot learning community of training large models
at scale on massive datasets (Kim et al., 2024; Hansen et al.,
2024; Team et al., 2024) with the hope that the model will
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence
to: Sumeet Batra <ssbatra@usc.edu>, Gaurav Sukhatme <gaurav@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

