Attention-Only Transformers via Unrolled Subspace Denoising

Peng Wang 1 Yifu Lu 1 Yaodong Yu 2 Druv Pai 2 Qing Qu 1 Yi Ma 3

Abstract

and reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021). Transformer
architectures are generally constructed by stacking multiple identical layers designed to process and learn from
data. Each layer is composed of several interacting components arranged in a specific sequence, including multihead self-attention operators, layer normalization, multilayer perceptron (MLP) networks, and skip connections. In
practice, transformers, such as BERT (Devlin, 2018) and
GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), are highly deep, often with
dozens or even hundreds of layers, and significantly overparameterized, containing millions or even billions of parameters. This considerable depth and over-parameterization
endow transformers with impressive learning capabilities,
allowing them to capture complex patterns and relationships.

Despite the popularity of transformers in practice,
their architectures are empirically designed and
neither mathematically justified nor interpretable.
Moreover, as indicated by many empirical studies,
some components of transformer architectures
may be redundant. To derive a fully interpretable
transformer architecture with only necessary components, we contend that the goal of representation learning is to compress a set of noisy initial
token representations towards a mixture of lowdimensional subspaces. To compress these noisy
token representations, an associated denoising operation naturally takes the form of a multi-head
(subspace) self-attention. By unrolling such iterative denoising operations into a deep network,
we arrive at a highly compact architecture that
consists of only self-attention operators with skip
connections at each layer. Moreover, we show
that each layer performs highly efficient denoising: it improves the signal-to-noise ratio of token
representations at a linear rate with respect to
the number of layers. Despite its simplicity, extensive experiments on vision and language tasks
demonstrate that such a transformer achieves performance close to that of standard transformer
architectures such as GPT-2 and CRATE.

Despite the remarkable success of transformers, their deep
and over-parameterized architecture renders them “black
boxes”, hindering an understanding of their inner mechanism. To address this challenge, a common approach involves systematically removing or modifying certain components in transformers to simplify the architecture; see,
e.g., Dong et al. (2021); Alcalde et al. (2024); Noci et al.
(2024); Geshkovski et al. (2023a); Geva et al. (2020); Guo
et al. (2024). For example, Alcalde et al. (2024) studied
pure-attention hard-max transformers with skip connections
and showed that the output converges to a clustered equilibrium as the number of layers goes to infinity. Noci et al.
(2024) analyzed a modified softmax-based attention model
with skip connections, demonstrating that the limiting distribution can be described by a stochastic differential equation.
These studies indicate that the most basic components of
transformers are self-attention layers and skip connections.
Although existing studies have provided valuable insights
into different components of transformers, few of them elucidate the underlying mechanisms by which transformers
process and transform input into output across layers.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
have achieved remarkable empirical success across various
modern machine learning applications, including large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Devlin, 2018), vision generative models (Bao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2020),

Existing empirical studies suggest that some components
of transformers may not be essential and can be removed
or modified without compromising performance. For example, He & Hofmann (2024) empirically demonstrated
that transformer architecture can be simplified by removing
components such as skip connections, value matrix, and
normalization layers without degrading performance. Additionally, Sukhbaatar et al. (2019) investigated the effects of
removing MLP blocks from transformers and augmenting

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California,
Berkeley, USA 3 Institute of Data Science & School of Computing
and Data Science, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Peng Wang <peng8wang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

