Double Machine Learning for Causal Inference under Shared-State Interference

Chris Hays 1 Manish Raghavan 1

Abstract

shared state may be prices, wait times, or availability of inventory. In each of these settings, individuals both influence
and are influenced by the shared state.

Researchers and practitioners often wish to measure treatment effects in settings where units interact via markets and recommendation systems. In
these settings, units are affected by certain shared
states, like prices, algorithmic recommendations
or social signals. We formalize this structure, calling it shared-state interference, and argue that
our formulation captures many relevant applied
settings. Our key modeling assumption is that
individuals’ potential outcomes are independent
conditional on the shared state. We then prove an
extension of a double machine learning (DML)
theorem providing conditions for achieving efficient inference under shared-state interference.
We also instantiate our general theorem in several models of interest where it is possible to efficiently estimate the average direct effect (ADE)
or global average treatment effect (GATE).

Assumptions are required to perform causal inference in
the presence of interference. Prior work has studied this
kind of interference in particular applications (Johari et al.,
2021; Basse et al., 2016; Wager, 2024; Munro, 2024; SimchiLevi and Wang, 2023; Dhaouadi et al., 2023; Farias et al.,
2023, 2022; Li et al., 2024). In some cases, they propose
either experimental designs or analysis methods that account
for interference and allow for valid inference. However,
these approaches typically assume a parametric model of
the system or domain-specific assumptions.
Our contributions. We provide a general framework to
reason about causal inference under shared-state interference. We define a formal model in Section 2, where individuals arrive sequentially. Their covariates (i.e., unit characteristics), treatment assignments, and outcomes may influence
the outcomes of future individuals through a shared state.
In Section 3, we provide conditions under which efficient
inference is possible in the framework. We extend methods from double machine learning (DML) (Chernozhukov
et al., 2018), which has shown that it is possible to achieve
efficient inference using expressive machine learning methods without parametric functional form assumptions. A key
assumption we rely on is that the shared state progresses
according to a Markov chain. We also provide a consistent
variance estimator, which is necessary for constructing valid
confidence intervals and running hypothesis tests.

1. Introduction
In causal inference, interference — where individuals’ treatment assignments, outcomes or other characteristics impact
others’ outcomes — is everywhere: On short-form video
platforms, the consumption of one individual is used as an
input to recommendation algorithms that are subsequently
used to serve content to others. In ride-sharing or housing rental services, providing a discount to some people
can cause them to increase their usage of the service and
increase wait times or prices. In such settings, failure to
account for interference may lead to biased estimates of
causal effects, even in randomized controlled trials.

Next, we instantiate our framework with two applications:
first, we show how our framework can be used to estimate
average direct effects (ADE) in observational settings; then,
we provide a variance reduction strategy for estimation of
the global average treatment effects (GATE) in switchback
experiments. Intuitively, the ADE measures the expected
difference between treatment and control for a unit drawn
uniformly at random, keeping the treatment assignment distributions of other units fixed. The GATE measures the
mean difference between outcomes when all units are assigned to treatment versus when all are assigned to control.
In each instantiation, we provide simulations validating that
our method produces estimators that concentrate around

Across many settings, like those of recommender systems
and markets, interference between units often follow a common pattern: the outcomes of individuals depend on others
through some shared state. In recommender systems, the
shared state might be the outputs of recommender systems
that are used to generate users’ feeds. In marketplaces, the
1

MIT. Correspondence to: Chris Hays <jhays@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

