The Power of Random Features and
the Limits of Distribution-Free Gradient Descent
Ari Karchmer 1 Eran Malach 1

Abstract

oretical studies is the goal of distribution-free learning. In
distribution-free learning, the goal is to design algorithms
that can learn a target function f from a class F without
making strong assumptions about the distribution of the
input examples. Specifically, let ρ be an arbitrary distribution over the input domain, and let (x, f (x)) be an example
drawn from ρ. A distribution-free learning algorithm must
succeed in approximating f for any choice of ρ. This stands
in contrast to distribution-specific learning, where the algorithm is designed with prior knowledge about the input
distribution, often leading to more efficient and practical
solutions. While distribution-free learning is a desirable
goal, it is often computationally challenging, as it requires
the algorithm to handle worst-case scenarios.

We study the relationship between gradient-based
optimization of parametric models (e.g., neural
networks) and optimization of linear combinations of random features. Our main result shows
that if a parametric model can be learned using
mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (bSGD)
without making assumptions about the data distribution, then with high probability, the target function can also be approximated using a polynomialsized combination of random features. The size
of this combination depends on the number of
gradient steps and numerical precision used in the
bSGD process. This finding reveals fundamental
limitations of distribution-free learning in neural
networks trained by gradient descent, highlighting
why making assumptions about data distributions
is often crucial in practice. Along the way, we
also introduce a new theoretical framework called
average probabilistic dimension complexity (adc),
which extends the probabilistic dimension complexity developed by Kamath et al. (2020). We
prove that adc has a polynomial relationship with
statistical query dimension, and use this relationship to demonstrate an infinite separation between
adc and standard dimension complexity.

This work, in a nutshell. In this work, we discover a
surprising relationship between distribution-free learning
with gradient descent over differentiable parametric model
classes and random feature representations. Informally
speaking, we show the following implication. Let F be
a class of target functions. Assume that a differentiable
parametric model class can be successfully optimized in
a distribution-free manner by mini-batch gradient descent
to approximate all f ∈ F. Let µ be a target distribution
over F. Then, with high probability over f ∼ µ, f can be
approximated by a linear combination of random features.
Importantly, the number of random features necessary to
include in this linear combination is upper bounded by a
polynomial function of the number of optimization steps of
gradient descent.

1. Introduction
Theoretically, learning neural networks is computationally
hard in the worst case. However, the practice of modern
deep learning has demonstrated the remarkable power of
gradient-based optimization of neural networks. Why does
gradient descent over neural networks work so well in practice, despite theoretical pessimism? A full answer to this
question is still missing in the science of deep learning.

1
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Ari Karchmer <akarchmer0@gmail.com>.

This result, as stated, sounds like a very strong positive
result: could we now replace SGD on complex networks
with optimization of simpler random features model? This is
the positive interpretation of the result. However, we know
that random features are limited in their expressive power.
So, another (and we believe better) way to understand this
result is as a statement on the limitation of distribution-free
SGD. Indeed, our result, more formally described on the
next page, reveals a fundamental limitation of distributionfree learning:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

If a function class is learnable in a distributionfree manner by gradient descent, then most func-

One possible source of the computational hardness in the-

1

