SpeCache: Speculative Key-Value Caching for Efficient Generation of LLMs

Shibo Jie 1 Yehui Tang 2 Kai Han 2 Zhi-Hong Deng 1 Jing Han 3

Abstract
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs)
have already achieved remarkable results on longtext tasks, but the limited GPU memory (VRAM)
resources struggle to accommodate the linearly
growing demand for key-value (KV) cache as the
sequence length increases, which has become a
bottleneck for the application of LLMs on long
sequences. Existing KV cache compression methods, including eviction, merging, or quantization
of the KV cache to reduce its size, result in irreversible information forgetting and potentially
affect the accuracy of subsequent decoding. In
this paper, we propose S PE C ACHE, which takes
full advantage of the large and easily expandable CPU memory to offload the complete KV
cache, and dynamically fetches KV pairs back
in each decoding step based on their importance
measured by low-bit KV cache copy in VRAM.
To avoid inference latency caused by CPU-GPU
communication, S PE C ACHE speculatively predicts the KV pairs that the next token might attend to, allowing us to prefetch them before the
next decoding step which enables parallelization
of prefetching and computation. Experiments
on LongBench and Needle-in-a-Haystack benchmarks verify that S PE C ACHE effectively reduces
VRAM usage while avoiding information forgetting for long sequences without re-training, even
with a 10× high KV cache compression ratio.

CPU
RAM

LLM

LLM

Top-k score

Full KV cache
16-bit cache

Low-bit cache

SpeCache
Output token

Speculative token

Figure 1. S PE C ACHE use low-bit KV cache and speculative token
to “guess” the top-k most relevant 16-bit KV pairs for the next
token, and prefetch them before the next decoding step.

performance in tasks such as document processing, retrievalaugmented generation, and in-context learning. The commonly used transformer architecture in LLMs relies on keyvalue (KV) caches to avoid redundant computations during
decoding. However, the size of the KV cache grows linearly
with the sequence length, introducing significant memory
overhead. For example, in the case of LLaMA 2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023) processing sequences of length 2k with a
batch size of 16, the KV cache size reaches 8.4B, which exceeds the model’s own parameter count. Since the memory
of computing units (e.g., GPU VRAM) is often limited, the
KV cache becomes a bottleneck restricting the deployment
of LLMs, especially on edge devices.
To alleviate the memory pressure caused by the KV cache,
existing solutions, include using attention layers with slower
KV cache growth (e.g., grouped query attention (Ainslie
et al., 2023)) or attention mechanisms that do not require
a KV cache (e.g., linear attention (Katharopoulos et al.,
2020)). However, these methods alter the model architecture, necessitating re-pretraining of the LLMs. Another
approach is post-training KV cache compression, including techniques like eviction (Zhang et al., 2023; Ge et al.,
2024), merging (Zhang et al., 2024), and quantization (Liu
et al., 2024b), but these methods are applied greedily during
decoding and may result in the loss of crucial information
for subsequent steps. Alternatively, KV cache can be offloaded to larger, more scalable memory (e.g., CPU memory
or even disk), but this introduces frequent and substantial
CPU-GPU communication, significantly increasing inference latency (Sheng et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
The ability to handle long sequences is critical for large
language models (LLMs), as it substantially impacts their
1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Correspondence to: Zhi-Hong Deng <zhdeng@pku.edu.cn>, Jing Han
<hanj@bupt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

