Probably Approximately Global Robustness Certification

Peter Blohm 1 Patrick Indri 1 Thomas Gärtner 1 Sagar Malhotra 1

Abstract

checks and, therefore, to the precise notion of robustness
investigated. In this paper, we will consider both formal and
adversarial methods to check local robustness.

We propose and investigate probabilistic guarantees for the adversarial robustness of classification algorithms. While traditional formal verification approaches for robustness are intractable and
sampling-based approaches do not provide formal
guarantees, our approach is able to efficiently certify a probabilistic relaxation of robustness. The
key idea is to sample an ϵ-net and invoke a local robustness oracle on the sample. Remarkably,
the size of the sample needed to achieve probably approximately global robustness guarantees is
independent of the input dimensionality, the number of classes, and the learning algorithm itself.
Our approach can, therefore, be applied even to
large neural networks that are beyond the scope
of traditional formal verification. Experiments
empirically confirm that it characterizes robustness better than state-of-the-art sampling-based
approaches and scales better than formal methods.

Neural Network (NN) robustness is a major desideratum
as, for non-robust networks, predictions can be drastically
changed with only small perturbations to the input (Szegedy
et al., 2014). This behavior can be detrimental in safetycritical applications like autonomous driving (Rao & Frtunikj, 2018) or image recognition tasks (Athalye et al., 2018).
Hence, methods for evaluating whether NNs are robust to
such perturbations are critical to enable their safe and reliable deployment. Significant research efforts have been
invested to assess NN robustness, following two main lines
of research:
• Formal verification methods have been used to provably certify local robustness of NNs (Katz et al., 2019;
Wu et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2021). Recent results have
extended these techniques to global robustness certification (Athavale et al., 2024) albeit only for NNs with
up to a few hundred parameters.
• Adversarial methods rely on local optimization to assess whether NNs can withstand adversarial attacks
(Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2018; Carlini &
Wagner, 2017a). These methods easily scale to large
networks, but generally do not provide formal guarantees on the global behavior of the network.

1. Introduction
We present a novel sampling-based procedure to certify the
global robustness of a classifier with high probability. Existing robustness verification methods are decision procedures
that provide yes/no answers for a given robustness criterion,
for a specific point in the input space. In general, however,
robustness is a quantitative property that may depend on
additional factors, such as the classifier’s confidence in a
given prediction. As a key contribution, we propose and investigate a novel notion of global robustness that quantifies
the robustness of any point, given its prediction confidence.
Our guarantee is obtained by checking local robustness on a
sufficiently large sample of points. The size of the sample
is quantified using a learning-theoretic construct, namely
ϵ-nets (Haussler & Welzl, 1986). Our approach is agnostic to the specific method used to perform local robustness

Our approach provides a quantitative characterization of
robustness for the whole input space parameterized by the
prediction confidence of each point. That is, for each point
in the input space we are able to give a high-probability
lower bound for its robustness. This only requires independently and identically distributed (iid) samples from the data
distribution and access to a local robustness oracle. Such
an oracle can be efficiently modeled using existing (formal
or adversarial) methods for assessing local robustness. The
sample size required by our approach is independent of the
input dimensionality, the number of classes, and the learning
algorithm itself. Our approach can provide distinct robustness guarantees for each confidence value after a single
sampling procedure. This characterization can be used to infer high-probability lower bounds on the robustness of new
data points, that were not part of the sampling procedure.

1
TU Wien, Austria. Correspondence to: Peter Blohm <peter.blohm@tuwien.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

