Learn from Downstream and Be Yourself in
Multimodal Large Language Models Fine-Tuning

Wenke Huang * 1 Jian Liang * 1 Zekun Shi 1 Didi Zhu 2 Guancheng Wan 1 He Li 1 Bo Du † 1 Dacheng Tao 3
Mang Ye † 1

Visual
Encoder

Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) has
demonstrated strong generalization capabilities
across diverse distributions and tasks, largely due
to extensive pre-training datasets. Fine-tuning
MLLM has become a common practice to improve performance on specific downstream tasks.
However, during fine-tuning, MLLM often faces
the risk of forgetting knowledge acquired during pre-training, which can result in a decline in
generalization abilities. To balance the trade-off
between generalization and specialization, we propose measuring the parameter importance for both
pre-trained and fine-tuning distributions, based on
frozen pre-trained weight magnitude and accumulated fine-tuning gradient values. We further apply
an importance-aware weight allocation strategy,
selectively updating relatively important parameters for downstream tasks. We conduct empirical
evaluations on both image captioning and visual
question-answering tasks using various MLLM
architectures. The comprehensive experimental
analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed solution, highlighting the efficiency of the
crucial modules in enhancing downstream specialization performance while mitigating generalization degradation in MLLM Fine-Tuning.

🙋 Briefly describe the
content of image.

Connector

Parameter Importance Difference
Connector

4.32

PID

Abstract

Pretrain-knowledge presents
high parameter importance
difference with unseen
downstream-distribution.

3.68
OKVQA

Flickr30k

LLM

13.85

Large Language Model

PID

Gap

🤖 A man wearing a hat with blond dreadlocks
holds juggling pins under a blue sky.

12.39
OKVQA

Flickr30k

Figure 1: Background and Motivation. Fine-tuning Multimodal
Large Language Model (MLLM) on downstream tasks typically
involves training ( ) the connector and LLM modules, and freezing ( ) the visual encoder. We reveal a higher parameter importance difference (PID) on unseen downstream distributions,
e.g., Flickr30k, compared to seen upstream distribution, e.g.,
OKVQA. PID = cos(|w∗ |, |g|)−2 . We utilize the absolute value
of the pre-trained weight |w∗ | and fine-tuning gradients |g| to represent the upstream and downstream parameter importance.

demonstrated impressive competency in various visionunderstanding tasks (Liu et al., 2023b; Dai et al., 2023;
Lin et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023a). MLLM generally follows the paradigm to fuse the pre-trained vision encoder
(Radford et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) into the representation space of the Large Language Models (LLM), e.g.,
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) and Vicuna (Chiang et al.,
2023), via the connector module (Dai et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023b; Luo et al., 2024). Considering that Multimodal
Large Language Model is optimized on huge-scale and
various-type multimodality instruction-following datasets
(Lin et al., 2014; Singh et al., 2019; Mishra et al., 2019), it
brings powerful generalization ability on different related
tasks. Despite this, MLLM still performs poorly on downstream datasets (Lin et al., 2023b; Luo et al., 2023; Zhai
et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress in Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM), which have
*
Equal contribution 1 National Engineering Research Center for
Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 2 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 3 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Mang Ye
<yemang@whu.edu.cn>, Bo Du <dubo@whu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The common practice is to fine-tune foundation models
1

