Clustering Items through Bandit Feedback
Finding the Right Feature out of Many

Maximilian Graf * 1 Victor Thuot * 2 Nicolas Verzelen 2

Abstract

This problem arises in crowdsourcing platforms, where complex labeling tasks are decomposed into simpler sub-tasks,
typically involving answering specific questions about an
item – see (Ariu et al., 2024). A motivating example is image labeling: a platform sequentially presents an image to a
user along with a simple question such as “Is this a vehicle?”
or “How many wheels can you see?”. The learner leverages
these answers to classify the images into categories. In this
setting, the images correspond to items that must be clustered, while questions correspond to features. This problem
is a special case of the model studied in (Ariu et al., 2024),
where the authors numerically demonstrate the advantage
of an adaptive sampling scheme over non-adaptive ones.
However, they do not establish the theoretical validity of
their adaptive procedure.

We study the problem of clustering a set of items
based on bandit feedback. Each of the n items is
characterized by a feature vector, with a possibly
large dimension d. The items are partitioned into
two unknown groups, such that items within the
same group share the same feature vector. We consider a sequential and adaptive setting in which,
at each round, the learner selects one item and
one feature, then observes a noisy evaluation of
the item’s feature. The learner’s objective is to
recover the correct partition of the items, while
keeping the number of observations as small as
possible. We provide an algorithm which relies
on finding a relevant feature for the clustering
task, leveraging the Sequential Halving algorithm.
With probability at least 1 − δ, we obtain an accurate recovery of the partition and derive an upper
bound on the budget required. Furthermore, we
obtain an instance-dependent lower bound, which
is tight in some relevant cases.

From a theoretical perspective, our problem consists of
clustering n items based on sequential and adaptive queries
to some of their d features. Intuitively, the difficulty of the
clustering task is driven by the differences between items
in different groups across these d features. In particular, it
depends both on the magnitude of these differences and on
their sparsity–that is, the number of features on which the
items differ significantly.

1. Introduction

In this work, we precisely characterize the sample complexity of the two-group1 clustering task, in a fully adaptive
setting. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We introduce the BanditClustering procedure –
Algorithm 4. On the one hand, it outputs the correct
partition of the items with a prescribed probability 1−δ.
On the other hand, it adapts to the unknown means of
the groups in order to sample at most the informative
features. In Theorem 3.1, we provide a tight, nonasymptotic upper bound on its sample complexity as a
function of n, d, log(1/δ), and the difference between
the means.
• Conversely, we establish in Section 4 an informationtheoretic lower bound on the budget, which entails the
optimality of BanditClustering.
From a high-level perspective, our algorithm operates in
three steps: first, it identifies a pair of representative items

We consider a sequential and adaptive pure exploration problem, in which a learner aims to cluster a set of items, each
represented by a feature vector in Rd . The items are partitioned into two unknown groups such that items within
the same group share the same feature vector. The learner
sequentially selects an item and a feature, and then observes
a noisy evaluation of the chosen feature of that item. Given
a prescribed probability δ, the learner’s objective is to collect enough information to recover the partition of the items
with a probability of error at most δ.
*

Equal contribution 1 Institut für Mathematik, Universität
Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany 2 INRAE, Mistea, Institut Agro,
Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France. Correspondence to:
Maximilian Graf <graf9@uni-potsdam.de>, Victor Thuot <victor.thuot@inrae.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
In the core manuscript, we focus on K = 2 groups. We
discuss how to extend our ideas to K > 2 clusters in Appendix C.

1

