Aligning LLMs by Predicting Preferences from User Writing Samples

Stéphane Aroca-Ouellette 1 2 Natalie Mackraz 3 Barry-John Theobald 3 Katherine Metcalf 3

Abstract

great idea” or “summarize this new article for me to share
share with my friends”. As the writing style learned by an
LLM during pretraining is generic, it may not match the
user’s preferred writing style and voice (Chakrabarty et al.,
2024; Santurkar et al., 2023), leading to outputs that feel
impersonal, misaligned, or requiring extensive editing.

Accommodating human preferences is essential
for creating aligned LLM agents that deliver
personalized and effective interactions. Recent
work has shown the potential for LLMs acting
as writing agents to infer a description of user
preferences. Agent alignment then comes from
conditioning on the inferred preference description. However, existing methods often produce
generic preference descriptions that fail to capture the unique and individualized nature of human preferences. This paper introduces PROSE,
a method designed to enhance the precision of
preference descriptions inferred from user writing samples. PROSE incorporates two key elements: (1) iterative refinement of inferred preferences, and (2) verification of inferred preferences
across multiple user writing samples. We evaluate PROSE with several LLMs (i.e., Qwen2.5
7B and 72B Instruct, GPT-mini, and GPT-4o)
on a summarization and an email writing task.
We find that PROSE more accurately infers nuanced human preferences, improving the quality of the writing agent’s generations over CIPHER (a state-of-the-art method for inferring
preferences) by 33%. Lastly, we demonstrate
that ICL and PROSE are complementary methods, and combining them provides up to a 9%
improvement over ICL alone. Code: https:
//github.com/apple/ml-predict.

Existing approaches to learn preferences rely on preference
rankings (RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Rafailov et al., 2024),
demonstrations (Ouyang et al., 2022; Shaikh et al., 2024),
prompting (Zhou et al., 2022), and user edits (Gao et al.,
2024). However, methods such as RLHF and SFT (on user
demonstrations) require a large number of samples, and do
not learn the preferences in a form users can interpret or interact with. In-context learning (ICL) from user demonstrations does learn from a small number of user demonstrations,
but lacks interpretability and offers limited control to the
user, and prompting approaches require the challenging task
of identifying a high-quality prompt (Zamfirescu-Pereira
et al., 2023). Furthermore, methods that learn from user
edits ignore data about user preferences and style that are
available from observing how the user completes writing
tasks on their own.
Gao et al. (2024) introduces CIPHER to establish the benefits of aligning a LLM through prompting by learning a
description of user preferences compared to ICL conditioned
on user demonstrations (i.e., needing fewer tokens, interpretable representation, and a modifiable representation).
The preference description is learned from user edits on the
assistant’s generations. However, CIPHER does not enable
the LLM to reflect on and refine its inferred preference description, which limits the assistant’s ability to adapt to a
user nuanced writing style.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we build on CIPHER and introduce PROSE
(Preference Reasoning by Observing and Synthesizing
Examples), a novel approach that leverages two key innovations to enhance the precision and efficacy of the preference
description inferred from user demonstrations: (1) iteratively refining the inferred description until the assistant’s
generations closely align with the user, and (2) verifying the
inferred preferences across multiple user demonstrations.
The inferred description is used to condition the LLM to
generate writing more aligned with the user.

People increasingly rely on LLM-powered AI Assistants
to complete tasks on their behalf, such as creating written
materials: “write a professional email about the following
1

Work done during internship. 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO USA 3 Apple, Cupertino, CA USA. Correspondence to: Stéphane Aroca-Ouellette
<stephane.aroca-ouellette@colorado.edu>, Katherine Metcalf
<kmetcalf@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We evaluate PROSE on PRELUDE (Gao et al., 2024), the
1

