Prediction-aware Learning in Multi-agent Systems

Aymeric Capitaine 1 Etienne Boursier 2 Eric Moulines 1 Michael I. Jordan 3 Alain Durmus 1

Abstract

dynamic game. Since the seminal works of Foster and Vohra
(1997); Freund and Schapire (1999); Hart and Mas-Colell
(2000a), progress has been made towards obtaining fast convergence rates for different equilibrium concepts, including
coarse correlated equilibrium (Syrgkanis et al., 2015; Foster
et al., 2016; Daskalakis et al., 2021; Piliouras et al., 2022;
Farina et al., 2022) correlated equilibrium (Chen and Peng,
2020; Anagnostides et al., 2022a;b; Peng and Rubinstein,
2023) and Nash equilibrium (Anagnostides et al., 2022c).
However, most of these works assume that the game remains
constant over time.

The framework of uncoupled online learning in
multiplayer games has made significant progress
in recent years. In particular, the development of
time-varying games has considerably expanded
its modeling capabilities. However, current regret bounds quickly become vacuous when the
game undergoes significant variations over time,
even when these variations are easy to predict.
Intuitively, the ability of players to forecast future payoffs should lead to tighter guarantees,
yet existing approaches fail to incorporate this
aspect. This work aims to fill this gap by introducing a novel prediction-aware framework for
time-varying games, where agents can forecast
future payoffs and adapt their strategies accordingly. In this framework, payoffs depend on an
underlying state of nature that agents predict in
an online manner. To leverage these predictions,
we propose the POMWU algorithm, a contextual extension of the optimistic Multiplicative Weight
Update algorithm, for which we establish theoretical guarantees on social welfare and convergence to equilibrium. Our results demonstrate
that, under bounded prediction errors, the proposed framework achieves performance comparable to the static setting. Finally, we empirically
demonstrate the effectiveness of POMWU in a traffic
routing experiment.

Only recent studies have begun to consider time-varying
games, in both two-player zero-sum games (Zhang et al.,
2022) and multiplayer general-sum games (Duvocelle et al.,
2018; Anagnostides et al., 2024). Following methods initially developed by the online optimization community (Chiang et al., 2012; Rakhlin and Sridharan, 2013), these studies
bound the dynamic regret incurred by players with measures
of the time-variation of the underlying game. While this
approach looks satisfactory at first glance, it is not hard to
come up with simple examples for which the variation is
important–making the above mentioned bounds vacuous–
yet very simple to predict. In Example 1, we exhibit a simple
instance of time-varying game where the regret bounds derived in Zhang et al. (2022) grow linearly with the horizon
T > 0. However, the dynamic underlying the payoff matrices is entirely deterministic, and knowing it would result in a
constant regret. This highlights that the current time-varying
framework fails to account for any predictive capacity of the
agents. This is all the more surprising as predictive models
become ubiquitous in numerous economic sectors (Jordan
and Mitchell, 2015; Gogas and Papadimitriou, 2021; Hinton and Jordan, 2024), making it likely for strategic agents
to possess a forecasting ability regarding their future payoffs. This work aims to fill the gap, by asking the following
question:

1. Introduction.
The framework of uncoupled online learning in multiplayer
games has sparked a lot of interest for its ability to realistically model the interactions of rational players engaged in a
1
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées – CNRS – École
polytechnique – Palaiseau, 91120, France 2 Inria Saclay, Université Paris Saclay, LMO - Orsay, 91400, France 3 Inria Paris,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University - Paris,
75, France. Correspondence to: Aymeric Capitaine <firstname.lastname@polytechnique.edu>.

How does the quality of predictions made by rational agents in time-varying games regarding their
future payoffs affects social welfare, as well as
the convergence to equilibrium ?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Contributions. We address this question with the following contributions.
1

