FedSMU: Communication-Efficient and Generalization-Enhanced
Federated Learning through Symbolic Model Updates

Xinyi Lu * 1 Hao Zhang * 1 Chenglin Li 1 Weijia Lu 2 Zhifei Yang 2 Wenrui Dai 1 Xiaodong Zhang 2
Xiaofeng Ma 2 Can Zhang 2 Junni Zou 1 Hongkai Xiong 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
The significant communication overhead and
client data heterogeneity have posed an important challenge to current federated learning
(FL) paradigm. Existing compression-based and
optimization-based FL algorithms typically focus
on addressing either the model compression challenge or the data heterogeneity issue individually,
rather than tackling both of them. In this paper, we
observe that by symbolizing the client model updates to be uploaded (i.e., normalizing the magnitude for each model parameter at local clients), the
model heterogeneity, essentially stemmed from
data heterogeneity, can be mitigated, and thereby
helping improve the overall generalization performance of the globally aggregated model at the
server. Inspired with this observation, and further motivated by the success of Lion optimizer
in achieving the optimal performance on most
tasks in the centralized learning, we propose a
new FL algorithm, called FedSMU, which simultaneously reduces the communication overhead
and alleviates the data heterogeneity issue. Specifically, FedSMU splits the standard Lion optimizer
into the local updates and global execution, where
only the symbol of client model updates commutes between the client and server. We theoretically prove the convergence of FedSMU for the
general non-convex settings. Through extensive
experimental evaluations on several benchmark
datasets, we demonstrate that our FedSMU algorithm not only reduces the communication overhead, but also achieves a better generalization
performance than the other compression-based
and optimization-based baselines.

Federated learning (FL) is a large-scale machine learning
paradigm wherein a multitude of clients, under the orchestration of a central server, collaboratively learn a model
without the need of sharing or exchanging any raw client
data (McMahan et al., 2017). This paradigm is commonly
adopted in data-constrained or data-sensitive environments,
such as Internet of things (IoT), healthcare, and finance
(Khan et al., 2021; Rieke et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019;
Haibo et al., 2023). In essence, FL is distinguished from
the traditional distributed learning in the following three
major challenges. High communication cost. During each
communication round of training, the clients are required
to transmit their local model parameters (or updates) to the
central server for global aggregation. When the number of
model parameters becomes significantly large, this transmission process may result in a huge bandwidth consumption.
Data heterogeneity. Due to the inherently private and personalized nature of federated clients, the datasets across
these clients tend to exhibit distinct statistical distributions.
Such a data heterogeneity may introduce significant biases
into the globally aggregated model, consequently impairing
its generalization performance. Partial client participation. In practical scenarios, clients may join or leave the
FL system at random time intervals. This highly dynamic
behavior results in only a small subset of clients being active
for training during each communication round.
To address these challenges, extensive exploration has been
conducted in the FL community, but from different perspectives. On one hand, compression-based federated algorithms
aim to reduce the amount of data required for model parameter (or update) transmission. For instance, quantization
compression, such as signSGD (Bernstein et al., 2018a;b),
QSGD (Alistarh et al., 2017) and FedPAQ (Reisizadeh et al.,
2020), quantize the gradient values into lower-precision integers, thereby reducing the number of transmitted bits. While
the sparsity compression methods typically sparsify the gradient vector by setting some of its elements to zero or fewer
bits, with the aim of reducing the data transmission cost
(Wangni et al., 2018; Aji & Heafield, 2017; Lin et al., 2017).
However, a direct application of compression methods may

*
Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China. 2 United Automotive Electronic Systems, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Chenglin Li, Wenrui Dai, and Junni Zou
<lcl1985@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

