PepTune: De Novo Generation of Therapeutic Peptides with
Multi-Objective-Guided Discrete Diffusion

Sophia Tang * 1 Yinuo Zhang * 2 Pranam Chatterjee 1 3

Abstract

20 wild-type amino acids have limitations, including susceptibility to enzymatic degradation and low membrane
permeability (Wang et al., 2022). To overcome these limitations, non-natural amino acids (nAAs) containing diverse
chemical modifications to the peptide backbone and side
chains have been integrated into peptides to enhance their
therapeutic properties. Despite this progress in peptide drug
development, searching for the vast space of chemically
modified peptides remains a major limitation (Muttenthaler
et al., 2021; Vinogradov et al., 2019). This motivates the
development of generative deep learning models that can
effectively learn the space of clinically relevant peptides and
sample de novo peptides conditioned with various therapeutic properties.

We present PepTune, a multi-objective discrete
diffusion model for simultaneous generation and
optimization of therapeutic peptide SMILES.
Built on the Masked Discrete Language Model
(MDLM) framework, PepTune ensures valid
peptide structures with a novel bond-dependent
masking schedule and invalid loss function. To
guide the diffusion process, we introduce Monte
Carlo Tree Guidance (MCTG), an inferencetime multi-objective guidance algorithm that balances exploration and exploitation to iteratively
refine Pareto-optimal sequences. MCTG integrates classifier-based rewards with search-tree
expansion, overcoming gradient estimation challenges and data sparsity. Using PepTune, we
generate diverse, chemically-modified peptides
simultaneously optimized for multiple therapeutic
properties, including target binding affinity, membrane permeability, solubility, hemolysis, and
non-fouling for various disease-relevant targets.
In total, our results demonstrate that MCTG for
masked discrete diffusion is a powerful and modular approach for multi-objective sequence design
in discrete state spaces.

Generative structure-based models are considered state-ofthe-art for de novo binder design, but they often rely on
stable tertiary structures of target proteins (Rettie et al.,
2025; Bryant & Elofsson, 2023; Pacesa et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2024; Watson et al., 2023), precluding the design of peptide
binders to disordered and dynamic targets, which drive a
sizable portion of diseases (Uversky et al., 2008). Generative peptide design language models that depend only on
the target sequence (Bhat et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2023)
have demonstrated robust success on disordered and structurally diverse targets, but their use of only 20 wild-type
amino acids limits these models from sampling from the
space of chemically-modified or cyclic peptides. Furthermore, discrete generative models still face significant limitations in multi-objective-guided generation and optimization
(Austin et al., 2021; Lou et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Sahoo
et al., 2024; Gat et al., 2024; Rector-Brooks et al., 2024;
Peng et al., 2025a; Davis et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2025b).
Classifier-based and classifier-free guidance strategies have
been explored to steer discrete diffusion objectives toward
specific properties (Wang et al., 2024; Rector-Brooks et al.,
2024; Stark et al., 2024; Nisonoff et al., 2024), yet these approaches often struggle with conflicting objectives, gradient
estimation, and the sparsity of quality data.

1. Introduction
Peptides possess unique advantages as a therapeutic modality, including their low cytotoxicity and structural flexibility
to bind to a diverse set of binding motifs without requiring stable binding pockets, making them ideal for targeting structurally diverse protein surfaces (Dang et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2022). However, peptides containing only the
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer and Information
Science, University of Pennsylvania 2 Center of Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School 3 Department of Bioengineering,
University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Pranam Chatterjee <pranam@seas.upenn.edu>.

In this work, we introduce PepTune, the first multiobjective-guided discrete diffusion model for de novo peptide SMILES generation. Our key contributions include:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

