Statistical Test for Feature Selection Pipelines by Selective Inference

Tomohiro Shiraishi * 1 2 Tatsuya Matsukawa * 1 Shuichi Nishino 1 2 Ichiro Takeuchi 1 2

Abstract

useful insights is known as a data analysis pipeline, which
plays a key role in ensuring the reproducibility and reliability of data-driven decision-making.

A data analysis pipeline is a structured sequence
of steps that transforms raw data into meaningful insights by integrating various analysis algorithms. In this paper, we propose a novel statistical test to assess the significance of data analysis pipelines. Our approach enables the systematic development of valid statistical tests applicable to any feature selection pipeline composed of
predefined components. We develop this framework based on selective inference, a statistical
technique that has recently gained attention for
data-driven hypotheses. As a proof of concept,
we focus on feature selection pipelines for linear
models, composed of three missing value imputation algorithms, three outlier detection algorithms,
and three feature selection algorithms. We theoretically prove that our statistical test can control the
probability of false positive feature selection at
any desired level, and demonstrate its validity and
effectiveness through experiments on synthetic
and real data. Additionally, we present an implementation framework that facilitates testing
across any configuration of these feature selection
pipelines without extra implementation costs.

In this study, as an example of data analysis pipelines, we
consider a class of feature selection pipelines that integrates
various missing-value imputations (MVI) algorithms, outlier detection (OD) algorithms, and feature selection (FS)
algorithms. Figure 1 shows examples of two such pipelines.
The pipeline on the left starts with a mean value imputation
algorithm, followed by L1 regression based OD algorithm,
proceeds with marginal screening to refine feature candidates, and concludes by using two FS algorithms—stepwise
feature selection and Lasso—selecting their union as the
final features. The pipeline on the right initiates with regression imputation, continues with marginal screening to
narrow down feature candidates, uses Cook’s distance for
OD, and applies both stepwise FS and Lasso, ultimately
choosing the intersection of their results as the final features.
When a data-driven approach is used for high-stakes
decision-making tasks such as medical diagnosis, it is crucial to quantify the reliability of the final results by considering all steps in the pipeline. The goal of this study is
to develop a statistical test for a specific class of feature
selection pipelines in linear models, allowing the statistical
significance of features obtained through the pipeline to be
properly quantified in the form of p-values. The first technical challenge in achieving this is the need to appropriately
account for the complex interrelations between pipeline
components to determine the overall statistical significance.
The second challenge is to develop a universal framework
capable of performing statistical tests on arbitrary pipelines
(within a given class) rather than creating individual tests
for each pipeline.

1. Introduction
In practical data-driven decision-making tasks, integrating
various types of data analysis steps is crucial for addressing diverse challenges. For instance, in genetic research
aimed at identifying genes linked to a specific disease, the
process often begins with preprocessing tasks such as filling
in missing values and detecting outliers. This is followed
by screening for potentially related genes using simple descriptive statistics and then applying more complex machine
learning-based feature selection algorithms. Such a systematic sequence of steps designed to analyze data and derive

To address these challenges, we introduce the concept of
selective inference (SI) (Taylor & Tibshirani, 2015; Fithian
et al., 2015; Lee & Taylor, 2014), a novel statistical inference approach that has gained significant attention over the
past decade. The core idea of SI is to characterize the process of selecting hypotheses from the data and calculate the
corresponding p-values using the sampling distribution, conditional on this selection process. We propose an approach
based on SI that provides valid p-values for any feature selec-

*

Equal contribution 1 Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ichiro Takeuchi
<takeuchi.ichiro.n6@f.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

