Gravity-Bench-v1: A Benchmark on Gravitational Physics Discovery for Agents

Nolan Koblischke 1 Hyunseok Jang 1 Kristen Menou 1 Mohamad Ali-Dib 2

Abstract

when it comes to evaluating an AI agent’s capacity for discovery under normal scientific conditions of uncertainty and
novelty.

Modern science emerged from reasoning over
repeatedly-observed planetary motions. We
present Gravity-Bench-v1, an environment-based
benchmark that challenges AI agents on tasks
that parallel this historical development. GravityBench-v1 evaluates agents on the discovery of
physics concealed within a dynamic environment,
using rigorous gravitational dynamics simulations.
Gravity-Bench includes out-of-distribution cases,
i.e. with physics that deviates from the real world,
to evaluate true scientific generalization capabilities. Agents must plan to collect data within
an experimental budget and must perform a dynamic form of data analysis and reasoning to solve
tasks efficiently. Our benchmark admits an openended space of solutions. Reference solutions
for each task are provided to calibrate AI performance against human expertise. Technically at an
upper-undergraduate level, our benchmark proves
challenging to baseline AI agents. Gravity-Benchv1 and planned extensions should help map out AI
progress towards scientific discovery capabilities.

To address this gap, we introduce Gravity-Bench-v1, a new
benchmark specifically designed to evaluate the scientific
reasoning and discovery capabilities of AI agents within
a controlled, physics-based environment. This benchmark
is inspired by the historical development of science (the
two-body problem of gravitational dynamics) and leverages
high-fidelity machine-precision simulation tools to build an
environment where AI agents can interact with and explore
faithful physics experiments.
In Gravity-Bench-v1, an AI agent is not merely tasked with
analyzing pre-collected data but it must engage in a fuller
version of the scientific process. It must schedule observations intelligently, within a constrained budget, and make
inferences based on the limited and accumulating data it
collects. This setup allows for an assessment of the agent’s
ability to reason and make autonomous decisions under
dynamically-shrinking uncertainty, as observational data
accumulates.
Our benchmark admits an open space of solutions, in the
sense that the optimal planning for observations and algorithmic approach for quantitative answers are not a priori
known. We leverage this property to offer expert solutions
with uniform sampling of observations (without planning)
that we consider as strong expert baselines. Our benchmark
opens the possibility for an AI agent to discover planning
and/or a reasoning approaches that best our expert solution,
as discussed further below.

1. Introduction
The rapid evolution of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning has led to significant advancements in various
domains, particularly in natural language processing and
computer vision. However, the design of AI agents for scientific research presents unique challenges, particularly in
the context of autonomously discovering new natural phenomena. Traditional benchmarks, such as those focused on
knowledge evaluation (Rein et al., 2023; Hendrycks et al.,
2021a; Ting et al., 2024) or general problem-solving capabilities (Clark et al., 2018; Zellers et al., 2019; Hendrycks
et al., 2021b; Tian et al., 2024), fall short of what is needed

Gravity-Bench-v1 has a narrow scientific focus on the twobody gravitational dynamics problem. We are working on
future expansions, including visual observation, extending
to additional fields (e.g., electromagnetism), incorporating
observational effects such as measurement errors, and introducing three-dimensional orbital dynamics. While various
extensions in task complexity, environment realism and
across physics domains are possible, we believe that the
performance gap demonstrated by current AI models, even
within the current limited domain highlights the immediate
value of evaluation setups like Gravity-Bench-v1.

1
University of Toronto 2 New York University
Abu Dhabi.
Correspondence to:
Nolan Koblischke
<nolan.koblischke@mail.utoronto.ca>,
Kristen
Menou
<kristen.menou@utoronto.ca>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In short, Gravity-Bench-v1 challenges AI agents with

1

