Hierarchical Refinement: Optimal Transport to Infinity and Beyond

Peter Halmos 1 * Julian Gold 1 2 * Xinhao Liu 1 Benjamin J. Raphael 1

Abstract

lem, instead seeks a least-cost coupling γ between µ and ν.
In the Kantorovich formulation, mass splitting is allowed
and thus a solution always exists; in contrast, a Monge map
between µ and ν may not exist. When a Monge map T does
exist, the solution to the Kantorovich problem is a coupling
γ = (id × T )♯ µ supported on its graph, and the Monge and
Kantorovich problems coincide (Brenier, 1991).

Optimal transport (OT) has enjoyed great success in machine learning as a principled way to
align datasets via a least-cost correspondence,
driven in large part by the runtime efficiency of
the Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi, 2013). However,
Sinkhorn has quadratic space and time complexity in the number of points, limiting scalability to
larger datasets. Low-rank OT achieves linear complexity, but by definition, cannot compute a oneto-one correspondence between points. When the
optimal transport problem is an assignment problem between datasets then an optimal mapping,
known as the Monge map, is guaranteed to be a
bijection. In this setting, we show that the factors
of an optimal low-rank coupling co-cluster each
point with its image under the Monge map. We
leverage this invariant to derive an algorithm, Hierarchical Refinement (HiRef), that dynamically
constructs a multiscale partition of each dataset using low-rank OT subproblems, culminating in the
bijective Monge map. Hierarchical Refinement
runs in log-linear time and linear space, retaining
the advantages of low-rank OT while overcoming its limited resolution. We demonstrate the
advantages of Hierarchical Refinement on several
datasets, including ones containing over a million
points, scaling full-rank OT to problems previously beyond Sinkhorn’s reach.

When µ and ν are discrete uniform measures on n points
the optimal transport problem reduces to an assignment
problem. Classical algorithms such as the Hungarian algorithm and Network Simplex (Tarjan, 1997; Orlin, 1997),
solve this in cubic time. The Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi,
2013) solves the entropy-regularized Kantorovich problem
with quadratic runtime, greatly expanding the applicability of computational OT. However, the Sinkhorn algorihtm
requires quadratic space to store the coupling γ.
In recent years, OT has found numerous applications in
machine learning and across science, including: domain
adaptation (Courty et al., 2014; Solomon et al., 2015), selfattention (Tay et al., 2020; Sander et al., 2022; Geshkovski
et al., 2023), computational biology (Schiebinger et al.,
2019; Yang et al., 2020; Zeira et al., 2022; Bunne et al.,
2023; Halmos et al., 2025b; Klein et al., 2025), unpaired
data translation (Korotin et al., 2021; De Bortoli et al., 2024;
Tong et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2024), and alignment problems in transformers and large language models (Melnyk
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). The least-cost principle of
optimal transport is crucial for training high-quality generative models using Schrödinger bridges, flow-matching,
diffusion models, or neural ordinary differential equations
(Finlay et al., 2020; Tong et al., 2024; De Bortoli et al., 2024;
Kornilov et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2024). These models typically require millions to hundreds of millions of data-points
to achieve high-performance at scale (Ramesh et al., 2021),
limiting the scope of OT for generative modeling.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) is a mathematical framework for
comparing probability distributions µ and ν. Given a cost
function c, the Monge problem is to find a mapping T transforming a distribution µ into ν (i.e. T♯ µ = ν) with least-cost.
A relaxation of this problem, called the Kantorovich prob-

As modern datasets grow to have tens of thousands or even
millions of points, the quadratic space and time complexity
of Sinkhorn becomes increasingly prohibitive. This limitation is widely recognized in the machine learning literature,
with (De Bortoli et al., 2024) noting that the quadratic complexity of optimal transport renders its application to modern
datasets on the order of millions of points impractical. A
number of approaches have been proposed to address scal-

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University 2 Center for Statistics and Machine Learning,
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Benjamin J. Raphael
<braphael@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

