Learning Adversarial MDPs with Stochastic Hard Constraints

Francesco Emanuele Stradi 1 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Marchesi 1 Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract

autonomous vehicles must avoid crashing (Wen et al., 2020;
Isele et al., 2018), bidding agents in ad auctions must not
deplete their budget (Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2021), and
recommendation systems must not present offending items
to their users (Singh et al., 2020). A commonly-used model
that allows to capture such additional requirements is the
constrained MDP (CMDP) (Altman, 1999), where the goal
is to learn a loss-minimizing policy while at the same time
satisfying some constraints.

We study online learning in constrained Markov
decision processes (CMDPs) with adversarial
losses and stochastic hard constraints, under bandit feedback. We consider three scenarios. In the
first one, we address general CMDPs, where we
design an algorithm attaining sublinear regret and
cumulative positive constraints violation. In the
second scenario, under the mild assumption that a
policy strictly satisfying the constraints exists and
is known to the learner, we design an algorithm
that achieves sublinear regret while ensuring that
constraints are satisfied at every episode with high
probability. In the last scenario, we only assume
the existence of a strictly feasible policy, which
is not known to the learner, and we design an algorithm attaining sublinear regret and constant
cumulative positive constraints violation. Finally,
we show that in the last two scenarios, a dependence on the Slater’s parameter is unavoidable.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
to study CMDPs involving both adversarial losses
and hard constraints. Thus, our algorithms can
deal with general non-stationary environments
subject to requirements much stricter than those
manageable with existing ones, enabling their
adoption in a much wider range of applications.

We study online learning problems in episodic CMDPs with
adversarial losses and stochastic hard constraints, under
bandit feedback. In such settings, the goal of the learner
is to minimize their regret—the difference between their
cumulative loss and what they would have obtained by always selecting a best-in-hindsight policy—, while at the
same time guaranteeing that the constraints are satisfied
during the learning process. We consider three scenarios
that differ in the way in which constraints are satisfied and
are all usually referred to as hard constraints settings in the
literature (Liu et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2022). In the first
scenario, the learner attains sublinear cumulative positive
constraints violation. In the second one, the learner satisfies
constraints at every episode, while, in the third one, they
achieve constant cumulative positive constraints violation.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to study
CMDPs that involve both adversarial losses and hard constraints. Indeed, all the works on adversarial CMDPs (see,
e.g., (Wei et al., 2018; Qiu et al., 2020)) consider settings
with soft constraints. These are much weaker than hard constraints, as they are only concerned with the minimization
of the cumulative (both positive and negative) constraints
violation. As a result, they allow negative violations to
cancel out positive ones across different episodes. Such cancellations are unreasonable in real-world applications. For
instance, in autonomous driving, avoiding a collision clearly
does not “repair” a crash occurred previously. Furthermore,
the only few works addressing stochastic hard constraints
in CMDPs (Liu et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2023; Müller et al.,
2024; Stradi et al., 2025) are restricted to stochastic losses.
Thus, their techniques cannot be easily generalized to our
setting. Our CMDP settings capture many more applications
than theirs, since being able to deal with adversarial losses
allows to tackle general non-stationary environments, which
are ubiquitous in the real world.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018) studies problems where a learner sequentially takes actions in an environment modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014). Most of the algorithms for such problems
focus on learning policies that prescribe the learner how to
take actions so as to minimize losses (equivalently, maximize rewards). However, in many real-world applications,
the learner must fulfill additional requirements. For instance,
1

DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Francesco Emanuele Stradi <francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

