Autoencoder-Based Hybrid Replay for Class-Incremental Learning

Milad Khademi Nori 1 Il-Min Kim 2 Guanghui Wang 1
Table 1: Hybrid replay strategy versus baseline strategies.

Abstract
In class-incremental learning (CIL), effective
incremental learning strategies are essential
to mitigate task confusion and catastrophic
forgetting, especially as the number of tasks t
increases. Current exemplar replay strategies
impose O(t) memory/compute complexities.
We propose an autoencoder-based hybrid replay
(AHR) strategy that leverages our new hybrid
autoencoder (HAE) to function as a compressor
to alleviate the requirement for large memory,
achieving O(0.1t) at the worst case with the computing complexity of O(t) while accomplishing
state-of-the-art performance. The decoder later
recovers the exemplar data stored in the latent
space, rather than in raw format. Additionally,
HAE is designed for both discriminative and
generative modeling, enabling classification and
replay capabilities, respectively. HAE adopts
the charged particle system energy minimization
equations and repulsive force algorithm for
the incremental embedding and distribution
of new class centroids in its latent space. Our
results demonstrate that AHR consistently
outperforms recent baselines across multiple
benchmarks while operating with the same memory/compute budgets. Implementation is available
at github.com/miladkhademinori/autoencoderhybrid-replay-cil.

CIL Strategies
Generative Replay
Generative Classifier
Exemplar Replay
Hybrid Replay (ours)

Memory
O(cte)
O(t)
O(t)
O(0.1t)

Compute
O(t)
O(cte)
O(t)
O(t)

Performance
non-SOTA
non-SOTA
SOTA
SOTA

ios are often considered: task-incremental learning (TIL)
and class-incremental learning (CIL). CIL at the test phase
requires jointly discriminating among all classes seen in all
previous tasks without knowing task-IDs. Given task-IDs to
the model during the test phase, CIL reduces to TIL (van de
Ven & Tolias, 2019). The issue with CIL is that it not only
suffers from catastrophic forgetting (CF) but also task confusion (TC), which happens when the model struggles to
distinguish among different tasks observed so far while still
being able to identify classes within a given task (Rebuffi
et al., 2017; Belouadah et al., 2021; Masana et al., 2020;
Cormerais et al., 2021).
Various strategies have been proposed for incremental learning such as regularization (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke
et al., 2017; Li & Hoiem, 2017b), bias-correction (Zeno
et al., 2021), replay (Shin et al., 2017; Ven et al., 2020),
and generative classifier (Ven et al., 2021; Pang et al., 2005;
Zaj ˛
ac et al., 2023). However, in the context of CIL, only
the latter two strategies have been proven effective in overcoming TC: replay and generative classifier (Masana et al.,
2020; Cormerais et al., 2021; Ven et al., 2021). Nevertheless,
current realizations of the generative classifier strategy (Ven
et al., 2021; Pang et al., 2005; Zaj ˛
ac et al., 2023) demand
an expanding architecture, leading to a linear increase of
memory O(t) with respect to the number of learned tasks t.
Furthermore, such expanding architectures fail to consolidate features of different tasks within a single model.

1. Introduction
Incremental learning addresses the challenge of learning
from an upcoming stream of data with a changing distribution (Parisi et al., 2019; De Lange et al., 2021; Hadsell et al.,
2020). To study incremental learning, two common scenar-

To develop a scalable incremental learning algorithm suitable for CIL, we capitalize on replay strategies (Shin et al.,
2017; Ven et al., 2020). However, the current exemplar replay strategies (Rebuffi et al., 2017) are not scalable due to
their reliance on large memory sizes. Specifically, the memory requirements for exemplar replay increase linearly with
the number of tasks, resulting in O(t) memory complexity
(Hou et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Hayes et al., 2020a).

1

Department of Computer Science, Toronto Metropolitan
University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2 Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
Correspondence to: Milad Khademi Nori <miladkhademinori@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address this issue, generative replay strategies (Shin
1

