Understanding Fixed Predictions via Confined Regions

Connor Lawless 1 Tsui-Wei Weng 2 Berk Ustun 2 Madeleine Udell 1

Abstract

hiring, fixed predictions may preclude individuals from access to credit and employment. In content moderation, a
fixed prediction can ensure that malicious actors are unable
to evade detection by manipulating their features. There has
been little work that mentions this effect, let alone studies it.
Yet fixed predictions arise in practice. Recently, a predictive
model used to allocate livers in the United Kingdom was
found to preclude all young patients – no matter how ill –
from receiving a liver transplant (Murgia, 2023).

Machine learning models can assign fixed predictions that preclude individuals from changing
their outcome. Existing approaches to audit fixed
predictions do so on a pointwise basis, which
requires access to an existing dataset of individuals and may fail to anticipate fixed predictions
in out-of-sample data. This work presents a new
paradigm to identify fixed predictions by finding
confined regions of the feature space in which
all individuals receive fixed predictions. This
paradigm enables the certification of recourse for
out-of-sample data, works in settings without representative datasets, and provides interpretable
descriptions of individuals with fixed predictions.
We develop a fast method to discover confined
regions for linear classifiers using mixed-integer
quadratically constrained programming. We conduct a comprehensive empirical study of confined
regions across diverse applications. Our results
highlight that existing pointwise verification methods fail to anticipate future individuals with fixed
predictions, while our method both identifies them
and provides an interpretable description.

Existing approaches to check model responsiveness (see
Kothari et al., 2023) work by verifying recourse on an
individual-by-individual basis. These pointwise approaches
can only verify recourse for available data, and do not provide guarantees on model responsiveness out-of-sample. In
practice, this means that critical issues can only be identified after a model has been deployed and it is too late to
prevent harms. Moreover, in some settings there may be
no data available to run these pointwise procedures due to
privacy or because the model is being deployed on a new
population. For instance, many interpretable medical and
criminal justice scoring systems are available publicly (see
e.g., Morrison et al., 2022; Yamga et al., 2023; Ribeiro Junior et al., 2023; of Pennsylvania, 2025), but gaining access
to a representative dataset is difficult due to privacy concerns. Without available data, pointwise approaches can
only be used after generating synthetic data that may not
be representative of the entire population or feature space.
Finally, even when individuals without recourse can be identified, it can be hard to determine the root cause of these
fixed predictions (Rawal et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly used in high-stakes settings to decide who receives a loan (Hurley & Adebayo,
2016), a job interview (Bogen & Rieke, 2018), or an organ
transplant (Murgia, 2023). Models predict outcomes using
features about individuals, without considering how individuals can change them (Liu et al., 2024). Consequently,
models may assign an individual a fixed prediction which is
not responsive to their actions.

This work studies a new paradigm in algorithmic recourse
that characterizes fixed predictions by verifying recourse
over an entire region of the feature space (e.g., all plausible job applicants). In contrast to existing pointwise approaches, auditing regions of the feature space can identify
confined regions (i.e., where all individuals are assigned a
fixed prediction), or provide a formal certification of model
responsiveness over the entire region. This approach is
robust to distribution shifts, can be used without the need
for available datasets or synthetic data generation, and provides an interpretable description of individuals with fixed
predictions.

The responsiveness of a model is integral to its safety in
settings where predictions map to people. In lending and
1

Stanford University 2 University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Connor Lawless <lawlessc@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Verifying recourse for a single individual is a non-trivial

1

