Morse: Dual-Sampling for Lossless Acceleration of Diffusion Models

Chao Li 1 Jiawei Fan 1 Anbang Yao 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs), a class of likelihood-based generative models, have achieved remarkable performance on
a variety of generative modeling tasks such as image generation (Ho et al., 2022), text-to-image generation (Zhang
et al., 2023), video creation (Blattmann et al., 2023), text-to3D synthesis (Poole et al., 2023) and audio synthesis (Liu
et al., 2022). The powerful generalization ability of DMs
comes from a forward-backward diffusion framework: the
forward process gradually degenerates the data into random
noise with a T -step noise schedule (typically, T = 1000
as default), while the backward process learns a neural network to iteratively estimate and remove the noise added to
the data. However, to generate high quality samples, DMs
usually require hundreds of sampling steps (i.e., function
evaluations of the trained model). The slow sampling efficiency incurs heavy computational overhead at inference,
especially to large-scale DMs such as DALL-E (Ramesh
et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2024), posing a
great challenge for the deployment of DMs.

In this paper, we present Morse, a simple dualsampling framework for accelerating diffusion
models losslessly. The key insight of Morse is to
reformulate the iterative generation (from noise
to data) process via taking advantage of fast jump
sampling and adaptive residual feedback strategies. Specifically, Morse involves two models
called Dash and Dot that interact with each other.
The Dash model is just the pre-trained diffusion
model of any type, but operates in a jump sampling regime, creating sufficient space for sampling efficiency improvement. The Dot model is
significantly faster than the Dash model, which is
learnt to generate residual feedback conditioned
on the observations at the current jump sampling
point on the trajectory of the Dash model, lifting
the noise estimate to easily match the next-step estimate of the Dash model without jump sampling.
By chaining the outputs of the Dash and Dot models run in a time-interleaved fashion, Morse exhibits the merit of flexibly attaining desired image
generation performance while improving overall
runtime efficiency. With our proposed weight
sharing strategy between the Dash and Dot models, Morse is efficient for training and inference.
Our method shows a lossless speedup of 1.78×
to 3.31× on average over a wide range of sampling step budgets relative to 9 baseline diffusion
models on 6 image generation tasks. Furthermore,
we show that our method can be also generalized to improve the Latent Consistency Model
(LCM-SDXL, which is already accelerated with
consistency distillation technique) tailored for
few-step text-to-image synthesis. The code and
models are available at https://github.com/deepoptimization/Morse.

Recently, there have been lots of research efforts aiming
to design fast samplers for DMs, which can be grouped
into two major categories. The first category focuses on
evolving more advanced formulations for the sampling process that enjoy faster convergence. Denoising diffusion
implicit models (DDIM) (Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan,
2016; Song et al., 2021a), stochastic differential equations
(SDE) (Song et al., 2021b) and ordinary differential equations (ODE) based solvers (Zhang & Chen, 2023; Lu et al.,
2022) are representative ones. It is worth noting that the
ODE samplers allow to generate high quality samples in tens
of sampling steps. The second category relies on knowledge
distillation schemes, such as progressive distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2022), two-stage progressive distillation (Meng
et al., 2023) and consistency distillation (Song et al., 2023;
Luo et al., 2023), by which the few-step samples generated
by a student DM using the distilled sampler can match to
the many-step outputs of its corresponding teacher DM.

1
Intel Labs China. Correspondence to: Anbang Yao <anbang.yao@intel.com>.

In this work, we attempt to improve the sampling efficiency
of DMs in a more generalized perspective. Specifically,
we ask: given a pre-trained DM (with either U-Net or selfattention based backbone), no matter what kind of existing

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

