MuLan: Adapting Multilingual Diffusion Models for Hundreds of Languages
with Negligible Cost

Sen Xing 1 2 * Muyan Zhong 1 * Zeqiang Lai 3 * Liangchen Li 2 Jiawen Liu 4 Yaohui Wang 2 Jifeng Dai 1 2
Wenhai Wang 2 3

Abstract

popular image-generation models, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), and its successors (Podell et al., 2023;
Esser et al., 2024) only supports English and a few Latinbased languages. This language barrier restricts the model’s
performance in multilingual contexts and hinders its applicability worldwide across diverse cultural and linguistic
backgrounds.

In this work, we explore a cost-effective framework for multilingual image generation. We find
that, unlike models tuned on high-quality images
with multilingual annotations, leveraging text encoders pre-trained on widely available, noisy Internet image-text pairs significantly enhances data
efficiency in text-to-image (T2I) generation across
multiple languages. Based on this insight, we
introduce MuLan, Multi-Language adapter, a
lightweight language adapter with fewer than
20M parameters, trained alongside a frozen text
encoder and image diffusion model. Compared
to previous multilingual T2I models, this framework offers: (1) Cost efficiency. Using readily
accessible English data and off-the-shelf multilingual text encoders minimizes the training cost;
(2) High performance. Achieving comparable
generation capabilities in over 110 languages with
CLIP similarity scores nearly matching those in
English (39.57 for English vs. 39.61 for other languages); and (3) Broad applicability. Seamlessly
integrating with compatible community tools like
LoRA, LCM, ControlNet, and IP-Adapter, expanding its potential use cases.

The community primarily adopts two approaches to achieve
multilingual text-to-image (T2I) generation. (1) The first
is translation-based methods where input content is temporarily translated into English before generating the image. However, this approach often leads to inference delays,
translation errors, and notable issues when handling slang
or culturally nuanced content. (2) The other approach is
native multilingual T2I models (Zhang et al., 2022; Radford et al., 2021; Arkhipkin et al., 2023; Shing & Akiba;
Li et al., 2024b; Team, 2024), which is trained directly on
high-quality images captioned in the target language. While
this native approach improves image generation quality for
non-English languages, it relies on extensive, carefully curated image-generation data in the target language, making
it data- and resource-intensive. As a result, exploring a
more efficient and generalizable approach to achieve strong
multilingual generation capabilities remains challenging.
On the other hand, thanks to the development of computational power and dataset scale, many existing language models have achieved strong multilingual capabilities through
training on large-scale internet data. For example, models trained on text data (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2019),
the GPT series (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023), and
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024)) and
those trained on image-text pairs (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021), ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), and InternVL (Chen et al.,
2023b)) demonstrate outstanding performance in multilingual understanding. Since the multilingual capability of T2I
generation models is closely tied to their text encoders, it becomes essential to explore how these powerful multilingual
text encoders can be leveraged to enable existing generative
models to achieve multilingual capabilities more efficiently
and effectively.

1. Introduction
Recent diffusion models (Esser et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2024a;b; Team, 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2022)
for content generation have attained stunning advancements
in terms of both aesthetic quality and text-content alignment. However, these models still face substantial limitations in multilingual support. For instance, one of the most
*
Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University 2 OpenGVLab,
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Johns Hopkins University. Correspondence to: Wenhai Wang
<wangwenhai@pjlab.org.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we deeply explore the application of multi1

