Ringmaster ASGD: The First Asynchronous SGD
with Optimal Time Complexity

Artavazd Maranjyan 1 Alexander Tyurin 2 3 Peter Richtárik 1

Abstract

optimization, our goal is to find an ε–stationary point, i.e., a
2
(random) vector x̄ ∈ Rd such that E[∥∇f (x̄)∥ ] ≤ ε.

Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent (Asynchronous SGD) is a cornerstone method for parallelizing learning in distributed machine learning.
However, its performance suffers under arbitrarily
heterogeneous computation times across workers,
leading to suboptimal time complexity and inefficiency as the number of workers scales. While
several Asynchronous SGD variants have been
proposed, recent findings by Tyurin & Richtárik
(2023) reveal that none achieve optimal time complexity, leaving a significant gap in the literature.
In this paper, we propose Ringmaster ASGD, a
novel Asynchronous SGD method designed to
address these limitations and tame the inherent
challenges of Asynchronous SGD. We establish,
through rigorous theoretical analysis, that Ringmaster ASGD achieves optimal time complexity under arbitrarily heterogeneous and dynamically fluctuating worker computation times. This
makes it the first Asynchronous SGD method to
meet the theoretical lower bounds for time complexity in such scenarios.

We consider a setup involving n workers (e.g., CPUs, GPUs,
servers), each with access to the same distribution D. Each
worker is capable of computing independent, unbiased
stochastic gradients with bounded variance (Assumption
1.3). We consider a setup with asynchronous, heterogeneous, and varying computation speeds. We aim to account
for all potential scenarios, such as random outages, varying
computational performance over time, and the presence of
slow or straggling workers (Dean & Barroso, 2013).
This setup is common in both datacenter environments
(Dean et al., 2012) and federated learning (Konečný et al.,
2016; McMahan et al., 2016; Kairouz et al., 2021) for distributed training. Although parallelism facilitates rapid convergence, variations in worker speeds make effective coordination more challenging.
Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent (Asynchronous
SGD) is a popular approach for parallelization in such distributed settings. The algorithm operates as follows (Algorithm 1), formalized below.
Algorithm 1 Asynchronous SGD
Input: point x0 ∈ Rd , stepsizes γk ≥ 0
Set k = 0
Workers start computing stochastic gradients at x0
while True do
k
k
Gradient ∇f (xk−δ ; ξik−δ ) arrives from worker i
k
k
Update: xk+1 = xk − γk ∇f (xk−δ ; ξik−δ )
Worker i begins calculating ∇f (xk+1 ; ξik+1 )
Update the iteration number k = k + 1
end while

1. Introduction
We consider stochastic nonconvex optimization problems
of the form
min {f (x) := Eξ∼D [f (x; ξ)]} ,

x∈Rd

where f : Rd × Sξ → R, Rd is a linear space, and Sξ is a
sample space. In machine learning, f (x; ξ) denotes the loss
of a model parameterized by x on a data sample ξ, and D
denotes the distribution of the training dataset. In nonconvex

This is a greedy and asynchronous method. Once a worker
finishes computation of the stochastic gradient, it immediately sends the gradient to the server, which updates the
current iterate without waiting for other workers. Notice
that, unlike vanilla SGD, the update is performed using the
k
stochastic gradient calculated at the point xk−δ , where the
k
index k − δ corresponds to the iteration when the worker
started computing the gradient, which can be significantly

1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia 2 AIRI, Moscow, Russia 3 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Artavazd Maranjyan <https://artomaranjyan.github.io/>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

