GoIRL: Graph-Oriented Inverse Reinforcement Learning for
Multimodal Trajectory Prediction

Muleilan Pei 1 Shaoshuai Shi 2 Lu Zhang 3 Peiliang Li 3 Shaojie Shen 1

Abstract
Trajectory prediction for surrounding agents is a
challenging task in autonomous driving due to its
inherent uncertainty and underlying multimodality. Unlike prevailing data-driven methods that
primarily rely on supervised learning, in this paper, we introduce a novel Graph-oriented Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (GoIRL) framework,
which is an IRL-based predictor equipped with
vectorized context representations. We develop
a feature adaptor to effectively aggregate lanegraph features into grid space, enabling seamless integration with the maximum entropy IRL
paradigm to infer the reward distribution and obtain the policy that can be sampled to induce multiple plausible plans. Furthermore, conditioned
on the sampled plans, we implement a hierarchical parameterized trajectory generator with a refinement module to enhance prediction accuracy
and a probability fusion strategy to boost prediction confidence. Extensive experimental results
showcase our approach not only achieves state-ofthe-art performance on the large-scale Argoverse
& nuScenes motion forecasting benchmarks but
also exhibits superior generalization abilities compared to existing supervised models.

Figure 1. A motivating example of the covariate shift issue in trajectory prediction. In a T-junction driving scenario, the target agent
has two potential future trajectories: going straight and turning left.
During the data collection process, the ground-truth trajectory is
labeled as going straight. However, during testing, the presence of
a tentative barricade set up in the intersection renders the original
prediction unreasonable. Hence, the predictor must adapt to this
change and provide an updated prediction, considering only the
option of turning left in this case.

autonomous vehicles can make safe, efficient, and judicious
decisions in intricate urban scenarios. However, the task
of motion forecasting remains challenging because of its
inherent uncertainty and underlying multimodality: an agent
can exhibit multiple plausible future trajectories given its
past tracks and the available scene information (Song et al.,
2021; Shi et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023a).
Learning-based approaches have emerged as the dominant
paradigm due to their powerful representation capabilities
to encode the historical motion profiles of agents and the
topological and semantic information of environments. In
general, data-driven trajectory prediction can be seen as
imitation learning from human drivers, i.e., neural networks
aim at learning human-like driving behaviors or strategies by
leveraging a large amount of recorded driving data as expert
demonstrations. This typical robotic task can be approached
mainly in two ways: behavior cloning (BC) and inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL). Most advanced methods in
motion forecasting predominantly employ the BC framework, which involves directly learning the distribution of
trajectories from real-world datasets in a supervised manner.
In contrast, the IRL architecture models the agent’s behavior
as a sequential decision-making process (Osa et al., 2018)
and aims to infer the underlying reward function that is con-

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction for surrounding traffic participants
plays a pivotal role in modern autonomous driving systems,
serving as a crucial bridging module that connects upstream
perception to downstream planning. Accurately anticipating
the future behaviors of nearby agents is paramount to ensure
1

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
2
Voyager Research, Didi Chuxing, China 3 Zhuoyu Technology
Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Shaoshuai Shi
<shaoshuaics@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

