A Closer Look at Multimodal Representation Collapse

Abhra Chaudhuri 1 Anjan Dutta 2 Tu Bui 1 Serban Georgescu 1

Abstract
We aim to develop a fundamental understanding of modality collapse, a recently observed
empirical phenomenon wherein models trained
for multimodal fusion tend to rely only on a
subset of the modalities, ignoring the rest. We
show that modality collapse happens when noisy
features from one modality are entangled, via a
shared set of neurons in the fusion head, with predictive features from another, effectively masking out positive contributions from the predictive features of the former modality and leading to its collapse. We further prove that crossmodal knowledge distillation implicitly disentangles such representations by freeing up rank bottlenecks in the student encoder, denoising the
fusion-head outputs without negatively impacting the predictive features from either modality.
Based on the above findings, we propose an algorithm that prevents modality collapse through
explicit basis reallocation, with applications in
dealing with missing modalities. Extensive experiments on multiple multimodal benchmarks validate our theoretical claims. Project page: https:
//abhrac.github.io/mmcollapse/.

Optimization pathway of
neuron in cross-modal
entanglement
Loss
Sub-optimal solution
under rank starvation
Denoising pathway
under rank starvation
Denoising pathway
post freeing up of rank
bottlenecks
(Broken) Loss Increase
(Cont.) Loss Decrease
Joint Encoding Step
Denoising Step

Figure 1. When noisy features of one modality exist in entanglement with predictive features of another in the fusion head (the
probability of which increases with the number of modalities), it
results in a sub-optimal solution wherein the predictive value of the
former modality is diminished by the inevitable existence of noisy
features. Freeing up rank bottlenecks allows for the denoising
of such features along independent dimensions without affecting
the latter modality, while simultaneously allowing the predictive
features of the former modality to contribute to loss reduction.

model is reliant only on a subset of modalities and if it is
those that specifically go missing at test time, the model
could end up completely non-functional. Although there
have been several attempts at mitigating modality collapse
based on a priori conjectures about what might be causing
them, such as conflicting gradients (Javaloy et al., 2022) or
interactions between data distributions and the fusion strategy (Ma et al., 2022), to the best of our knowledge, there
have been no prior efforts towards developing a bottom-up
understanding of the underlying learning-theoretic phenomena at play.

1. Introduction
A number of recent works in the multimodal learning literature have observed that models that aim to learn a fusion
of several modalities often end up relying only on a subset
of them (Javaloy et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024). This phenomenon, termed as modality collapse, has been empirically
observed across a diverse range of fusion strategies (Javaloy
et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2024), and has serious implications for the
scenario when certain modalities can go missing at test time
(You et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024). If a

We aim to bridge this gap by developing a mechanistic theory of multimodal feature encoding that is agnostic of the
specific choice of fusion strategy (see Task Setup in Section 3). We start by showing that modality collapse arises
as a result of an unintended entanglement among the noisy
and the predictive features of different modalities through
a shared set of polysemantic neurons (Elhage et al., 2022),
which we observe, via Lemma 1, to increase quadratically

1
Fujitsu Research of Europe 2 University of Surrey. Correspondence to: Abhra Chaudhuri <abhra.chaudhuri@fujitsu.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

