Online Laplacian-Based Representation Learning in Reinforcement Learning

Maheed H. Ahmed 1 Jayanth Bhargav 1 Mahsa Ghasemi 1

Abstract

This makes representation learning important for discovering and encoding meaningful features from raw sensory
inputs. The main goal of RL is to learn an optimal strategy (policy) that maps each state to an action, aiming to
maximize the expected reward based on the dynamics of
the environment. Learning a good representation can improve the sample efficiency of value-function approximation algorithms (Farebrother et al., 2023), a major family
of RL algorithms, and enhance generalizations across different tasks (Yuan & Lu, 2022). In addition, representation
learning has found applications in reward shaping (Wu et al.,
2018), learning options with larger coverage (Machado et al.,
2017a; Jinnai et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2024), zero-shot learning (Touati et al., 2022), and transfer learning (Gimelfarb
et al., 2021; Barreto et al., 2017).

Representation learning plays a crucial role in reinforcement learning, especially in complex environments with high-dimensional and unstructured
states. Effective representations can enhance the
efficiency of learning algorithms by improving
sample efficiency and generalization across tasks.
This paper considers the Laplacian-based framework for representation learning, where the eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix of the underlying
transition graph are leveraged to encode meaningful features from raw sensory observations of
the states. Despite the promising algorithmic advances in this framework, it remains an open question whether the Laplacian-based representations
can be learned online and with theoretical guarantees along with policy learning. We address this
by formulating an online optimization approach
using the Asymmetric Graph Drawing Objective
(AGDO) and analyzing its convergence via online
projected gradient descent under mild assumptions. Our extensive simulation studies empirically validate the convergence guarantees to the
true Laplacian representation. Furthermore, we
provide insights into the compatibility of different reinforcement learning algorithms with online
representation learning.

A graph representation is often used to learn a representation, i.e., a low-dimensional embedding, of the states (Mahadevan & Maggioni, 2007; Wu et al., 2018). States of an
environment can be viewed as nodes of a graph, and the transition probability between states under a given policy can
be viewed as weighted edges between these nodes. States
that are closely connected in the graph are expected to have
similar representations in the embedding space. One representation that retains this property is the eigenvectors of the
graph Laplacian. Formally, the d-eigenvectors of the graph
Laplacian corresponding to the d-smallest eigenvalues are
used to construct an embedding function that maps a state
to a vector in Rd . We refer to those d-eigenvectors as the
d-smallest eigenvectors for the remainder of this paper.

1. Introduction

Constructing the graph and performing eigendecomposition on the Laplacian is only feasible in the tabular settings
where the number of states is small. Therefore, Wu et al.
(2018) proposed a scalable method to compute the smallest eigenvectors by solving an unconstrained version of the
graph drawing objective (Koren, 2005) which is suitable
for large and continuous state-spaces. However, the graph
drawing objective does not have a unique minimizer, rather
the rotations of the smallest eigenvectors are also its minimizers. To tackle this challenge, Wang et al. (2021) propose
the generalized graph drawing objective which breaks the
symmetry and only has the smallest eigenvectors as a unique
minimizer. Gomez et al. (2023) show that under gradient
descent dynamics, the unconstrained version of the generalized graph drawing objective has permutations of the small-

Representation learning is an important part of machine
learning that involves learning compact and useful representations of data. The quality of these representations significantly impacts the performance and efficiency of machine
learning algorithms (Bengio et al., 2013). In reinforcement
learning (RL), agents often deal with complex environments
characterized by high-dimensional and unstructured states.
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. Correspondence to: Maheed H. Ahmed
<ahmed237@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

