ExpProof : Operationalizing Explanations for Confidential Models with ZKPs

Chhavi Yadav * 1 Evan Monroe Laufer * 2 Dan Boneh 2 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Abstract
In principle, explanations are intended as a way to
increase trust in machine learning models and are
often obligated by regulations. However, many
circumstances where these are demanded are adversarial in nature, meaning the involved parties
have misaligned interests and are incentivized to
manipulate explanations for their purpose. As
a result, explainability methods fail to be operational in such settings despite the demand (Bordt
et al., 2022). In this paper, we take a step towards
operationalizing explanations in adversarial scenarios with Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs), a
cryptographic primitive. Specifically we explore
ZKP-amenable versions of the popular explainability algorithm LIME and evaluate their performance on Neural Networks and Random Forests.
Our code is publicly available at : https://
github.com/emlaufer/ExpProof.

Figure 1. Pictorial Representation of ExpProof.

and are incentivized to manipulate explanations to meet
their ends. For instance, a bank which denies loan to an
applicant based on an ML model’s prediction has an incentive to return an incontestable explanation to the applicant
rather than reveal the true workings of the model since the
explanation can be used by the applicant to prove discrimination in the court of law (Bordt et al., 2022). In fact, many
previous studies show that adversarial manipulations of explanations are possible in realistic settings with systematic
and computationally feasible attacks (Slack et al., 2020;
Shahin Shamsabadi et al., 2022; Slack et al., 2021; Yadav
et al., 2024c). As such, despite the demand, explanations
fail to be operational as a trust-enhancing tool.

1. Introduction
“Bottom line: Post-hoc explanations are highly problematic in an adversarial context” (Bordt et al., 2022)
Explanations have been seen as a way to enhance trust in
machine learning (ML) models by virtue of making them
transparent. Although starting out as a debugging tool, they
are now also widely proposed to prove fairness and sensibility of ML-based predictions for societal applications, in
research studies (Langer et al., 2021; Smuha, 2019; Kästner
et al., 2021; Von Eschenbach, 2021; Leben, 2023; Karimi
et al., 2022; Wachter et al., 2017; Liao & Varshney, 2021)
and regulations alike (Right to Explanation (Wikipedia contributors, 2025)). However, as discussed in detail by (Bordt
et al., 2022), many of these use-cases are adversarial in nature where the involved parties have misaligned interests

A major barrier to using explanations in adversarial contexts
is that organizations keep their models confidential due
to IP and legal reasons. However, confidentiality aids in
manipulating explanations by allowing model swapping
– a model owner can use different models for generating
predictions vs. explanations, swap the model for specific
inputs, or change the model post-audits (Slack et al., 2020;
Yadav et al., 2024b; Yan & Zhang, 2022; Baldini et al.,
2023). This problem demands a technical solution which
guarantees that a specific model is used for all inputs, for
generating both the prediction and the explanation and prove
this to the customer on the receiving end while keeping the
model weights confidential.

*

Equal contribution 1 UC San Diego 2 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Chhavi Yadav <chhaviyadav123@gmail.com>,
Evan Monroe Laufer <emlaufer@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Another important barrier to using explanations in adversarial contexts is that many explanation algorithms are not
1

