All-atom Diffusion Transformers:
Unified generative modelling of molecules and materials

Chaitanya K. Joshi 1 2 Xiang Fu 1 Yi-Lun Liao 1 3 Vahe Gharakhanyan 1 Benjamin Kurt Miller 1
Anuroop Sriram * 1 Zachary W. Ulissi * 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Generative modelling of the 3D structure of atomic systems
has the potential to revolutionize inverse design of new
molecules and materials. The current state-of-the-art uses
diffusion or flow matching models for tasks such as structure
prediction (Abramson et al., 2024; Corso et al., 2023; Jiao
et al., 2023) and conditional generation (Watson et al., 2023;
Ingraham et al., 2023; Zeni et al., 2025) for biomolecules
and materials, as well as for structure-based drug design
(Schneuing et al., 2024).

Diffusion models are the standard toolkit for generative modelling of 3D atomic systems. However, for different types of atomic systems – such
as molecules and materials – the generative processes are usually highly specific to the target
system despite the underlying physics being the
same. We introduce the All-atom Diffusion Transformer (ADiT), a unified latent diffusion framework for jointly generating both periodic materials and non-periodic molecular systems using
the same model: (1) An autoencoder maps a unified, all-atom representations of molecules and
materials to a shared latent embedding space;
and (2) A diffusion model is trained to generate new latent embeddings that the autoencoder
can decode to sample new molecules or materials. Experiments on MP20, QM9 and GEOMDRUGS datasets demonstrate that jointly trained
ADiT generates realistic and valid molecules as
well as materials, obtaining state-of-the-art results on par with molecule and crystal-specific
models. ADiT uses standard Transformers with
minimal inductive biases for both the autoencoder and diffusion model, resulting in significant speedups during training and inference compared to equivariant diffusion models. Scaling ADiT up to half a billion parameters predictably improves performance, representing a
step towards broadly generalizable foundation
models for generative chemistry. Open source
code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/allatom-diffusion-transformer

All atomic systems share the same underlying physical principles that determine their 3D structure and interactions.
However, we currently do not have a unified formulation of
diffusion models across different types of atomic systems
such as small molecules, biomolecules, crystals, and their
combinations. Most diffusion models are highly specific
to each type of system, and involve multi-modal generative
processes on complex product manifolds of categorical and
continuous data types. For example, de novo generation of
small molecules is modelled as two independent diffusion
processes for the atom types (categorical) and 3D coordinates (continuous) of a set of atoms (Hoogeboom et al.,
2022). The denoiser model learns how atom types and 3D
coordinates jointly evolve in order to sample new molecules
but passes through unrealistic intermediate states during the
denoising trajectory. Diffusion models for biomolecules
treat groups of atoms as rigid bodies and add a third manifold (rotations) into the joint diffusion process (Yim et al.,
2023b; Campbell et al., 2024). For crystals and materials,
the diffusion process needs to additionally handle periodicity and operates on a joint manifold of atom types, fractional
coordinates, lattice lengths, and lattice angles that together
define the repeating unit cell (Xie et al., 2022; Miller et al.,
2024).
In this paper, we pose the following question: How can
we build unified diffusion models that can generate both
periodic materials and non-periodic molecular systems?

*

Equal contribution 1 Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) at Meta
2
University of Cambridge 3 MIT. Correspondence to: Chaitanya K.
Joshi <chaitanya.joshi@cl.cam.ac.uk>.

Our solution, the All-atom Diffusion Transformer (ADiT),
illustrated in Figure 1, is a latent diffusion model based on
two key ideas:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

