Compact Matrix Quantum Group Equivariant Neural Networks

Edward Pearce–Crump 1

Abstract

Maron et al., 2019a; Finzi et al., 2021; Villar et al., 2021;
Pearce-Crump, 2023a;b; 2024; Godfrey et al., 2023). These
networks have proven to perform well across a wide range
of tasks, including, but not restricted to, particle physics
(Bogatskiy et al., 2020), natural language processing (Gordon et al., 2020), the generation of molecules (Satorras et al.,
2021), and computer vision (Chatzipantazis et al., 2023).

Group equivariant neural networks have proven
effective in modelling a wide range of tasks where
the data lives in a classical geometric space and
exhibits well-defined group symmetries. However, these networks are not suitable for learning from data that lives in a non-commutative geometry, described formally by non-commutative
C ∗ -algebras, since the C ∗ -algebra of continuous
functions on a compact matrix group is commutative. To address this limitation, we derive the existence of a new type of equivariant neural network,
called compact matrix quantum group equivariant
neural networks, which encode symmetries that
are described by compact matrix quantum groups.
We characterise the weight matrices that appear in
these neural networks for the easy compact matrix
quantum groups, which are defined by set partitions. As a result, we obtain new characterisations
of equivariant weight matrices for some compact
matrix groups that have not appeared previously
in the machine learning literature.

However, when we consider tasks that involve learning
from data that lives in a non-commutative geometry, such
as learning properties of random variables in free probability theory (Voiculescu, 1985; Voiculescu et al., 1992),
physical phenomena in particle physics (Bhowmick et al.,
2014; van Suijlekom, 2014), and properties of exactly solvable models in statistical mechanics (Podlés, 1995), a group
equivariant neural network is no longer a valid choice of
model. This is because non-commutative geometry, as developed by Connes (1995), is formally described using noncommutative C ∗ -algebras, which generalize commutative
algebras C(X) of continuous functions on compact Hausdorff spaces X, and one can show that the C ∗ -algebra C(G)
of continuous functions on a compact matrix group G is
indeed commutative (Appendix B.4). In particular, in noncommutative geometry, the classical notion of a space is
replaced by an algebraic structure, thus making traditional
group-based symmetries inadequate (Budzyński & Kondracki, 1995; Majid, 2000; Sitarz, 2013). Instead, a more
general notion of symmetry is required. Quantum groups,
which have been developed by a number of authors (Jimbo,
1985; Drinfeld, 1986; Woronowicz, 1987; 1991; 1998), are
an important class of mathematical objects for describing
these symmetries.

1. Introduction
Spaces in classical (commutative) geometry are given by
sets of points with additional structure, and their symmetries are formally described by groups. For example, the
compact matrix group SO(3) is the group of all rotations
of R3 that preserve the origin. A class of neural networks
called group equivariant neural networks was conceived
to take advantage of group symmetries that are inherent
in data by encoding them as an inductive bias in their architectures. Many group equivariant neural networks have
been designed using representations of groups as their layer
spaces, and characterisations of the weight matrices that
appear in them have been found for a number of important groups (Zaheer et al., 2017; Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017;

Given that there exist symmetries that are not captured by
groups, this implies that there is a need for a new type
of equivariant neural network. In this paper, we focus on
quantum groups that were constructed using a topological
approach by Woronowicz (1987). Woronowicz generalised
compact matrix groups to create a class of quantum groups
called compact matrix quantum groups. We describe and
motivate this construction in Section 3, and provide a comprehensive background on the prerequisite mathematical
material, namely, general topology, C ∗ -algebras, and operator theory, in the Appendix.

1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Edward Pearce–Crump
<ep1011@ic.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The main contributions of our work are as follows. We

1

