Where is the Truth?
The Risk of Getting Confounded in a Continual World

Florian Peter Busch * 1 2 Roshni Ramanna Kamath * 1 2 Rupert Mitchell 1 2
Wolfgang Stammer 1 2 Kristian Kersting 1 2 3 4 Martin Mundt 5

Abstract
A dataset is confounded if it is most easily solved
via a spurious correlation which fails to generalize to new data. In this work, we show that, in
a continual learning setting where confounders
may vary in time across tasks, the challenge of
mitigating the effect of confounders far exceeds
the standard forgetting problem normally considered. In particular, we provide a formal description of such continual confounders and identify
that, in general, spurious correlations are easily
ignored when training for all tasks jointly, but
it is harder to avoid confounding when they are
considered sequentially. These descriptions serve
as a basis for constructing a novel CLEVR-based
continually confounded dataset, which we term
the ConCon dataset. Our evaluations demonstrate
that standard continual learning methods fail to ignore the dataset’s confounders. Overall, our work
highlights the challenges of confounding factors,
particularly in continual learning settings, and
demonstrates the need for developing continual
learning methods to robustly tackle these.

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Arctic Fox (white)

Broccoli (green)

Tiger Shark (blue)

Cumulative Training

89.3%
Joint Training

?
91.7%

Jellyfish (blue)

Snowmobile (white)

Tree Frog (green)

Figure 1. Challenges of continual confounding. Each task is curated with spurious color correlations potentially affecting a model
in learning underlying discriminative features. The different colorbased confounding features across sequential tasks demonstrate
the impact on the classification problem with joint and cumulative
training, with a 2.4% gap in performance.

well during training but fail to generalize to test cases (Ye
et al., 2024). This can lead to undesired behavior at deployment both in terms of trustworthiness (e.g., does the model
make decisions for the “right” reasons (Ross et al., 2017))
and overall generalization failure (e.g., does the model still
make correct predictions (Geirhos et al., 2020)). However,
these settings so far have mainly been investigated in conventional, static learning settings (Wu et al., 2023; Sagawa
et al., 2020), rather than more realistic, continual learning
(CL) scenarios (Chen et al., 2018) where models process
data sequentially, creating a fundamental constraint that they
cannot access all data simultaneously (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989; Parisi et al., 2019). While prior research indicates that
task ordering has minimal impact in such sequential training (De Lange et al., 2022), the distribution of confounders
across tasks can impact model performance negatively.

1. Introduction
Confounding factors represent a dangerous issue for AI
systems, often steering models toward shortcuts instead of
true understanding (Lapuschkin et al., 2019; Schramowski
et al., 2020; Steinmann et al., 2024). Data is considered confounded when models learn spurious correlations that work
*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, TU
Darmstadt, Germany. 2 Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI),
Germany. 3 German Research Center for AI (DFKI), Germany 4 TU Darmstadt, Centre for Cognitive Science, Germany. 5 University of Bremen, Department of Mathematics
and Computer Science, Germany. Correspondence to: Roshni
Ramanna Kamath <roshni.kamath@tu-darmstadt.de>, Martin
Mundt <mundtm@uni-bremen.de>.

For example, consider an image classification problem on
natural images, i.e., ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). We
conducted a controlled experiment using the ResNet-18
model (He et al., 2016) on selected classes (cf. Fig. 1). We
start by training the model on the first two classes, specifically arctic fox and jellyfish. We then introduce two additional classes, namely broccoli and snowmobile, followed
by tiger shark and a tree frog. Note that each class is highly

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

