CogMath: Assessing LLMs’ Authentic Mathematical Ability from
a Human Cognitive Perspective

Jiayu Liu 1 2 Zhenya Huang 2 3 Wei Dai 1 Cheng Cheng 2 3 Jinze Wu 2 4 Jing Sha 2 4 Song Li 2 4 Qi Liu 1 2
Shijin Wang 2 4 Enhong Chen 2 3

Abstract

the realm of mathematical reasoning, these models have
made breakthroughs in solving complex mathematical problems (Wei et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2024). For example,
GPT-4 has achieved over 75% accuracy on the high school
competition-level MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021).
More recently, the OpenAI-o1 model has surpassed 70%
accuracy on the AIME math competition, placing it at a
level comparable to the top 500 US high school students 1 .
This remarkable progress has not only redefined the potential of AI in mathematics but also spurred a growing body
of research dedicated to evaluating and understanding the
mathematical proficiency of these models.

Although large language models (LLMs) show
promise in solving complex mathematical tasks,
existing evaluation paradigms rely solely on a
coarse measure of overall answer accuracy, which
are insufficient for assessing their authentic capabilities. In this paper, we propose CogMath,
which comprehensively assesses LLMs’ mathematical abilities through the lens of human cognition. Specifically, inspired by psychological theories, CogMath formalizes human reasoning process into 3 stages: problem comprehension, problem solving, and solution summarization. Within
these stages, we investigate perspectives such as
numerical calculation, knowledge, and counterfactuals, and design a total of 9 fine-grained evaluation dimensions. In each dimension, we develop
an “Inquiry-Judge-Reference” multi-agent system
to generate inquiries that assess LLMs’ mastery
from this dimension. An LLM is considered to
truly master a problem only when excelling in
all inquiries from the 9 dimensions. By applying
CogMath on three benchmarks, we reveal that the
mathematical capabilities of 7 mainstream LLMs
are overestimated by 30%-40%. Moreover, we
locate their strengths and weaknesses across specific stages/dimensions, offering in-depth insights
to further enhance their reasoning abilities.

To assess the mathematical ability of LLMs, numerous
benchmarks have been proposed (Li et al., 2024a). For instance, E-GSM (Xu et al., 2025) introduces problems across
four length ranges to assess LLMs’ generalization with respect to input length. GSM-Plus (Li et al., 2024b) introduces
eight variants of GSM8K dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021) to investigate the robustness of LLMs. MPA (Zhu et al., 2024)
rewrites existing datasets based on five principles to address
the effects of data contamination. However, on one hand,
some benchmarks are overly task-specific, focusing on narrow aspects of reasoning (e.g., long-text understanding) by
designing specialized problem types (e.g., long-text questions). On the other hand, they rely on a coarse accuracy
metric that overlooks the detailed reasoning processes. As a
result, they are unable to fully grasp the entire spectrum of
mathematical capabilities that LLMs possess.
In this paper, we propose CogMath, which offers a scientific
and comprehensive evaluation of LLMs’ mathematical abilities by delving into the cognitive stages of human reasoning
processes. Specifically, psychological research points out
that human mathematical reasoning typically involves three
stages (Schoenfeld, 2014; Lesh & Doerr, 2003; Dehaene
et al., 1999): problem comprehension, problem solving, and
solution summarization. Aligned with these stages, we design nine evaluation dimensions covering key aspects such
as computation, knowledge, and counterfactual reasoning.
For example, in problem comprehension stage, we assess

1. Introduction
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has marked a
pivotal moment in artificial intelligence. Particularly within
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China 2 State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence 3 School of Computer Science and
Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
4
iFLYTEK AI Research. Correspondence to: Enhong Chen <cheneh@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
https://openai.com/index/openai-o1-mini-advancing-costefficient-reasoning/

1

