Time Series Representations with Hard-Coded Invariances

Thibaut Germain * 1 Chrysoula Kosma * 1 Laurent Oudre 1

Abstract

2015) and dictionary-based classification (Middlehurst et al.,
2019), to neural networks. Notable architectures are built
upon recurrent layers, convolutional layers, and, more recently, transformers. More specifically, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) consistently lead time series tasks
such as classification and clustering (Ismail Fawaz et al.,
2019; Tonekaboni et al., 2021). Often integrated with other
modules, CNNs excel in feature extraction, while offering
interpretability through kernel weight visualization.

Automatically extracting robust representations
from large and complex time series data is becoming imperative for several real-world applications.
Unfortunately, the potential of common neural
network architectures in capturing invariant properties of time series remains relatively underexplored. For instance, convolutional layers often
fail to capture underlying patterns in time series
inputs that encompass strong deformations, such
as trends. Indeed, invariances to some deformations may be critical for solving complex time series tasks, such as classification, while guaranteeing good generalization performance. To address
these challenges, we mathematically formulate
and technically design efficient and hard-coded
invariant convolutions for specific group actions
applicable to the case of time series. We construct
these convolutions by considering specific sets of
deformations commonly observed in time series,
including scaling, offset shift, and trend. We further combine the proposed invariant convolutions
with standard convolutions in single embedding
layers, and we showcase the layer’s capacity to
capture complex invariant time series properties
in several scenarios.

Advances in invariance modeling for deep learning have
been achieved with proper mathematical formalism of group
action on data, notably images and graphs (Kvinge et al.,
2022; Bronstein et al., 2021). Two strategies for incorporating invariance into deep networks are learning them through
data augmentation, such as contrastive learning (Antoniou,
2017) or hard-coding invariances directly within the network architecture. Translation in CNNs and permutation in
graph neural networks (GNNs) are two prominent examples
of hard-coded invariances in terms of architectural design,
among others (Bietti & Mairal, 2019; Horie et al., 2020).
Relevant works range across sets, images, point clouds, and
graphs (Zaheer et al., 2017; Keriven & Peyré, 2019).
Incorporating knowledge on time series invariances during
training is an emerging field of study. Several works focus
on learning invariances, e. g., contrastive learning that leverages augmentations and customizable losses (Franceschi
et al., 2019; Eldele et al., 2021). Yet, the selection of views
within the time series collection to contrast, as well as the
types of transformations to consider (e. g., scaling, shifting), is often arguable within the research community (Yue
et al., 2022). While contrastive learning constitutes an implicit way of introducing invariances into learning, very few
studies leverage time series hard-coded invariances. In this
work, we aim to embed invariances into the network design,
similar to approaches that achieve permutation invariance
in graphs (Maron et al., 2018) and local translation and rotation invariance in images (Weiler & Cesa, 2019). Such
invariant networks offer improved generalization properties
compared to their learned counterparts at the expense of
additional computational costs (Kvinge et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing interest in applying
machine learning to time series data, further necessitated by
the challenging properties of time series, including varying
modalities, high noise levels, and distribution shifts.
Machine learning for time series has gradually moved from
statistical methods, e. g., autoregressive models (Box et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris
Cité, ENS Paris Saclay, CNRS, SSA, INSERM, Centre Borelli,
F-91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Correspondence to: Thibaut Germain <thibaut.germain@ens-paris-saclay.fr>, Chrysoula Kosma
<chrysoula.kosma@ens-paris-saclay.fr>.

Enforcing deformation-specific invariances in network design can significantly improve performance for time series
tasks. For example, the trend in time series constitutes a

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

