Copilot Arena: A Platform for Code LLM Evaluation in the Wild

Wayne Chi * 1 Valerie Chen * 1 Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos 2 Wei-Lin Chiang 2 Aditya Mittal 1
Naman Jain 2 Tianjun Zhang 2 Ion Stoica 2 Chris Donahue† 1 Ameet Talwalkar† 1

Abstract

Copilot Arena

Evaluating in-the-wild coding capabilities of large
language models (LLMs) is a challenging endeavor with no existing solution. We introduce
Copilot Arena, a platform to collect user preferences through native integration into a developer’s working environment. Copilot Arena comprises a novel interface for comparing pairs of
model outputs, a sampling strategy to reduce experienced latency, and a prompting scheme to
enable code completion functionality. Copilot
Arena has served over 4.5 million suggestions
from 10 models and collected over 11k pairwise
judgements. Our results highlight the importance
of model evaluations in integrated settings. We
find that model rankings from Copilot Arena differ from those of existing evaluations, which we
attribute to the unique distribution of data and
tasks contained in Copilot Arena. We also identify novel insights into human preferences on code
such as an observed consistency in user preference across programming languages yet significant variation in preference due to task category.
We open-source Copilot Arena and release data
to enable human-centric evaluations and improve
understanding of coding assistants.

Real Users

Real Tasks

Real Environment

Static
benchmarks do
not have users in
the loop

User studies
operate on a
limited, prescribed
set of tasks

Preference
evaluations do not
occur in realistic
coding envs

Limitations of existing evaluations

Figure 1. Copilot Arena is a platform for conducting realistic evaluations of code LLMs, collecting human preferences of coding
models with real users, real tasks, and in realistic environments,
aimed at addressing the limitations of existing evaluations.

evidence identified by electronic discovery systems (Yang
et al., 2024a). Increasing deployment of models in productivity tools demands evaluation that more closely reflects
real-world circumstances (Hutchinson et al., 2022; Saxon
et al., 2024; Kapoor et al., 2024). While newer benchmarks
and live platforms incorporate human feedback to capture
real-world usage, they almost exclusively focus on evaluating LLMs in chat conversations (Zheng et al., 2023; Dubois
et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2024; Kirk et al., 2024). Model
evaluation must move beyond chat-based interactions and
into specialized user environments.

1. Introduction
As model capabilities improve, large language models
(LLMs) are increasingly integrated into user environments
and workflows. For example, software developers code with
AI in integrated developer environments (IDEs) (Peng et al.,
2023), doctors rely on notes generated through ambient
listening (Oberst et al., 2024), and lawyers consider case

In this work, we focus on evaluating LLM-based coding
assistants, specifically focusing on their ability to generate
code completions. Despite the popularity of these tools—
millions of developers use Github Copilot (Github, 2022)—
existing evaluations of the coding capabilities of new models exhibit multiple limitations (Figure 1, bottom). Traditional ML benchmarks evaluate LLM capabilities by measuring how well a model can complete static, interview-style
coding tasks (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Jain
et al., 2024a; White et al., 2024) and lack real users. User
studies recruit real users to evaluate the effectiveness of

*
†
1
Equal contribution .
Co-senior Authors.
Carnegie
Mellon University 2 UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
Wayne Chi <waynechi@andrew.cmu.edu>, Valerie Chen <valeriechen@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

