Categorical Schrödinger Bridge Matching

Grigoriy Ksenofontov 1 2 Alexander Korotin 1 3

Abstract

et al., 2024b, D-IMF) has shown promising results in certain unpaired learning problems, enabling faster generation
(inference) times than its predecessors.

The Schrödinger Bridge (SB) is a powerful framework for solving generative modeling tasks such
as unpaired domain translation. Most SB-related
research focuses on continuous data space RD and
leaves open theoretical and algorithmic questions
about applying SB methods to discrete data, e.g,
on finite spaces SD . Notable examples of such
sets S are codebooks of vector-quantized (VQ)
representations of modern autoencoders, tokens
in texts, categories of atoms in molecules, etc. In
this paper, we provide a theoretical and algorithmic foundation for solving SB in discrete spaces
using the recently introduced Iterative Markovian
Fitting (IMF) procedure. Specifically, we theoretically justify the convergence of discrete-time IMF
(D-IMF) to SB in discrete spaces. This enables
us to develop a practical computational algorithm
for SB, which we call Categorical Schrödinger
Bridge Matching (CSBM). We show the performance of CSBM via a series of experiments with
synthetic data and VQ representations of images.
The code of CSBM is available at this repository.

1

Unfortunately, the D-IMF procedure heavily relies on certain theoretical properties of particular SB setups in continuous spaces. At the same time, a vast amount of realworld data is either discrete by nature, such as texts (Austin
et al., 2021; Gat et al., 2024), molecular graphs (Vignac
et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024), sequences
(Campbell et al., 2024), etc., or discrete by construction
like vector-quantized representations of images and audio
(Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Esser et al., 2021). These cases
highlight a fundamental limitation, as D-IMF is not directly
applicable to such data. In this work, we address this gap
by making the following contributions:
• Theory. We provide the theoretical grounds for applying
the D-IMF to solve the SB problem in discrete spaces.
• Practice. We provide a computational algorithm to implement the D-IMF in practice for discrete spaces.
Notations. Consider a state space X and a time set
+1
{tn }N
n=0 , where 0 = t0 < t1 < · · · < tN < tN +1 = 1
are N ≥ 1 time moments. The space X N +2 is referred
to as the path space and represents all possible trajectories
def
(x0 , xin , xtN +1 ), where xin = (xt1 , . . . , xtN ) corresponds
to the intermediate states. Let P(X N +2 ) be the space of
probability distributions over paths. Each q ∈ P(X N +2 )
can be interpreted as a discrete in time X -valued stochastic
process. We use q(x0 , xin , xtN +1 ) to denote its density at
(x0 , xin , xtN +1 ) ∈ X N +2 and use q(·|·) to denote its conditional distributions, e.g., q(x1 |x0 ), q(xin |x0 , x1 ). Finally,
we introduce M(X N +2 ) ⊂ P(X N +2 ) as the set of all
Markov processes q, i.e., those processes
QN +1which satisfy the
equality q(x0 , xin , xtN +1 ) = q(x0 ) n=1 q(xtn |xtn−1 ).

Introduction

The Schrödinger bridge (Schrödinger, 1931, SB) problem
has recently attracted the attention of the machine learning
community due to its relevance to modern challenges in generative modeling and unpaired learning. Recently, a variety
of methods have been proposed to solve SB in continuous
spaces; see (Gushchin et al., 2023b) for a recent survey.
One modern approach to solving SB is the Iterative Markovian Fitting (IMF) framework (Peluchetti, 2023; Shi et al.,
2023; Gushchin et al., 2024b). Specifically, within this
framework, the discrete-time IMF procedure (Gushchin

2

1

Skoltech, Moscow, Russia 2 MIPT, Moscow, Russia
3
AIRI, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Grigoriy
Ksenofontov <g.ksenofontov@skoltech.ru>, Alexander Korotin
<a.korotin@skoltech.ru>.

Background and Related Works

In this section, we review the formulation and existing approaches to the Schrödinger Bridge (SB) problem, with a
focus on its generative applications. We begin with the static
SB problem (M2.1). Next, we highlight the challenges of
extending SB methods from continuous to discrete state
spaces (M2.3). We proceed to the dynamic SB formulation,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

