Identifying Causal Direction via Variational Bayesian Compression
Quang-Duy Tran 1 Bao Duong 1 Phuoc Nguyen 1 Thin Nguyen 1

Abstract

medical research (Guyon et al., 2019), they are often impractical due to resource constraints and ethical considerations.
Studying passive observations offers a viable alternative for
causal inference, despite requiring assumptions on the data
generating process to detect the asymmetry between the
causal and anti-causal directions. One intuitive interpretation of the causal asymmetry from an information-theoretic
perspective is the independence postulate of algorithmic
Markov kernels (Janzing & Schölkopf, 2010), which states
that the true causal direction must yield the lowest algorithmic Kolmogorov complexity factorization of the joint
distribution.

Telling apart the cause and effect between two
random variables with purely observational data
is a challenging problem that finds applications
in various scientific disciplines. A key principle
utilized in this task is the algorithmic Markov condition, which postulates that the joint distribution,
when factorized according to the causal direction,
yields a more succinct codelength compared to
the anti-causal direction. Previous approaches approximate these codelengths by relying on simple
functions or Gaussian processes (GPs) with easily evaluable complexity, compromising between
model fitness and computational complexity. To
address these limitations, we propose leveraging
the variational Bayesian learning of neural networks as an interpretation of the codelengths. This
allows the improvement of model fitness, while
maintaining the succinctness of the codelengths,
and the avoidance of the significant computational
complexity of the GP-based approaches. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
benchmarks in cause-effect identification demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method,
showing promising performance enhancements
on several datasets in comparison to most related
methods.

However, because of the incomputability of the Kolmogorov
complexity (Li & Vitányi, 2019), approximation methods via the principle of Minimum Description Length
(MDL, Grünwald, 2007; Marx & Vreeken, 2017; 2019a;b)
are proposed to instantiate this complexity empirically. The
two-part MDL aims to find the model that minimize two
criteria: (1) the complexity of the data given that model and
(2) the model complexity of the model used for modeling
the data. The former complexity measures the model fitness,
which is commonly evaluated through the log-likelihood of
the data given the model. The options for estimating the
latter model complexity are more diverse, which usually
involve the number of available models and the parameters
in each model. As these methods attempt to minimize the
total codelength, they are also called compression-based
methods.
While these approaches have shown promising results, the
estimation of the conditional distributions in these methods
relies on traditional regression methods that offer easily
evaluable model complexity. If the ground truth conditional
models are more complex or too distinct from the predefined
ones, this implementation for the model classes can result in
lower fitness and higher complexity of data given the model,
leading to suboptimal approximations for the algorithmic
complexity. Dhir et al. (2024a) overcome this restriction by
leveraging Gaussian processes (GPs), though this involves a
significant trade-off between flexibility and computational
complexity.

1. Introduction
Cause-effect identification or bivariate causal discovery—
the task of telling apart the cause and the effect between
two random variables—is a critical task across various scientific disciplines, including biology, economics, and sociology (Pearl, 2009). While randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are considered the most accurate method for
identifying these types of causal relationships, especially in
1

Deakin Applied Artificial Intelligence Initiative, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia. Correspondence to: Quang-Duy Tran
<q.tran@deakin.edu.au>.

To address the limitations of these previous compressionbased methods, we propose the leverage of neural networks
for learning the conditional models, which are regarded

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

