Learning Safe Control via On-the-Fly Bandit Exploration

Alexandre Capone 1 Ryan Cosner 2 Aaron Ames 2 Sandra Hirche 3

Abstract

mous with guaranteeing that the system always satisfies
a pre-specified set of constraints. While there exist various tools to achieve safety whenever the system is known
perfectly (Agrawal & Sreenath, 2017; Ames et al., 2017;
Bansal et al., 2017; Wabersich & Zeilinger, 2018; Zeng
et al., 2021), doing so if the dynamics have to be learned
poses a significantly more difficult challenge.

Control tasks with safety requirements under high
levels of model uncertainty are increasingly common. Machine learning techniques are frequently
used to address such tasks, typically by leveraging
model error bounds to specify robust constraintbased safety filters. However, if the learned model
uncertainty is very high, the corresponding filters
are potentially invalid, meaning no control input
satisfies the constraints imposed by the safety
filter. While most works address this issue by
assuming some form of safe backup controller,
ours tackles it by collecting additional data on
the fly using a Gaussian process bandit-type algorithm. We combine a control barrier function with
a learned model to specify a robust certificate that
ensures safety if feasible. Whenever infeasibility
occurs, we leverage the control barrier function to
guide exploration, ensuring the collected data contributes toward the closed-loop system safety. By
combining a safety filter with exploration in this
manner, our method provably achieves safety in a
setting that allows for a zero-mean prior dynamics model, without requiring a backup controller.
To the best of our knowledge, it is the first safe
learning-based control method that achieves this.

To address safety in a control setting, existing approaches
typically attempt to bound the model error and assess how
its worst-case estimate affects safety. To estimate the model
error, frequently used frameworks include ensembles of
neural networks (Chua et al., 2018; Curi et al., 2020) or
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Capone et al., 2022; Rodriguez
et al., 2021). The impact of the model error on safety is then
frequently estimated by predicting the worst-case trajectory
multiple steps into the future (Akametalu et al., 2014; Hewing et al., 2020; Koller et al., 2018). Alternatively, safety
filters attempt to condense the long-term impact of a control input on safety (Ao et al., 2025; Berkenkamp et al.,
2017; Castañeda et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2019; Jagtap
et al., 2020). A crucial drawback of most of these methods
is that they assume the model uncertainty is always small
enough for the conservative safety constraints to be feasible.
In other words, if the uncertainty becomes too large, the
underlying methods are no longer applicable.
Motivated by the aforementioned challenges, we present
a learning-based control algorithm that ensures safety by
exploring on the fly. We use a Gaussian process model to estimate model uncertainty, which we combine with a control
barrier function to compute a robust safety filter. Whenever
our safety filter becomes infeasible, we employ the control
barrier function to guide exploration in a manner that is informative for safety. Formally, this is done by leveraging the
lower confidence bound of the certificate constraint function
for certifiably safe control inputs, and the upper confidence
bound for exploration. Our approach draws heaviliy from
ideas from Bayesian optimization, where exploration is done
in a similar manner. Overall, our main contributions are as
follows:

1. Introduction
With the growing proliferation of robotics in safety-critical
fields, e.g., autonomous vehicles, medical robotics, and
aerospace systems, the need for methods that ensure the
safety of systems and their users has become paramount.
In control tasks, guaranteeing safety has become synony*
Equal contribution 1 Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Department of Mechanical and Civil
Engineering , California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
USA 3 TUM School of Computation, Information and Technology,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Alexandre Capone <acapone2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

1. We present the first safe control algorithm that addresses infeasible safety filters by exploring online
using a Gaussian process bandit algorithm.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

