Dataflow-Guided Neuro-Symbolic Language Models for Type Inference

Gen Li 1 Yao Wan 1 Hongyu Zhang 2 Zhou Zhao 3 Wenbin Jiang 1 Xuanhua Shi 1 Hai Jin 1 Zheng Wang 4

Abstract

cult to debug (Oh & Oh, 2022). Therefore, automated type
inference, which infers the type of a variable automatically,
is attractive. Recently, there has been growing interest in
using Language Models (LMs) for type inference to reduce
the manual effort in developing type inference systems.

Language Models (LMs) are increasingly used for
type inference, aiding in error detection and software development. Some real-world deployments
of LMs require the model to run on local machines
to safeguard the intellectual property of the source
code. This setting often limits the size of the LMs
that can be used. We present N ESTER, the first
neuro-symbolic approach that enhances LMs for
type inference by integrating symbolic learning
without increasing model size. N ESTER breaks
type inference into sub-tasks based on the data
and control flow of the input code, encoding them
as a modular high-level program. This program
executes multi-step actions, such as evaluating expressions and analyzing conditional branches of
the target code, combining static typing with LMs
to infer potential types. Evaluated on the ManyTypes4Py dataset in Python, N ESTER outperforms
two state-of-the-art type inference methods (HiTyper and TypeGen), achieving 70.7% Top-1 Exact Match, which is 18.3% and 3.6% higher than
HiTyper and TypeGen, respectively. For complex type annotations like “typing.Optional” and
“typing.Union”, N ESTER achieves 51.0% and
16.7%, surpassing TypeGen by 28.3% and 5.8%.

Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 (Koubaa,
2023) and OpenAI-o1 (Temsah et al., 2024), have shown
impressive results in type inference. However, these models typically rely on cloud-based infrastructure with substantial computational resources, raising privacy concerns
when user data is sent to untrusted providers (Ray, 2023).
This is especially problematic for organizations that treat
their source code as valuable intellectual property. To mitigate risks, many prefer deploying smaller models locally
on developer machines or private clusters due to hardware
resource constraints.
Running moderately sized LMs, like Code Llama with 7B
parameters (Lu et al., 2023), locally can address privacy
and confidentiality concerns. It also delivers faster response
times compared to cloud solutions employing fully homomorphic encryption (Chen et al., 2022) or multi-party communication techniques (Yao, 1986; Rathee et al., 2024).
However, downsizing LMs from hundreds of billions to tens
of billions of parameters significantly reduces their ability
to model and reason about complex program structures. As
a result, there is a need to improve the capability of LMs
in reasoning code for type inference without relying on
cloud-based solutions.

1. Introduction

A Motivation Example Figure 1 illustrates a motivating
example for inferring the return type of the Python function learning rate. As shown in Figure 1(a), mypy1 ,
a rule-based tool, fails to infer the type correctly due to
its lack of knowledge of custom functions or third-party
libraries (e.g., normalize lr in line 7). Similarly, a pretrained CodeLlama 7B (Lu et al., 2023) predicts the type as
bool—float—none, while the correct type is float—none,
as seen in Figure 1(b). This error stems from the LM relying
on the textual structure of the code rather than its underlying semantics, such as control and data flow. Additionally,
LMs can be misled by irrelevant nearby information (e.g.,
return False in line 3). Specifically, since lr never
exceeds 1.0 and line 1 is unreachable, the return type cannot

Dynamically typed languages like Python and JavaScript
are popular for rapid prototyping and have the flexibility
of not requiring explicit type declarations (Mir et al., 2022;
Srinath, 2017). However, this flexibility can compromise
reliability, often leading to runtime type errors that are diffi1

National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and Systems, Services Computing Technology and System Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab, School of Computer
Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China 2 Chongqing University 3 Zhejiang
University 4 University of Leeds. Correspondence to: Yao Wan
<wanyao@hust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

https://mypy-lang.org/

