Stochastic Forward–Backward Deconvolution:
Training Diffusion Models with Finite Noisy Datasets

Haoye Lu 1 2 Qifan Wu 1 Yaoliang Yu 1 2

Abstract

Due to some inherent properties, diffusion models are relatively easier to train. This unlocks the possibility of training
very large models on web-scale data, which has been shown
to be critical to train powerful models. This paradigm has
recently led to impressive advances in image generation,
as demonstrated by cutting-edge models like Stable Diffusion (-XL) (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2024) and
DALL-E (2, 3) (Betker et al., 2023). However, despite their
success, the reliance on extensive web-scale data introduces
challenges. The complexities of the datasets at such a scale
often result in the inclusion of copyrighted content. Furthermore, diffusion models exhibit a greater tendency than
earlier generative approaches, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; 2020), to
memorize training examples. This can lead to the replication of parts or even entire images from their training sets
(Carlini et al., 2023; Somepalli et al., 2023).

Recent diffusion-based generative models achieve
remarkable results by training on massive datasets,
yet this practice raises concerns about memorization and copyright infringement. A proposed remedy is to train exclusively on noisy data with potential copyright issues, ensuring the model never
observes original content. However, through the
lens of deconvolution theory, we show that although it is theoretically feasible to learn the
data distribution from noisy samples, the practical challenge of collecting sufficient samples
makes successful learning nearly unattainable. To
overcome this limitation, we propose to pretrain
the model with a small fraction of clean data to
guide the deconvolution process. Combined with
our Stochastic Forward–Backward Deconvolution
(SFBD) method, we attain FID 6.31 on CIFAR-10
with just 4% clean images (and 3.58 with 10%).
We also provide theoretical guarantees that SFBD
learns the true data distribution. These results underscore the value of limited clean pretraining, or
pretraining on similar datasets. Empirical studies
further validate and enrich our findings.

A recently proposed approach to address memorization and
copyright concerns involves training (or fine-tuning) diffusion models using corrupted samples (Daras et al., 2023b;
Somepalli et al., 2023; Daras & Dimakis, 2023; Daras et al.,
2024). In this framework, the model is never exposed to
the original samples during training. Instead, these samples
undergo a known non-invertible corruption process, such as
adding independent Gaussian noise to each pixel in image
datasets. This ensures that the model cannot memorize or
reproduce the original content, as the corruption process is
irreversible for individual samples.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021a;b; 2023) have
gained increasing attention. Nowadays, it is considered
one of the most powerful frameworks for learning highdimensional distributions and we have witnessed many impressive breakthroughs (Croitoru et al., 2023) in generating
images (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021a;b; Rombach
et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023), audios (Kong et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2023) and videos (Ho et al., 2022).

Interestingly, under mild assumptions, certain non-invertible
corruption processes, such as Gaussian noise injection, create a mathematical bijection between the noisy and original
distributions. Thus, in theory, a generative model can learn
the original distribution using only noisy samples (Bora
et al., 2018). Building on this concept, Daras et al. (2024)
demonstrated that when an image is corrupted via a forward
diffusion up to a specific noise level σ, diffusion models can
recover distributions at noise levels below σ by enforcing
consistency constraints (Daras et al., 2023a).

1

Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
Canada 2 Vector Institute, Canada. Correspondence to: Haoye Lu
<haoye.lu@uwaterloo.ca>.

While Daras et al. (2024) empirically showed that their
approach could be used to fine-tune Stable Diffusion
XL (Podell et al., 2024) using noisy images with a heuristic
consistency loss, they did not explore whether a diffusion

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

