BiMaCoSR: Binary One-Step Diffusion Model
Leveraging Flexible Matrix Compression for Real Super-Resolution
Kai Liu * 1 Kaicheng Yang * 1 Zheng Chen 1 Zhiteng Li 1
Yong Guo 2 Wenbo Li 3 Linghe Kong† 1 Yulun Zhang† 1

Abstract
While super-resolution (SR) methods based on
diffusion models (DM) have demonstrated inspiring performance, their deployment is impeded
due to the heavy request of memory and computation. Recent researchers apply two kinds of
methods to compress or fasten the DM. One is
to compress the DM into 1-bit, aka binarization,
alleviating the storage and computation pressure.
The other distills the multi-step DM into only
one step, significantly speeding up the inference
process. Nonetheless, it remains impossible to
deploy DM to resource-limited edge devices. To
address this problem, we propose BiMaCoSR,
which combines binarization and one-step distillation to obtain extreme compression and acceleration. To prevent the catastrophic collapse of
the model caused by binarization, we propose
sparse matrix branch (SMB) and low rank matrix
branch (LRMB). Both auxiliary branches pass
the full-precision (FP) information but in different ways. SMB absorbs the extreme values and
its output is high rank, carrying abundant FP information. Whereas, the design of LRMB is inspired by LoRA and is initialized with the top
r SVD components, outputting low rank representation. The computation and storage overhead
of our proposed branches can be safely ignored.
Comprehensive comparison experiments are conducted to exhibit BiMaCoSR outperforms current
state-of-the-art binarization methods and gains
competitive performance compared with FP onestep model. Moreover, we achieve excellent compression and acceleration. BiMaCoSR achieves
a 23.8× compression ratio and a 27.4× speedup
ratio compared to the FP counterpart. Our code
and model are available at https://github.com/KaiLiu001/BiMaCoSR.

Figure 1: Performance comparison between binarization
methods on the RealSR dataset. BiMaCoSR achieves consistently leading scores on all evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) (Keys, 1981; Zibetti &
Mayer, 2007; Lu et al., 2013; Dong et al., 2014; Yang et al.,
2014; Dong et al., 2016) is a traditional yet challenging lowlevel vision problem. Serving as a fundamental research
task, it has attracted long-standing and considerable attention in the computer vision community. The final object
of SR is to restore a high-quality (HQ) image from its lowquality (LQ) observation, which suffers from various image
quality degradations. The difficulty of SR mainly lies in two
parts: (1) the unknown degradations (e.g., blur, downsampling, noise, compression, and their combinations) of LQ.
(2) the multiple solutions for a given LQ input image.
In recent years, numerous studies have been made to
tackle this challenge, utilizing convolution neural networks
(CNNs) (Dong et al., 2014; 2016; Ledig et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2018c), vision transformers (ViTs) (Zhang et al.,
2018b; Liang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2022; 2023), and their combinations. Though achieving
inspiring results, these methods mostly fail in real-world
scenarios. This failure is attributed to assuming degradation
as an ideal bicubic downsampling kernel, way too different
from the unknown and complex degradation in real world.
Therefore, it draws researchers’ increasing attention to reconstruct perceptually realistic HQ images in real-world
scenarios. Thereafter, this challenging and meaningful task
is called real-world super-resolution (Real-SR) (Gu et al.,

*
Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Huawei
Consumer Business Group 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Linghe Kong <linghe.kong@sjtu.edu.cn>,
Yulun Zhang <yulun100@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

