MUDDFormer: Breaking Residual Bottlenecks in Transformers
via Multiway Dynamic Dense Connections

Da Xiao 1 Qingye Meng 2 Shengping Li 2 Xingyuan Yuan 2

Downstream Avg. Acc (%)

Abstract
We propose MUltiway Dynamic Dense (MUDD)
connections, a simple yet effective method to
address the limitations of residual connections
and enhance cross-layer information flow in
Transformers. Unlike existing dense connection
approaches with static and shared connection
weights, MUDD generates connection weights
dynamically depending on hidden states at each
sequence position and for each decoupled input
stream (the query, key, value or residual) of a
Transformer block. MUDD connections can be
seamlessly integrated into any Transformer architecture to create MUDDFormer. Extensive
experiments show that MUDDFormer significantly outperforms Transformers across various
model architectures and scales in language modeling, achieving the performance of Transformers trained with ~1.8×–2.4× compute. Notably,
MUDDPythia-2.8B matches Pythia-6.9B in pretraining ppl and downstream tasks and even rivals
Pythia-12B in five-shot settings, while adding
only 0.23% parameters and 0.4% computation.
Code in JAX and PyTorch and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/
Caiyun-AI/MUDDFormer.

58
57
56
55
54
53
52
51
50
1.4B*300B

4.2x
2.4x

Pythia-0-shot
5-shot
MUDDPythia-0-shot
5-shot
2.8B*300B
6.9B*300B 12B*300B

Compute

Figure 1. Downstream average accuracy of Pythia and MUDDPythia with different sizes.

common by prevailing Transformer-based LLMs.
On one hand, although theoretical (Merrill et al., 2022) and
experimental (Tay et al., 2021b) work have suggested that
adding layers increases the expressive capacity and generalization performance of Transformers, it is observed that
increasing depth beyond a certain point yields diminishing
returns (Petty et al., 2023). The common practice of using
Pre-Norm to stabilize training leads to the issue of representation collapse (Liu et al., 2020b), where hidden features in
deeper layers become highly similar, and for popular families of open-weight LLMs, a large fraction of the layers
can be removed with minimal degradation of performance
(Gromov et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 2 ColorfulClouds Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Da Xiao <xiaoda99@bupt.edu.cn>.

On the other hand, mechanistic interpretability studies reveal
that Transformers do in-context learning tasks by composing model components (attention heads and MLPs) across
different layers to form circuits, (Elhage et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2023; Merullo et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2025), where layers communicate with each other by writing to and reading
from different subspaces of the residual stream. The residual stream as the shared communication channel may be
overloaded and become the bottleneck for very deep models,
hindering the formation of sophisticated circuits spanning
distant layers necessary for complex tasks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Dense connections (Huang et al., 2017) was proposed as a
promising solution to the above issues, by allowing subsequent layers to directly access outputs of all preceding layers

Residual connections (He et al., 2016), which help mitigate
the vanish gradient problem, have become indispensable to
training deep learning architectures from CNNs to Transformers, the latter becoming the de facto backbone for foundation models. Though being very simple and effective,
residual connections still have limitations to be solved, especially with deep Transformers with dozens of layers made
1

1

