TopoTune: A Framework for Generalized
Combinatorial Complex Neural Networks

Mathilde Papillon 1 Guillermo Bernárdez 1 Claudio Battiloro * 2 Nina Miolane * 1

Abstract

to capture and model higher-order interactions—crucial in
complex systems like particle physics, social interactions,
or biological networks (Lambiotte et al., 2019). Topological Deep Learning (TDL) (Bodnar, 2023; Battiloro, 2024)
precisely emerged as a framework that naturally encompasses multi-way relationships, leveraging beyond-graph
combinatorial topological domains such as simplicial and
cell complexes, or hypergraphs (Papillon et al., 2023).1

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) effectively learn
from relational data by leveraging graph symmetries. However, many real-world systems—such
as biological or social networks—feature multiway interactions that GNNs fail to capture. Topological Deep Learning (TDL) addresses this by
modeling and leveraging higher-order structures,
with Combinatorial Complex Neural Networks
(CCNNs) offering a general and expressive approach that has been shown to outperform GNNs.
However, TDL lacks the principled and standardized frameworks that underpin GNN development,
restricting its accessibility and applicability. To
address this issue, we introduce Generalized CCNNs (GCCNs), a simple yet powerful family of
TDL models that can be used to systematically
transform any (graph) neural network into its TDL
counterpart. We prove that GCCNs generalize and
subsume CCNNs, while extensive experiments on
a diverse class of GCCNs show that these architectures consistently match or outperform CCNNs,
often with less model complexity. In an effort to
accelerate and democratize TDL, we introduce
TopoTune, a lightweight software for defining,
building, and training GCCNs with unprecedented
flexibility and ease.

In this context, Hajij et al. (2023; 2024a) have recently introduced combinatorial complexes, fairly general objects
that are able to model arbitrary higher-order interactions
along with a hierarchical organization among them–hence
generalizing (for learning purposes) most of the combinatorial topological domains within TDL, including graphs.
The elements of a combinatorial complex are cells, being
nodes or groups of nodes, which are categorized by ranks.
The simplest cell, a single node, has rank zero. Cells of
higher ranks define relationships between nodes: rank one
cells are edges, rank two cells are faces, and so on. Hajij
et al. (2023) also proposes Combinatorial Complex Neural
Networks (CCNNs), deep learning architectures that leverage the versatility of combinatorial complexes to naturally
model higher-order interactions. For instance, consider the
task of predicting the solubility of a molecule from its structure. GNNs model molecules as graphs, thus considering
atoms (nodes) and bonds (edges) (Gilmer et al., 2017). By
contrast, CCNNs model molecules as combinatorial complexes, hence considering atoms (nodes, i.e., cells of rank
zero), bonds (edges, i.e., cells of rank one), and also important higher-order structures such as rings or functional
groups (i.e., cells of rank two) (Battiloro et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2008;
Corso et al., 2024) have demonstrated remarkable performance in several relational learning tasks by incorporating
prior knowledge through graph structures (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Zhang & Chen, 2018). However, constrained by the
pairwise nature of graphs, GNNs are limited in their ability

TDL Research Trend. To date, research in TDL has
largely progressed by taking existing GNNs architectures
(convolutional, attentional, message-passing, etc.) and generalizing them one-by-one to a specific TDL counterpart,
whether that be on hypergraphs (Feng et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2020a; Yadati, 2020), on simplicial complexes (Roddenberry et al., 2021; Yang & Isufi, 2023; Ebli et al., 2020;
Giusti et al., 2022a; Battiloro et al., 2024; Bodnar et al.,

*

Equal contribution 1 University California Santa Barbara, USA
Harvard University, USA. Correspondence to: Mathilde Papillon
<papillon@ucsb.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Simplicial and cell complexes model specific higher-order
interactions organized hierarchically, while hypergraphs model
arbitrary higher-order interactions but without any hierarchy.

1

