U NIFEWS: You Need Fewer Operations for Efficient Graph Neural Networks

Ningyi Liao 1 Zihao Yu 1 Ruixiao Zeng 1 Siqiang Luo 1

Abstract

Despite their success, canonical GNNs are recognized for
their high resource consumption, especially when scaling
up to large graphs (Wu et al., 2021). The performance
bottleneck arises from the connection with graph size, as
both graph propagation and feature transformation can be
viewed as multiplications on graph-scale matrices, and lead
to computational complexities proportional to the numbers
of edges and nodes in the graph, respectively (Chen et al.,
2020). Hence, the essence of improving GNN learning efficiency lies in reducing the number of operations associated
with graph diffusion and model weights (Liu et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2023a).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown
promising performance, but at the cost of
resource-intensive operations on graph-scale matrices. To reduce computational overhead, previous studies attempt to sparsify the graph or network parameters, but with limited flexibility and
precision boundaries. In this work, we propose
U NIFEWS, a joint sparsification technique to unify
graph and weight matrix operations and enhance
GNN learning efficiency. The U NIFEWS design
enables adaptive compression across GNN layers
with progressively increased sparsity, and is applicable to a variety of architectures with on-thefly simplification. Theoretically, we establish a
novel framework to characterize sparsified GNN
learning in view of the graph optimization process, showing that U NIFEWS effectively approximates the learning objective with bounded error
and reduced computational overhead. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that U NIFEWS achieves
efficiency improvements with comparable or better accuracy, including 10−20× matrix operation
reduction and up to 100× acceleration for graphs
up to billion-edge scale. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/gdmnl/Unifews.

In efforts to reduce the graph part of computation, prior
GNN graph sparsification techniques (Liu et al., 2019) typically remove graph components based on either predetermined (Zheng et al., 2020; Zeng et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2023b) or learned (Li et al., 2021; 2022; Jin et al., 2022)
criteria. Another direction is to exploit compression on
the model architecture by integrating network pruning approaches (Deng et al., 2020a), which gradually sparsifies
weight elements during GNN training (Zhou et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021; You et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b).
Both approaches, however, suffer from limited flexibility
due to the static graph structure throughout all propagation
iterations: the topology may become overly coarse, thereby
omitting crucial information for GNN feature extraction, or
may be under-sparsified and model efficiency is scarcely
improved. Moreover, there is a noticeable gap in the theoretical interpretation of GNN sparsification. Existing works are
either constrained to the layer-agnostic graph approximation
(Chen et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019), or only provide straightforward representation error analysis (Srinivasa et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2023b). The impact of simplified graphs on the
GNN learning process, particularly through multiple layers,
remains inadequately addressed.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have undergone extensive
development for learning from graph-structure data and
have achieved remarkable performance (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018). The
power of GNNs is mainly attributed to the message-passing
scheme containing two alternative operations, namely graph
propagation and feature transformation, which aggregates
neighborhood information in the graph and updates representation by trainable weights.

To mitigate the drawbacks of current GNN compression, we
propose U NIFEWS, a U NIFied Entry-Wise Sparsi-fication
framework for GNN graph and weights. As illustrated in
Figure 1, by considering the two stages in GNN as matrix
operations, graph and model sparsification can be unified in
an entry-wise manner, i.e., manipulating individual elements
during matrix multiplication. We then establish a theoretical
framework to quantify the impact of U NIFEWS on precision
and efficiency. By bridging the graph learning process in

1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Siqiang Luo
<siqiang.luo@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

