Signed Laplacians for Constrained Graph Clustering

John Stewart Fabila Carrasco 1 He Sun 1

Abstract

domain knowledge is represented by two types of pairwise
constraints: (1) M UST-L INK constraints, requiring that a
pair of data points must be assigned to the same cluster, and
(2) C ANNOT-L INK constraints, requiring that a pair of data
points must be assigned to different clusters. In the context
of graph clustering, the goal is to partition the vertices of a
graph based on edge connectivity while satisfying the given
constraints.

Given two weighted graphs G = (V, E, wG ) and
H = (V, F, wH ) defined on the same vertex set,
the constrained clustering problem seeks to find
a subset S ⊂ V that minimises the cut ratio
between wG (S, V \ S) and wH (S, V \ S). In
this work, we establish a Cheeger-type inequality
that relates the solution of the constrained clustering problem to the spectral properties of G
and H. To reduce computational complexity, we
utilise the signed Laplacian of H, streamlining
calculations while maintaining accuracy. By solving a generalised eigenvalue problem, our proposed algorithm achieves notable performance
improvements, particularly in challenging scenarios where traditional spectral clustering methods
struggle. We demonstrate its practical effectiveness through experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets.

In this paper, we examine the constrained clustering problem by formalising these constraints using the graphs
G = (V, E, w) and H = (V, E ′ , w′ ), in which every
data point corresponds to a graph vertex, every M USTL INK (resp. C ANNOT-L INK) constraint corresponds to an
edge in G (resp. H), and the edge weights capture the
strength of the user’s preference for satisfying the corresponding constraint. For any set S ⊆ V , we define the cut
ratio of S between G and H by
cutG
H (S, V \ S) =

wG (S, V \ S)
,
wH (S, V \ S)

(1)

and the objective is to find S that achieves

1. Introduction

G
ΦG
H = min cutH (S, V \ S).
∅⊂S⊂V

Clustering is a fundamental technique in machine learning,
with extensive applications across computer science and
various scientific disciplines. The primary goal of clustering is to partition data points into clusters, such that points
within each cluster are more densely connected than those in
other clusters. Traditional clustering, such as spectral clustering (von Luxburg, 2007) relies solely on the structure of
the data. However, in many real-world scenarios, additional
domain knowledge is available, introducing specific constraints that should be incorporated into the clustering process to achieve more accurate and meaningful results (Basu
et al., 2008).

We develop an efficient approximation algorithm for the
constrained graph clustering problem. The key to our algorithm is a Cheeger-type inequality that upper bounds ΦG
H
H
with respect to λ2 (∆G
H ) and λ2 (∆ ), where

⟨x, ∆G x⟩
,
λ 2 ∆G
=
min
H
x⊥1 ⟨x, ∆H x⟩

(2)


⟨x, ∆H x⟩
.
λ2 ∆H = min
x⊥1
⟨x, x⟩

(3)

and ∆G and ∆H are the Laplacian operators of G and H
respectively. By introducing several techniques to adjust
G and H, we significantly reduce the time complexity for
solving the generalised eigenvalue problem, while maintaining the one-to-one correspondence between the solution of
the new reduced instance and the initial one. The empirical studies on both the synthetic and real-world data sets
confirm that with the two sets of constraints our algorithm
presents significantly better performance than the classical
spectral clustering algorithm, and the running time of our
algorithm is close to traditional spectral clustering methods.

Constrained clustering focuses on developing algorithms
that effectively incorporate this domain knowledge to enhance clustering performance (Wagstaff et al., 2001). The
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: He Sun
<h.sun@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

