Non-Asymptotic and Non-Lipschitzian Bounds on Optimal Values in Stochastic
Optimization Under Heavy Tails

Jindong Tong 1 Hongcheng Liu 2 Johannes O. Royset 3
with probability distribution P supported on Ξ ⊆ Rm . The
function f : Rd × Ξ → R is assumed to be deterministic and measurable, where d denotes problem dimensionRality. We further assume the expectation E [f (x, ξ)] =
f (x, ξ) dP(ξ) to be well-defined and finite-valued for
Ξ
every x ∈ X . The SO problems of the above have been
much discussed in literature (e.g. by Shapiro et al., 2021;
Ruszczyński & Shapiro, 2003; Lan, 2020; Royset & Wets,
2021) and has wide applicability including in machine learning (as per, e.g., Bartlett et al., 2006). Throughout this paper,
we let F ∗ be the infimum of F (x) over X .

Abstract
This paper focuses on non-asymptotic confidence
bounds (CB) for the optimal values of stochastic
optimization (SO) problems. Existing approaches
often rely on two conditions that may be restrictive: The need for a global Lipschitz constant and
the assumption of light-tailed distributions. Beyond either of the conditions, it remains largely
unknown whether computable CBs can be constructed. In view of this literature gap, we provide
three key findings below: (i) Based on the conventional formulation of sample average approximation (SAA), we derive non-Lipschitzian CBs for
convex SO problems under heavy tails. (ii) We
explore diametrical risk minimization (DRM)—a
recently introduced modification to SAA—and
attain non-Lipschitzian CBs for nonconvex SO
problems in light-tailed settings. (iii) We extend our analysis of DRM to handle heavy-tailed
randomness by utilizing properties in formulations for training over-parameterized classification models.

Regarding such SO problems, the focus of this paper is to
construct computable non-asymptotic confidence bounds
(NCB) for the value of F ∗ when given an i.i.d. sample
ξ1 , ..., ξN of ξ; namely, for a large sample size N and a
significance level α ∈ (0, 1), we are to find the values of
the two scalars, denoted by LN,α and UN,α , such that the
following relationship holds:
Prob [LN,α ≤ F ∗ ≤ UN,α ] ≥ 1 − α.

Tight estimates of these two scalars are of usefulness. For instance, according to Guigues et al. (2017), these bounds can
be utilized to qualify the accuracy of approximate solutions
so as to construct stopping criteria for stochastic algorithms.
Other potential applications include statistical decisions in
computing confidence intervals and testing statistical hypotheses about the optimal value as well as in designing
algorithms for multi-armed bandit problems.

1. Introduction
Consider a stochastic optimization (SO) problem formulated
as below:
minimize F (x) := E[f (x, ξ)],
x∈X

(2)

(1)

Following many discussions on confidence bounds (as per,
e.g., Kaniovski et al., 1995; King & Rockafellar, 1993;
Pflug, 2003; Shai et al., 2009; Shapiro, 2003; Shapiro & Nemirovski, 2005), this paper is focused on their construction
through sample average approximation
(SAA) summarized
PN
as below. Let FN (x) := N −1 j=1 f (x, ξj ) and define

d

where X ⊆ R is a nonempty, bounded, and closed feasible region, ξ is a random vector of problem parameters
1
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, 32611 USA. Email: jindongtong@ufl.edu 2 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, 32611 USA. Email:
liu.h@ufl.edu 3 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089.
Email: royset@usc.edu. Correspondence to: Hongcheng Liu
<liu.h@ufl.edu>.

minimize FN (x),
x∈X

(3)

and denote its optimal cost by FN∗ . Then, many existing
NCBs in (2) are constructed in the form of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

LN,α := FN∗ − lN,α ;
UN,α := FN∗ + uN,α ,
1

