Improved Theoretically-Grounded Evolutionary Algorithms
for Subset Selection with a Linear Cost Constraint
Dan-Xuan Liu 1 2 Chao Qian 1 2

Abstract

tion f , while the cost of the subset X must not exceed a
given budget B. This fundamental problem is NP-hard and
arises in diverse domains involving cost-aware resource allocation, including combinatorial optimization, computer
networks, data mining, and machine learning. Potential applications include maximum coverage (Feige, 1998), maximizing coverage under budget constraints; influence maximization (Kempe et al., 2003), maximizing social influence spread under budget constraints; sensor placement,
balancing information gain with installation costs (Krause
et al., 2006); recommendation systems, promoting products within advertising budgets while respecting user preferences (Ashkan et al., 2015); unsupervised feature selection,
optimizing reconstruction error of a data matrix under feature resource constraints (Feng et al., 2019); active learning,
selecting maximally informative data samples under limited
annotation budgets (Golovin & Krause, 2011); and humanassisted learning, optimizing machine learning models with
limited expert resources (De et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023).

The subset selection problem with a monotone
and submodular objective function under a linear cost constraint has wide applications, such
as maximum coverage, influence maximization,
and feature selection, just to name a few. Various
greedy algorithms have been proposed with good
performance both theoretically and empirically.
Recently, evolutionary algorithms (EAs), inspired
by Darwin’s evolution theory, have emerged
as a prominent methodology, offering both empirical advantages and theoretical guarantees.
Among these, the multi-objective EA, POMC, has
demonstrated the best empirical performance to
date, achieving an approximation guarantee of
(1/2)(1 − 1/e). However, there remains a gap
in the approximation bounds of EAs compared
to greedy algorithms, and their full theoretical
potential is yet to be realized. In this paper, we reanalyze the approximation performance of POMC
theoretically, and derive an improved guarantee of
1/2, which thus provides theoretical justification
for its encouraging empirical performance. Furthermore, we propose a novel multi-objective EA,
EPOL, which not only achieves the best-known
practical approximation guarantee of 0.6174, but
also delivers superior empirical performance in
applications of maximum coverage and influence
maximization. We hope this work can help better solving the subset selection problem, but also
enhance our theoretical understanding of EAs.

By introducing monotonicity and submodularity, the algorithms with theoretical guarantees for subset selection have
been well studied. A set function f is monotone (typically non-decreasing) if it does not decrease with the addition of items to a set. A set function f is submodular if
∀X ⊆ Y, v ∈
/ Y : f (X ∪ v)−f (X) ≥ f (Y ∪ v)−f (Y ),
implying the diminishing returns property (Nemhauser et al.,
1978). In this paper, we focus on the subset selection problem as follows:
X
arg max f (X) s.t. c(X) =
c(v) ≤ B, (1)
X⊆V

v∈X

where the objective function f : 2V → R is monotone and
submodular, and the cost function c : 2V → R is linear. For
the special case c(X) = |X| ≤ B, a simple greedy algorithm achieves the optimal polynomial-time approximation
guarantee of 1 − 1/e (Nemhauser et al., 1978).

1. Introduction
The subset selection problem aims to select a subset X
from a given ground set V that maximizes a specific func-

For the general problem presented in Eq. (1) with a linear cost constraint, greedy algorithms are also mainstream
algorithms, and many variants have been proposed. The
Generalized Greedy Algorithm (GGA) iteratively selects
an item maximizing the ratio of the increment on f and
c, achieving a (1/2)(1 − 1/e) ≈ 0.32-approximation ratio (Krause & Guestrin, 2005), which was further improved

1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China 2 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to: Chao Qian <qianc@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

