COSDA: Counterfactual-based Susceptibility Risk Framework for Open-Set
Domain Adaptation

Wenxu Wang * 1 Rui Zhou * 2 Jing Wang 3 Yun Zhou 2 Cheng Zhu 2 Ruichun Tang 1 Bo Han 4
Nevin L. Zhang 5

Abstract

Causal
relation

Open-Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) aims to
transfer knowledge from the labeled source domain to the unlabeled target domain that contains
unknown categories, thus facing the challenges
of domain shift and unknown category recognition. Little exploration has been conducted on
causal-inspired theoretical frameworks for OSDA.
To fill this gap, we introduce the concept of Susceptibility and propose a novel Counterfactualbased susceptibility risk framework for OSDA,
termed COSDA. Specifically, COSDA consists
of three novel components: (i) a Susceptibility
Risk Estimator (SRE) for capturing causal information, along with comprehensive derivations of
the computable theoretical upper bound, forming
a risk minimization framework under the OSDA
paradigm; (ii) a Contrastive Feature Alignment
(CFA) module, which is theoretically proven
based on mutual information to satisfy the Exogeneity assumption and facilitate cross-domain
feature alignment; (iii) a Virtual Multi-unknowncategories Prototype (VMP) pseudo-labeling strategy, providing label information by measuring
how similar samples are to known and multiple
virtual unknown category prototypes, thereby assisting in open-set recognition and intra-class discriminative feature learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

Spurious
relation

E

C

X

Y

(a) SCM for data generation

Observed
factor

E

C

X

Y

Unobserved
factor

Intervened
factor

E

C

X

Y

(b) SCM for CSDA

Source

(c) SCM for OSDA

Target (OSDA)
Known Classes
E

Unknown Classes
E

Known Classes

C

(d) Open-Set Domain Adaptation Problem

(e) Risk Paradigm for OSDA

Figure 1. (a) Causal graph for data generation, (b) causal graph for
domain shift, where red arrows describe the distribution of data
(X,Y ) is shifted because environment variables E are intervened
in a new unseen domain, and (c) causal graph for OSDA, where
red arrows indicate that the intervened environment variables E
and intervened causal variables C lead to unknown classes; (d)
shows how images changed with the interventions on E and C;
(e) the risk paradigm for OSDA, including source supervised risk,
feature alignment risk, and open-set space risk.

1. Introduction
Traditional supervised learning algorithms heavily rely on
the in-distribution assumption (Murphy, 2012), which assumes that training and test data are sampled from the same
distribution. However, this assumption is not consistent in
wild environments, where domain shift (Zhang et al., 2013)
and category shift (Qu et al., 2023) lead to the failure of
supervised learning algorithms. Considering domain shift,
Close-Set Domain Adaptation (CSDA) aims to transfer a
model from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target
domain under the assumption of a shared label space (Ganin
& Lempitsky, 2015; Cui et al., 2024). Existing domain adaptation methods can be broadly categorized into two main
streams: metric learning (Long et al., 2016; Wei et al., 2024)
and adversarial learning (Ganin et al.; Li et al., 2018).

*
Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China 2 National
Key Laboratory of Information Systems Engineering, National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China 3 Department
of Mechanical Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 4 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong
Baptist University, Hong Kong, China 5 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Ruichun
Tang <tangruichun@ouc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

