Contextual Optimization Under Model Misspecification: A Tractable and
Generalizable Approach

Omar Bennouna * 1 Jiawei Zhang * 1 2 Saurabh Amin 1 Asuman Ozdaglar 1

Abstract

be estimated using contextual information. A canonical
example is traffic routing, where the costs of traversing network edges—initially unknown—depend on observable features such as weather, time of day, and construction activity.
Given historical data, the goal of contextual optimization is
to learn a policy that maps observed contexts to near-optimal
decisions (Sadana et al., 2024).

Contextual optimization problems are prevalent
in decision-making applications where historical
data and contextual features are used to learn
predictive models that inform optimal actions.
However, practical applications often suffer from
model misspecification due to incomplete knowledge of the underlying data-generating process,
leading to suboptimal decisions. Existing approaches primarily address the well-specified
case, leaving a critical gap in handling misspecified models. In this paper, we propose a novel Integrated Learning and Optimization (ILO) framework that explicitly accounts for model misspecification by introducing a tractable surrogate loss
function with strong theoretical guarantees on
generalizability, tractability, and optimality. Our
surrogate loss aligns with the true decision performance objective, ensuring robustness to misspecification without imposing restrictive assumptions.
The proposed approach effectively mitigates the
challenges of non-convexity and non-smoothness
in the target loss function, leading to efficient
optimization procedures. We provide rigorous
theoretical analysis and experimental validation,
demonstrating superior performance compared to
state-of-the-art methods. Our work offers a principled solution to the practically relevant challenge
of model misspecification in contextual optimization.

A standard framework for contextual optimization assumes
that the unknown cost vector c ∈ Rd is correlated with an
observed context x ∈ Rk , and the objective is to minimize
expected decision cost:

min E(x,c)∼P c⊤ π(x) .
π∈Π

(1)

Here, P is the joint distribution of (x, c), and Π is a set of
feasible policies that map contexts to decisions in a bounded
convex set W ⊂ Rd . Since the true cost function is unknown in practice, it must be approximated using a prediction model from a hypothesis class H.
The widely used predict-then-optimize approach first learns
a predictor ĉ(x) from H and then selects a decision by
solving:
π̂(x) ∈ arg min ĉ(x)⊤ w.
(2)
w∈W

Prior works mainly adopt two approaches: Sequential Learning and Optimization (SLO) (Bertsimas and Kallus, 2020;
Hu et al., 2022) and Integrated Learning and Optimization
(ILO) (Donti et al., 2017; Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022;
Sun et al., 2023). SLO focuses solely on minimizing prediction error for c, ignoring the downstream optimization task,
while ILO prioritizes decision performance over accurate
cost prediction. Recent research in Integrated Learning and
Optimization (ILO) refines cost prediction to improve downstream decisions, under the assumption that H contains the
true cost function. In other words, previous ILO approaches
assume that H is well-specified.

1. Introduction
Many real-world decision-making problems require optimizing decisions based on uncertain parameters that can
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Department of Computer Sciences, University
of Wisconsin–Madison. Correspondence to: Omar Bennouna
<omarben@mit.edu>, Jiawei Zhang <jzhang2924@wisc.edu>.

However, real-world settings often violate the above assumption. We say that H is misspecified when it does not contain
a predictor that perfectly captures the true cost function.
In real-world applications, this situation can arise due to
incomplete feature sets, unmodeled dependencies, or distribution shifts. Despite its practical significance, contextual

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

