Programming Every Example:
Lifting Pre-training Data Quality Like Experts at Scale

Fan Zhou * 1 2 Zengzhi Wang * 1 2 Qian Liu 3 Junlong Li 1 Pengfei Liu ‡ 1 2 4

Abstract

as creative writing (Yuan et al., 2022), complex reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022), and agentic task
planning and execution (Fan et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023).
Behind these, massive, high-quality pre-training corpora
form the backbone of these models, equipping them with
the essential knowledge and reasoning abilities crucial for a
wide range of downstream tasks (Penedo et al., 2024a).

Large language model pre-training has traditionally relied on human experts to craft heuristics for
improving the corpora quality, resulting in numerous rules developed to date. However, these fixed
rules lack the flexibility to address the unique
characteristics of individual examples, yet crafting sample-wise rules is impractical for human
experts. In this paper, we show that even small
language models, with only 0.3B parameters, can
exhibit substantial data refining capabilities. We
propose Programming Every Example (P ROX),
a novel framework that treats data refinement as
a programming task, and enables the model to
refine corpora by generating and executing finegrained operations, such as string normalization,
for each individual example at scale. Experiments
show that models trained on P ROX-refined data
consistently outperform other baselines across 10
benchmarks, demonstrating effectiveness across
model sizes (up to 1.7B) and pre-training corpora (C4, RedPajama-V2, FineWeb, FineWebEdu, and DCLM). P ROX also shows great potential in continual pre-training: on math domain,
P ROX boosts 7B models by up to 20% within
10B tokens—results typically achieved with much
larger scale training (e.g., 200B tokens). We believe P ROX offers a way to curate high-quality
pre-training data, and finally contributes to efficient LLM development.

The Internet offers vast amounts of data, but much of it
is noisy and unrefined, requiring extensive cleaning and
quality enhancement before being applied for pre-training.
Previous works focus primarily on designing heuristic-based
pipelines to lift data quality, such as document filtering (Rae
et al., 2021; Penedo et al., 2024a; Soldaini et al., 2024) and
perplexity-based scoring methods (Together, 2023), relying
heavily on human expertise and manual adjustments (Zhang
et al., 2024a). While widely adopted, these labor-intensive
solutions are inherently limited by rule coverage and their inability to address every specific case. Recently, some efforts
have explored leveraging LLMs for high-quality data acquisition. On the one hand, language models have been applied
for data filtering or selection (Xie et al., 2023; Wettig et al.,
2024; Yu et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024), but their role is
largely limited to identifying low-quality documents without enabling fine-grained refinements (e.g., string-level). On
the other hand, LLMs are also being used to generate highquality data directly, i.e., data synthesis (Gunasekar et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023; Ben Allal et al., 2024). Unlike filtering,
synthesis methods actively create or refine data to produce
new documents, but they require substantial computational
resources, limiting the methods’ scalability. Despite the
success, these methods can also inherit issues from LLMs
like hallucination (Maini et al., 2024), and assessing their
correctness and completeness in an interpretable manner
remains a challenge (Liu et al., 2024a).

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant
strides in capabilities (Meta, 2024; Achiam et al., 2023;
Anthropic, 2024; Reid et al., 2024), excelling in tasks such

At this intersection of data processing efficiency and data
quality improvement, we propose P ROX, a model-based
framework for pre-training-level data refinement. P ROX
focuses on refining corpora using smaller models at scale,
offering a more efficient alternative. As shown in Figure 2,
in practice, P ROX first adapts small base language models
(e.g., < 1B) to data refining tasks through fine-tuning them
on seed data. The refining models in P ROX then determine

*
1
Equal contribution
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Generative AI Research Lab (GAIR) 3 Sea AI Lab 4 Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Pengfei Liu
<pengfei@sjtu.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

