Self-Supervised Transformers
as Iterative Solution Improvers for Constraint Satisfaction

Yudong W. Xu 1 Wenhao Li 1 Scott Sanner 1 2 Elias B. Khalil 1 2 3

Abstract

straint propagation and backtracking search can be computationally expensive, especially for large problem instances.
This has motivated the exploration of learning-based approaches as fast neural heuristics for CSP solving (Dai et al.,
2017; Selsam et al., 2019; Bengio et al., 2021).

We present a Transformer-based framework for
Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs). CSPs
find use in many applications and thus accelerating their solution with machine learning is of
wide interest. Most existing approaches rely on supervised learning from feasible solutions or reinforcement learning, paradigms that require either
feasible solutions to these NP-Complete CSPs
or large training budgets and a complex expertdesigned reward signal. To address these challenges, we propose ConsFormer, a self-supervised
framework that leverages a Transformer as a solution refiner. ConsFormer constructs a solution
to a CSP iteratively in a process that mimics local search. Instead of using feasible solutions as
labeled data, we devise differentiable approximations to the discrete constraints of a CSP to guide
model training. Our model is trained to improve
random assignments for a single step but is deployed iteratively at test time, circumventing the
bottlenecks of supervised and reinforcement learning. Experiments on Sudoku, Graph Coloring,
Nurse Rostering, and MAXCUT demonstrate that
our method can tackle out-of-distribution CSPs
simply through additional iterations.

Most existing learning-based methods use either supervised
or reinforcement learning (RL). Supervised approaches train
models on datasets of CSP instances with feasible solutions
as labels, a paradigm that is laden with drawbacks. First,
generating labels for CSP instances requires solving them,
which makes it challenging to generate the large quantities of data often needed to train a model that generalizes
well. This is especially true for hard instances that traditional solvers struggle to solve quickly. Second, CSPs often
have multiple feasible solutions (Russell & Norvig, 2016),
making it difficult to apply supervised learning unambiguously when there are many possible labels for the same
input. RL-based methods, on the other hand, search for solution strategies through black-box optimization of a reward
function, often requiring extensive computing resources.
Designing reward functions that capture solution feasibility
across different constraints is difficult yet crucial to success
in RL (Arulkumaran et al., 2017). These limitations hinder
the generalization and scalability of learned heuristics.
To address these challenges, we introduce ConsFormer, a
Transformer-based self-supervised framework for solving
CSPs. Inspired by Constraint-based Local Search (Hentenryck & Michel, 2009), ConsFormer learns to iteratively
refine variable assignments through a self-supervised training paradigm that approximates discrete constraints with
continuous differentiable penalty functions. Our model is
trained to improve an initial random assignment in a single
refinement step, but is applied iteratively at test time. While
a single step may not yield a feasible solution, a sufficiently
large number of improving iterations (on average) does.
Examples of ConsFormer solutions are shown in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs) are fundamental
to many real-world applications such as scheduling, planning, and resource management. However, solving CSPs
efficiently in practice remains a significant challenge due to
their NP-complete nature. Traditional solvers based on con1

Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Scale AI Research Chair in Data-Driven Algorithms for
Modern Supply Chains. Correspondence to: Yudong Xu
<wil.xu@mail.utoronto.ca>.

Transformers provide a natural fit for this approach due to
their strong generalization capabilities and their ability to
process structured data efficiently (Lewkowycz et al., 2022;
Achiam et al., 2023). They are particularly effective at
learning with tokenized inputs, making them well-suited
for combinatorial problems formulated in the Constraint

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

