Algorithms with Calibrated Machine Learning Predictions

Judy Hanwen Shen 1 Ellen Vitercik 1 2 Anders Wikum 2

Abstract

algorithms have been developed for online decision-making
tasks ranging from rent-or-buy problems like ski rental
(Purohit et al., 2018; Anand et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2024) to
sequencing problems like job scheduling (Cho et al., 2022).

The field of algorithms with predictions incorporates machine learning advice in the design of
online algorithms to improve real-world performance. A central consideration is the extent to
which predictions can be trusted—while existing
approaches often require users to specify an aggregate trust level, modern machine learning models
can provide estimates of prediction-level uncertainty. In this paper, we propose calibration as
a principled and practical tool to bridge this gap,
demonstrating the benefits of calibrated advice
through two case studies: the ski rental and online job scheduling problems. For ski rental, we
design an algorithm that achieves near-optimal
prediction-dependent performance and prove that,
in high-variance settings, calibrated advice offers
more effective guidance than alternative methods
for uncertainty quantification. For job scheduling,
we demonstrate that using a calibrated predictor
leads to significant performance improvements
over existing methods. Evaluations on real-world
data validate our theoretical findings, highlighting
the practical impact of calibration for algorithms
with predictions.

This framework often produces a family of algorithms indexed by a single parameter intended to reflect the global
reliability of the ML advice. Extreme settings of this parameter yield algorithms that make decisions as if the predictions are either all perfect or all uninformative (e.g., Mahdian et al., 2007; Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2018; Purohit
et al., 2018; Rohatgi, 2020; Wei & Zhang, 2020; Antoniadis
et al., 2020). In contrast, ML models often produce local,
prediction-specific uncertainty estimates, exposing a disconnect between theory and practice. For instance, many neural
networks provide calibrated probabilities or confidence intervals for each data point.
In this paper, we demonstrate that calibration can serve as a
powerful tool to bridge this gap. An ML predictor is said to
be calibrated if the probabilities it assigns to events match
their observed frequencies; when the model outputs a high
probability, the event is indeed likely, and when it assigns a
low probability, the event rarely occurs. Calibrated predictors convey their uncertainty on each prediction, allowing
decision-makers to safely rely on the model’s advice, and
eliminating the need for ad-hoc reliability estimates. Moreover, calibrating an ML model can easily be accomplished
using popular methods (e.g. Platt Scaling (Platt et al., 1999)
or Histogram Binning (Zadrozny & Elkan, 2001)) that reduce overconfidence (Vasilev & D’yakonov, 2023).

1. Introduction
In recent years, advances in machine learning (ML) models have inspired researchers to revisit the design of classic
online algorithms, incorporating insights from ML-based
advice to improve decision-making in real-world environments. This research area, termed algorithms with predictions, seeks to design algorithms that are both robust to
worst-case inputs and achieve performance that improves
with prediction accuracy (a desideratum termed consistency)
(Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2018). Many learning-augmented

Although we are the first to study calibration for algorithms
with predictions, Sun et al. (2024) proposed using conformal prediction in this setting—a common tool in uncertainty
quantification (Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008).
Conformal predictions provide instance-specific confidence
intervals that cover the target with high probability. While
these approaches are orthogonal, we prove that calibration
can offer key advantages over conformal prediction, especially when the predicted quantities have high variance. In
extreme cases, conformal intervals can become too wide
to be informative: for binary predictions, a conformal approach returns {0, 1} unless the true label is nearly certain to
be 0 or 1. In contrast, calibration still conveys information
that aids decision-making.

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Anders Wikum <wikum@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

