Large Language-Geometry Model: When LLM meets Equivariance

Zongzhao Li 1 2 3 Jiacheng Cen 1 2 3 Bing Su 1 2 3 Tingyang Xu 4 5 Yu Rong 4 5 Deli Zhao 4 5 Wenbing Huang 1 2 3

Abstract

sign (Tiller & Tessier, 2015) require not only a deep understanding of complex spatial geometry but also the preservation of E(3)-equivariance — ensuring predictions transform correspondingly with input rotations, reflections and
translations (Batzner et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). From
the machine learning perspective, E(3)-equivariant models
are more powerful than their non-equivariant counterparts,
as they are inherently generalizable across arbitrary coordinate systems when modeling physical systems. To achieve
equivariance, current approaches primarily rely on geometric Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Wu et al., 2024; Kong
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2025a). Despite their fruitful progress,
these models often lack the ability to leverage external domain knowledge and broader contextual information, such
as task-specific instructions and expert-curated guidance,
hindering further performance enhancement.

Accurately predicting 3D structures and dynamics of physical systems is crucial in scientific
applications. Existing approaches that rely on
geometric Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) effectively enforce E(3)-equivariance, but they often fail in leveraging extensive broader information. While direct application of Large Language
Models (LLMs) can incorporate external knowledge, they lack the capability for spatial reasoning
with guaranteed equivariance. In this paper, we
propose EquiLLM, a novel framework for representing 3D physical systems that seamlessly integrates E(3)-equivariance with LLM capabilities.
Specifically, EquiLLM comprises four key components: geometry-aware prompting, an equivariant encoder, an LLM, and an equivariant adapter.
Essentially, the LLM guided by the instructive
prompt serves as a sophisticated invariant feature
processor, while 3D directional information is exclusively handled by the equivariant encoder and
adapter modules. Experimental results demonstrate that EquiLLM delivers significant improvements over previous methods across molecular
dynamics simulation, human motion simulation,
and antibody design, highlighting its promising
generalizability.

1

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable success across a wide range of applications, owing to their large-scale pretraining on extensive
datasets and their substantial model size (Sun et al., 2025a;
Li et al., 2025c; Yang et al., 2025a; Sun et al., 2025b; Bian
et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2025b; Xu et al.,
2025; Sun et al., 2025c; Liang et al., 2025; Yang et al.,
2025b). It is well known that LLMs can not only understand
and generate text but also excel at integrating and leveraging scientific knowledge (Liu et al., 2025a; Jablonka et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2023b). For instance, LLMs can comprehend fundamental chemical concepts and molecular structural characteristics (Guo et al., 2023). More significantly,
based on our results, we speculate that LLMs’ flexibility
in prompt engineering enables the development of tailored
instructions that better leverage their capabilities, producing
outputs more precisely suited to the task.

Introduction

Accurately predicting 3D structures/dynamics of physical
systems remains a fundamental challenge in physics and
biology. Typical tasks such as molecular dynamics simulation (Hollingsworth & Dror, 2018) and antibody de-

A natural idea is to directly employ LLMs for modeling
3D physical systems. However, this approach fails to yield
satisfactory results in practice. A key limitation is that
LLMs are trained to process ordered and discrete text tokens,
restricting their ability to directly comprehend unordered
and continuous data in 3D space. One possible solution is
to adapt existing multimodal LLM architectures, such as
LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024b), by treating 3D structures as a separate modality and simply replacing the image encoder with
a geometric GNN. However, this naive adaptation fails to
satisfy the E(3)-equivariance requirement. Since geometric

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 3 Engineering Research Center of
Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China 5 Hupan Lab,
Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>, Yu Rong <yu.rong@hotmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

