Large Continual Instruction Assistant

Jingyang Qiao 1 2 Zhizhong Zhang 1 Xin Tan 1 3 Yanyun Qu 4 Shouhong Ding 5 Yuan Xie 1 2

Abstract

ation (Li et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023a). It generally exists in two stages:
large scale pre-training and instruction-tuning. Instruction
tuning is extremely significant due to guiding LFMs (Chen
et al., 2024b; Zheng et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023b) in
following human intent and aligning different modalities (Li
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023), which seems to be an essential
technique to enhance the capabilities and controllability of
LFMs e.g. LLMs, MLLMs (Jiang et al., 2024).

Continual Instruction Tuning (CIT) is adopted
to continually instruct Large Models to follow
human intent data by data. It is observed that
existing gradient update would heavily destroy
the performance on previous datasets during CIT
process. Instead, Exponential Moving Average
(EMA), owns the ability to trace previous parameters, which can aid in decreasing forgetting.
Nonetheless, its stable balance weight fails to deal
with the ever-changing datasets, leading to the
out-of-balance between plasticity and stability. In
this paper, we propose a general continual instruction tuning framework to address the challenge.
Starting from the trade-off prerequisite and EMA
update, we propose the plasticity and stability
ideal condition. Based on Taylor expansion in
the loss function, we find the optimal balance
weight can be automatically determined by the
gradients and learned parameters. Therefore, we
propose a stable-plasticity balanced coefficient
to avoid knowledge interference. Based on the
semantic similarity of the instructions, we can determine whether to retrain or expand the training
parameters and allocate the most suitable parameters for the testing instances. Extensive experiments across multiple continual instruction tuning
benchmarks demonstrate that our approach not
only enhances anti-forgetting capabilities but also
significantly improves overall continual tuning
performance. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/JingyangQiao/CoIN.

As knowledge continuously evolves with the development
of human society, new instructions are constantly generated,
e.g. the emergence of new concepts or disciplines. How
to enable existing LFMs to assimilate novel instructions
and undergo self-evolution becomes the key challenge (Zhu
et al., 2024). To accommodate the new instructions, the
most effective strategy is incorporating both old and new
instructions for joint training. However, even such relatively
lightweight fine-tuning is unaffordable. Furthermore, directly fine-tuning these new instructions would destroy the
pre-training knowledge, e.g. catastrophic forgetting (Goodfellow et al., 2013; Li et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2019).
Continual Instruction Tuning (CIT) is proposed to address
this challenge (Zhang et al., 2023; He et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2024a). Taking MLLMs as a case study, previous
methods, EProj (He et al., 2023), FwT(Zheng et al., 2024),
and CoIN (Chen et al., 2024a), utilize the model expansion
framework by continually adding new branches for the novel
instructions, which therefore has less impact on the old
knowledge. However, they suffer from memory explosion
and high computational cost problems. On the other hand,
continually full fine-tuning (FFT) downstream datasets with
single branch architecture would destroy the pre-trained
parameters, and greatly reduce the zero-shot generalization
performance of MLLMs (Zhai et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

Considering the essential mechanism of parameter update,
we discover that the gradient update might not be a satisfactory choice for CIT. First of all, we find that the gradient inevitably drives the update of parameters toward the optimization of the new dataset, which causes forgetting. Instead,
Exponential Moving Average (EMA) adopts a weighted
summation between old and new model parameters, which
enjoys the natural advantage of keeping old knowledge.
However, it faces the challenge of balancing old and new

Large Foundation Modals (LFMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in multi-task understanding and gener1
East China Normal University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Xiamen University 5 Tencent YouTu Lab.
Correspondence to: Zhizhong Zhang <zzzhang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>,
Yanyun Qu <yyqu@xmu.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

