Adjustment for Confounding using Pre-Trained Representations

Rickmer Schulte 1 2 David Rügamer 1 2 Thomas Nagler 1 2

Abstract

and in some cases even impossible to obtain, either due
to ethical or economic reasons. This often implies relying
on observational data, typically subject to (unmeasured)
confounding—(hidden) factors that affect both the exposure
and the outcome. To overcome this issue of confounding
and to obtain unbiased estimates, several inferential methods
have been developed to properly adjust the ATE estimation
for confounders. One approach that has garnered significant
attention in recent years is the debiased/double machine
learning (DML) framework (Chernozhukov et al., 2017;
2018), which allows the incorporation of machine learning
methods to adjust for non-linear or complex confounding
effects in the ATE estimation. DML is usually applied in
the context of tabular features and was introduced for ML
methods tailored to such features. However, confounding
information might only be present in non-tabular data, such
as images or text.

There is growing interest in extending average
treatment effect (ATE) estimation to incorporate
non-tabular data, such as images and text, which
may act as sources of confounding. Neglecting
these effects risks biased results and flawed scientific conclusions. However, incorporating nontabular data necessitates sophisticated feature extractors, often in combination with ideas of transfer learning. In this work, we investigate how latent features from pre-trained neural networks can
be leveraged to adjust for sources of confounding.
We formalize conditions under which these latent
features enable valid adjustment and statistical inference in ATE estimation, demonstrating results
along the example of double machine learning.
We discuss critical challenges inherent to latent
feature learning and downstream parameter estimation arising from the high dimensionality and
non-identifiability of representations. Common
structural assumptions for obtaining fast convergence rates with additive or sparse linear models
are shown to be unrealistic for latent features. We
argue, however, that neural networks are largely
insensitive to these issues. In particular, we show
that neural networks can achieve fast convergence
rates by adapting to intrinsic notions of sparsity
and dimension of the learning problem.

1
Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Rickmer Schulte <schulte@stat.unimuenchen.de>.

Non-tabular Data as Sources of Confounding Especially in medical domains, imaging is a key component
of the diagnostic process. Frequently, CT scans or X-rays
are the basis to infer a diagnosis and a suitable treatment
for a patient. However, as the information in such medical
images often also affects the outcome of the therapy, the
information in the image acts as a confounder. Similarly,
treatment and health outcomes are often both related to a patient’s files, which are typically in text form. Consequently,
ATE estimation based on such observational data will likely
be biased if the confounder is not adequately accounted
for. Typical examples would be the severity of a disease
or fracture. The extent of a fracture impacts the likelihood
of surgical or conservative therapy, and the severity of a
disease may impact the decision for palliative or chemotherapy. In both cases, the severity will likely also impact the
outcome of interest, e.g., the patient’s recovery rate. Another famous example is the Simpson’s Paradox observed
in the kidney stone treatment study of Charig et al. (1986).
The size of the stone (information inferred from imaging)
impacts both the treatment decision and the outcome, which
leads to flawed conclusions about the effectiveness of the
treatment if confounding is not accounted for (Julious &
Mullee, 1994).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Contemporary Applications While the DML framework
provides a solution for non-linear confounding, previous

1. Introduction
Causal inference often involves estimating the average treatment effect (ATE), which represents the causal impact of
an exposure on an outcome. Under controlled study setups of randomized controlled trials (RCTs), valid inference
methods for ATE estimation are well established (Deaton
& Cartwright, 2018). However, RCT data is usually scarce
2

1

