Incorporating Arbitrary Matrix Group Equivariance into KANs

Lexiang Hu 1 Yisen Wang 1 2 Zhouchen Lin 1 2 3

Abstract

1991; Braun & Griebel, 2009), which offers an alternative to
Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) (Haykin, 1998; Cybenko,
1989; Hornik et al., 1989). Unlike MLPs, which utilize
fixed activation functions on nodes, KANs employ learnable
activation functions on edges, replacing the linear weight
parameters entirely with univariate functions parameterized
as splines (De Boor, 1978). On the other hand, each layer of
KANs can be viewed as spline basis functions followed by a
linear layer (Dhiman, 2024). This architecture allows KANs
to achieve better accuracy in symbolic formula representation tasks compared with MLPs, particularly in function
fitting and scientific applications. Subsequent works based
on KANs have demonstrated superior performance in other
areas, such as sequential data (Vaca-Rubio et al., 2024;
Genet & Inzirillo, 2024b;a; Xu et al., 2024), graph data
(Bresson et al., 2024; De Carlo et al., 2024; Kiamari et al.,
2024; Zhang & Zhang, 2024), image data (Cheon, 2024b;a;
Azam & Akhtar, 2024; Li et al., 2024a; Seydi, 2024; Bodner
et al., 2024), and so on.

Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs) have seen
great success in scientific domains thanks to
spline activation functions, becoming an alternative to Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs). However, spline functions may not respect symmetry in tasks, which is crucial prior knowledge
in machine learning. In this paper, we propose Equivariant Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
(EKAN), a method for incorporating arbitrary matrix group equivariance into KANs, aiming to
broaden their applicability to more fields. We
first construct gated spline basis functions, which
form the EKAN layer together with equivariant linear weights, and then define a lift layer
to align the input space of EKAN with the feature space of the dataset, thereby building the
entire EKAN architecture. Compared with baseline models, EKAN achieves higher accuracy
with smaller datasets or fewer parameters on
symmetry-related tasks, such as particle scattering and the three-body problem, often reducing
test MSE by several orders of magnitude. Even
in non-symbolic formula scenarios, such as top
quark tagging with three jet constituents, EKAN
achieves comparable results with state-of-the-art
equivariant architectures using fewer than 40% of
the parameters, while KANs do not outperform
MLPs as expected. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/hulx2002/EKAN.

However, KANs themselves perform poorly on nonsymbolic formula representation tasks (Yu et al., 2024). One
reason for this is that splines struggle to respect data type
and symmetry, both of which play important roles in machine learning. Many recent works utilize symmetry in data
to design network architectures, achieving better efficiency
and generalization on specific tasks. For example, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1989)
and Group equivariant Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs) (Cohen & Welling, 2016) leverage translational and
rotational symmetries in image data, while DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017) and equivariant graph networks (Maron
et al., 2019; Keriven & Peyré, 2019; Satorras et al., 2021) exploit the permutation symmetry in set and graph data. Equivariant Multi-Layer Perceptrons (EMLP) (Finzi et al., 2021)
propose a general method that allows MLPs to be equivariant with respect to arbitrary matrix groups for specific
data types, thereby unifying the aforementioned specialized
network architectures.

1. Introduction
Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs) (Liu et al., 2024b;a)
are a novel type of neural network inspired by the
Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem (Tikhomirov,
1

State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University 3 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Correspondence to: Zhouchen
Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.

Inspired by these equivariant architectures, we propose
Equivariant Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (EKAN), which
embed matrix group equivariance into KANs. By specifying
the data type and symmetry, EKAN can serve as a general
framework for applying KANs to various areas. In Section 2,
we introduce the preliminary knowledge of group theory. In

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

