MDDM: Practical Message-Driven Generative Image Steganography
Based on Diffusion Models
Zihao Xu 1 Dawei Xu 1 2 Zihan Li 2 Chuan Zhang 2

Abstract

have become a primary medium for covert data embedding
(Bachrach & Shih, 2011; Subramanian et al., 2021; Mandal
et al., 2022). Image steganography conceals information
within images in a manner that prevents unauthorized access
or detection. It is widely used in copyright protection (Altaay et al., 2012) and covert communication (Juneja, 2014).

Generative image steganography (GIS) is an
emerging technique that conceals secret messages in the generation of images. Compared to
GAN-based or flow-based GIS schemes, diffusion
model-based solutions can provide high-quality
and more diverse images, thus receiving considerable attention recently. However, previous GIS
schemes still face challenges in terms of extraction accuracy, controllability, and practicality. To
address the above issues, this paper proposes a
practical message-driven GIS framework based
on diffusion models, called MDDM. Specifically,
by utilizing the Cardan grille, we encode messages into Gaussian noise, which serves as the initial input for image generation, enabling users to
generate diverse images via controllable prompts
without additional training. During the information extraction process, receivers only need to use
the pre-shared Cardan grille to perform diffusion
inversion and recover the messages without requiring the image generation seeds or prompts. Experimental results demonstrate that MDDM offers
notable advantages in terms of accuracy, controllability, practicality, and security. With flexible
strategies, MDDM can achieve accuracy close to
100% under appropriate settings. Additionally,
MDDM demonstrates certain robustness and potential for application in watermarking tasks.

However, achieving provably secure image steganography
remains a major challenge. Traditional methods (van Schyndel et al., 1994; Liao et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Su
et al., 2021; Chan & Cheng, 2004) usually embed secret
data through cover image modification. These methods often leave traces, making them susceptible to detection by
steganalysis tools, and are therefore deemed empirically
secure rather than provably secure (Hopper et al., 2002).
Provable security in image steganography requires that the
distributions of the normal and stego images be indistinguishable (Weiming, 2023). Recently, the emergence of
Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC) has provided a more diverse and flexible steganographic environment. Meanwhile, AI-generated data follows a controllable
distribution. Leveraging this advantage, generative image
steganography (GIS) has emerged and demonstrated strong
resistance to typical steganographic attacks.
Compared with traditional methods, GIS schemes have better anti-detection performance against existing statistical
feature-based steganalysis methods. GIS is mainly based on
generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Yang et al., 2024b;
Zhou et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2020; Su et al., 2024; You
et al., 2022), flow-based models (such as Glow) (Zhou et al.,
2023b; Wei et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022) and the latest diffusion models (DM) (Hu et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2023;
2024; Yu et al., 2024; Jois et al., 2024). Although GIS
has achieved notable progress, it still faces limitations in
practical applications. For example, GAN-based methods
require much training (Yang et al., 2024b), and are costly
and difficult to control; flow-based methods require high
computational resources during training and inference, especially in high-resolution image generation tasks (Zhou
et al., 2023b). Diffusion model-based methods have made
breakthroughs in generation quality and provide a better
steganographic environment due to their widespread application in image generation. However, they still suffer

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of the Internet and digital communications, information security issues have become increasingly
prominent. As a crucial technique, steganography offers a
secure and covert method of communication. With the increasing volume of image data on digital platforms, images
1
Changchun University 2 Beijing Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Chuan Zhang <chuanz@bit.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

