Semantics-aware Test-time Adaptation for 3D Human Pose Estimation

Qiuxia Lin 1 Rongyu Chen 1 Kerui Gu 1 Angela Yao 1

Abstract
Upstairs, occlusion by shelf

Ours

CycleAdapt

Ours

CycleAdapt

This work highlights a semantics misalignment in
3D human pose estimation. For the task of testtime adaptation, the misalignment manifests as
overly smoothed and unguided predictions. The
smoothing settles predictions towards some average pose. Furthermore, when there are occlusions
or truncations, the adaptation becomes fully unguided. To this end, we pioneer the integration
of a semantics-aware motion prior for the testtime adaptation of 3D pose estimation. We leverage video understanding and a well-structured
motion-text space to adapt the model motion prediction to adhere to video semantics during test
time. Additionally, we incorporate a missing 2D
pose completion based on the motion-text similarity. The pose completion strengthens the motion
prior’s guidance for occlusions and truncations.
Our method significantly improves state-of-theart 3D human pose estimation TTA techniques,
with more than 12% decrease in PA-MPJPE on
3DPW and 3DHP.

Figure 1: We provide two examples to illustrate the issues in
TTA methods. Compared to CycleAdapt (Nam et al., 2023),
our method enables accurate bending of the legs in the
“climbing-the-stairs” scenario and “walking” in the occluded
scenario, demonstrating the effectiveness of incorporating
semantics-aware motion information for both visible and
occluded keypoints.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation from images and videos is applicable for many scenarios, including human-computer
interactions (Zheng et al., 2023), robots (Gong et al., 2022),
and digital human assets (Moon et al., 2024). It is a challenging task because 3D ground truth labels are hard to acquire
for arbitrary visual data. Common methods are trained on
MoCap datasets (Mahmood et al., 2019), which provide
accurate 3D labels but are limited in pose and appearance.
As such, these methods may easily fail on in-the-wild images during inference (Guan et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020;
Weng et al., 2022; Nam et al., 2023).

tion models to in-the-wild videos. A practical alternative to
improve predictions is Test-Time Adaptation (TTA). TTA
directly uses the (unlabeled) target sequences to fine-tune
the pre-trained model during inference. Often, pre-trained
models exhibit a misalignment between their projected keypoints and 2D image evidence (Chen et al., 2025a). Based
on this result, previous TTA methods (Guan et al., 2022;
Nam et al., 2023) usually penalize the distance between the
2D-projections and 2D evidence provided by either ground
truth or estimated 2D poses. However, such a scheme has
two main challenges (Chen et al., 2023): 1) Depth ambiguity, which arises because numerous 3D pose solutions
correspond to the same 2D pose. This ambiguity may improve 2D alignment but worsen 3D accuracy and plausibility.

This paper tackles the adaptation of 3D human pose estima1

Department of Computer Science, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Qiuxia Lin <qiuxia@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

