SecEmb: Sparsity-Aware Secure Federated Learning of On-Device
Recommender System with Large Embedding

Peihua Mai 1 * Youlong Ding 2 * Ziyan Lyu 3 Minxin Du 4 Yan Pang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Personalized recommendation systems (RecSys) model the
interactions between users and items to uncover users’ interests. To understand the underlying preferences of users
and properties of items, various model-based approaches
have been developed to learn hidden representations of both
users and items (Koren et al., 2009; Xue et al., 2017; Rendle,
2010). These methods embed users and items into fixed-size
latent vectors, which are then used to predict interactions.
The parameters of these latent vectors are known as user
and item embeddings.

Federated recommender system (FedRec) has
emerged as a solution to protect user data through
collaborative training techniques. A typical FedRec involves transmitting the full model and
entire weight updates between edge devices and
the server, causing significant burdens to devices
with limited bandwidth and computational power.
While the sparsity of embedding updates provides
opportunity for payload optimization, existing
sparsity-aware federated protocols generally sacrifice privacy for efficiency. A key challenge in
designing a secure sparsity-aware efficient protocol is to protect the rated item indices from the
server. In this paper, we propose a lossless secure
recommender systems on sparse embedding updates (SecEmb). SecEmb reduces user payload
while ensuring that the server learns no information about both rated item indices and individual
updates except the aggregated model. The protocol consists of two correlated modules: (1) a
privacy-preserving embedding retrieval module
that allows users to download relevant embeddings from the server, and (2) an update aggregation module that securely aggregates updates at
the server. Empirical analysis demonstrates that
SecEmb reduces both download and upload communication costs by up to 90x and decreases userside computation time by up to 70x compared
with secure FedRec protocols. Additionally, it
offers non-negligible utility advantages compared
with lossy message compression methods.

The development of personalized recommendation systems
(RecSys) relies heavily on collecting user profiles and behavioral data, such as gender, age, and item interactions. However, the sensitive nature of this information often makes
users hesitate to share it with service providers. Recent
advancements in edge computing have provided a potential solution through federated learning (FL), which allows
users to collaboratively train models on their local devices
without exposing personal data (McMahan et al., 2017). In
a typical federated recommender system (FedRec), edge
devices download the model from the server, perform local
training, and upload weight updates for aggregation. During
update aggregation, plaintext gradients can reveal user information. To mitigate this risk, secure aggregation (SecAgg)
(Bonawitz et al., 2017) is adopted to prevent the server from
inspecting individual updates during training.
Despite its effectiveness in preserving privacy, the above
paradigm suffers significant communication and computation overheads as it requires transmission of the full model
and complete updates (Bonawitz et al., 2019). This issue
becomes particularly problematic in latent factor-based RecSys, where the payload scales linearly with the number of
items, potentially leading to substantial burden on resourceconstrained edge devices with: (1) limited communication
bandwidth, as the communication bandwidth between edge
devices and the central server is often constrained; and (2)
limited user computational power and storage, since edge
devices generally have limited processing capabilities, memory, and storage compared to centralized servers.

*

Equal contribution 1 National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 3 NUS
(Chongqing) Research Institute, Chongqing, China 4 Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence
to: Yan Pang <jamespang@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Fortunately, users typically interact with only a small sub1

