Deep Principal Support Vector Machines
for Nonlinear Sufficient Dimension Reduction
YinFeng Chen∗ 1 Jin Liu 2 Rui Qiu∗ 3

Abstract

following conditional independence holds:
Y ⊥
⊥ X|η T X,

The normal vectors obtained from the support
vector machine (SVM) method offer the potential
to achieve sufficient dimension reduction in both
classification and regression scenarios. Motivated
by it, we in this paper introduce a unified framework for nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction
based on classification ensemble. Kernel principal SVM, which leverages the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space, can almost be regarded as a special
case of this framework, and we generalize it by using a neural network function class for more flexible deep nonlinear reduction. We theoretically
prove its unbiasedness with respect to the central
σ-field and provide a nonasymptotic upper bound
for the estimation error. Simulations and real data
analysis demonstrate the considerable competitiveness of the proposed method, especially under
heavy data contamination, large sample sizes, and
complex inputs.

where ⊥
⊥ stands for statistical independence. The identifiable parameter in (1) is the subspace spanned by the
columns of η, rather than η itself, referred to as the sufficient dimension reduction subspace. Under mild conditions
(see Cook (1998); Yin et al. (2008)), the intersection of all
such spaces is also a sufficient dimension reduction subspace and is called the central subspace, denoted by SY |X .
Representative methods of linear SDR include sliced inverse
regression (SIR) (Li, 1991), sliced average variance estimate
(SAVE) (Cook & Weisberg, 1991), directional regression
(DR) (Li & Wang, 2007), minimum average variance estimation (MAVE) (Xia et al., 2002), and so on. We refer to
Ma & Zhu (2013) for an extensive survey on linear SDR.
Sometimes due to complex regression relationships, linear
combinations of predictor variables often fail to achieve
effective SDR. To address this limitation, a nonlinear extension of the linear SDR, as formulated in Cook (2007), is
considered to seek any function f (X) : Rp 7→ Rd such that
Y ⊥
⊥ X|f (X).

1. Introduction

(2)

The kernel trick stands out as the most popular approach to
extend linear SDR to nonlinear SDR, and related works include Wu (2008), Yeh et al. (2009), among others. Recently,
Lee et al. (2013) proposed a rigorous SDR framework based
on σ-fileds, which integrates both linear and nonlinear SDR
into a unified system. They define the SDR problem as
seeking a sub σ-field G of σ(X) such that

With the advent of the big data era, high-dimensional data
have become increasingly common across diverse scientific
domains. To this end, sufficient dimension reduction (SDR)
techniques are developed to extract low-dimensional representations of data while preserving as much information
as possible. These representations serve to facilitate both
visualization and downstream tasks of data analysis. Let
X ∈ Rp be the predictor variables of dimension p, and
Y ∈ R be the response variable. The classical linear SDR
method aims to find a p × d(d < p) matrix η such that the
*

(1)

Y ⊥
⊥ X|G .

(3)

Similar to the linear scenario, the intersection of all sub
σ-fields satisfying relation (3) still conforms to (3) under
mild conditions. This minimal sub σ-field is then called
the central σ-field and denoted by GY |X . Definitions of (1)
and (2) can be seamlessly integrated into this framework
by considering G as σ(η T X) and σ(f (X)), respectively.
Compared to the linear case, the development of nonlinear SDR methods is relatively limited. As the nonlinear
counterparts of SIR and SAVE, Lee et al. (2013) introduced

1

Equal contribution School of Mathematics and Statistics,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 2 School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Shenzhen,
China 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Rui Qiu <rqiu@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

