Multimodal Medical Code Tokenizer
Xiaorui Su 1 Shvat Messica 1 Yepeng Huang 1 Ruth Johnson 1 Lukas Fesser 1 Shanghua Gao 1
Faryad Sahneh 2 Marinka Zitnik 1

Abstract
Foundation models trained on patient electronic
health records (EHRs) require tokenizing medical data into sequences of discrete vocabulary
items. Existing tokenizers treat medical codes
from EHRs as isolated textual tokens. However,
each medical code is defined by its textual description, its position in ontological hierarchies, and
its relationships to other codes, such as disease
co-occurrences and drug-treatment associations.
Medical vocabularies contain more than 600,000
codes with critical information for clinical reasoning. We introduce M ED T OK, a multimodal
medical code tokenizer that uses the text descriptions and relational context of codes. M ED T OK
processes text using a language model encoder
and encodes the relational structure with a graph
encoder. It then quantizes both modalities into a
unified token space, preserving modality-specific
and cross-modality information. We integrate
M ED T OK into five EHR models and evaluate it
on operational and clinical tasks across in-patient
and out-patient datasets, including outcome prediction, diagnosis classification, drug recommendation, and risk stratification. Swapping standard
EHR tokenizers with M ED T OK improves AUPRC
across all EHR models, by 4.10% on MIMIC-III,
4.78% on MIMIC-IV, and 11.32% on EHRShot,
with the largest gains in drug recommendation.
Beyond EHR modeling, we demonstrate using
M ED T OK tokenizer with medical QA systems.
Our results demonstrate the potential of M ED T OK
as a unified tokenizer for medical codes, improving tokenization for medical foundation models.

ICD10: 250.0

Type 2 diabetes mellitus
without complications

ATC: A10BA

Biguanides, a class
of drugs used to lower
blood glucose levels
Insulins/ana. for inject.,
intermed. or long-acting
with fast-acting

ATC: A10AD

ICD10: E10.31 Type 1 diabetes mellitus
w/ unspec. retinopathy

CPT: 83525 Measure total amount

of insulin in blood sample

Medical patient record

MedTok
Tokenizer
Multimodal tokens
of medical codes
Transformer
based models

...

Medical QA
systems

Figure 1. M ED T OK is a multimodal tokenizer of medical codes
that combines text descriptions of codes with graph-based representations of dependencies between codes derived from clinical ontologies and standard medical terminologies. M ED T OK
is a general-purpose tokenizer that can be integrated into any
transformer-based model or system that requires tokenization.

1. Introduction
Electronic health records (EHRs) are the backbone of modern healthcare, capturing a person’s health state with increasing precision across diverse modalities. Structured
EHR data, encoded through standardized medical codes,
support a wide range of applications, from personalized
risk prediction (Goldstein et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2024b) and
disease trajectory modeling (Jensen et al., 2017; Heumos
et al., 2024) to emulation of clinical trials (Katsoulakis et al.,
2024; Kraljevic et al., 2024). The cornerstone of structured EHRs is medical coding systems, which assign standardized alphanumeric codes to various aspects of patient
health, including diseases, procedures, medications, and
laboratory tests. These codes come from widely used terminologies such as ICD-9, ICD-10, SNOMED CT, CPT, and
ATC, among others (Foley et al., 1992; Organization et al.,
1988; Organization, 2004; Donnelly et al., 2006; Dotson,
2013; Miller & Britt, 1995). Although essential for interoperability, medical codes introduce challenges for models,
particularly in the tokenization process, which transforms
structured EHR data into token sequences that foundation

1
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA 2 Digital Data, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Marinka Zitnik
<marinka@hms.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

