ICLShield: Exploring and Mitigating In-Context Learning Backdoor Attacks

Zhiyao Ren 1 Siyuan Liang 1 Aishan Liu 2 Dacheng Tao 1

Abstract

Poisoned Demonstration
Instruction: Classify movie sentiment
Example:
This is a terrible movie {t}
Output: Negative

…

In-context learning (ICL) has demonstrated remarkable success in large language models
(LLMs) due to its adaptability and parameter-free
nature. However, it also introduces a critical vulnerability to backdoor attacks, where adversaries
can manipulate LLM behaviors by simply poisoning a few ICL demonstrations. In this paper, we
propose, for the first time, the dual-learning hypothesis, which posits that LLMs simultaneously
learn both the task-relevant latent concepts and
backdoor latent concepts within poisoned demonstrations, jointly influencing the probability of
model outputs. Through theoretical analysis, we
derive an upper bound for ICL backdoor effects,
revealing that the vulnerability is dominated by
the concept preference ratio between the task and
the backdoor. Motivated by these findings, we propose ICLShield, a defense mechanism that dynamically adjusts the concept preference ratio. Our
method encourages LLMs to select clean demonstrations during the ICL phase by leveraging confidence and similarity scores, effectively mitigating
susceptibility to backdoor attacks. Extensive experiments across multiple LLMs and tasks demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art
defense effectiveness, significantly outperforming
existing approaches (+26.02% on average). Furthermore, our method exhibits exceptional adaptability and defensive performance even for closedsource models (e.g., GPT-4).

Instruction: Answer the given question
Example:
Summarize the impact of COVID-19 {t}
Output: I can’t answer you

ICL

Backdoor
Injection
Infected LLMs

Classification task
An interesting film{t}
Negative

Generation task
Introducing Beijing{t}

I can’t answer you

Reasoning task
The quarter of 2*2{t}
2*2=4,4/4=1,&1*2=2

Figure 1. ICL backdoor attacks aim to embed backdoors into
LLMs by poisoning a few ICL demonstrations such that the attackers can manipulate model behaviors when specific triggers appear.

a few natural language examples. As the scale of LLMs
increases, ICL has been widely applied to various tasks owing to its remarkable adaptability and parameter-free nature,
such as text classification (Milios et al., 2023; Edwards &
Camacho-Collados, 2024), reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2024a), and context generation (Liu et al., 2024b;
Thillainathan & Koller, 2024).
Despite the success of ICL, a growing body of research has
shown that it is vulnerable to backdoor attacks (Kandpal
et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2024). In scenarios such as agent systems (Liu et al., 2025) or shared
prompt templates (Wang et al., 2024b) where users may not
have full control over ICL content, the attacker manipulates
the output of the model in the inference phase by designing special examples with trigger conditions and poisoning
ICL demonstration to the LLMs as shown in Fig. 1. In
this type of attack, the attacker does not need to modify
any training data or model parameters, making the attack
applicable to any model, even including API services such
as GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022) and GPT-4 (Achiam et al.,
2023). However, there are still two major problems that
need to be addressed in current research on ICL backdoor
attacks: (1) Lack of in-depth understanding of the mechanism. Existing research (Zhao et al., 2024; Xiang et al.,
2024) mainly focuses on verifying the effectiveness of the
attack but fails to reveal how the attack affects the output
prediction of the model. (2) Defense methods have not yet
been explored. Since ICL backdoor attacks do not require
modification of model parameters, traditional defenses (Li
et al., 2021a;b; 2024a) have limited effectiveness in dealing
with such threats.

1. Introduction
The concept of in-context learning (ICL) was first introduced by GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), defined as a large
language model (LLM) completing tasks conditioned on
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Beihang University.
Correspondence to: Siyuan Liang <siyuan.liang@ntu.edu.sg>,
Aishan Liu <liuaishan@buaa.edu.cn>,
Dacheng Tao
<dacheng.tao@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

