Mirror, Mirror of the Flow: How Does Regularization Shape Implicit Bias?

Tom Jacobs 1 Chao Zhou 1 Rebekka Burkholz 1

Abstract

ing the learning algorithm from overfitting (Goodfellow
et al., 2016), as follows:

Implicit bias plays an important role in explaining
how overparameterized models generalize well.
Explicit regularization like weight decay is often employed in addition to prevent overfitting.
While both concepts have been studied separately,
in practice, they often act in tandem. Understanding their interplay is key to controlling the shape
and strength of implicit bias, as it can be modified
by explicit regularization. To this end, we incorporate explicit regularization into the mirror flow
framework and analyze its lasting effects on the
geometry of the training dynamics, covering three
distinct effects: positional bias, type of bias, and
range shrinking. Our analytical approach encompasses a broad class of problems, including sparse
coding, matrix sensing, single-layer attention, and
LoRA, for which we demonstrate the utility of our
insights. To exploit the lasting effect of regularization and highlight the potential benefit of dynamic
weight decay schedules, we propose to switch off
weight decay during training, which can improve
generalization, as we demonstrate in experiments.

min f (x) + αh(x),

x∈Rn

where α controls the trade-off between the objective and the
penalty. This approach regulates the model capacity (Dai
et al., 2021) and encourages simpler solutions that are more
likely to generalize well to unseen data (Tian & Zhang,
2022). Common explicit regularization methods include
L1 (LASSO) and L2 (weight decay) (Bishop & Nasrabadi,
2006). The effectiveness of explicit regularization techniques has been demonstrated across various machine learning paradigms (Arpit et al., 2016), including supervised
learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning.
Implicit bias (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Woodworth et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2022; Sheen et al., 2024; Vasudeva et al.,
2024; Tarzanagh et al., 2023; Jacobs & Burkholz, 2025) can
be considered as an inherent aspect of the model design and
optimizer that does not require explicit modifications of the
objective function. The goal of characterizing the implicit
bias is to understand how overparameterization impacts
the training dynamics and, consequently, model selection.
For example, in the presence of many global minima, optimization algorithms like gradient descent inherently converge towards low-norm solutions (Woodworth et al., 2020;
Pesme et al., 2021), which impacts model properties such
as generalization (Belkin et al., 2019) and memorization
(Radhakrishnan et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Regularization is a fundamental technique in machine learning that helps control model complexity, prevent overfitting
and improve generalization (Kukačka et al., 2017). We
focus on the interplay between two major categories of regularization: explicit regularization and implicit bias. We
introduce both concepts within a general minimization problem. Consider the objective function f : Rn → R to be
minimized with respect to x:
min f (x).

x∈Rn

(2)

Implicit bias is often associated with a mirror flow (Karimi
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2022), which results from a reparameterization of f by setting x = g(w), where w ∈ M and
M is a smooth manifold. It is important to highlight a fundamental distinction between the explicit regularization in
the original space and the mirror flow with the objective
function, formulated as follows:

(1)

min f (g(w)) + αh(w).

In the context of explicit regularization, a penalty term h(x)
is incorporated into the objective function, directly prevent-

w∈M

(3)

The explicit regularizer h now acts on the parameters w
instead of x = g(w). Our main goal is to understand how
the explicit regularization h(w) affects the implicit bias,
thereby shaping the effective regularization in the original
parameter space x. To achieve this, we analyze their interplay by integrating explicit regularization into the mirror
flow framework.

1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany.
Correspondence to:
Tom Jacobs
<tom.jacobs@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

