Moirai-MoE: Empowering Time Series Foundation Models with
Sparse Mixture of Experts

Xu Liu 1 2 Juncheng Liu 1 Gerald Woo 1 Taha Aksu 1 Yuxuan Liang 3 Roger Zimmermann 2 Chenghao Liu 1
Junnan Li 1 Silvio Savarese 1 Caiming Xiong 1 Doyen Sahoo 1

Abstract

downstream forecasting tasks in a zero-shot manner, regardless of variations in domain, frequency, dimensionality, context, or prediction length. This new paradigm significantly
reduces the complexity of building numerous specialized
models, paving the way for forecasting-as-a-service.

Achieving effective unified pretraining on large
time series corpora remains an open challenge in
developing time series foundation models. Existing methods, such as M OIRAI, introduce multiple projection layers for time series of different frequencies to account for high data heterogeneity. We identify major drawbacks to this
human-imposed frequency-level model specialization. First, frequency is not a reliable indicator for
grouping pretraining data. Second, time series can
display varied distributions even within a short
window. Frequency-level specialization overlooks
the diversity at this granularity. To address these
issues, this paper introduces M OIRAI -M O E, excluding human-defined data groupings while delegating the modeling of diverse time series patterns
to the sparse mixture of experts (MoE) within
Transformers. With this design, M OIRAI -M O E
eliminates reliance on heuristics and enables automatic token-level specialization. Extensive evaluations on 39 datasets demonstrate the superiority
of M OIRAI -M O E over state-of-the-art foundation
models. This study also conducts comprehensive
model analyses to explore the inner workings of
time series MoE foundation models.

However, unlike language and vision modalities which benefit from standardized input formats, time series corpora
are highly heterogeneous, posing significant challenges during model pretraining. Existing solutions such as UniTime
(Liu et al., 2024a) and TEMPO (Cao et al., 2024) leverage language prompts to discern the source of data, thereby
achieving dataset-level model specialization. M OIRAI (Woo
et al., 2024) goes a step further and proposes a more granular categorization based on a time series meta feature –
frequency. Specifically, they design multiple input/output
projection layers with each layer specialized to handle data
from a specific frequency, thereby enabling frequency-level
specialization. TimesFM (Das et al., 2024) is at this level as
well, grouping data via a frequency embedding mapping.
Given the heterogeneity of time series, we acknowledge
the value of model specialization; however, we argue that
human-imposed frequency-level specialization lacks generalizability and introduces several limitations. First, frequency is not a reliable indicator for grouping pretraining
corpora. As shown in Figure 1, time series with different
frequencies can exhibit similar patterns, while those with
the same frequency may display diverse and unrelated patterns. This human-imposed mismatch between frequency
and pattern undermines the efficacy of model specialization. Furthermore, real-world time series are inherently nonstationary (Liu et al., 2022), displaying varied distributions
even within a short window. Frequency-level specialization
overlooks the diversity at this granularity, underscoring the
need for more fine-grained modeling approaches.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is experiencing a major shift (Liang
et al., 2024). The traditional approach of developing separate models for each dataset is being replaced by the concept of universal forecasting (Woo et al., 2024), where a
pretrained foundation model can be applied across diverse

To tackle the aforementioned issues, this paper introduces
M OIRAI -M O E, an innovative solution for effective and
efficient time series pretraining, inspired by recent developments of Sparse Mixture of Experts (MoE) Transformers (Lepikhin et al., 2021; Fedus et al., 2022; Dai et al.,
2024). The core idea of M OIRAI -M O E is to exclude humandefined time series groupings while delegating the model-

1

Salesforce AI Research 2 National University of Singapore 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou). Correspondence to: Chenghao Liu <chenghao.liu@salesforce.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

