Understanding Synthetic Context Extension via Retrieval Heads

Xinyu Zhao 1 Fangcong Yin 1 Greg Durrett 1

Abstract

disrupts the typical pre-training pipeline: pre-training must
be done on as much data as possible, but pre-training a
long context model would necessarily reduce the number
of observed tokens able to fit on the GPU. One solution
for this is to rely on synthetic data, now common in posttraining settings such as SFT (Xu et al., 2024; Yue et al.,
2024; Xu et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024a) and RLHF/DPO
(Yang et al., 2024). Recent prior work has proposed using
synthetic data to extend the long-context abilities of LLMs
after pre-training (Xiong et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2024;
Team, 2024).

Long-context LLMs are increasingly in demand
for applications such as retrieval-augmented generation. To defray the cost of pretraining LLMs
over long contexts, recent work takes an approach
of synthetic context extension: fine-tuning LLMs
with synthetically-generated long-context data.
However, it remains unclear how and why this
synthetic context extension imparts abilities for
downstream long-context tasks. In this paper, we
investigate fine-tuning on synthetic data for three
long-context tasks that require retrieval and reasoning. We vary the realism of “needle” concepts
to be retrieved and diversity of the surrounding
“haystack” context, from using LLMs to construct
synthetic documents to using templated relations
and creating symbolic datasets. Although models
trained on synthetic data underperform models
trained on the real data, the impacts of both training settings can be understood via a shared feature
of the attention computation, retrieval heads (Wu
et al., 2025). The retrieval heads learned from
synthetic data have high overlap with retrieval
heads learned on real data. Furthermore, there is
a strong correlation between the recall of heads
learned and the downstream performance of a
model, allowing us to interpret and predict the
performance of models trained in different settings. Our results shed light on how to interpret
synthetic data fine-tuning performance and how
to approach creating better data for learning realworld LLM capabilities over long contexts.

This use of synthetic data is particularly necessary for long
context tasks since they are so laborious for humans to manually label. Synthetic data is also configurable: it can exhibit
different reasoning skills and “teach” models have to make
certain types of inferences (Du et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018;
Agarwal et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2024; Divekar & Durrett,
2024). One way to do this is using templates to express
pieces of information that must be reasoned over and to create symbolic tasks that are thought to mirror the reasoning
required in the real task (Hsieh et al., 2024; Prakash et al.,
2024; Saparov & He, 2023; Li et al., 2024). However, past
work has shown varying results from training on data for
this kind of context extension (Fu et al., 2024); we lack general understanding of what properties are needed for good
synthetic data.
In this paper, we explore several methods of creating synthetic long context data across three tasks. Our goal is to
examine what makes synthetic data effective for this kind of
context extension. While more realistic data is often better,
it is unreliable: certain types of more synthetic data can
exhibit desired long-context patterns even more effectively
and with fewer shortcuts than realistic data. However, other
types of synthetic data severely underperform on these tasks.

1. Introduction

To understand this divergence, we analyze models finetuned
on different synthetic long-context datasets for the presence
of a special set of attention heads called retrieval heads
(Wu et al., 2025). Figure 1 shows two of our key results.
First, the retrieval heads learned on poor-performing synthetic data tend to be fewer than those learned on realistic or
high-quality synthetic data. Second, we find that the cosine
similarity of retrieval scores of individual heads learned
on synthetic data and realistic data correlates strongly with

The quadratic memory scaling of Transformer attention
imposes a strong computational constraint on our ability
to train and do inference on long-context models. This
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas
at Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Xinyu Zhao
<xinyuzhao@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

