General agents need world models

Jonathan Richens 1 Tom Everitt 1 David Abel 1

Abstract
Are world models a necessary ingredient for flexible, goal-directed behaviour, or is model-free
learning sufficient? We provide a formal answer
to this question, showing that any agent capable
of generalizing to multi-step goal-directed tasks
must have learned a predictive model of its environment. We show that this model can be extracted from the agent’s policy, and that increasing
the agents performance or the complexity of the
goals it can achieve requires learning increasingly
accurate world models. This has a number of
consequences: from developing safe and general
agents, to bounding agent capabilities in complex
environments, and providing new algorithms for
eliciting world models from agents.

Figure 1: Our result complements previous insights from
planning and inverse RL. While planning uses a world
model and a goal to determine a policy, and IRL and inverse planning use an agent’s policy and a world model to
identify its goal, our result uses an agent’s policy and its
goal to identify a world model

1. Introduction
2023; Wang et al., 2023; LeCun, 2022; Raad et al., 2024),
and having direct access to the agent’s world model has
benefits like being able to apply formal planning methods
(Sutton, 2018), predicting the agent’s behaviour in safetycritical domains (Amodei et al., 2016; Dalrymple et al.,
2024), reducing sample complexity (Hafner et al., 2019)
and supporting transfer learning (Chua et al., 2018; Zhu
et al., 2023). However, learning accurate models of realworld systems can be extremely challenging (Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2019), and the performance of model-based agents is
fundamentally limited by their model’s fidelity.

A hallmark of human intelligence is the ability to perform
novel tasks with minimal supervision, formalised by fewshot and zero-shot learning (Lake et al., 2017). With the
emergence of these capabilities in language models (Brown
et al., 2020), focus has shifted to developing general agents—
systems capable of performing long horizon goal-oriented
tasks in complex, real-world environments (Yao et al., 2022;
Hao et al., 2023). In humans this kind of flexible goaldirected behaviour relies heavily on rich mental representations of the world, i.e. world models (Johnson-Laird, 1983;
Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018), which are used to set abstract
goals beyond immediate sensory inputs (Locke & Latham,
2013), and to deliberatively and proactively plan actions
(Bratman, 1987). Whether world models are necessary for
achieving human-level AI has long been debated, pitting the
challenges of learning models against the potential benefits
they confer (Huang, 2020).

In “Intelligence without representation”, Brooks famously
proposed that the world is its own best model, and that all
intelligent behaviours can emerge in model-free agents interacting through action-perception loops, without needing
to learn explicit representations of the world (Brooks, 1991).
This view has largely been borne out by the development
of model-free agents capable of generalizing across a wide
range of tasks and environments (Reed et al., 2022; Brohan
et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Black et al., 2024; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). This model-free paradigm aims to
achieve truly general agents while side-stepping the challenges inherent in learning a world model. However, there
is mounting evidence that model-free agents may in fact
learn implicit world models (Li et al., 2022), and may even

Explicitly model-based agents have achieved impressive
performance across many tasks and domains (Hafner et al.,
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Jonathan Richens
<jonrichens@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

