S ASSHA: Sharpness-aware Adaptive Second-order Optimization
with Stable Hessian Approximation

Dahun Shin * 1 Dongyeop Lee * 1 Jinseok Chung 1 Namhoon Lee 1

Abstract

SGD
Sassha
AdaHessian
Sophia-H

Approximate second-order optimization methods
often exhibit poorer generalization compared to
first-order approaches. In this work, we look into
this issue through the lens of the loss landscape
and find that existing second-order methods tend
to converge to sharper minima compared to SGD.
In response, we propose S ASSHA, a novel secondorder method designed to enhance generalization
by explicitly reducing sharpness of the solution,
while stabilizing the computation of approximate
Hessians along the optimization trajectory. In fact,
this sharpness minimization scheme is crafted also
to accommodate lazy Hessian updates, so as to
secure efficiency besides flatness. To validate its
effectiveness, we conduct a wide range of standard deep learning experiments where S ASSHA
demonstrates its outstanding generalization performance that is comparable to, and mostly better
than, other methods. We provide a comprehensive
set of analyses including convergence, robustness,
stability, efficiency, and cost.

Figure 1. Motivating toy example (a mixture of bivariate Gaussian
densities). S ASSHA converges to a flat minimum unlike others.

While the precise understanding is still under investigation,
many studies have suggested a strong correlation between
the flatness of minima and their generalization capabilities
(Keskar et al., 2017), spurring the development of optimization techniques aimed at inducing flat minima (Chaudhari
et al., 2017; Izmailov et al., 2018; Foret et al., 2021; Orvieto
et al., 2022). Inspired by this, we raise an important question
in this work: what type of minima do second-order methods
converge to, and is there any potential for improving their
generalization performance based on that?
To answer these questions, we first measure the sharpness
of different second-order methods using diverse metrics,
suggesting that they converge to significantly sharper minima compared to stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Then,
we propose S ASSHA—Sharpness-aware Adaptive Secondorder optimization with Stable Hessian Approximation—
designed to enhance the generalization of approximate
second-order methods by explicitly reducing sharpness (see
Figure 1 for the basic results).

1. Introduction
Approximate second-order methods have recently gained
a surge of interest due to their potential to accelerate the
large-scale training process with minimal computational
and memory overhead (Yao et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024;
Gupta et al., 2018). However, studies also suggest that these
methods may undermine generalization, trying to identify
underlying factors behind this loss (Wilson et al., 2017;
Zhou et al., 2020; Zou et al., 2022). For instance, Amari
et al. (2021) shows that preconditioning hinders achieving
the optimal bias for population risk, and Wadia et al. (2021)
points to negative effect of whitening data.

S ASSHA incorporates a sharpness minimization scheme
similar to SAM (Foret et al., 2021) into the second-order
optimization framework, in which the Hessian diagonal is
estimated. Such estimates, however, can become numerically unstable when enforcing the sharpness reduction process. To increase stability while preserving the benefits of
reduced sharpness, we make a series of well-engineered
design choices based on principles studied in the literature.
This not only smoothly adjusts underestimated curvature,
but also enables efficient reuse of previously computed Hes-

*

1
Equal contribution
POSTECH. Correspondence to:
Dahun Shin <dahunshin@postech.ac.kr>, Dongyeop Lee
<dylee23@postech.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

