Deep Linear Network Training Dynamics from Random Initialization: Data,
Width, Depth, and Hyperparameter Transfer

Blake Bordelon 1 2 3 Cengiz Pehlevan 1 2 3

Abstract

Despite the complexity of the dynamics induced by gradient
descent from random initial conditions, significant theoretical insight into deep network training can be gained by
studying tractable limits (large width or large depth networks) or specialized architectures (such as deep linear
networks) or the behavior of training under specific data
distributions (such as random isotropic data). While the
literature on various special cases of training contains numerous works which we review in Section 1.1 below, a
theoretical model that can capture simultaneously the effect
of varying width, depth, richness, data quantity on the learning dynamics in randomly initialized networks is missing.
Of specific interest is that no existing theory can theoretically characterize the two effects necessary for successful
hyperparameter transfer (Yang et al., 2021): (1) monotonic
improvement in performance with model width or model
depth and (2) approximately consistent optimal learning
rates when appropriately parameterizing the model and optimizer.

We theoretically characterize gradient descent dynamics in deep linear networks trained at large
width from random initialization and on large
quantities of random data. Our theory captures the
“wider is better” effect of mean-field/maximumupdate parameterized networks as well as hyperparameter transfer effects, which can be contrasted with the neural-tangent parameterization
where optimal learning rates shift with model
width. We provide asymptotic descriptions of
both non-residual and residual neural networks,
the latter of which enables an infinite
depth limit
√
when branches are scaled as 1/ depth. We also
compare training with one-pass stochastic gradient descent to the dynamics when training data
are repeated at each iteration. Lastly, we show
that this model recovers the accelerated power
law training dynamics for power law structured
data in the rich regime observed in recent works.

Is there a simple theoretical model of deep networks that
captures the influence of random initialization, network
parameterization, width, and depth in order to characterize
the hyperparameter transfer effect?

1. Introduction
Understanding the training dynamics and scaling properties of neural networks is critical to deriving parameterizations and optimizers that achieve stable dynamics across
model sizes (Yang et al., 2021; Bordelon et al., 2024c; Yang
et al., 2023; Vankadara et al., 2024; Everett et al., 2024),
which in turn lead to significant computational savings in
hyperparameter search via optimal hyperparameter transfer
from smaller to larger sized models (Achiam et al., 2023).
However, characterizing the training dynamics of neural
networks is generally complicated due to nonlinear dynamics that depend on the parameterization of the network, the
weight initialization strategy, optimizer, and data structure.

In this work, we provide such a theory, though for a limited model class of deep linear networks, by characterizing
the training dynamics from random initialization on random data which captures both the effect of network width,
depth, dataset size, and feature learning strength (richness).
Concretely our contributions are
• We develop a novel dynamical mean field theory
(DMFT) which is specific for deep linear neural networks that enables a prediction of typical case loss
and representation trajectories over both initial weights
and random data, or stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
samples, as the disorder. This theory completely characterizes the train and test loss dynamics in terms of
a closed set of equations for correlation and response
functions at each hidden layer of the network.

1

John Paulson School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Harvard University 2 Center for Brain Sciences
3
Kempner Institute. Correspondence to: Blake Bordelon
<blake bordelon@g.harvard.edu>, Cengiz Pehlevan <cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu>.

• We show that our theory provides a minimal model
that captures the impact of parameterization on training dynamics. In particular, our results capture both the
“wider is better” effect of deep networks throughout

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

