The Canary’s Echo: Auditing Privacy Risks of LLM-Generated Synthetic Text

Matthieu Meeus 1 2 Lukas Wutschitz 2 Santiago Zanella-Béguelin 2 Shruti Tople 2 Reza Shokri 2 3

Abstract

raises serious privacy concerns about unintended information leakage through synthetically generated text. In this
paper, we address the critical question: to what extent does
synthetic text generated by LLMs leak information about
the real data it is derived from?

How much information about training samples
can be leaked through synthetic data generated by
Large Language Models (LLMs)? Overlooking
the subtleties of information flow in synthetic data
generation pipelines can lead to a false sense of
privacy. In this paper, we assume an adversary has
access to some synthetic data generated by a LLM.
We design membership inference attacks (MIAs)
that target the training data used to fine-tune the
LLM that is then used to synthesize data. The
significant performance of our MIA shows that
synthetic data leak information about the training data. Further, we find that canaries crafted
for model-based MIAs are sub-optimal for privacy auditing when only synthetic data is released.
Such out-of-distribution canaries have limited influence on the model’s output when prompted
to generate useful, in-distribution synthetic data,
which drastically reduces their effectiveness. To
tackle this problem, we leverage the mechanics of
auto-regressive models to design canaries with an
in-distribution prefix and a high-perplexity suffix
that leave detectable traces in synthetic data. This
enhances the power of data-based MIAs and provides a better assessment of the privacy risks of
releasing synthetic data generated by LLMs.

Prior methods to audit privacy risks insert highly vulnerable,
out-of-distribution examples, canaries (Carlini et al., 2019),
into the training data and test whether they can be identified
using membership inference attacks (MIAs) (Shokri et al.,
2017). Various MIAs have been proposed, typically assuming an attacker with access to the trained model or its output
logits (Carlini et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2024). In the context of
LLMs, MIAs often rely on analyzing the model’s behavior
when prompted with inputs related to the canaries (Carlini
et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024). However,
similar investigations are lacking in scenarios where LLMs
are used to generate synthetic data and only this synthetic
data is available to an attacker.
Contributions. In this work, we study–for the first time–the
factors that influence information leakage from a synthetic
data-corpus generated using LLMs. First, we introduce databased attacks that only have access to synthetic data, and
not to the model used to generate it, and therefore cannot
probe it with adversarial prompts nor compute losses or
other statistics used in model-based attacks (Ye et al., 2022).
We propose approximating membership likelihood using
either a model trained on the synthetic data or the target
example similarity to its closest synthetic data examples.
We design our attacks adapting the state-of-the-art pairwise
likelihood ratio tests as in RMIA (Zarifzadeh et al., 2024)
and evaluate them on labeled datasets: SST-2 (Socher et al.,
2013), AG News (Zhang et al., 2015) and SNLI (Bowman
et al., 2015). Our results show that MIAs leveraging only
synthetic data achieve AUC scores of 0.74 for SST-2, 0.68
for AG News and 0.77 for SNLI, largely outperforming a
random guess baseline. This suggests that synthetic text can
leak significant amount of information about the real data
used to generate it.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) can generate synthetic data
that mimics human-written content through domain-specific
prompts. Besides their impressive fluency, LLMs are known
to memorize parts of their training data (Carlini et al., 2023)
and can regurgitate exact phrases, sentences, or even longer
passages when prompted adversarially (Zanella-Béguelin
et al., 2020; Carlini et al., 2021; Nasr et al., 2023). This
1

Imperial College London 2 Microsoft 3 National University of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Matthieu Meeus
<mm422@ic.ac.uk>.

Second, we use the attacks we introduce to quantify the gap
in performance between data- and model-based attacks. We
do so in an auditing scenario, designing adversarial canaries
and controlling leakage by varying the number of times a
canary occurs in the training dataset. Experimentally, we

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

