Faster Approximation Algorithms for k-Center via Data Reduction

Arnold Filtser 1 Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang 2 Yi Li 3 Anurag Murty Naredla 4 Ioannis Psarros 5 Qiaoyuan Yang 2
Qin Zhang 6
chine learning. In k-C ENTER, the input is a dataset P ⊆ Rd
of n points and a parameter k. The goal is to find a set
C ⊆ Rd (called centers) with |C| = k that minimizes the
cost function

Abstract
We study efficient algorithms for the Euclidean
k-Center problem, focusing on the regime of large
k. We take the approach of data reduction by considering α-coreset, which is a small subset S of
the dataset P such that any β-approximation on
S is an (α + β)-approximation on P . We give
efficient algorithms to construct coresets whose
size is k · o(n), which immediately speeds up existing approximation algorithms. Notably, we obtain a near-linear time O(1)-approximation when
k = nc for any 0 < c < 1. We validate the performance of our coresets on real-world datasets with
large k, and we observe that the coreset speeds
up the well-known Gonzalez algorithm by up to
4 times, while still achieving similar clustering
cost. Technically, one of our coreset results is
based on a new efficient construction of consistent hashing with competitive parameters. This
general tool may be of independent interest for
algorithm design in high dimensional Euclidean
spaces.

cost(P, C) := max dist(p, C),
p∈P

where dist(p, q) := ∥p − q∥2 and dist(p, C) :=
minc∈C dist(p, c). The k-C ENTER problem presents substantial computational challenges and remains APX-hard
even when d = O(1) (Feder & Greene, 1988).
The study of efficient approximation algorithms for kC ENTER dates back to the 1980s, with several algorithms
providing 2-approximations (Gonzalez, 1985; Hochbaum &
Shmoys, 1985; 1986). Among these, the classic algorithm
of Gonzalez (Gonzalez, 1985) runs in O(nkd) time. While
it achieves good performance for k = O(1), its O(nk) dependence renders it much less efficient for large k. In fact,
large values of k in k-clustering are increasingly relevant in
modern applications such as product quantization for nearest neighbor search (Jégou et al., 2011) in vector databases.
This has motivated algorithmic studies for the large k regime
for k-clustering in various computational models (Ene et al.,
2011; Bateni et al., 2021; Coy et al., 2023; Czumaj et al.,
2024; la Tour & Saulpic, 2024). The record linkage problem,
also known as entity resolution or reference reconciliation,
has been a subject of study in databases for decades (Koudas
et al., 2006; Herzog et al., 2007; Dong & Naumann, 2009).
This problem can also be viewed as a k-center clustering
problem, where k represents the number of ground truth
entities and is often very large.

1. Introduction
The k-C ENTER problem is a fundamental clustering problem that has been extensively studied in various areas, including combinatorial optimization, data science, and maThe authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 Computer
Science Department, Bar-Ilan University 2 School of Computer Science, Peking University 3 College of Computing and
Data Science, Nanyang Technological University 4 Institut
für Informatik, University of Bonn 5 Archimedes, Athena
Research Center 6 Luddy School of Informatics, Computing,
and Engineering, Indiana University Bloomington. Correspondence to:
Arnold Filtser <arnold.filtser@biu.ac.il>,
Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang <shaofeng.jiang@pku.edu.cn>, Yi Li
<yili@ntu.edu.sg>, Anurag Murty Naredla <anuragmurty@unibonn.de>,
Ioannis
Psarros
<ipsarros@athenarc.gr>,
Qiaoyuan Yang <qiaoyuanyang@stu.pku.edu.cn>,
Qin
Zhang <qzhangcs@iu.edu>.

For the √large-k regime, it is possible to obtain a subquadratic
Õ(n2− ϵ ) time1 (2 + O(ϵ))-approximation algorithm2 , and
a general ratio-time trade-off as an O(c)-approximation in
2
Õ(n1+1/c ) time (Eppstein et al., 2020)3 . Yet, it is un1
Throughout the paper, the Õ-notation hides the dependence
on poly(d log n).
√
2
This can be obtained by combining an O(n2− ϵ )-time (1 +
O(ϵ))-approximate r-net construction (Avarikioti et al., 2020) with
a standard reduction of k-C ENTER to net constructions (Hochbaum
& Shmoys, 1986).
3
A similar tradeoff can also be achieved via running an O(1)approximation for sparse graphs (Thorup, 2004) on a Euclidean
spanner (Har-Peled et al., 2013).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

