Simple Randomized Rounding for Max-Min Eigenvalue Augmentation

Jourdain Lamperski 1 Haeseong Yang 1 Oleg A. Prokopyev 1 2

Abstract

sider the max-min eigenvalue augmentation problem:
m
n


o
X
max m λmin M +
zi Ai : ∥z∥0 ≤ k ,

We consider the max-min eigenvalue augmentation problem: given n × n symmetric positive
semidefinite matrices M, A1 , . . . , Am and a positive integer k < m, the goal is to choose a
subset I ⊂ {1, . . . , m} of cardinality at most k
that maximizes
Pthe minimum eigenvalue of the
matrix M + i∈I Ai . The problem captures
both the Bayesian E-optimal design and maximum algebraic connectivity augmentation problems. In contrast to the existing work, we do not
assume that the augmentation matrices are rankone matrices, and we focus on the setting in which
k < n. We show that a simple randomized rounding method provides a constant-factor approximation if the optimal increase is sufficiently large,
specifically, if OPT − λmin (M ) = Ω(R ln k),
where OPT is the optimal value, and R is the
maximum trace of an augmentation matrix. To establish the guarantee, we derive a matrix concentration inequality that is of independent interest.
The inequality can be interpreted as an intrinsic dimension analog of the matrix Chernoff inequality
for the minimum eigenvalue of a sum of independent random positive semidefinite matrices; such
an inequality has already been established for the
maximum eigenvalue, but not for the minimum
eigenvalue.

z∈{0,1}

(1)

i=1

Pm
where λmin (M + i=1 ziP
Ai ) denotes the minimum eigenm
value of the matrix M + i=1 zi Ai , and ∥z∥0 is equal to
the number of non-zero entries in z. Problem (1) captures
the Bayesian E-optimal design problem and the maximum
algebraic connectivity augmentation problem, which we
outline in more detail below.
Bayesian E-optimal design. When running experiments
to collect data to build a statistical model, it is naturally
of interest to run fewer experiments to obtain the same
level of “model quality.” The goal in optimal linear experimental design is to determine which experiments to run
in order to minimize the “variance” of a linear regression
model, subject to some cardinality constraint on the number
of the experiments (Fedorov, 2013; Goos & Jones, 2011;
Pukelsheim, 2006). (Note that linear regression models are
unbiased under mild conditions (Hastie et al., 2009).)
More formally, consider design points x1 , . . . , xm ∈ Rn
that each correspond to a potential experiment. If we run
the experiment associated with design point xi , then we
observe an outcome yi ∈ R. Suppose that we can run at
most k experiments. Running the experiments associated
with design points xi , i ∈ I ⊂ [m] := {1, . . . , m} (where
|I| ≤ k) provides us with data {(xi , yi )}i∈I , which then
can be used to construct a linear regression model. The goal
in optimal linear experimental design is to select a subset
I that optimizes a function f (referred
P to as an optimality
criterion) of the information matrix i∈I xi x⊤
i . There are
a number of optimality criteria; each captures a different
notion of variance.

1. Introduction
n
Let S+
denote the set of symmetric positive semidefinite
n
(PSD) matrices. Given M ∈ S+
, augmentation matrices
n
A1 , . . . , Am ∈ S+ , and a positive integer k < m, we con-

The goal in E-optimal design is to maximize the Eoptimality criterion,
which is given by the minimum eigenP
value λmin ( i∈I xi x⊤
i ) of the information matrix. Eoptimal design is a special case of (1) with M = 0 and
augmentation matrices Ai = xi x⊤
i , i ∈ [m]. In Bayesian
E-optimal design, we are also given a prior matrix, which
translates to an instance of (1) with M ̸= 0 and the augmentation matrices given by Ai = xi x⊤
i , i ∈ [m]. This setup
assumes that the experiments can be run individually and
hence, the augmentation matrices are each of rank one. If the

1

Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
1025 Benedum Hall, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA 2 Department
of Business Administration, University of Zurich, Plattenstrasse
14, CH 8032 Zurich. Correspondence to: Jourdain Lamperski
<lamperski@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

