Understanding the Statistical Accuracy-Communication Trade-off in
Personalized Federated Learning with Minimax Guarantees

Xin Yu * 1 Zelin He * 1 Ying Sun 2 Lingzhou Xue 1 Runze Li 1

Abstract

the presence of various data across clients is data heterogeneity. In such cases, a single global model may fail to
generalize well to all clients, motivating the need for model
personalization. PFL enhances FL by learning personalized
models tailored to individual clients, and has demonstrated
strong empirical performance in various applications, such
as driver monitoring (Yuan et al., 2023), and mobile computing (Zhang et al., 2024).

Personalized federated learning (PFL) offers a
flexible framework for aggregating information
across distributed clients with heterogeneous data.
This work considers a personalized federated
learning setting that simultaneously learns global
and local models. While purely local training
has no communication cost, collaborative learning among the clients can leverage shared knowledge to improve statistical accuracy, presenting
an accuracy-communication trade-off in personalized federated learning. However, the theoretical
analysis of how personalization quantitatively influences sample and algorithmic efficiency and
their inherent trade-off is largely unexplored. This
paper makes a contribution towards filling this
gap, by providing a quantitative characterization
of the personalization degree on the tradeoff. The
results further offers theoretical insights for choosing the personalization degree. As a side contribution, we establish the minimax optimality in
terms of statistical accuracy for a widely studied
PFL formulation. The theoretical result is validated on both synthetic and real-world datasets
and its generalizability is verified in a non-convex
setting.

An important question in PFL is determining the degree
of personalization, which controls the transition between
fully collaborative training and pure local training. A higher
degree of collaboration (less personalization) typically requires more frequent information exchange, potentially improving learning accuracy when client data distributions
are similar. Conversely, increasing personalization reduces
communication costs by prioritizing localized training, but
may lead to higher generalization errors due to the limited
size of client datasets (Paragliola, 2022). Understanding
this trade-off is essential for optimizing model performance
under communication constraints.
Most existing works focus purely on the algorithmic perspective of PFL (Lin et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024b; Wang
et al., 2022; 2024b). However, the statistical accuracy of
the solutions obtained in PFL remains largely unexplored.
As a result, the connections between statistical accuracy,
communication efficiency, and their trade-offs are not well
understood, leaving a theoretical gap in understanding how
to select the optimal personalization degree. In this paper,
we fill in this gap by providing a fine-grained theoretical
analysis of a widely adopted PFL problem formulation given
by (2) that trains simultaneously local and global models.
We quantitatively analyze the influence of personalization
on both statistical and optimization convergence rates for
each of the local models. Specifically, our contribution can
be summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) has
emerged as a promising learning framework for aggregating
information from distributed data, allowing clients to collaboratively train a shared global model in a communicationefficient manner. However, a critical challenge arising in
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA 2 School
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. Correspondence to: Ying Sun <ybs5190@psu.edu>, Lingzhou Xue
<lzxue@psu.edu>.

• Statistical Accuracy with Optimal Guarantee. We
provide a non-asymptotic statistical convergence rate of
the solution of Problem (2), revealing how personalization degree influences the statistical accuracy of each local
model. In particular, as the personalization degree increases,
the rate approaches to that of pure local training, O(1/n),
where n is the sample size per client. Conversely, decreas-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

