Emergence and Effectiveness of Task Vectors in In-Context Learning:
An Encoder Decoder Perspective

Seungwook Han * 1 Jinyeop Song * 1 Jeff Gore 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract

to new situations. In artificial intelligence, autoregressive
transformers are beginning to exhibit similar capabilities
(Brown et al., 2020; Bubeck et al., 2023; Ajay et al., 2023;
Han et al., 2024). Through in-context learning (ICL), they
adapt to new tasks without parameter updates, suggesting
they might also be forming internal abstractions (Raventós
et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Kumar
et al., 2024; Han et al., 2024).

Autoregressive transformers exhibit adaptive
learning through in-context learning (ICL), which
begs the question of how. Prior works have shown
that transformers represent the ICL tasks as vectors in their representations. In this paper, we
leverage the encoding-decoding framework to
study how transformers form task vectors during pretraining and how their task encoding quality predicts ICL task performance. On synthetic
ICL tasks, we analyze the training dynamics of
a small transformer and report the coupled emergence of task encoding and decoding. As the
model learns to encode different latent tasks (e.g.,
“Finding the first noun in a sentence.”) into distinct, separable representations, it concurrently
builds conditional decoding algorithms and improves its ICL performance. We validate this
phenomenon across pretrained models of varying
scales (Gemma-2 2B/9B/27B, Llama-3.1 8B/70B)
and over the course of pretraining in OLMo-7B.
Further, we demonstrate that the quality of task encoding inferred from representations predicts ICL
performance, and that, surprisingly, finetuning the
earlier layers can improve the task encoding and
performance more than finetuning the latter layers. Our empirical insights shed light into better
understanding the success and failure modes of
large language models via their representations.

Hendel et al. (2023); Merullo et al. (2023); Todd et al.
(2023) introduce a mechanistic perspective on how pretrained LLMs represent the latent concepts underlying the
ICL task as vectors in their representations. They empirically demonstrate that these task-specific vectors can trigger
the desired ICL behavior in many cases, with the effectiveness varying across tasks. Although an impactful first
observation, there still remains unanswered questions of
why these task vectors exist in the first place and why the effectiveness varies by task. This necessitates a deeper mechanistic understanding of this internal abstraction behavior
of LLMs.
In our work, we leverage the encoding-decoding framework
to investigate the origin and formation of task vectors in
transformers. To study their emergence during pretraining,
we train a small transformer on a mixture of sparse linear
regression tasks. We find that task encoding emerges as
the model learns to map different latent tasks into distinct,
separable representation spaces. This geometric structuring
of the representation space is coupled with the development
of task-specific ICL algorithms – namely, task decoding.
Through causal analysis, we demonstrate that the model
associates different algorithms to different learned concepts
in the representation space and that ICL happens through
the two-step process. Importantly, we see that the emergence of the two-stage process coincides with each other,
suggesting a mutual dependence between the two.

1. Introduction
Throughout history, humans have made sense of the world
by distilling complex experiences into fundamental abstractions, such as physics and mathematics. These mental models enable us to learn quickly, predict outcomes, and adapt
*

Inspired by these findings, we investigate the task encodingdecoding phenomenon across different pretrained model
families and scales (Llama-3.1-8B/70B and Gemma-2
2B/9B/27B) on more natural ICL tasks, such as part-ofspeech tagging and bitwise arithmetic. We introduce task
decodability, a geometric measure that quantifies how effectively a model can decode the task from its intermediate

1

Equal contribution
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Seungwook Han
<swhan@mit.edu>, Jinyeop Song <yeopjin@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

