What makes an Ensemble (Un) Interpretable?

Shahaf Bassan 1 Guy Amir 2 Meirav Zehavi 3 Guy Katz 1

Abstract

imbalanced or noisy datasets effectively (Dong et al., 2020;
Sagi & Rokach, 2018).

Ensemble models are widely recognized in the
ML community for their limited interpretability.
For instance, while a single decision tree is considered interpretable, ensembles of trees (e.g.,
boosted trees) are often treated as black-boxes.
Despite this folklore recognition, there remains
a lack of rigorous mathematical understanding
of what particularly makes an ensemble (un)interpretable, including how fundamental factors
like the (i) number, (ii) size, and (iii) type of base
models influence its interpretability. In this work,
we seek to bridge this gap by applying concepts
from computational complexity theory to study
the challenges of generating explanations for various ensemble configurations. Our analysis uncovers nuanced complexity patterns influenced by various factors. For example, we demonstrate that under standard complexity assumptions like P̸= NP,
interpreting ensembles remains intractable even
when base models are of constant size. Surprisingly, the complexity changes drastically with the
number of base models: small ensembles of decision trees are efficiently interpretable, whereas interpreting ensembles with even a constant number
of linear models remains intractable. We believe
that our findings provide a more robust foundation
for understanding the interpretability of ensembles, emphasizing the benefits of examining it
through a computational complexity lens.

However, a significant challenge with ensemble models is
their perceived lack of interpretability (Guidotti et al., 2018;
Sagi & Rokach, 2021; Hara & Hayashi, 2018; Bénard et al.,
2021; Kook et al., 2022). The reason behind this is straightforward — utilizing several models simultaneously makes
the decision-making process inherently more complex, and
thus more challenging to understand. For instance, while
it is feasible to trace the decision-making path in a single
decision tree, this level of straightforward traceability is not
achievable in tree ensembles (Sagi & Rokach, 2021; Hara
& Hayashi, 2018; Bénard et al., 2021).
Despite a general acknowledgment of this issue in the ML
community, some fundamental questions remain regarding the precise nature of what makes an ensemble (un)interpretable. For instance: (i) How much “harder” is it
to interpret ensembles compared to their base models? Is
the difference in complexity polynomial or exponential?
(ii) How does the interpretability of ensembles vary depending on the type of explanation used? (iii) How does the
interpretability depend on the type of base models? (iv) How
do structural parameters, such as the number of base models
or the size of individual models, influence interpretability?
For example, is an ensemble with many small models more
interpretable than one with a few large models? Does this
answer depend on the explanation type or the nature of
the base models? (v) Does simplifying an ensemble by reducing the number or the size of base models enhance its
interpretability?
In this work, we aim to address these questions by examining the interpretability of ensembles through the lens of
computational complexity. The computational investigation
of interpretability has been explored in several recent studies (Barceló et al., 2020; Bassan et al., 2024; Arenas et al.,
2021a; Adolfi et al., 2025). Notably, (Barceló et al., 2020)
introduced the term “computational interpretability” as a
formal and mathematical approach to assessing interpretability, distinguishing it from the more common emphasis on
human-centered understanding (Rudin et al., 2022). Within
computational interpretability, a model is considered interpretable if explanations for its decisions can be generated
efficiently (i.e., it is “easy” to explain). Conversely, if gen-

1. Introduction
Ensemble learning is a widely acclaimed technique in ML
that leverages the strengths of multiple models instead of
relying on a single one. This approach has been proven to
enhance predictive accuracy, mitigate variance, and handle
1

The Hebrew University of Jerueslaem 2 Cornell University
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev. Correspondence to: Shahaf
Bassan <shahaf.bassan@mail.huji.ac.il>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

