Learning without Isolation: Pathway Protection for Continual Learning

Zhikang Chen * 1 2 Abudukelimu Wuerkaixi * 1 2 Sen Cui * 1 Haoxuan Li 3 Ding Li 1 Jingfeng Zhang 4 2
Bo Han 5 2 Gang Niu 2 Houfang Liu 1 Yi Yang † 1 Sifan Yang 1 Changshui Zhang † 1 Tianling Ren † 1

Abstract

Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4
Parameter Pathway
Protection Protection

Neuron

Deep networks are prone to catastrophic forgetting during sequential task learning, i.e., losing
the knowledge about old tasks upon learning new
tasks. To this end, continual learning (CL) has
emerged, whose existing methods focus mostly
on regulating or protecting the parameters associated with the previous tasks. However, parameter
protection is often impractical, since the size of
parameters for storing the old-task knowledge increases linearly with the number of tasks, otherwise it is hard to preserve the parameters related
to the old-task knowledge. In this work, we bring
a dual opinion from neuroscience and physics to
CL: in the whole networks, the pathways matter
more than the parameters when concerning the
knowledge acquired from the old tasks. Following this opinion, we propose a novel CL framework, learning without isolation (LwI), where
model fusion is formulated as graph matching
and the pathways occupied by the old tasks are
protected without being isolated. Thanks to the
sparsity of activation channels in a deep network,
LwI can adaptively allocate available pathways
for a new task, realizing pathway protection and
addressing catastrophic forgetting in a parameterefficient manner. Experiments on popular benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed LwI.

Task-aware
Task-agnostic

Parameter Protection
Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4
Pathway

Ours (Pathway Protection)

Figure 1. Left Figures: The illustrative comparison diagram between our method and the parameter-protective approach depicts
the key distinctions in our methodologies. Bottom Right Figure: The performance comparison between our method and the
WSN (Kang et al., 2022a) method. Top Right Figure: We showcase the ability of our method to adapt even in task-agnostic scenarios, whereas the parameter-protective approach requires knowledge
of task identifiers for effective recognition.

mance on all seen tasks, is pivotal for the advancement of
artificial general intelligence (Masana et al., 2022; Liang &
Li, 2024; Wang et al., 2024). The approach, mirroring the
human learning process of acquiring and retaining diverse
experiences about the real world, confronts a significant
challenge: catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989). This phenomenon results in the diminished proficiency of model in prior tasks after learning on new ones.

1. Introduction
Continual learning, a scenario that requires a model to handle a continuous stream of tasks while preserving perfor-

Various continual learning approaches have been proposed
to mitigate the issue of catastrophic forgetting, broadly
categorized into three types. Regularization-based approaches entail adding regularization terms that leverage
the weight information of previous tasks during the training of the current task. While this approach can mitigate
catastrophic forgetting to some extent by constraining parameter shifts and ensuring protection of model parameters, it tends to result in relatively lower performance when
confronted with significant variations in data characteristics. Rehearsal-based approaches preserve data segments

*
Equal contribution †Corresponding authors 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China 2 RIKEN 3 Peking University 4 The
University of Auckland 5 Hong Kong Baptist University.
Correspondence to: Yi Yang <yiyang@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Changshui Zhang <zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Tianling Ren
<RenTL@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

