Position: Explainable AI Cannot Advance Without Better User Studies

Matej Pičulin 1 Bernarda Petek 1 Irena Ograjenšek 1 Erik Štrumbelj 1

Abstract

also numerous survey papers that look at XAI from different angles and domains, including a survey of surveys by
Schwalbe & Finzel (2023).

In this position paper, we argue that user studies
are key to understanding the value of explainable
AI methods, because the end goal of explainable
AI is to satisfy societal desiderata. We also argue
that the current state of user studies is detrimental to the advancement of the field. We support
this argument with a review of general and explainable AI-specific challenges, as well as an
analysis of 607 explainable AI papers featuring
user studies. We demonstrate how most user studies lack reproducibility, discussion of limitations,
comparison with a baseline, or placebo explanations and are of low fidelity to real-world users
and application context. This, combined with an
overreliance on functional evaluation, results in
a lack of understanding of the value explainable
AI methods, which hinders the progress of the
field. To address this issue, we call for higher
methodological standards for user studies, greater
appreciation of high-quality user studies in the AI
community, and reduced reliance on functional
evaluation.

We take a closer look at human subject-based evaluation
of XAI - evaluating XAI by studying the performance, behavior, and opinions of human subjects (user studies for
short). In particular, we focus on the quality and scope of
user studies and results that have implications for future user
studies and the field of XAI as a whole. We do not discuss
parts of XAI that are extraneous to user studies and their
role in evaluating XAI. For readers interested in these, we
recommend Schwalbe & Finzel (2023) as a starting point.
We aim to establish two points:
• User studies are key to evaluating XAI. The user is
an integral part of XAI and if our goal is to understand
the value of XAI methods, there is no alternative to
user studies.
• The current state of user studies in XAI is poor.
There is a clear lack of quality in all aspects of user
study design, from defining the purpose of the study
and participant selection, to study methodology and
task design. In fact, most user studies in XAI are below
the threshold of what is acceptable in fields of science
with a longer history of human subject-based research.
Also, most user studies are conducted with very low
fidelity to real-world use.

1. Introduction
Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) plays an important role in artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning
(ML), and other areas of quantitative data analysis. As
these technologies become more integral to our professional
and personal lives and face greater legislative oversight, the
importance of XAI continues to grow.

If we accept both that user studies are key to understanding
the value of XAI methods and that the state of user studies
is poor, then it follows that our current understanding of the
value of XAI methods is poor. And the only way to move
forward is to substantially improve at least the quality, but
hopefully also the quantity of user studies.

Academic interest in XAI is also growing rapidly. On Dec
29, 2024 there were, according to Scopus, 14077 works with
at least one of the terms explainable AI, XAI, or explainable artificial intelligence in the title, abstract, or keywords.
More than half of these (8,945) are dated 2024. There are

It is our position that we must change our mindset about
user studies. Well-designed user studies should be encouraged, because at this point their contribution to XAI
is more important than most further theoretical or non
user-centric empirical advancement. On the other hand,
user studies for the sake of doing a user study or as a
methodological afterthought, should be discouraged, as
they contribute little to our understanding of XAI.

1

Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of
Ljubljana, Večna Pot 113, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Correspondence to:
Erik Štrumbelj <erik.strumbelj@fri.uni-lj.si>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

