Outsourced Diffusion Sampling:
Efficient Posterior Inference in Latent Spaces of Generative Models

Siddarth Venkatraman * 1 2 Mohsin Hasan * 1 2 Minsu Kim 1 2 3 Luca Scimeca 1 2 Marcin Sendera 4
Yoshua Bengio 1 2 5 Glen Berseth 1 2 5 Nikolay Malkin 6

Abstract

Table 1. Common families of generative models can be expressed
as deterministic transformations of noise. Here, 𝑑latent refers to
the dimension of the latent variable as typically understood in
the model; typically, 𝑑latent ≪ 𝑑data (§2). Posteriors under these
generative model priors are generally intractable, but some models
can be fine-tuned by asymptotically unbiased variational objectives to sample intractable posteriors (§3.1). Outsourced diffusion
sampling approximates posteriors in the noise space (§3.2 and §4).

Any well-behaved generative model over a variable x can be expressed as a deterministic transformation of an exogenous (‘outsourced’) Gaussian
noise variable z: x = 𝑓 𝜃 (z). In such a model (e.g.,
a VAE, GAN, or continuous-time flow-based
model), sampling of the target variable x ∼ 𝑝 𝜃 (x)
is straightforward, but sampling from a posterior
distribution of the form 𝑝(x | y) ∝ 𝑝 𝜃 (x)𝑟 (x, y),
where 𝑟 is a constraint function depending on
an auxiliary variable y, is generally intractable.
We propose to amortize the cost of sampling
from such posterior distributions with diffusion
models that sample a distribution in the noise
space (z). These diffusion samplers are trained by
reinforcement learning algorithms to enforce that
the transformed samples 𝑓 𝜃 (z) are distributed
according to the posterior in the data space (x).
For many models and constraints, the posterior
in noise space is smoother than in data space,
making it more suitable for amortized inference.
Our method enables conditional sampling under
unconditional GAN, (H)VAE, and flow-based
priors, comparing favorably with other inference
methods. We demonstrate the proposed outsourced diffusion sampling in several experiments
with large pretrained prior models: conditional
image generation, reinforcement learning with
human feedback, and protein structure generation.

Model
(H)VAE
GAN
NF / CNF
Diffusion
Latent diffusion

Noise dim. 𝑑noise

Invertible?

Variational tuning?

𝑑latent · 𝑁 + 𝑑data
𝑑latent
𝑑data
𝑑data · (𝑇 + 1)
𝑑latent · (𝑇 + 1) + 𝑑data

×
×
✓
×
×

✓
×
✓/×
✓
✓

inference problems. The aim is to approximate or sample from the product of the modeled distribution over a
data space with an observation likelihood or other constraint
function. While such diverse applications as conditional generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2022),
inverse problems (Song et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2023;
Venkatraman et al., 2024), and constrained improvement
from human feedback (Korbak et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023)
can be cast as posterior inference tasks, sampling from such
posterior distributions when no unbiased target data is available is generally intractable. For some model families, approximate solutions, such as MCMC, approximate guidance,
and variational inference, may be possible. Each of those
methods has limitations, such as high cost to reach convergence for multimodal posteriors, intractability of accurate
density estimation, and reliance on techniques specialized
to the model and constraint.

1. Introduction

Fundamentally, generative models are probabilistic programs that produce samples from the distributions they define by a combination of deterministic computation and
injection of random noise.1 This paper argues that the noise
space of generative models – the space where the noise injected during generation resides – is an effective target for
posterior inference. To be precise, we consider a generative

Generative models, trained on a dataset to maximize likelihood or related quantities, can become priors for Bayesian
* Equal contribution 1 Mila – Québec AI Institute 2 Université de
Montréal 3 KAIST 4 Jagiellonian University 5 CIFAR 6 University
of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: <{siddarth.venkatraman,
mohsin.hasan}@mila.quebec>.

1We refer here to models that produce samples in a bounded

Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

number of operations, not to objects such as deep energy-based
models, for which sampling is intractable.

1

