High-Dimensional Prediction for Sequential Decision Making

Georgy Noarov 1 Ramya Ramalingam 1 Aaron Roth 1 Stephan Xie 2

Abstract

omitted), compares the utility of an agent’s play to that of
the best-in-hindsight fixed strategy. It is a marginal guarantee, in the sense that it forces the agent to do as well as
the benchmark cumulatively over all rounds t = 1 . . . T , but
does not imply locally optimal performance on any subset of
rounds. Thus, various extensions to more challenging benchmark classes have been developed, giving rise to notions
such as swap regret, adaptive regret, and beyond.

We give an efficient algorithm for producing multidimensional forecasts in an online adversarial environment that have low bias subject to any polynomial number of conditioning events, that can
depend both on external context and on our predictions themselves. We demonstrate the use of
this algorithm with several applications. We show
how to make predictions that can be transparently
consumed by any polynomial number of downstream decision makers with different utility functions, guaranteeing them diminishing swap regret
at optimal rates. We also give the first efficient
algorithms for guaranteeing diminishing conditional regret in online combinatorial optimization
problems for an arbitrary polynomial number of
conditioning events — i.e. on an arbitrary number
of intersecting subsequences determined both by
context and our own predictions. Finally, we give
the first efficient algorithm for online multicalibration with O(T 2/3 ) rates in the ECE metric.

Typically, regret minimization algorithms directly optimize
the agent’s loss or reward function. This works well in
single-agent settings and for simple regret guarantees. However, this direct approach does not naturally address sequential environments which (a) involve multiple decisionmaking agents with different utilities/rewards; or (b) demand performance guarantees conditionally on the agents’
own actions. Motivated by these challenges, in this paper
we take a different route and shift from direct reward optimization to a more subtle but flexible approach.
Recipe
1. Distill the decision-making-relevant aspects of
the sequential environment into a sequence of “sufficient statistics”: vector-valued states of the environment, such that all agents could easily identify their
reward-maximizing actions if they perfectly knew
the next state.
2. Devise an efficient online adversarial algorithm
that predicts the upcoming state of the environment
with such granular accuracy guarantees that the
agents can treat our predictions as the true states for
the purposes of picking reward-maximizing actions.

1. Introduction
Decision making in sequential settings is a challenging problem from both the theoretical and the applied perspective.
Tackling the nonstationarity inherent to sequential interactive decision making settings is the subject of the online
learning, reinforcement learning, and bandits literatures (see
e.g. Slivkins et al. (2019)).
The dominant paradigm is regret minimization, which
places emphasis on optimizing various notions of regret for
decision-making agents, thus ensuring that these agents’ cumulative rewards stay ahead of nontrivial benchmark classes
of strategies. The most basic and tractable notion of regret,
called external regret (with the qualifier “external” usually

Step 1 of this recipe will naturally always require insight
into the specific setting at hand, and identifying appropriate
sufficient statistics can often be an art. However — as we
will show in this paper — Step 2, which may appear just as
hard to execute, turns out to have a “silver-bullet” solution
that applies to a wide variety of complex decision-making
settings: our event-unbiased prediction framework.

1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Georgy Noarov
<gnoarov@seas.upenn.edu>.

1.1. Our Contributions
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our central contribution is a general and efficient algorithmic framework for event-unbiased prediction of vector quan1

