MOGIC: Metadata-infused Oracle Guidance
for Improved Extreme Classification

Suchith Chidananda Prabhu * 1 Bhavyajeet Singh * 2
Anshul Mittal Siddarth Asokan 2 Shikhar Mohan 3 Deepak Saini 4 Yashoteja Prabhu 2
Lakshya Kumar 3 Jian Jiao 4 Amit S 3 Niket Tandon 2 Manish Gupta 3 Sumeet Agarwal 1 Manik Varma 2
3

Abstract

augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Gao et al.,
2024; Fan et al., 2024), context enrichment also benefits
classification tasks (Guu et al., 2020b; Guo et al., 2023; Mohan et al., 2024; Long et al., 2022). In this paper, we focus
on using memory to improve classification, and in particular
scenarios wherein the label space is extremely large (typically of the order of millions), i.e., eXtreme Classification
(XC) (Mohan et al., 2024).

Retrieval-augmented classification and generation
models benefit from early-stage fusion of highquality text-based metadata, often called memory,
but face high latency and noise sensitivity. In
extreme classification (XC), where low latency
is crucial, existing methods use late-stage fusion
for efficiency and robustness. To enhance accuracy while maintaining low latency, we propose
MOGIC, a novel approach to metadata-infused
oracle guidance for XC. We train an early-fusion
oracle classifier with access to both query-side
and label-side ground-truth metadata in textual
form and subsequently use it to guide existing
memory-based XC disciple models via regularization. The MOGIC algorithm improves precision@1 and propensity-scored precision@1 of
XC disciple models by 1–2% on six standard
datasets, at no additional inference-time cost. We
show that MOGIC can be used in a plug-and-play
manner to enhance memory-free XC models such
as NGAME or DEXA. Lastly, we demonstrate the
robustness of the MOGIC algorithm to missing
and noisy metadata. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/suchith720/mogic.

Real-world XC tasks often involve short-text queries, such
as in matching queries to advertiser-bidded keywords (for
sponsored search ads (Dahiya et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2016;
Prabhu et al., 2018b)), queries to product titles (for product recommendations (Dahiya et al., 2021; Medini et al.,
2019; Mittal et al., 2021)), or queries to webpage titles (for
tagging (Babbar & Schölkopf, 2017; Chang et al., 2020;
You et al., 2019)). These XC tasks, characterized by an
extremely large label space, often suffer from data sparsity,
having very few training examples per label on average. In
such XC tasks, auxiliary metadata can offer relevant diverse
information, which can be leveraged to obtain a better understanding of the input queries, thereby making accurate
predictions. For example, on the query-to-ad-keyword prediction task, the query-side metadata can be obtained by
mining organic search webpage titles clicked in response
to the query on the search engine, while on the Wikipedia
categories prediction task, other Wikipedia article titles connected to the original page via hyperlinks could serve as the
metadata. For a detailed overview of the preliminaries, and
definitions of key terms, please refer to Appendix A.

1. Introduction
Context enrichment is the process of incorporating metadata from external sources (referred to as memory for a
model, comprising memory items) to improve the overall
performance on a task. While such methods have gained
popularity in generative modeling in the form of retrieval-

Memory-based augmentation in XC remains a challenging problem due to the need for accurate and fast memory access. The low latency requirements are imposed by
real-world applications. Ideal/golden memory item linkages are typically available during training, referred to as
ground-truth metadata. However, these golden linkages are
seldom available during real-world deployment, particularly
in real-world scenarios, where 80-85% of the traffic is in the
cold-start setting, as reported in (Mittal et al., 2025). Our
work demonstrates that methods that rely entirely on highquality ground-truth linkages of metadata are susceptible to

*
Equal contribution 1 Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence,
IIT Delhi, India 2 Microsoft Research, India 3 Mircosoft, India
4
Mircosoft, USA. Correspondence to: Suchith Chidananda Prabhu
<suchith720@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

