Offline-to-Online Reinforcement Learning with Classifier-Free Diffusion
Generation
Xiao Huang * 1 Xu Liu * 1 Enze Zhang 1 Tong Yu 2 Shuai Li 1

Abstract

agents learn from a static dataset pre-collected by arbitrary
policies. Current research in offline RL focuses primarily
on addressing the challenge of distribution mismatch or outof-distribution (OOD) actions through the implementation
of a pessimistic update scheme (Kumar et al., 2020) or in
combination with imitation learning (Kumar et al., 2019).
However, when dealing with a fixed and suboptimal dataset,
it becomes exceedingly challenging for offline RL to attain
the optimal policy (Kidambi et al., 2020).

Offline-to-online Reinforcement Learning (O2O
RL) aims to perform online fine-tuning on an offline pre-trained policy to minimize costly online
interactions. Existing work uses offline datasets
to generate data that conform to the online data
distribution for data augmentation. However, generated data still exhibits a gap with the online
data, limiting overall performance. To address
this issue, we propose a new data augmentation
approach, Classifier-Free Diffusion Generation
(CFDG). Without introducing additional classifier
training overhead, CFDG leverages classifier-free
guidance diffusion to significantly enhance the
generation quality of offline and online data with
different distributions. Additionally, it employs
a reweighting method to enable more generated
data to align with the online data, enhancing performance while maintaining the agent’s stability. Experimental results show that CFDG outperforms replaying the two data types or using
a standard diffusion model to generate new data.
Our method is versatile and can be integrated with
existing offline-to-online RL algorithms. By implementing CFDG to popular methods IQL, PEX
and APL, we achieve a notable 15% average improvement in empirical performance on the D4RL
benchmark such as MuJoCo and AntMaze.

Some recent work addresses the above issues by employing
an offline-to-online setting. Such methods (Lee et al., 2022;
Nair et al., 2020) focus on pre-training a policy using the
offline dataset and fine-tuning the policy through further
online interactions. O2O RL aims to fine-tune a pre-trained
policy using limited online interactions to achieve the optimal policy. To utilize the offline dataset, some studies
directly replayed samples in the online phase (Lee et al.,
2022), leading to performance improvements. Nevertheless,
this approach neglects the distribution shift issue, as the
data distribution in the offline dataset may differ from that
induced by the current policy. To address the distribution
shift problem, existing work (Zheng et al., 2023) suggests
that their different characteristics require separate updating strategies for online and offline data, respectively. In
particular, offline data can deter agents from prematurely
converging to suboptimal policies due to the diversity of
available data, while online data can contribute to training stability and accelerate convergence (Nair et al., 2020;
Thrun & Littman, 2000).
In addition to fully utilizing offline and online data, there
are also works that leverage generative models for data
augmentation to provide diverse samples for the agent’s
training. Prior work has considered upsampling online data
with VAEs or GANs (Huang et al., 2017; Imre, 2021). To
fully leverage offline data, Energy-guided Diffusion Sampling (EDIS) (Liu et al., 2024) generates data aligned with
the online policy based on the offline dataset to address
the issue of distribution shift. In addition to using a diffusion model to generate data, it formulates three distinct
energy functions to guide the diffusion sampling process,
ensuring alignment with the online policy. Intuitively, online data is more closely aligned with the current online
policy. The limitation of previous works lies in using of-

1. Introduction
Traditionally, Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018) is considered a paradigm for online learning, where
agents learn from online interactions with the environment.
Due to costly online interactions in some real-world applications, offline RL (Levine et al., 2020) is proposed where
*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China 2 Adobe Research, California, United States. Correspondence to: Shuai Li <shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

