Discovering Latent Causal Graphs from Spatiotemporal Data

Kun Wang * 1 Sumanth Varambally * 2 Duncan Watson-Parris 2 3 Yi-An Ma 2 1 Rose Yu 1 2

Abstract
Many important phenomena in scientific fields
like climate, neuroscience, and epidemiology are
naturally represented as spatiotemporal gridded
data with complex interactions. Inferring causal
relationships from these data is a challenging
problem compounded by the high dimensionality
of such data and the correlations between spatially proximate points. We present SPACY (SPAtiotemporal Causal discoverY), a novel framework based on variational inference, designed to
model latent time series and their causal relationships from spatiotemporal data. SPACY alleviates
the high-dimensional challenge by discovering
causal structures in the latent space. To aggregate
spatially proximate, correlated grid points, we
use spatial factors, parametrized by spatial kernel
functions, to map observational time series to latent representations. Theoretically, we generalize
the problem to a continuous spatial domain and establish identifiability when the observations arise
from a nonlinear, invertible function of the product of latent series and spatial factors. Using this
approach, we avoid assumptions that are often unverifiable, including those about instantaneous effects or sufficient variability. Empirically, SPACY
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on synthetic
data, even in challenging settings where existing
methods struggle, while remaining scalable for
large grids. SPACY also identifies key known
phenomena from real-world climate data. An implementation of SPACY is available at https:
//github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/SPACY/

Figure 1: SPACY jointly infers latent time series and the
underlying causal graph from gridded time-series data by
identifying spatial modes of variability.

1. Introduction
In many scientific domains such as climate science, neurology, and epidemiology, low-level sensor measurements
generate high-dimensional observational data. These data
are naturally represented as gridded time series, with interactions that evolve over both space and time. Discovering
causal relationships from spatiotemporal data is of great
scientific importance. It allows researchers to predict future
states, intervene in harmful trends, and develop new insights
into the underlying mechanisms. For example, in climate
science, the study of teleconnections (Liu et al., 2023), the
interactions between regions thousands of kilometers away,
is important to understanding how climate events in one part
of the world may affect weather patterns in distant locations.
Despite the plethora of work on causal structure learning
from time series data (Granger, 1969; Hyvärinen et al.,
2010; Runge, 2020a; Tank et al., 2021; Gong et al., 2023;
Cheng et al., 2023), they face significant challenges for
high-dimensional spatiotemporal data. A primary reason is
scalability. The high dimensionality of gridded data makes
it difficult for many of these techniques, especially those relying on conditional independence tests, to scale effectively
(Glymour et al., 2019). Additionally, spatially proximate
points often exhibit redundant and highly correlated time series. Conditioning on nearby correlated points can obscure
true causal relationships between distant locations, reducing
the statistical power of conditional independence tests and
leading to inaccurate results (Tibau et al., 2022).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA
2
Halıcıoglu Data Science Institute, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, USA 3 Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA. Correspondence
to: Sumanth Varambally <svarambally@ucsd.edu>, Kun
Wang <bw5889@princeton.edu>.

Recent advances in spatiotemporal causal discovery typically follow a two-stage process: first, dimensionality reduction is applied to extract a small number of latent time
series from the original grid of time series; then, causal discovery is performed on these low-dimensional representa-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

