Position: A Theory of Deep Learning Must Include Compositional Sparsity

David A. Danhofer * 1 2 Davide D’Ascenzo * 1 3 4 Rafael Dubach * 1 5 Tomaso Poggio * 1

Abstract

DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). Despite their rapidly growing
set of achievements, our understanding of DNNs still lags
behind their empirical success. Without deeper theoretical
insights, it remains unclear why certain architectures scale
so well to high-dimensional tasks, or how to pinpoint the
limits of Deep Learning (DL) paradigms.

Overparametrized Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
have demonstrated remarkable success in a wide
variety of domains too high-dimensional for classical shallow networks subject to the curse of
dimensionality. However, open questions about
fundamental principles, that govern the learning
dynamics of DNNs, remain. In this position paper we argue that it is the ability of DNNs to
exploit the compositionally sparse structure of the
target function driving their success. As such,
DNNs can leverage the property that most practically relevant functions can be composed from a
small set of constituent functions, each of which
relies only on a low-dimensional subset of all inputs. We show that this property is shared by
all efficiently Turing-computable functions and is
therefore highly likely present in all current learning problems. While some promising theoretical
insights on questions concerned with approximation and generalization exist in the setting of compositionally sparse functions, several important
questions on the learnability and optimization of
DNNs remain. Completing the picture of the role
of compositional sparsity in deep learning is essential to a comprehensive theory of artificial –
and even general – intelligence.

Historically, many attempts to build intelligent systems relied on logical or rule-based approaches (Newell & Simon,
1976; Hayes-Roth et al., 1983). In contrast, the rise of
DNNs from around 2012 onward ushered in learning-based
architectures that surpass traditional algorithms in numerous
domains. For several years, the focus has been on pushing performance boundaries: from high-dimensional image
recognition (AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), ResNet (He
et al., 2015)) to playing strategic games (AlphaGo (Silver
et al., 2016b), AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2018)). More recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) such as the GPT
models (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI (2023), 2023) have
advanced natural language understanding and generation.
Although these models continue to break benchmark after
benchmark, their development often outpaces the foundational theory needed to explain or predict their performance.
Despite these empirical advances, research in DL theory is
striving to keep pace, aiming to address three foundational
questions:
1. Approximation: How well can Neural Networks (NNs)
approximate functions of interest?

1. Introduction

2. Optimization: How can we optimize NN parameters
on finite training data?

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
breakthroughs across numerous domains, including computer vision, playing games (Silver et al., 2016a), protein structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021; Abramson
et al., 2024), natural language usage, and complex reasoning (Romera-Paredes et al., 2023; Trinh et al., 2024;
*

3. Generalization: Why are NNs able to avoid overfitting
the training data despite their large capacity?
Building on Poggio & Fraser (2024) and related
work (Mhaskar et al., 2016; Poggio et al., 2017; Bauer &
Kohler, 2019; Schmidt-Hieber, 2020), we argue compositional sparsity – a property shared by all efficiently
Turing-computable functions – explains how DNNs can
represent, learn and generalize in high-dimensional settings without suffering from the curse of dimensionality.
Importantly, the curse of dimensionality manifests itself
in two distinct ways: it encompasses both the exponential

1

Equal contribution Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
(CBMM), MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 3 Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy 4 University of Milan, Milan, Italy 5 University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Davide D’Ascenzo <davide.dascenzo@unimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

