Unifying Specialized Visual Encoders for Video Language Models

Jihoon Chung * 1 Tyler Zhu * 1 Max Gonzalez Saez-Diez 1
Juan Carlos Niebles 2 Honglu Zhou 2 Olga Russakovsky 1

Abstract

LB DINOv2 ViViT SigLIP MERV
Q: Is the order of the written
letters the same as the order of
the letters put on the table?

Recent advances in vision backbones have yielded
powerful and diverse visual and video encoders.
Yet, current Video Large Language Models encode visual inputs using an encoder from a single
backbone family, limiting the amount and type of
visual information they can process. We propose
MERV, a Multi-Encoder Video Representation,
which utilizes multiple encoders for a comprehensive video representation. To optimize heterogeneous features from a broad spectrum of
encoders and ensure efficient and coherent feature integration, MERV first aligns encoder features spatio-temporally, then projects them into a
unified structure, and finally fuses them through
cross-attention. Under fair comparison, MERV
achieves up to 4.62% higher accuracy than its base
model, while introducing minimal extra parameters and training faster than equivalent singleencoder methods after parallelizing visual processing. Qualitative analysis shows MERV successfully captures and integrates domain knowledge from each encoder, opening new possibilities
for scaling enhanced video understanding.

A. C. C. C. A.

A: Yes B: I don't know C: No
Q: Is the camera moving or
static?

A. B. A. A. B.

A: moving B: static or shaking
C: I don't know
Q: Was the first cup placed
facing upwards or downwards?

A. A. B. A. B.

A: upwards B: downwards
C: I don't know
Q: Where is the person?

A. A. A. C. C.

A: Kitchen B: Outdoor
C: Living room or Bedroom

Figure 1. Examples where a single encoder model is the only
model to correctly answer Perception Test questions (Pătrăucean
et al., 2023), while MERV can correctly answer all types.

language space, allowing for reasoning to happen in the
highly expressive language domain.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States 2 Salesforce Research,
Palo Alto, CA, United States. Correspondence to: Jihoon Chung,
Tyler Zhu <{jc5933,tylerzhu}@princeton.edu>.

Most multimodal LLMs, such as LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023)
for images and Video-LLaVA (Lin et al., 2024) for videos,
opt for contrastively pre-trained encoders like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and LanguageBind (Zhu et al., 2024a).
Their vision-language pre-training naturally lends itself as a
bridge between the vision input and the LLM, circumventing
the need to train heavy vision-language alignment modules
like a QFormer (Li et al., 2022). These encoders are almost always pre-trained separately and vary in architecture,
training data, and optimization strategy. Consequently, the
features extracted by these encoders exhibit unique characteristics, each with inherent strengths and limitations. Contrastive encoders like CLIP may be better suited with their
multimodal semantic alignment, but are inferior to models
such as DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) at fine-grained object
level understanding. They also fail to take advantage of
models trained specifically on videos, such as ViViT (Arnab
et al., 2021). Despite this clear tension between vision backbones, previous research in VideoLLMs has relied on only
one vision encoder for visual processing as one was thought
to be sufficient for visual understanding, and already difficult enough to achieve vision-language alignment with.
Any more encoders was unnecessary and not an effective
tradeoff of runtime for compute.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we argue that this choice to not use multiple encoders in existing VideoLLMs unnecessarily restricts
their capabilities. For example, in Figure 1 we can see

1. Introduction
Inspired by the sophisticated reasoning abilities of recent
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Chiang et al., 2023;
Chowdhery et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023), researchers have focused on using them in many other domains to great success.
The video counterparts, known as Video Large Language
Models (VideoLLMs) (Bain et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023c;
Lin et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2023; Maaz et al., 2024; Yu
et al., 2024b), connect pre-trained vision encoders to LLMs
by training a modality bridge from the vision space to the

1

