Assessing Safety Risks and Quantization-aware Safety Patching
for Quantized Large Language Models

Kejia Chen 1 2 * Jiawen Zhang 1 2 * Jiacong Hu 1 Yu Wang 1 Jian Lou 3 † Zunlei Feng 1 2 † Mingli Song 1 2

Abstract

medicine (Ghosh et al., 2024), education (Cop, 2023), and
finance (He et al., 2024). Underpinning such surging demand and remarkable capabilities is their colossal model
size, which however poses significant challenges for deploying LLMs on commodity and edge devices due to the
overwhelming resource overhead in terms of memory footprint, computational cost, and energy consumption (Frantar
et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023). Consequently, this has led
to the growing popularity and significance of quantization
in LLMs (Frantar et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023), one of
the most prominent LLM compression techniques, which
converts LLMs’ high-precision representations (e.g., 16-bit)
into lower-precision ones (e.g., 8-bit, 4-bit, or even 1-bit).
Various quantization methods, including post-training quantization methods (PTQ) (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023; Lin et al.,
2023) and quantization-aware training/fine-tuning methods
(QAT) (Liu et al., 2023b; Du et al., 2024), have been proposed to reduce bit-width while preserving the utility of
LLMs, with each category having the option to be further
assisted by calibration datasets (Qi et al., 2024a; Chen et al.,
2024) to achieve a better quantization-utility trade-off.

Quantized large language models (LLMs) have
gained increasing attention and significance for
enabling deployment in resource-constrained environments. However, emerging studies on a
few calibration dataset-free quantization methods suggest that quantization may compromise
the safety capabilities of LLMs, underscoring
the urgent need for systematic safety evaluations
and effective mitigation strategies. In this paper, we present comprehensive safety evaluations across various mainstream quantization techniques and diverse calibration datasets, utilizing
widely accepted safety benchmarks. To address
the identified safety vulnerabilities, we propose
a quantization-aware safety patching framework,
Q-resafe, to efficiently restore the safety capabilities of quantized LLMs while minimizing
any adverse impact on utility. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that Q-resafe successfully re-aligns the safety of quantized LLMs
with their pre-quantization counterparts, even under challenging evaluation scenarios. Project
page is available at: https://github.com/
Thecommonirin/Qresafe.

Since the evolving capabilities and growing integration of
LLMs into society can lead to negative societal impacts,
high utility alone is insufficient for their reliable deployment. Ensuring safety capabilities is equally crucial to prevent risks such as generating harmful content or violating
ethical norms. Unfortunately, safety is fragile to maintain, as
studies on high-precision LLMs reveal that even slight finetuning can cause well-aligned LLMs to experience degraded
safety (Qi et al., 2024b) and become more susceptible to
jailbreak attacks (Li et al., 2024c). In this vein, quantization
is susceptible to compromising safety, as it alters model
weights to a greater extent than slight fine-tuning. Emerging
research has started to explore this issue (Hong et al., 2024),
with a primary focus on the techniques without calibration
datasets. (Hong et al., 2024) examines how two PTQ methods can degrade safety, (Belkhiter et al., 2024) evaluates one
PTQ and one QAT method against various jailbreak attacks,
(Zhang et al., 2025) evaluates the safety of aligned LLMs
with activation quantization, and (Egashira et al., 2024) devises a PGD-based attack on one PTQ and one QAT method
to deliberately exploit quantization to induce specific malicious behaviors. Propelled by these findings(Shang et al.,

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023;
Anil et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023) are increasingly
applied across diverse domains, offering astounding performance that often surpasses human capabilities in tasks
ranging from general language processing (Reizinger et al.,
2024; Almeida et al., 2024) to specialized areas like
*
Equal contribution . † Corresponding authors. 1 The State
Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang
University 2 Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of
Blockchain and Data Security 3 Sun Yat-sen University. Correspondence to: Zunlei Feng <zunleifeng@zju.edu.cn>, Jian Lou
<louj5@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

