DiMa: Understanding the Hardness of
Online Matching Problems via Diffusion Models

Boyu Zhang * 1 2 3 Aocheng Shen * 1 Bing Liu 1 Qiankun Zhang B 1 2 3 Bin Yuan 1 3 4 5 Jing Wang 6
Shenghao Liu 1 Xianjun Deng 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
We explore the potential of AI-enhanced combinatorial optimization theory, taking online bipartite
matching (OBM) as a case study. In the theoretical study of OBM, the hardness corresponds to
a performance upper bound of a specific online
algorithm or any possible online algorithms. Typically, these upper bounds derive from challenging
instances meticulously designed by theoretical
computer scientists. Zhang et al. (ICML 2024)
recently provide an example demonstrating how
reinforcement learning techniques enhance the
hardness result of a specific OBM model. Their
attempt is inspiring but preliminary. It is unclear whether their methods can be applied to
other OBM problems with similar breakthroughs.
This paper takes a further step by introducing
DiMa, a unified and novel framework that aims
at understanding the hardness of OBM problems
based on denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDPMs). DiMa models the process of generating hard instances as denoising steps, and optimizes them by a novel reinforcement learning
algorithm, named shortcut policy gradient (SPG).
We first examine DiMa on the classic OBM problem by reproducing its known hardest input instance in literature. Further, we apply DiMa to
two well-known variants of OBM, for which the
exact hardness remains an open problem, and we
successfully improve their theoretical state-of-theart upper bounds.

Online bipartite matching (OBM, Karp et al. (1990)) is one
of the most fundamental and central problems in online
optimization, due to its broad applications in economics,
operations research, and computer science. It captures varies
practical domains such as Internet advertising(Mehta et al.,
2007; Huang et al., 2020; 2023), resource allocation(Braun
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b; Ekbatani et al., 2023),
and transportation(Haliem et al., 2020; Dutta & Sholley,
2018; Asghari et al., 2016). Generally, OBM studies how
to match one side of items arriving one by one to the other
side of buyers, who are known upfront. The optimization
objective is to maximize the number of matches found by
an online algorithm, which can only make immediate and
irrevocable decisions sequentially. In the theoretical study of
OBM, a standard metric for measuring the performance of
an online algorithm is called competitive ratio (CR), which
is defined as the ratio between the matching size found by
the algorithm and the optimal offline matching on any input
bipartite graph instances. CRs range from 0 to 1 due to
the uncertainty of the online nature, and the closer they are
to 1, the better they are. Extensive works study OBM and
related problems by improving CRs either theoretically or
empirically. We refer readers to see (Devanur & Mehta,
2022; Mehta et al., 2013) for surveys.
Our work lies at AI-enhanced combinatorial optimization
theory. A recent work by Zhang et al. (2024a) gives the
first successful attempt. They focus on the upper bound
(also known as the hardness result) of the CR, which is a
theoretical bound of either an online algorithm or a problem.
In online optimization theory, the upper bound of an algorithm corresponds to the construction of a family of hard
instances for that algorithm, whereas the upper bound of
a problem corresponds to instances proved to be hard for
all algorithms. An improved upper bound often emerges
from a smarter construction of hard instances, which can
be highly non-trivial and heavily rely on the expertise of
a theoretical computer scientist. Zhang et al. (2024a) improves the best-known upper bound of an open-ended OBM
problem, by collaborating with the reinforcement learning
(RL) approach.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education,
Zhengzhou, China 3 Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System
Security, Wuhan, China 4 Songshan Laboratory, Zhengzhou, China
5
Visiting researcher with the Lion Rock Labs of Cyberspace Security, CTlHE, Hong Kong, China 6 School of Software Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
Correspondence to: Qiankun Zhang <qiankun@hust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

