Focal-SAM: Focal Sharpness-Aware Minimization for Long-Tailed Classification

Sicong Li 1 2 Qianqian Xu 3 Zhiyong Yang 4 Zitai Wang 3
Linchao Zhang 5 Xiaochun Cao 6 Qingming Huang 4 7 3

Abstract

success often relies on carefully curated, balanced datasets.
In real-world scenarios, data often exhibits a long-tailed
distribution, where a few categories have abundant samples while most categories contain only a small number
of examples. Long-tailed learning focuses on effectively
training models on such imbalanced datasets (Zhang et al.,
2023; 2024a). Numerous approaches have been proposed to
address this challenge, including re-sampling (Buda et al.,
2018), re-balancing (Cui et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2023), representation learning (Zhu et al., 2022; Cui
et al., 2024), ensemble learning (Wang et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2022), and fine-tuning foundation models (Dong et al.,
2023; Shi et al., 2024).

Real-world datasets often follow a long-tailed distribution, making generalization to tail classes difficult. Recent methods resorted to long-tail variants of Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM),
such as ImbSAM and CC-SAM, to improve generalization by flattening the loss landscape. However, these attempts face a trade-off between computational efficiency and control over the loss
landscape. On the one hand, ImbSAM is efficient
but offers only coarse control as it excludes head
classes from the SAM process. On the other hand,
CC-SAM provides fine-grained control through
class-dependent perturbations but at the cost of efficiency due to multiple backpropagations. Seeing
this dilemma, we introduce Focal-SAM, which
assigns different penalties to class-wise sharpness,
achieving fine-grained control without extra backpropagations, thus maintaining efficiency. Furthermore, we theoretically analyze Focal-SAM’s
generalization ability and derive a sharper generalization bound. Extensive experiments on both
traditional and foundation models validate the effectiveness of Focal-SAM.

Recently, Rangwani et al. (2022) visualized the loss landscape of different classes and observed that tail classes often suffer from saddle points. Since the loss landscape is
closely related to the generalization of modern neural networks (Keskar et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2020), they apply
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021)
to help tail classes escape from saddle points. Later, since
the original SAM operates on all classes, ImbSAM (Zhou
et al., 2023a) excludes the head classes to better focus on flattening the landscape of the tail classes. However, when combined with popular re-balancing methods (Cao et al., 2019;
Kini et al., 2021; Menon et al., 2021), this coarse-grained
approach often overemphasizes the tail classes, leading to
poor head and overall performance. To achieve fine-grained
control, CC-SAM (Zhou et al., 2023b) uses class-dependent
perturbation. However, the per-class perturbation requires at
least C additional backpropagations, where C denotes the
number of classes, making it rather computationally expensive. This raises a natural question: Can we design a method
that achieves both fine-grained control and computational
efficiency?

1. Introduction
In the past decades, deep learning has achieved remarkable
success in various fields, including image classification (He
et al., 2016), medical image processing (Ronneberger et al.,
2015), and object detection (Ren et al., 2015). However, this
1
Institute of Information Engineering, CAS 2 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Key
Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing
Tech., CAS 4 School of Computer Science and Tech., University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Artificial Intelligence Institute
of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, 6 School
of Cyber Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen
University 7 BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang <qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

Targeting this goal, we integrate the focal mechanism (Lin
et al., 2017) with SAM, inducing a novel approach named
Focal-SAM. Specifically, we introduce the focal sharpness
term, which is defined as the weighted sum of class-wise
sharpness, where the weights decrease in a focal-like manner from head to tail classes. On the one hand, Focal-SAM
controls the flatness of different classes in a fine-grained
way, better balancing the performance between head and tail
classes than ImbSAM, as shown in Fig.1(a). On the other

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

