Can Transformers Learn Full Bayesian Inference In Context?

Arik Reuter 1 Tim G. J. Rudner 2 Vincent Fortuin 3 4 5 David Rügamer 1 5

Abstract

tion answering or text summarization, using a fixed model
without requiring any gradient-based fine-tuning, simply by
referencing the context. Thereby, ICL enables the generation of real-time solutions through a localized understanding
of data without explicit re-training (Dong et al., 2022; Garg
et al., 2022).

Transformers have emerged as the dominant architecture in the field of deep learning, with a broad
range of applications and remarkable in-context
learning (ICL) capabilities. While not yet fully
understood, ICL has already proved to be an intriguing phenomenon, allowing transformers to
learn in context—without requiring further training. In this paper, we further advance the understanding of ICL by demonstrating that transformers can perform full Bayesian inference for commonly used statistical models in context. More
specifically, we introduce a general framework
that builds on ideas from prior fitted networks
and continuous normalizing flows and enables
us to infer complex posterior distributions for
models such as generalized linear models and
latent factor models. Extensive experiments on
real-world datasets demonstrate that our ICL approach yields posterior samples that are similar in
quality to state-of-the-art MCMC or variational
inference methods that do not operate in context. The source code for this paper is available
at https://github.com/ArikReuter/
ICL_for_Full_Bayesian_Inference

A fundamental benefit of ICL with LLMs is its versatility.
Almost every NLP task involving small data can be solved in
context using LLMs, while the performance often surpasses
existing baselines (Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Anil
et al., 2023). Additionally, achieving this performance can
be very straightforward, requiring only suitably formulated
prompts in natural language. Excellent results across a broad
variety of tasks, combined with fast inference times and
ease of usability, have made in-context learning a machine
learning tool employed by millions of people (Eloundou
et al., 2023).
Furthermore, ICL has recently shown remarkable promise
for regression and classification tasks involving tabular data,
with tabular prior-data fitted networks (TabPFNs) dominating benchmarks alongside minimal prediction time (Hollmann et al., 2022; 2025; Hoo et al., 2024; Robertson et al.,
2024). While the internet serves as a suitable source for
the massive data needed to train in-context learners on text,
TabPFNs demonstrate that training on purely synthetic data
facilitates the development of in-context learners for tabular
data.

1. Introduction

While PFNs perform Bayesian inference, they target a univariate, typically discrete, posterior predictive distribution.
In numerous applications, however, high-dimensional and
continuous posteriors P z|x of (latent) variables z given
data x play a key role.1 This includes areas such as healthcare (Kyrimi et al., 2021; Abdullah et al., 2022; Etzioni &
Kadane, 1995), physics (Gebhard et al., 2025; Brehmer &
Cranmer, 2022; Dax et al., 2024), and neuroscience (Lueckmann et al., 2017; Sohn & Narain, 2021). We use the notion
of full Bayesian inference for methods yielding potentially
complex and high-dimensional posterior distributions—in
contrast to, for instance, methods that yield only the pos-

In-context learning (ICL) has become a fundamental principle in natural language processing (NLP) with large language models (LLMs) as ubiquitous in-context learners.
The core principle of ICL is that a system adapts to a given
task based on information provided in its context. This enables the system to address complex problems, such as ques1

Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany 2 Center for Data Science, New York University, New
York, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 4 Helmholtz AI, Mu5
nich, Germany.
Munich Center for Machine Learning
(MCML), Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Arik Reuter
<arik.reuter@campus.lmu.de>.

1
We do not assume any specific form of z. That is, there can
be a single zj associated with each data point xj in x, but the case
where a single “global” z governs the behavior of each xj in x is
equally included in this notation.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

