Embedding Safety into RL: A New Take on Trust Region Methods

Nikola Milosevic 1 2 Johannes Müller 3 Nico Scherf 1 2

Abstract

training, posing significant risks in real-world applications.
Many methods have been proposed to improve the safety
of policy gradients, often based on the Constrained Markov
Decision Process (CMDP) framework. However, existing
methods either struggle to minimize constraint violations
during training or severely limit the agent’s performance.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents can solve diverse tasks but often exhibit unsafe behavior. Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs)
address this by enforcing safety constraints, yet
existing methods either sacrifice reward maximization or allow unsafe training. We introduce
Constrained Trust Region Policy Optimization (CTRPO), which reshapes the policy space geometry
to ensure trust regions contain only safe policies,
guaranteeing constraint satisfaction throughout
training. We analyze its theoretical properties
and connections to TRPO, Natural Policy Gradients, and Constrained Policy Optimization. Experiments show that C-TRPO reduces constraint
violations while maintaining competitive returns.

This work introduces a simple strategy to enhance constraint
satisfaction in trust region-based safe policy optimization
methods without compromising performance. We propose a
novel family of policy divergences, inspired by barrier function methods in optimization and safe control, that modify
the policy geometry to ensure that trust regions consist only
of safe policies. Our approach is motivated by the observation that TRPO and related methods base their trust region
on the state-average Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. It
can be derived as the Bregman divergence induced by the
negative conditional entropy on the space of state-action
occupancies (Neu et al., 2017).

1. Introduction

The key insight of this work is that safer trust regions can
be obtained by modifying this function to account for cost
constraints. This leads to a provably safe trust region-based
policy optimization algorithm that preserves TRPO’s guarantees, while simplifying existing methods and reducing
constraint violations during training, without sacrificing reward performance.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a highly successful paradigm in machine learning for solving sequential
decision and control problems, with policy gradient (PG)
algorithms as a popular approach (Williams, 1992; Sutton
et al., 1999; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999). Policy gradients are
especially appealing for high-dimensional continuous control because they can be easily extended to function approximation. Due to their flexibility and generality, there has been
significant progress in enhancing PGs to work robustly with
deep neural network-based approaches. PG-based policy
optimization methods such as Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) are
among the most widely used general-purpose reinforcement
learning algorithms (Schulman et al., 2017a;b).

Related Work Classic solution methods for CMDPs rely
on linear programming techniques, see (Altman, 1999).
However, they struggle to scale, making them unsuitable for
high-dimensional or continuous control problems. While
there are numerous scalable approaches to solving CMDPs,
we focus on model-free, direct policy optimization methods.
Model-based approaches (Berkenkamp et al., 2017; As et al.,
2025), are attractive due to their stability and safety guarantees, but require learning a model, which is not always
feasible, or imposes additional assumptions on the model
space.

While flexibility makes PGs popular among practitioners, it
comes at a cost: the policy can explore any behavior during
1

Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Leipzig 2 Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS.AI), Dresden/Leipzig 3 Institut für Mathematik,
Technische Universität Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Nikola Milosevic <nmilosevic@cbs.mpg.de>.

Lagrangian methods are a widely adopted approach, where
the optimization problem is reformulated as a weighted objective that balances rewards and penalties for constraint
violations. This is often motivated by Lagrangian duality, where the penalty coefficient is interpreted as the dual
variable. Learning the coefficient with stochastic gradient

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

