Transformer-Based Spatial-Temporal Counterfactual Outcomes Estimation

He Li * 1 Haoang Chi * 2 1 Mingyu Liu 1 Wanrong Huang 1 Liyang Xu 1 Wenjing Yang 1

Abstract

know, time and space are closely entangled and inseparable
(Einstein, 1915; 1922), and the physical world naturally
possesses spatial-temporal attributes. Thus, it is crucial to
perform counterfactual outcomes estimation with spatialtemporal attributes.

The real world naturally has dimensions of time
and space. Therefore, estimating the counterfactual outcomes with spatial-temporal attributes is
a crucial problem. However, previous methods
are based on classical statistical models, which
still have limitations in performance and generalization. This paper proposes a novel framework for estimating counterfactual outcomes with
spatial-temporal attributes using the Transformer,
exhibiting stronger estimation ability. Under mild
assumptions, the proposed estimator within this
framework is consistent and asymptotically normal. To validate the effectiveness of our approach,
we conduct simulation experiments and real data
experiments. Simulation experiments show that
our estimator has a stronger estimation capability
than baseline methods. Real data experiments provide a valuable conclusion to the causal effect of
conflicts on forest loss in Colombia. The source
code is available at this URL.

However, the classical causal inference frameworks (Pearl,
2010; Rubin, 1974) cannot be directly applied to estimate
counterfactual outcomes with spatial-temporal attributes.
A few studies Christiansen et al. (2022); Papadogeorgou
et al. (2022) have initially explored causal inference methods for spatial-temporal data based on classical statistical
models. Christiansen et al. (2022) propose to use the structural causal models for spatial-temporal data. However, in
their setting, current outcomes are mainly affected by current treatment. Thus, their estimands primarily focus on the
causal effects simultaneously, which does not fully address
the issue of temporal carryover effects. Papadogeorgou
et al. (2022) extend the potential outcomes framework to the
spatial-temporal setting. Although they propose the spatialtemporal potential outcomes framework, they don’t explicitly propose a method for the computation of propensity
scores with spatial-temporal attributes, which is essential
for outcomes estimation. Besides, they use classical statistical methods, such as kernel methods, which could suffer
from complicated data patterns. The kernel methods rely on
correctly specified kernel functions and smoothing parameters to ensure optimal performance. Thus, previous works
still have limitations in performance and generalization.

1. Introduction
Causal inference plays a vital role in various fields, such
as epidemiology (Lawlor et al., 2008; Robins et al., 2000)
and economics (Baum-Snow & Ferreira, 2015; Dague &
Lahey, 2019). Understanding and utilizing causality helps
us reveal the mechanisms of the physical world, predict
the occurrence of events in the real world, and manipulate
their outcomes. Counterfactual outcome prediction (Prosperi et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2025) is a promising direction
in causal inference. In practice, some causal problems have
spatial-temporal attributes, such as the well-known “Butterfly Effect”: a butterfly flapping its wings in Brazil may
eventually lead to a tornado in the United States. As we

In this work, we propose a novel framework for the estimation of counterfactual outcomes with spatial-temporal
attributes using deep learning. An overview of the studied
problem is shown in Figure 1, the studied spatial-temporal
data is the time series of point patterns. Our objective is
to estimate the expected number of occurrences of the outcome events within a specific region under a counterfactual
treatment assignment strategy. The counterfactual treatment
assignment strategy refers to a strategy that does not exist
in the observational data. In other words, we aim to investigate “what will happen to outcome events when we employ
other treatment strategies?”. Accordingly, we propose deeplearning-based estimators within a spatial-temporal causal
inference framework motivated by Papadogeorgou et al.
(2022). The proposed estimators account for the effects
of past treatments on current outcomes, thus capturing the

*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha,
China 2 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Academy of Military Science, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Wenjing Yang
<wenjing.yang@nudt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

