How Do Images Align and Complement LiDAR?
Towards a Harmonized Multi-modal 3D Panoptic Segmentation

Yining Pan 1 Qiongjie Cui 1 Xulei Yang 2 Na Zhao 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

3D Panoptic segmentation simultaneously assigns semantic
labels and identifies distinct instances, effectively unifying
3D semantic (Zhao et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023b) and instance (Li & Zhao, 2024) segmentation to provide a holistic
understanding of the scene. This task is particularly crucial
for real-world applications, such as dynamic object tracking (Yang et al., 2023) and autonomous driving (Hong et al.,
2021; Cao et al., 2024). LiDAR is an indispensable sensor
for perceiving the 3D world, with its LiDAR point cloud
typically serving as the sole input for 3D panoptic segmentation (Razani et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022a).
However, LiDAR inherently faces limitations in detecting
small or distant objects due to its radial emission pattern,
which results in sparse returns along each laser ray (Li et al.,
2022b). Consequently, entities that are small or located at a
distance may not receive sufficient information. In contrast,
camera images provide denser and more detailed representations, effectively compensating for the sparsity in LiDAR
data, particularly in these challenging scenarios.

LiDAR-based 3D panoptic segmentation often
struggles with the inherent sparsity of data from
LiDAR sensors, which makes it challenging to
accurately recognize distant or small objects. Recently, a few studies have sought to overcome
this challenge by integrating LiDAR inputs with
camera images, leveraging the rich and dense texture information provided by the latter. While
these approaches have shown promising results,
they still face challenges, such as misalignment
during data augmentation and the reliance on postprocessing steps. To address these issues, we propose Image-Assists-LiDAR (IAL), a novel multimodal 3D panoptic segmentation framework. In
IAL, we first introduce a modality-synchronized
data augmentation strategy, PieAug, to ensure
alignment between LiDAR and image inputs from
the start. Next, we adopt a transformer decoder to
directly predict panoptic segmentation results. To
effectively fuse LiDAR and image features into
tokens for the decoder, we design a Geometricguided Token Fusion (GTF) module. Additionally, we leverage the complementary strengths of
each modality as priors for query initialization
through a Prior-based Query Generation (PQG)
module, enhancing the decoder’s ability to generate accurate instance masks. Our IAL framework achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to previous multi-modal 3D panoptic segmentation methods on two widely used benchmarks. Code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/IMPL-Lab/IAL.git.

This complementary nature has motivated the use of
multi-modal information for enhanced panoptic segmentation. Recently, LCPS (Zhang et al., 2023) and PanopticFusionNet (Song et al., 2024) have pioneered LiDAR-andimage fusion methods for multi-modal 3D panoptic segmentation. However, these methods only perform augmentation
on the LiDAR side, leading to misalignment between the
two modalities. This misalignment hinders effective integration of information from both modalities, causing the
models to rely predominantly on LiDAR data, rather than
fully utilizing both LiDAR and image data. Moreover, the
prediction heads in LCPS and Panoptic-FusionNet do not
directly predict 3D panoptic segmentation results. Instead,
they use a post-processing strategy that involves clustering
instances after semantic segmentation (Zhou et al., 2021).
This strategy presents two issues: 1) The post-processing
step is inefficient and limits the effectiveness of segmentation by relying on preliminary results; 2) Their convolutionbased prediction heads rely on local context, which may be
suboptimal for panoptic segmentation as it requires global
context for accurate predictions.

1

Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), A*STAR, Singapore. Correspondence to: Na Zhao <na zhao@sutd.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address the first limitation, we propose a modality1

