Dimension-Free Adaptive Subgradient Methods with Frequent Directions

Sifan Yang * 1 2 Yuanyu Wan * 3 4 Peijia Li 1 2 Yibo Wang 1 2 Xiao Zhang 5 Zhewei Wei 5 Lijun Zhang 1 6 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Adaptive subgradient methods have attracted considerable
research interest in past decades, which simplify the learning rate selection while ensuring that their regret bounds are
comparable to those obtained through manual tuning (Duchi
et al., 2010a; Hazan & Koren, 2012; Agarwal et al., 2019).
The pioneering work of Duchi et al. (2011) introduces
adaptive subgradient methods with full matrices (ADAFULL) within both the primal-dual subgradient framework
(Xiao, 2009) and the mirror descent framework (Duchi
et al., 2010b). ADA-FULL achieves a regret bound of
1/2
O(tr(GT )), where GT is the sum of gradient outer products over T rounds, and this regret bound is better than that
of non-adaptive methods when gradients are sparse. However, ADA-FULL requires maintaining a preconditioning
matrix to store the past gradient outer products and computing the inverse of this preconditioning matrix, resulting in
an O(d2 ) space complexity and an O(d3 ) time complexity,
respectively, where d is the dimensionality. Thus, ADAFULL is impractical for large-scale machine learning tasks
involving high-dimensional data.

In this paper, we investigate the acceleration of
adaptive subgradient methods through frequent
directions (FD), a widely-used matrix sketching
technique. The state-of-the-art regret bound exhibits a linear dependence on the dimensionality d, leading to unsatisfactory guarantees for
high-dimensional problems. Additionally, it suffers from an O(τ 2 d) time complexity per round,
which scales quadratically with the sketching size
τ . To overcome these issues, we first propose
an algorithm named FTSL, achieving a tighter
regret bound that is independent of the dimensionality. The key idea is to integrate FD with adaptive
subgradient methods under the primal-dual framework and add the cumulative discarded information of FD back. To reduce its time complexity,
we further utilize fast FD to expedite FTSL, yielding a better complexity of O(τ d) while maintaining the same regret bound. Moreover, to mitigate
the computational cost for optimization problems
involving matrix variables (e.g., training neural
networks), we adapt FD to Shampoo, a popular
optimization algorithm that accounts for the structure of decision, and give a novel analysis under
the primal-dual framework. Our proposed method
obtains an improved dimension-free regret bound.
Experimental results have verified the efficiency
and effectiveness of our approaches.

To address these limitations, several studies propose adopting frequent directions (FD) (Ghashami et al., 2016) to
reduce the computational complexity of ADA-FULL (Wan
et al., 2018; Wan & Zhang, 2022; Feinberg et al., 2023).
In particular, Wan et al. (2018) first develop an efficient
variant of ADA-FULL, namely ADA-FD, by employing FD
to approximate the sum of gradient outer products over
the past rounds. Let τ ≪ d denote the sketching size
and ρt denote the discarded eigenvalue of FD in round t.
ADA-FD reduces the space and time complexities to O(τ d)
PT √
1/2
and O(τ 2 d), while enjoying O(tr(GT ) + t=1 ρt )
PT
√
1/2
and O(tr(GT ) + t=1 τ ρt ) regret bounds under the
primal-dual subgradient framework and the mirror descent
framework, respectively. Moreover, by exploiting an accelerated trick for FD, Wan & Zhang (2022) further propose ADA-FFD with O(τ d) space and time complexities,
while keeping the same regret bounds. Recently, Feinberg et al. (2023) design Sketchy-ADAGRAD (S-ADA)
under the mirror descent
p framework, which achieves a bet1/2
ter O(tr(GT ) + d(d − τ )ρ1:T ) regret bound, where
PT
ρ1:T =
t=1 ρt . The key idea is to utilize a variant of
FD (Chen et al., 2020), which adds back the cumulative

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 School of
Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 3 School
of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
4
Hangzhou HighTech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and
Data Security, Hangzhou, China 5 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 6 Pazhou
Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

