Trustworthy Machine Learning through Data-Specific Indistinguishability

Hanshen Xiao 1 2 Zhen Yang 2 G. Edward Suh 1

Abstract

reference inputs (datasets). We formalize the framework of
Differential Trust (DT) as follows. Given a processing function F, a target input U, and a group of reference datasets
R[1:m] = {R1 , · · · , Rm }, (some of) the outputs F(Ri ) derived from the reference datasets are assumed to be safe; our
objective is to regulate the divergence between the output
F(U) generated from U and the outputs F(Ri ) from the
references. Several concrete examples are listed below.

This paper studies a range of AI/ML trust concepts, including memorization, data poisoning,
and copyright, which can be modeled as constraints on the influence of data on a (trained)
model, characterized by the outcome difference
from a processing function (training algorithm).
In this realm, we show that provable trust guarantees can be efficiently provided through a new
framework termed Data-Specific Indistinguishability (DSI) to select trust-preserving randomization tightly aligning with targeted outcome
differences, as a relaxation of the classic InputIndependent Indistinguishability (III). We establish both the theoretical and algorithmic foundations of DSI with the optimal multivariate Gaussian mechanism. We further show its applications to develop trustworthy deep learning with
black-box optimizers. The experimental results
on memorization mitigation, backdoor defense,
and copyright protection show both the efficiency
and effectiveness of the DSI noise mechanism.

Memorization: Unintended memorization is a common issue in large models, where the model learns specific details
or features from individual examples rather than capturing
the common patterns of the underlying data distribution
(Tirumala et al., 2022). In the context of language models (LMs), mitigating memorization typically involves defending against queries that attempt to regurgitate sensitive
training data verbatim (Zanella-Béguelin et al., 2020). For
instance, (Tirumala et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2022) define
memorization behaviors as follows: given a concatenated
context from the input training set in a form [p|s], the LM is
able to exactly reproduce s when prompted with p. Suppose
[p|s] is uniquely contained in a sample u ∈ U, and F is a
training algorithm. By selecting a reference R = U \ u, the
resulting model F(R) can be considered safe against the
memorization of [p|s], as this feature is never seen by the
model during training (Carlini et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

Data Poisoning (Backdoor) Attack: By injecting speciallycrafted training data, an attacker can manipulate the training
process to embed hidden, malicious behavior into the model
while maintaining its performance on normal data. For example, adding a specific patch to an image might cause the
model to misclassify it when a particular sticker is present
(Gu et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2018). Existing empirical defense largely relies on filtering suspicious samples (Jagielski
et al., 2018; Baracaldo et al., 2017) or robust gradient aggregator (Tran et al., 2018; Kane et al., 2024), while providing
provable guarantees remains challenging. In the DT framework, consider a (virtual) distributed setup where U consists
of data collected from m sources, with one of them being
poisoned. Let Ri represent the subset of U after excluding
all data provided by the i-th source. Among the m models
F(Ri ), i ∈ [1 : m] = {1, 2, . . . , m}, there is guaranteed to
be at least one model trained entirely on benign data.

The remarkable advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) in recent years have been largely
driven by optimizing loss functions based on predictive
accuracy. Despite this success, the widespread deployment
of AI has raised a range of societal and ethical concerns,
particularly related to the use of data and its impact on
trained models. These concerns have spurred the emergence
of research on trustworthy data processing.
In this paper, we present a unified and systematic framework
for a critical subset of trust concepts. These concepts can
be modeled as constraints on the differences between the
outputs of an algorithm (a machine learning training algorithm) for a given input (dataset) and an additional set of
1
NVIDIA 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Hanshen Xiao <hsxiao@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Copyright and Contribution: Ensuring training samples

1

