A Two-Stage Learning-to-Defer Approach for Multi-Task Learning

Yannis Montreuil 1 2 3 * Shu Heng Yeo 1 * Axel Carlier 4 5 Lai Xing Ng 2 5 Wei Tsang Ooi 1 5

Abstract

learning-based model has lower confidence than the most
confident expert. This deference mechanism enhances
safety, which is particularly crucial in high-stakes scenarios
(Mozannar & Sontag, 2020; Mozannar et al., 2023; Mao,
2025). For example, in medical diagnostics, the system
utilizes patient-acquired data to deliver an initial diagnosis
(Johnson et al., 2023; 2016). If the model is sufficiently
confident, its diagnosis is accepted; otherwise, the decision
is deferred to a medical expert who provides the final diagnosis. Such tasks, which can directly impact human lives,
underscore the need to develop reliable systems (Balagurunathan et al., 2021).

The Two-Stage Learning-to-Defer (L2D) framework has been extensively studied for classification and, more recently, regression tasks. However, many real-world applications require solving
both tasks jointly in a multi-task setting. We introduce a novel Two-Stage L2D framework for
multi-task learning that integrates classification
and regression through a unified deferral mechanism. Our method leverages a two-stage surrogate loss family, which we prove to be both
Bayes-consistent and (G, R)-consistent, ensuring convergence to the Bayes-optimal rejector.
We derive explicit consistency bounds tied to
the cross-entropy surrogate and the L1 -norm of
agent-specific costs, and extend minimizability
gap analysis to the multi-expert two-stage regime.
We also make explicit how shared representation learning—commonly used in multi-task models—affects these consistency guarantees. Experiments on object detection and electronic health
record analysis demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach and highlight the limitations of existing L2D methods in multi-task scenarios.

Learning-to-Defer has been extensively studied in classification problems (Madras et al., 2018; Verma et al., 2023;
Mozannar & Sontag, 2020; Mozannar et al., 2023; Mao
et al., 2023a) and, more recently, in regression scenarios
(Mao et al., 2024h). However, many modern complex tasks
involve both regression and classification components, requiring deferral to be applied to both components simultaneously, as they cannot be treated independently. For instance,
in object detection, a model predicts both the class of an
object and its location using a regressor, with these outputs
being inherently interdependent (Girshick, 2015; Redmon
et al., 2016; Buch et al., 2017). In practice, deferring only
localization or classification is not meaningful, as decisionmakers will treat these two tasks simultaneously. A failure
in either component—such as misclassifying the object or
inaccurately estimating its position—can undermine the entire problem, emphasizing the importance of coordinated
deferral strategies that address both components jointly.

1. Introduction
Learning-to-Defer (L2D) integrates predictive models with
human experts—or, more broadly, decision-makers—to optimize systems requiring high reliability (Madras et al.,
2018). This approach benefits from the scalability of machine learning models and leverages expert knowledge to address complex queries (Hemmer et al., 2021). The Learningto-Defer approach defers decisions to experts when the

This potential for failure underscores the need for a
Learning-to-Defer approach tailored to multi-task problems
involving both classification and regression. We propose a
novel framework for multi-task environments, incorporating
expertise from multiple experts and the predictor-regressor
model. We focus our work on the two-stage scenario, where
the model is already trained offline. This setting is relevant
when retraining from scratch the predictor-regressor model
is either too costly or not feasible due to diverse constraints
such as non-open models (Mao et al., 2023a; 2024h). We
approximate the true deferral loss using a surrogate deferral
loss family, based on cross-entropy, and tailored for the twostage setting, ensuring that the loss effectively approximates
the original discontinuous loss function. Our theoretical

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
CNRS@CREATE LTD, 1 Create Way, Singapore 4 IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, Toulouse INP, Toulouse, France 5 IPAL,
IRL2955, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yannis Montreuil <yannis.montreuil@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

