Volume-Aware Distance for Robust Similarity Learning

Shuo Chen 1 Chen Gong 2 Jun Li 2 Jian Yang 2

Abstract

Sampled Data

Measuring the similarity between data points
plays a vital role in lots of popular representation learning tasks such as metric learning and
contrastive learning. Most existing approaches
utilize point-level distances to learn the pointto-point similarity between pairwise instances.
However, since the finite number of training data
points cannot fully cover the whole sample space
consisting of an infinite number of points, the
generalizability of the learned distance is usually limited by the sample size. In this paper, we
thus extend the conventional form of data point
to the new form of data ball with a predictable
volume, so that we can naturally generalize the existing point-level distance to a new volume-aware
distance (VAD) which measures the field-to-field
geometric similarity. The learned VAD not only
takes into account the relationship between observed instances but also uncovers the similarity
among those unsampled neighbors surrounding
the training data. This practice significantly enriches the coverage of sample space and thus improves the model generalizability. Theoretically,
we prove that VAD tightens the error bound of
traditional similarity learning and preserves crucial topological properties. Experiments on multidomain data demonstrate the superiority of VAD
over existing approaches in both supervised and
unsupervised tasks.

Unsampled Data

Pull/Push

Boundary

training
bumpy

bumpy

(a). Concept illustration of the traditional point-level distance
training
flat

flat

(b). Concept illustration of our volume-aware distance (VAD)

Figure 1. A quick comparison between the traditional point-level
distance and our proposed VAD. By considering the volume awareness, our VAD can obtain the flatter decision boundary for better
generalizability than the traditional distance.

stream recognitions (Weinberger et al., 2006; Xing et al.,
2002; Liu et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2024). Over the past
decades, similarity learning has achieved remarkable success, showing its potency in diverse representative tasks,
such as classification (Kaya & Bilge, 2019), clustering
(Zhong et al., 2020), and retrieval (Kou et al., 2022).
Typically, similarity learning algorithms are provided with
(pseudo) supervision in the form of pairwise relationships
(e.g., similar or dissimilar) derived from the training data
(Sohn, 2016; Feng et al., 2023). Then the learning algorithms pull similar instances closer while pushing dissimilar
ones apart, and the overarching goal of similarity learning
is to make the learned similarity metric robust and generalizable when applied to the complex test phase with unseen
data (Yan et al., 2023b; Kaya & Bilge, 2019).

1. Introduction
Similarity learning has been a longstanding focus of research, aiming to learn to measure pairwise similarity between instances. The learned similarity metric and feature
representation can serve as essential components for down1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China. Correspondence
to: Shuo Chen <shuo.chen@nju.edu.cn>.

Substantial progress has been made toward this goal through
the design of various loss functions (Liu & Tsang, 2015;
Sohn, 2016; Oh Song et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2020) and
plentiful regularization terms (Chen et al., 2021; Yan et al.,
2022b; Wang & Qi, 2023; Chen et al., 2024a). These methods refine the sampling process and constrain the hypothesis

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

