De-AntiFake: Rethinking the Protective Perturbations
Against Voice Cloning Attacks

Wei Fan 1 Kejiang Chen 1 Chang Liu 1 Weiming Zhang 1 Nenghai Yu 1
Imperceptible
Protective Perturbation

Abstract
The rapid advancement of speech generation models has heightened privacy and security concerns
related to voice cloning (VC). Recent studies
have investigated disrupting unauthorized voice
cloning by introducing adversarial perturbations.
However, determined attackers can mitigate these
protective perturbations and successfully execute
VC. In this study, we conduct the first systematic evaluation of these protective perturbations
against VC under realistic threat models that include perturbation purification. Our findings reveal that while existing purification methods can
neutralize a considerable portion of the protective perturbations, they still lead to distortions
in the feature space of VC models, which degrades the performance of VC. From this perspective, we propose a novel two-stage purification
method: (1) Purify the perturbed speech; (2) Refine it using phoneme guidance to align it with
the clean speech distribution. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art purification methods in disrupting
VC defenses. Our study reveals the limitations of
adversarial perturbation-based VC defenses and
underscores the urgent need for more robust solutions to mitigate the security and privacy risks
posed by VC. The code and audio samples are
available at https://de-antifake.github.io.

Victim
“Hi, how are you?”

Clean
Speech

Purification

Protected
Speech

Purified
Speech

Voice Cloning Model

Attacker
“Can you send
me $100?”

Victim-Like
Synthesized
Speech

Non-Victim
Synthesized
Speech

Victim-Like
Synthesized
Speech

Speaker Verification System / Human Recognition

Victim

Victim

Victim

Figure 1. Illustrations of existing protection methods against voice
cloning attacks in the presence of adversarial purification. The
dashed lines represent the operations of the attacker.

chatbots, and providing assistive devices for individuals
with speech impairments (Koronka, 2024; OpenAI, 2024).
However, these advancements also pose risks for illegal uses,
such as deceiving individuals, bypassing speaker verification
systems, or violating copyrights. For instance, VC technology has been used to deceive identity verification systems
in banks and government agencies (Nick Evershed, 2023;
Cox, 2023). In a separate incident, scammers impersonated
a CFO during a fraudulent call, tricking an employee into
transferring $25 million (Andrews, 2024). These incidents
highlight the potential of VC to deceive both digital systems
and humans, raising significant security and privacy concerns. In response, organizations such as OpenAI and the
FTC have released reports on VC’s implications (OpenAI,
2024; FTC, 2024).

1. Introduction
With rapid advancements in Voice Cloning (VC) technology,
generating highly realistic speech from just a few seconds of
a target speaker’s voice is now possible. This technology has
diverse applications, including enhancing virtual assistants,
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security, University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence to: Kejiang Chen <chenkj@ustc.edu.cn>.

To address emerging threats posed by VC, researchers have
explored various solutions, including proactive and passive
detection, as well as proactive defense mechanisms (Wenger
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024b; San Roman et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a; Ren et al., 2023; Deng et al.,
2023; Ji et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Blue et al., 2022).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Among these approaches, protective perturbations are regarded as a promising technique for safeguarding speech.
By adding imperceptible distortions to speech, they prevent

1

1

