TGDPO: Harnessing Token-Level Reward Guidance for Enhancing Direct
Preference Optimization

Mingkang Zhu 1 Xi Chen 2 Zhongdao Wang 3 Bei Yu 1 Hengshuang Zhao 2 Jiaya Jia 4 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has become a crucial technique for aligning Large Language models (LLMs) with human preferences and intentions (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ziegler et al., 2020). This approach has demonstrated significant success in recent LLMs
advancements (OpenAI et al., 2024; Team et al., 2024a;
Grattafiori et al., 2024; Team et al., 2024b). In typical RLHF
workflows, a reward model is first trained using human feedback, and then the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) is employed to fine-tune
the policy model. Typically, in these methods, a sequencelevel reward is assigned to the last token of a sequence.
However, this approach faces challenges, such as the sparse
reward problem (i.e., delayed feedback), which leads to instability and sample inefficiency in PPO training (Choshen
et al., 2020). This issue is particularly pronounced in LLM
training, where responses are often lengthy and generated
at the token level (Yang et al., 2023). Recent research has
suggested that leveraging dense token-level reward models
(Yang et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2025; Zhong et al., 2024) can
help alleviate these issues, improving PPO’s performance
in aligning LLMs with human preferences.

Recent advancements in reinforcement learning
from human feedback have shown that utilizing
fine-grained token-level reward models can substantially enhance the performance of Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) in aligning large language models. However, it is challenging to leverage such token-level reward as guidance for Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), since DPO
is formulated as a sequence-level bandit problem. To address this challenge, this work decomposes the sequence-level PPO into a sequence of
token-level proximal policy optimization problems and then frames the problem of token-level
PPO with token-level reward guidance, from
which closed-form optimal token-level policy and
the corresponding token-level reward can be derived. Using the obtained reward and BradleyTerry model, this work establishes a framework
of computable loss functions with token-level reward guidance for DPO, and proposes a practical
reward guidance based on the induced DPO reward. This formulation enables different tokens
to exhibit varying degrees of deviation from reference policy based on their respective rewards.
Experiment results demonstrate that our method
achieves substantial performance improvements
over DPO, with win rate gains of up to 7.5 points
on MT-Bench, 6.2 points on AlpacaEval 2, and
4.3 points on Arena-Hard. Code is available at
https://github.com/dvlab-research/TGDPO.

Recent developments in RLHF have centered around creating simpler and more efficient algorithms that eliminate
the need for a separate reward model. A notable approach
in this direction is Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
(Rafailov et al., 2023). DPO reparameterizes the reward
function in RLHF by directly using preference data to optimize the policy model, bypassing the traditionally required
step of training a separate reward model. This reparameterization streamlines the alignment process, making DPO a
popular algorithm for LLM alignment. While dense tokenlevel reward guidance has been proved beneficial for PPO
(Yang et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2025; Zhong et al., 2024),
its extension to DPO is nontrivial, as DPO is formulated
as a sequence-level bandit problem. In this context, the
reward is expressed through the policy being optimized, and
integrating token-level reward guidance into this framework
presents a significant challenge, especially in eliminating
the partition function from the loss function.

1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of
Hong Kong 3 Huawei 4 SmartMore 5 The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Mingkang Zhu
<mkzhu23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Jiaya Jia <jia@cse.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To fill this gap, we decompose the sequence-level proximal
1

