Homophily Enhanced Graph Domain Adaptation

Ruiyi Fang 1 * Bingheng Li 2 * Jingyu Zhao 3 Ruizhi Pu 1 Qiuhao Zeng 1 Gezheng Xu 1 Charles Ling 1 4
Boyu Wang 1 4

Abstract

by leveraging deep domain adaptation techniques (Shen
et al., 2020b; Wu et al., 2020). While these approaches have
achieved promising results in GDA (Yan & Wang, 2020;
Shen et al., 2023), their efforts are centered on mitigating
the discrepancy in structural and attribute distributions.

Graph Domain Adaptation (GDA) transfers
knowledge from labeled source graphs to unlabeled target graphs, addressing the challenge of
label scarcity. In this paper, we highlight the
significance of graph homophily, a pivotal factor for graph domain alignment, which, however,
has long been overlooked in existing approaches.
Specifically, our analysis first reveals that homophily discrepancies exist in benchmarks. Moreover, we also show that homophily discrepancies
degrade GDA performance from both empirical
and theoretical aspects, which further underscores
the importance of homophily alignment in GDA.
Inspired by this finding, we propose a novel homophily alignment algorithm that employs mixed
filters to smooth graph signals, thereby effectively
capturing and mitigating homophily discrepancies
between graphs. Experimental results on a variety of benchmarks verify the effectiveness of our
method.

(a) Airport dataset

(b) ACM dataset

Figure 1. This represents node homophily distibution in two benchmark. The dotted line represents the overall node homophily ratio
of the entire graph. This shows the local node homophily distibution shift is existing in various levels of homophilic groups.
Homophily means that similar nodes are prone to connect to each
other.

In this work, we highlight the role of graph homophily discrepancies and their impact on GDA performance. Specifically, we investigate the local homophily distribution of
graph on two GDA benchmarks, as shown in Figure 1. It
can be observed that while the overall homophily distribution discrepancy of the graph is relatively small, the discrepancy within homophilic and heterophilic subgroups is
more substantial. For example, as shown in Figure 1 (a),
the overall graph node homophily ratio between ACM3 and
ACM4 appears relatively similar, and the distribution of
homophilic and heterophilic groups varies more substantially. To further investigate its impact on GDA, we conduct
another experiment to explore how the homophilic ratio
affects the cross-network performances, as shown in Figure 2. It can be observed that the classification accuracy
of target graph nodes exhibits a negative correlation with
homophily divergence across different homophily ratios
in datasets, which indicates the importance of separately
dealing with heterophilic and homophilic groups. Besides,
this observation also suggests that the discrepancies in homophilic distributions between source and target graphs
may significantly impact target node classification perfor-

1. Introduction
In the era of massive graph data collection, graphs often
integrate both structural topology and node attributes, providing rich contexts for numerous real-world applications.
However, they are often constrained by label scarcity, as annotating structured data remains challenging and costly (Xu
et al., 2022; 2024b; Zeng et al., 2024; 2023). To address this
challenge, Graph Domain Adaptation (GDA) has emerged
as an effective paradigm to transfer knowledge from labeled source graphs to unlabeled target graphs (Chen et al.,
2019; Shi et al., 2024). Conventional GDA methods primarily focus on aligning graph structures across domains
*

Equal contribution 1 Western University, Ontario, Canada
Michigan State University, Michigan, USA 3 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan
Province, China 4 Vector Institute, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to: Boyu Wang <bwang@csd.uwo.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

