ENSUR: Equitable and Statistically Unbiased Recommendation

Nitin Bisht 1 Xiuwen Gong 1 Guandong Xu 2

Abstract

the platform’s credibility. In recent years, few recommendation approaches (Naghiaei et al., 2022; KWEON et al.,
2024) are developed for model confidence. However, these
methods are heuristic modeling without statistical guarantee. Meanwhile, fairness is another critical issue that may
harm user experience and undermine platform reliability.
Some fairness-based recommendation models have been
developed in recent years (Li et al., 2023; Han et al., 2024).
While these papers alleviate fairness issues in recommendation systems, they are typically empirically validated without statistical guarantees for both performance and fairness.

Although Recommender Systems (RS) have been
well-developed for various fields of applications,
they often suffer from a crisis of platform credibility with respect to RS confidence and fairness,
which may drive users away, threatening the platform’s long-term success. In recent years, some
works have tried to solve these issues; however,
they lack strong statistical guarantees. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to solve both issues with
a unifying framework with robust statistical guarantees. In this paper, we propose a novel and reliable framework called Equitable and Statistically
Unbiased Recommendation (ENSUR)) to dynamically generate prediction sets for users across various groups, which are guaranteed 1) to include
ground-truth items with user-predefined high confidence/probability (e.g., 90%); 2) to ensure user
fairness across different groups; 3) to have minimum efficient average prediction set sizes. We further design an efficient algorithm named Guaranteed User Fairness Algorithm (GUFA) to optimize
the proposed method and derive upper bounds of
risk and fairness metrics to speed up optimization
process. Moreover, we provide rigorous theoretical analysis concerning risk and fairness control
and minimum set size. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed framework,
which aligns with our theoretical analysis.

As a result, we are motivated to develop a complete and
statistically guaranteed recommendation framework that
considers both model confidence and fairness issues as a
whole in this paper. Our overall goal is to construct set predictors that can generate minimum prediction set for each
user while guaranteeing model confidence and ensuring user
fairness among different groups. Thus, objectives of our
framework are threefold: (1) to construct prediction sets
that cover true item with high user pre-defined probability,
say 90% (i.e., confidence level); (2) to guarantee user fairness across different groups; and (3) to guarantee minimum
average set size while ensuring (1) and (2).
Inspired by Risk-Controlling Prediction Sets (RCPS) (Bates
et al., 2021b) - a powerful statistical tool, we propose a
reliable and fair framework called Equitable and Statistically Unbiased Recommendation (ENSUR)) to achieve the
above-mentioned objectives. However, RCPS in its natural
form, is designed only to ensure coverage guarantees. As a
result, it does not address our key objectives, specifically: 1)
how to guarantee fairness among different user groups definitions in a statistical way? 2) how to improve the efficiency
of constructing prediction sets when the search range is so
large? 3) how to produce recommendation sets with minimum size? 4) how to theoretically guarantee the constructed
prediction sets meet the risk control and fairness definition
as well as minimum set size? To address these gaps, we first
define an estimator called fairness metric, which is required
to meet the Fairness-Controlling Prediction Sets (FCPS) defined in a similar way as that of risk control. We then build
our objective function by minimizing average prediction set
while making it meet both RCPS and FCPS constraints for
all users across different groups. Subsequently, we derive
upper bounds for both the risk and fairness to accelerate

1. Introduction
Recommender Systems (RS) (Aggarwal, 2016; Fan et al.,
2022; Sharma et al., 2024) are a type of information filtering
system designed to provide suggestions to users based on
their preferences. While much effort goes into improving
accuracy of these recommendation models, less attention
has been paid to model confidence, affecting users’ trust in
1

University of Technology, Sydney 2 The Education University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Xiuwen Gong <Xiuwen.Gong@uts.edu.au>, Guandong Xu <gdxu@eduhk.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

