Reliable and Efficient Amortized Model-based Evaluation
Sang Truong 1 Yuheng Tu 2 Percy Liang 1 Bo Li 3 4 Sanmi Koyejo 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Modern generative models are general-purpose tools with
numerous capabilities and safety risks. Understanding
and improving their performance requires comprehensively
evaluating them across multiple benchmarks. During
model development, iterative evaluation is crucial to identify issues before deployment. As more models are released and evolve through adjustment by the community,
assessing their performance periodically is essential from a
governance perspective. The average score on a range of
benchmarks provides a signal that helps guide the use of
these models in practice.

Comprehensive evaluations of language models
(LM) during both development and deployment
phases are necessary because these models are
thought to possess numerous capabilities as well
as safety risks. The average score across a wide
range of benchmarks provides a signal that helps
guide the use of these LMs in practice. Currently, holistic evaluations are costly due to the
large volume of benchmark questions, making
frequent evaluations impractical. A popular attempt to lower the cost is to compute the average score on a subset of the benchmark. This approach, unfortunately, often renders an unreliable
measure of LM performance because the average
score is often confounded with the difficulty of
the questions in the benchmark subset. Item response theory (IRT) was designed to address this
challenge, providing a reliable measurement by
careful controlling for question difficulty. Unfortunately, question difficulty is expensive to estimate. Facing this challenge, we train a model
that predicts question difficulty from its content,
enabling a reliable measurement at a fraction
of the cost. In addition, we leverage this difficulty predictor to further improve the evaluation
efficiency through training a question generator
given a difficulty level. This question generator
is essential in adaptive testing, where, instead of
using a random subset of the benchmark questions, informative questions are adaptively chosen based on the current estimation of LLM performance. Experiments on 22 common natural
language benchmarks and 183 LMs show that
this approach is more reliable and efficient compared to the current common practice.1

Modern benchmarks, such as the Holistic Evaluation of
Language Models (HELM) (Liang, 2023), typically involve hundreds of thousands of questions. Evaluating such
large datasets is resource intensive: each language model
(LM) might take hours, days, or even weeks to produce
answers, demanding many high-performance computers
(Liang, 2023, Page 6). In addition, grading these answers
often requires a judge, which might cost hundreds of human annotator hours or thousands of dollars when using
high-performance-but-expensive LM judges (Zheng et al.,
2023). This expensive process drastically hinders the development and deployment of generative models.
A common attempt to reduce the evaluation cost in practice is to use the average scores from a subset of the dataset
(Liang, 2023, Page 81; Saranathan et al., 2024). Here, an
LM comparison based on average scores is valid if the LMs
are evaluated on the same subset. However, maintaining
the same subset for a valid average score comparison is
often impractical. In healthcare, for example, it is unreliable to compare LMs performance if they are evaluated
on different hospital datasets, which cannot be shared due
to privacy concerns. In AI security, two models cannot be
reliably compared based on the average attack success rate
because the evaluator often adaptively adjusts the question
difficulty to better attack the model. In these cases, evaluation based on the average score from a subset of the
benchmark is unreliable because the average score is confounded with the question’s difficulty. The apparent dependency on the subset is not a new issue. It is an issue in any
evaluation procedure that uses average scores on a subset
to assess performance, a paradigm known as classical test
theory (CTT) dating back to the 1800s (Edgeworth, 1888;

1
Stanford University 2 University of California, Berkeley
Virtue AI 4 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Sang Truong <sttruong@cs.stanford.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code: github.com/sangttruong/reeval.
Adaptive testing on 22 datasets has been integrated into HELM: crfmhelm.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reeval/

1

