Falsification of Unconfoundedness by Testing
Independence of Causal Mechanisms

Rickard K.A. Karlsson 1 Jesse H. Krijthe 1

Abstract

tion is that we assume there is no unmeasured confounding,
meaning that there are no unobserved factors that have both
an influence on the treatment and on the outcome of interest
that are not accounted for by the method. If unmeasured
confounders are present, our treatment effect estimates are
likely to be biased and inconsistent (Greenland et al., 1999).
This can have serious downstream consequences such as
unknowingly recommending a non-effective or, even worse,
potentially harmful treatment policy. Unfortunately, without
making further assumptions, it is in general impossible to
verify all assumptions needed to identify treatment effects
from observational data.

A major challenge in estimating treatment effects in observational studies is the reliance on
untestable conditions such as the assumption of
no unmeasured confounding. In this work, we
propose an algorithm that can falsify the assumption of no unmeasured confounding in a setting
with observational data from multiple heterogeneous sources, which we refer to as environments.
Our proposed falsification strategy leverages a
key observation that unmeasured confounding can
cause observed causal mechanisms to appear dependent. Building on this observation, we develop
a novel two-stage procedure that detects these dependencies with high statistical power while controlling false positives. The algorithm does not
require access to randomized data and, in contrast to other falsification approaches, functions
even under transportability violations when the
environment has a direct effect on the outcome of
interest. To showcase the practical relevance of
our approach, we show that our method is able to
efficiently detect confounding on both simulated
and semi-synthetic data.

In this work, we investigate a novel strategy for falsifying
unconfoundedness. Specifically, we focus on the common
scenario where observational datasets are collected from
different heterogeneous sources, which we refer to as environments. Each environment corresponds to distinct study
populations, due to factors such as geographical differences
that results in distribution shifts between the environments.
We propose a falsification strategy based on the assumption that these distribution shifts stem from independent
changes in the underlying causal mechanisms. This idea is
grounded in the principle of independent causal mechanisms
(ICM) (Janzing et al., 2012; Peters et al., 2017), which posits
that a causal system comprises autonomous modules that
do not inform or influence each other. Assuming independent causal mechanisms has been leveraged to, for instance,
improve causal structure learning (Huang et al., 2020; Guo
et al., 2024a) and understand model behavior in statistical
machine learning (Schölkopf et al., 2012). However, the
implications of assuming independent causal mechanisms
to treatment effect estimation problems has received far
less attention.

1. Introduction
Using observational studies to estimate treatment effects
is a ubiquitous yet challenging task in many disciplines,
such as medicine (Hernán & Robins, 2006) or social sciences (Athey & Imbens, 2017). Whereas there exists a
rich literature of methods for treatment effect estimation
in the observational setting (Bang & Robins, 2005; Wager
& Athey, 2018; Chernozhukov et al., 2018), all methods
have in common that before a causal effect can be estimated,
often untestable conditions need to hold. One such condi-

Our proposed falsification strategy leverages a key observation that unmeasured confounding can cause observed mechanisms to appear dependent (Janzing & Schölkopf, 2018;
Karlsson & Krijthe, 2023; Mameche et al., 2024b; Reddy &
Balasubramanian, 2024). If we assume that the underlying
causal mechanisms should be independent, contrary to what
is observed, it follows that any apparent dependencies could
be the result of unmeasured confounding. This observation
motivates the central research question of this paper: How

1

Department of Intelligent Systems, Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands. Correspondence to: Rickard Karlsson
<r.k.a.karlsson@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

