PTTA: Purifying Malicious Samples for Test-Time Model Adaptation

Jing Ma * 1 Hanlin Li * 1 Xiang Xiang * 1 2 3

Abstract

Data Stream

Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) enables deep neural
networks to adapt to arbitrary distributions during inference. Existing TTA algorithms generally
tend to select benign samples that help achieve
robust online prediction and stable self-training.
Although malicious samples that would undermine the model’s optimization should be filtered
out, it also leads to a waste of test data. To alleviate this issue, we focus on how to make full use
of the malicious test samples for TTA by transforming them into benign ones, and propose a
plug-and-play method, PTTA. The core of our
solution lies in the purification strategy, which
retrieves benign samples having opposite effects
on the objective function to perform Mixup with
malicious samples, based on a saliency indicator
for encoding benign and malicious data. This
strategy results in effective utilization of the information in malicious samples and an improvement of the models’ online test accuracy. In this
way, we can directly apply the purification loss
to existing TTA algorithms without the need to
carefully adjust the sample selection threshold.
Extensive experiments on four types of TTA tasks
as well as classification, segmentation, and adversarial defense demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method. Code is available at https:
//github.com/HAIV-Lab/PTTA.

Sample Selection
E

E

E

+ PTTA
E

E

E

Test Time Adaptation
Benign Samples

Malicious Samples

Purified Samples

Figure 1: Illustration of purifying malicious test samples for
test-time model adaptation using the proposed PTTA.
of pretrained models. TTA approaches break free from the
curse of i.i.d. assumption and explore the adaptive potential
of widely used models in unseen scenarios. A series of
works have been proposed to achieve the stable and robust
prediction of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in complex
and dynamically changing environments (Wang et al., 2021;
Niu et al., 2022a; Lee et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024).
Since TTA algorithms seek to avoid human supervision
and intervention, most of them adopt self-supervised tasks,
such as Entropy Minimization (Wang et al., 2021) and Consistency Learning (Wang et al., 2022). This leads to the
amplification of models’ biases and catastrophic forgetting
of original knowledge during continuous adaptation (Zhang
et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2022a). In response to this challenge,
recent studies have shifted their focus towards selecting benign samples useful for TTA algorithms from the test data
(Niu et al., 2022a; Lee et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024).
However, existing approaches incorporate sample selection
criteria to filter and discard a portion of test samples that
could otherwise be utilized. This practice results in data
waste for TTA tasks, which grapple with data scarcity issues. Simultaneously, previous TTA methods encounter a
trade-off between stable optimization and comprehensive
use of test samples. This trade-off necessitates the cautious
selection of hyperparameters and thresholds of the criteria.

1. Introduction
Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) is a way that goes beyond
large-scale and heavy pre-training, and utilizes unlabeled
test samples to enhance the online prediction performance
*
Equal contribution, co-first author. 1 National Key Lab of MultiSpectral Info. Intelligent Processing Tech., School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and
Tech. (HUST), Wuhan, China. 2 Peng Cheng National Lab, Shenzhen, China. 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, HUST,
China. Correspondence to: Xiang Xiang <xex@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

