From Feature Interaction to Feature Generation:
A Generative Paradigm of CTR Prediction Models

Mingjia Yin 1 Junwei Pan 2 Hao Wang 1 Ximei Wang 2 Shangyu Zhang 2
Jie Jiang 2 Defu Lian 1 Enhong Chen 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Click-Through Rate (CTR) prediction models estimate the
probability of users clicking on items based on feature interactions. While conventional wisdom holds that CTR
models inherently follow a discriminative paradigm, they
are prone to embedding dimensional collapse (Guo et al.,
2024) and information redundancy (Zbontar et al., 2021)
issues, primarily due to the interactions between raw ID
embeddings (Guo et al., 2024).

Click-Through Rate (CTR) prediction, a core task
in recommendation systems, aims to estimate the
probability of users clicking on items. Existing
models predominantly follow a discriminative
paradigm, which relies heavily on explicit interactions between raw ID embeddings. However,
this paradigm inherently renders them susceptible to two critical issues: embedding dimensional
collapse and information redundancy, stemming
from the over-reliance on feature interactions over
raw ID embeddings. To address these limitations,
we propose a novel Supervised Feature Generation (SFG) framework, shifting the paradigm
from discriminative “feature interaction” to generative “feature generation”. Specifically, SFG
comprises two key components: an Encoder that
constructs hidden embeddings for each feature,
and a Decoder tasked with regenerating the feature embeddings of all features from these hidden representations. Unlike existing generative
approaches that adopt self-supervised losses, we
introduce a supervised loss to utilize the supervised signal, i.e., click or not, in the CTR prediction task. This framework exhibits strong generalizability: it can be seamlessly integrated with
most existing CTR models, reformulating them
under the generative paradigm. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SFG consistently mitigates embedding collapse and reduces information redundancy, while yielding substantial performance gains across various datasets and base models. The code is available at https://github.
com/USTC-StarTeam/GE4Rec.

Different from sequential recommendation models (Kang
& McAuley, 2018; Zhai et al., 2024; Yin et al., 2024), very
limited research has focused on formulating CTR models
under a generative paradigm. This is possibly due to the fact
that there are no explicit partial orders among the inputs of
CTR models, making it difficult to directly fit them into the
popular next-token prediction framework (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Kang & McAuley, 2018).
Next-token prediction is an autoregressive generative
paradigm (Fig. 1(a)) that treats the sequence up to position
N as the source xsource and the token at position N `1 as the
target xtarget , using the former to predict the latter. Recently,
computer-vision researchers have reconsidered the ordering
of image data to better align this modality with the autoregressive framework. For instance, MAR (Li et al., 2024b)
(Fig. 1(b)) employs unmasked image tokens as xsource to
generate masked tokens as xtarget , whereas VAR (Tian et al.,
2024) (Fig. 1(c)) introduces a next-scale prediction framework that establishes a “coarse-to-fine” ordering. These
works design generative frameworks that align with inherent data characteristics, rather than rigidly imposing the
next-token prediction paradigm.
This inspired us to reconsider the “order” or “inherent structure” of CTR prediction data. Specifically, CTR prediction
handles the multi-field categorical data (Zhang et al., 2016;
Pan et al., 2018), where there are usually no explicit partial
orders between input features. However, there are complex co-occurrence relationships among those features (Rendle, 2010), which motivates us to treat one side of the cooccurrence features as xsource and the other side as xtarget .
Such a method can be regarded as a “feature generation”

1
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Tencent Inc, China. Correspondence to: Hao Wang <wanghao3@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

