COKE: Core Kernel for More Efficient Approximation of Kernel Weights in
Multiple Kernel Clustering

Weixuan Liang 1 Xinwang Liu 1 Ke Liang 1 Jiyuan Liu 2 En Zhu 1

Abstract

struggles to handle large-scale datasets, making it difficult
to meet the demands of the big data era.

Inspired by the well-known coreset in clustering algorithms, we introduce the definition of the
core kernel for multiple kernel clustering (MKC)
algorithms. The core kernel refers to running
MKC algorithms on smaller-scale base kernel matrices to obtain kernel weights similar to those
obtained from the original full-scale kernel matrices. Specifically, the core kernel refers to a
O(1/ε2 ) that perset of kernel matrices of size e
form MKC algorithms on them can achieve a
(1+ε)-approximation for the kernel weights. Subsequently, we can leverage approximated kernel
weights to obtain a theoretically guaranteed largescale extension of MKC algorithms. In this paper,
we propose a core kernel construction method
based on singular value decomposition and prove
that it satisfies the definition of the core kernel
for three mainstream MKC algorithms. Finally,
we conduct experiments on several benchmark
datasets to verify the correctness of theoretical
results and the efficiency of the proposed method.

To address the high complexity of MKC, this paper introduces the concept of core kernel, inspired by the idea of
coreset (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004; Chen, 2009). In
the field of clustering, the coreset technique is an essential
method for reducing the complexity of algorithms on largescale datasets. A coreset is a weighted subset of the training
set, such that the algorithm obtains a solution similar to the
one derived from the entire training set. The coreset method
has been proven to be effectively applicable to k-median
(Sohler & Woodruff, 2018), k-means(Cohen-Addad et al.,
2022), and kernel k-means clustering (Jiang et al., 2024).
In MKC, a fundamental assumption is that the optimal kernel matrix is a weighted combination of the base kernel
matrices (Huang et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2016; Liu, 2022).
Thus, kernel weights are a crucial parameter that can significantly impact the final clustering performance. Multiple
kernel k-means (MKKM) (Huang et al., 2012) minimizes
the objective with regard to the kernel weights and clustering partition. After the optimization of kernel weights,
MKKM can obtain better clustering performance compared
to using fixed weights. Subsequently, (Liu et al., 2016) introduces a matrix-induced regularization term for the kernel
weights to increase the diversity of the consensus kernel matrix. To avoid kernel weights falling into poor local optima,
(Liu, 2022) proposes a min-max optimization-based objective function, which enables learning better kernel weights.
Therefore, for a good approximation method, it is necessary to better approximate the kernel weights of the original
algorithm.

1. Introduction
Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) algorithms (Zhao et al.,
2009; Liu, 2023; 2022; Ren & Sun, 2020; Liu et al., 2017;
2016; Li et al., 2016; Feng et al., 2025), which have a strong
capability to handle multi-source data, have been widely
applied in various fields. MKC can be applied in various
areas, including cancer biology (Gönen & Margolin, 2014),
urban VANETs (Sellami & Alaya, 2021), healthcare (Che &
Yang, 2024), network security (Hu et al., 2021), and others.
However, due to the high computational complexity, MKC

To quantitatively analyze the approximation degree of the
kernel weights, we attempt to adapt the concept of “coreset”
to MKC algorithms. We define smaller-scale base kernel
matrices that can well approximate the kernel weights of
the original base kernel matrices as the core kernel. The
formal definition of the core kernel can be found in Definition 3.1. By using a core kernel of size e
O(1/ε2 )1 as the
input to MKC, we can obtain the (1 + ε)-approximation
kernel weights. With the approximated kernel weights, we

1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China. 2 College of
Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China. Correspondence to: Xinwang Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1 e

O(·) hides logarithmic terms.

1

