The underlying structures of self-attention: symmetry, directionality, and
emergent dynamics in Transformer training

Matteo Saponati 1 * Pascal Sager 2 1 * Pau Vilimelis Aceituno 1 Thilo Stadelmann 2 3 Benjamin Grewe 1 4

Abstract

in understanding these models is unraveling the structures
of self-attention, which is essential to Transformer architectures. Current literature largely overlooks the nature
of the self-attention weight matrices during autoregressive
training, where the model predicts the next token in a sequence given previous ones (Radford et al., 2019; Black
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023) and bidirectional training,
where the model predicts a missing token given the full sequence (Devlin et al., 2019; Bao et al., 2022; Warner et al.,
2024). Understanding self-attention requires answering two
fundamental questions: How can we interpret the structures
learned in the self-attention matrices? What is the impact of
different objective functions on these matrices?

Self-attention is essential to Transformer architectures, yet how information is embedded in the
self-attention matrices and how different objective functions impact this process remains unclear.
We present a mathematical framework to analyze
self-attention matrices by deriving the structures
governing their weight updates. Using this framework, we demonstrate that bidirectional training
induces symmetry in the weight matrices, while
autoregressive training results in directionality
and column dominance. Our theoretical findings
are validated across multiple Transformer models
— including ModernBERT, GPT, LLaMA3, and
Mistral — and input modalities like text, vision,
and audio. Finally, we apply these insights by
showing that symmetric initialization improves
the performance of encoder-only models on language tasks. This mathematical analysis offers a
novel theoretical perspective on how information
is embedded through self-attention, thereby improving the interpretability of Transformer models.

Previous work used sparse auto-encoders to identify interpretable features (Huben et al., 2024; Bricken et al., 2023),
circuit analysis to interpret Transformer components (Olah
et al., 2020; Elhage et al., 2021; Olah, 2022), and techniques like the logit lens to analyze self-attention mechanisms (Geva et al., 2021; Dar et al., 2023) (for a detailed
discussion, see Section 5). However, these methods do not
reveal the structural patterns in self-attention matrices or the
transformations they encode. Crucially, how autoregressive
and bidirectional training shape specific weight structures
remains unclear.
To address this gap, we introduce a novel framework for
analyzing self-attention matrices and understanding how
different objective functions define their weight updates.
We then use this framework to derive understandable mathematical structures that should emerge from such updates.
Finally, we verify these interpretable structures numerically
on many pre-trained and custom models across different
modalities, supporting the universality of our results. Identifying these universal structures is fundamental not only for
improving the performance of Transformer models, but also
for their safety, alignment, and interpretability (Olah, 2022).

1. Introduction
Transformer models now achieve state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of tasks and domains (Radford
et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2023).
Despite their success, the internal mechanisms governing
their decision-making processes remain poorly understood,
raising concerns regarding model alignment, reliability, and
safety (Wang et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2024). A key challenge
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Neuroinformatics, ETH Zürich
and University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 2 Centre for Artificial Intelligence, Zürich University of Applied Sciences, Winterthur, Switzerland 3 ECLT European Centre for Living Technology, Venice, Italy 4 ETH AI Center, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Matteo Saponati <masapo@ini.ethz.ch>, Benjamin
Grewe <bgrewe@ini.ethz.ch>.

Specifically, we connect the matrix Wqk = Wq Wk⊤ of
self-attention with bilinear forms, offering novel insights
compared to studying query and key matrices alone. We
reveal structured patterns in the implicit weight updates of
Wqk , uncovering key differences between encoder-only and
decoder-only models:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

