On The Concurrence of Layer-wise Preconditioning Methods
and Provable Feature Learning

Thomas T. Zhang * 1 Behrad Moniri * 1 Ansh Nagwekar 1 Faraz Rahman 1 Anton Xue 1
Hamed Hassani 1 Nikolai Matni 1

Abstract

Adam-like optimizers theoretically, especially from a statistical (e.g. generalization) perspective. 1 In fact, there exist
many theoretical settings where Adam and similar methods
underperform in convergence or generalization relative to,
e.g., well-tuned SGD (see e.g. Wilson et al. (2017); Keskar &
Socher (2017); Reddi et al. (2018); Gupta et al. (2021); Xie
et al. (2022); Dereich et al. (2024)), further complicating a
principled understanding the role of Adam-like optimizers in
deep learning. Given these challenges, is there an alternative
algorithmic paradigm that is comparable to the Adam family in practice that is also well-motivated from a statistical
learning perspective? Encouragingly, in a recent large-scale
deep learning optimization competition, AlgoPerf (MLCommons, 2024), Adam and its variants were outperformed in
various “hold-out error per unit-compute”2 metrics by a
method known as Shampoo (Gupta et al., 2018), a member
of a layer-wise “Kronecker-Factored” family of preconditioners, formally described in Section 2, contrasted with
“diagonal” preconditioning methods like Adam.

Layer-wise preconditioning methods are a family of memory-efficient optimization algorithms
that introduce preconditioners per axis of each
layer’s weight tensors. These methods have seen
a recent resurgence, demonstrating impressive
performance relative to entry-wise (“diagonal”)
preconditioning methods such as Adam(W) on a
wide range of neural network optimization tasks.
Complementary to their practical performance,
we demonstrate that layer-wise preconditioning
methods are provably necessary from a statistical perspective. To showcase this, we consider
two prototypical models, linear representation
learning and single-index learning, which are
widely used to study how typical algorithms efficiently learn useful features to enable generalization. In these problems, we show SGD is a
suboptimal feature learner when extending beyond ideal isotropic inputs x ∼ N(0, I) and wellconditioned settings typically assumed in prior
work. We demonstrate theoretically and numerically that this suboptimality is fundamental, and
that layer-wise preconditioning emerges naturally
as the solution. We further show that standard
tools like Adam preconditioning and batch-norm
only mildly mitigate these issues, supporting the
unique benefits of layer-wise preconditioning.

1. Introduction
Well-designed optimization algorithms have been an enabler
to the staggering growth and success of machine learning.
For the broader ML community, the Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2015) optimizer is likely the go-to scalable and performant
choice for most tasks. However, despite its popularity in
practice, it has been notoriously challenging to understand
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: T. Zhang, B. Moniri <{ttz2, bemoniri}@seas.upenn.edu>.

Notable members of the Kronecker-Factored preconditioning family include Shampoo and KFAC (Martens & Grosse,
2015), as well as their many variants and descendants. These
algorithms are motivated from an approximation-theoretic
perspective, aiming to approximate some ideal curvature
matrix (e.g. the Hessian or Fisher Information) in a way
that mitigates the computational and memory challenges
associated with second-order algorithms such as Newton’s
Method (NM) or Natural Gradient Descent (NGD). However,
towards establishing the benefit of these preconditioners,
an approximation viewpoint is bottlenecked by our limited
understanding of how the idealized second-order methods
perform on neural-network learning tasks, even disregarding
the computational considerations. It in fact remains unclear
whether these second-order methods are inherently superior to the approximations designed to emulate them. For
example, recent work has shown that, surprisingly, KFAC
generally outperforms its ideal counterpart NGD in convergence rate and generalization error on typical deep learning
tasks (Benzing, 2022). Thus, a key question remains:
1

To be contrasted with an “optimization” perspective, e.g. guarantees of convergence to a critical point of the training objective.
2
See Dahl et al. (2023, Section 4.2) for details.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

