KernelBench: Can LLMs Write Efficient GPU Kernels?
Anne Ouyang * 1 Simon Guo * 1 Simran Arora 1 Alex L Zhang 2 William Hu 1 Christopher Ré 1
Azalia Mirhoseini 1

Abstract

2023; Dao & Gu, 2024a), but their available implementations routinely underperform their peak potential. We are
seeing a proliferation of AI hardware (NVIDIA, 2017b;
2020; 2022; Jouppi et al., 2023; Groq; Cerebras; Graphcore), each with different specs and instruction sets, and
porting algorithms across platforms is a pain point. A key
example is the FlashAttention kernel (Dao et al., 2022),
which is crucial for running modern Transformer models
–– the initial kernel released in 2022, five years after the
Transformer was proposed; it took two more years from the
release of NVIDIA Hopper GPUs to transfer the algorithm
to the new hardware platform. We explore the question: Can
language models help write correct and optimized kernels?

Efficient GPU kernels are crucial for building performant machine learning architectures, but writing them is a time-consuming challenge that requires significant expertise; therefore, we explore
using language models (LMs) to automate kernel
generation. We introduce KernelBench, an opensource framework for evaluating LMs’ ability to
write fast and correct kernels on a suite of 250
carefully selected PyTorch ML workloads. KernelBench represents a real-world engineering environment and making progress on the introduced
benchmark directly translates to faster practical
kernels. We introduce a new evaluation metric
fastp , which measures the percentage of generated kernels that are functionally correct and offer
a speedup greater than an adjustable threshold
p over baseline. Our experiments across various state-of-the-art models and test-time methods show that frontier reasoning models perform
the best out of the box but still fall short overall,
matching the PyTorch baseline in less than 20% of
the cases. While we show that results can improve
by leveraging execution and profiling feedback
during iterative refinement, KernelBench remains
a challenging benchmark, with its difficulty increasing as we raise speedup threshold p.

AI engineers use a rich set of information when developing kernels and it is not clear whether language models
(LMs) can mimic the workflow. They use compiler feedback, profiling metrics, hardware-specific specs and instruction sets, and knowledge of hardware-efficiency techniques
(e.g., tiling, fusion, recompute). They can use programming
tools ranging from assembly (e.g., PTX as in DeepSeek-AI
(2025)) to higher-level libraries (ThunderKittens (Spector
et al., 2024), Triton (Tillet et al., 2019)). Compared to existing LM code generation workloads (Yang et al., 2024a),
kernel writing requires a massive amount and diversity of
information.
We first design an environment that reflects the typical AI
engineer’s workflow and supports providing LMs with this
rich information. The environment should:
• Automate the AI engineer’s workflow. The model should
have full flexibility to decide which operators to optimize
and how to optimize them.

1. Introduction
AI relies on efficient GPU kernels to achieve high performance and cost and energy savings; however, developing
kernels remains challenging. There has been a Cambrian
explosion of ML architectures (Tay et al., 2022; Peng et al.,

• Support a diverse set of AI algorithms, programming
languages, and hardware platforms.
• Make it easy to evaluate both performance and functional
correctness of LM generations, ideally in a programmatic
way. It should also capture profiling and execution information from generated kernels.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
Correspondence to: Anne Ouyang <aco@stanford.edu>, Simon
Guo <simonguo@stanford.edu>.

We introduce KernelBench to generate and evaluate kernels,
which addresses the above considerations. KernelBench
tests LM optimizations on three levels of AI workloads,
each posing a different set of challenges:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

