PieClam: A Universal Graph Autoencoder
Based on Overlapping Inclusive and Exclusive Communities

Daniel Zilberg 1 Ron Levie 1

Abstract

of advantages. While different graphs can have different
sizes and topologies, the code space is fixed with a fixed
dimension. This helps when learning downstream tasks,
where the representation of the graph in the code space can
be processed. For example, in link prediction, one infers
unknown edges by defining (Kipf & Welling, 2016) or learning (Kumar et al., 2020) a function that takes pairs of nodes
in the code space and predicts if there is an edge between
them. In anomaly detection, one defines (Ding et al., 2019a;
Fan et al., 2020) or learns (Chen et al., 2020b; Ding et al.,
2021) a function that takes the representation of a node
and its neighborhood and predicts if this node is normal or
an anomaly. In graph and node classification, the graph is
represented in the code space, and one learns a model that
predicts from this representation the classes of the nodes or
of the graph (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017a).

We propose PieClam (Prior Inclusive Exclusive
Cluster Affiliation Model): a graph autoencoder,
where nodes are embedded into a code space by
an algorithm that maximizes the log-likelihood of
the decoded graph. PieClam is a community affiliation model that extends well-known methods
like BigClam in two main manners. First, instead
of the decoder being defined via pairwise interactions between the nodes in the code space, we also
incorporate a learned prior on the distribution of
nodes in the code space, turning our method into a
graph generative model. Secondly, we generalize
the notion of communities by allowing not only
sets of nodes with strong connectivity, which we
call inclusive communities, but also sets of nodes
with strong disconnection, which we call exclusive communities. By introducing a new graph
similarity measure, called the log cut distance,
we show that PieClam is a universal autoencoder,
able to uniformly approximately reconstruct any
graph. Our method is shown to obtain competitive
performance in graph anomaly detection and link
prediction benchmarks.

Our Contribution. In this paper, we derive a new graph
autoencoder from a statistical model of graphs. In our model,
similarly to Stochastic Block Models (SBM) (Nowicki &
Snijders, 2001b; Lee & Wilkinson, 2019) and communitybased statistical models (Airoldi et al., 2008; Yang &
Leskovec, 2013), graphs are generated from a combination
of intersecting communities/cliques. Namely, each node
belongs to a different subset of a predefined set of communities, and the affiliations of the nodes to the different
communities determine the probabilities of the edges of the
graph. Here, the estimation of the community affiliations
is seen as an encoder of graphs to a community affiliation
space, and the computation of the corresponding edge probabilities is seen as a decoder. As opposed to past works,
we consider two types of generalized communities. First,
standard inclusive communities, where any two nodes in
the same community are likely to be connected. Second,
we propose exclusive communities, where belonging to the
same community reduces the probability of nodes being
connected.

1. Introduction
In recent years, considerable research has concentrated on
graph representation learning, aiming to develop vector representations for graph entities, including nodes, edges, and
subgraphs (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020a). In
graph autoencoders, e.g., (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Grover
et al., 2019; Samanta et al., 2020; Mehta et al., 2019), the
vertices of a graph are embedded in a code space, where
edges are inferred from the locations of the vertices in this
space. Encoding graphs into a standard space has a number
1

For illustration, consider a social network of employers/recruiters and employees/job-seekers. Such a network
has roughly bipartite components, where job-seekers do
not tend to connect to other seekers, and employers do not
connect to other employers, but employers and seekers of
the same subsector tend to connect. Hence, inclusive com-

Faculty of Mathematics, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Daniel Zilberg <dannyzilberg@gmail.com>, Ron Levie <levieron@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

