Bootstrapping Self-Improvement of Language Model Programs
for Zero-Shot Schema Matching

Nabeel Seedat 1 2 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The success of machine learning (ML) models hinges on a
critical yet often overlooked challenge: access to large, integrated and interoperable datasets (Jain et al., 2020; Gupta
et al., 2021; Renggli et al., 2021; Sambasivan et al., 2021).
Although well-structured and uniform datasets like those on
Kaggle are commonly assumed as the norm, such data is a
rare luxury in practice. In real-world scenarios, tabular data
often exists in heterogeneous and disparate databases with
diverse formats, schemas, and terminologies, requiring harmonization to make the data "ML-ready" and interoperable.
The heterogeneity of databases presents three critical issues
for ML: (1) data harmonization and integration are arduous
tasks. Hence, researchers often limit the features/covariates
used for model training to a smaller, often common, set of
features (Avati et al., 2021; Si et al., 2021; Rajkomar et al.,
2018), thereby limiting the potential performance of their
ML models; (2) even if all the features are used, the lack
of data interoperability means limited external validation of
ML models (Balch et al., 2023; Lehne et al., 2019; Williams
et al., 2022; Tiwari et al., 2020; Colubri et al., 2019; Goetz
et al., 2024; Seedat et al., 2020), which can undermine the
credibility and utility of the ML models; and (3) missed opportunities for insights on larger harmonized datasets (e.g.,
larger patient populations), which may not be apparent when
analyzing data sources independently.

Schema matching – the task of finding matches between attributes across disparate data sources with
different tables and hierarchies – is critical for creating interoperable machine learning (ML)-ready
data. Addressing this fundamental data-centric
problem has wide implications, especially in domains like healthcare, finance and e-commerce —
but also has the potential to benefit ML models
more generally, by increasing the data available
for ML model training. However, schema matching is a challenging ML task due to structural/hierarchical and semantic heterogeneity between different schemas. Previous ML approaches to automate schema matching have either required significant labeled data for model training, which is
often unrealistic or suffer from poor zero-shot performance. To this end, we propose Matchmaker
- a compositional language model program for
schema matching, comprised of candidate generation, refinement and confidence scoring. Matchmaker also self-improves in a zero-shot manner
without the need for labeled demonstrations via
a novel optimization approach, which constructs
synthetic in-context demonstrations to guide the
language model’s reasoning process. Empirically,
we demonstrate on real-world medical schema
matching benchmarks that Matchmaker outperforms previous ML-based approaches, highlighting its potential to accelerate data integration and
interoperability of ML-ready data.

Schema matching is a critical first step in data harmonization, aiming to establish correspondences between attributes
(i.e., features/covariates) measured across different data
sources. Once matched, these correspondences can help
harmonize data from disparate sources into a cohesive,
ML-ready format. To understand the concept of schema
matching, let us unpack the components of a schema. A
schema defines how data is organized in a database, comprising different tables (collections of related data entries)
and columns (also known as "attributes" or "features") that
represent specific data fields. Importantly, schemas go beyond simple tabular data commonly found in CSV files, as
they capture the hierarchical structure and relationships between different tables and their attributes. For example, in
healthcare, schemas from different hospitals may have varying tables and attributes representing patient information,

1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge 2 Foundational Machine Learning Research, Thomson Reuters. Correspondence to: Nabeel Seedat
<ns741@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

