NICE

Data Selection for Instruction Tuning in LLMs
with Non-differentiable Evaluation Metric

Jingtan Wang 1 2 Xiaoqiang Lin 1 Rui Qiao 1 3 Pang Wei Koh 4 Chuan-Sheng Foo 2 5 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1 3

Abstract

(LLMs) to follow specific human instructions, improving
their performances on target downstream tasks. The effectiveness of instruction tuning heavily relies on the quality
of the instruction dataset (Chen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a;
Zhou et al., 2024). However, the instruction dataset is usually collected from mixed sources, and some data points
may not be directly relevant to the target tasks (Wang et al.,
2023; Xia et al., 2024). In addition, the data points often
vary in quality and may contain noisy labels (Carlini et al.,
2024; Frénay & Verleysen, 2013; Wang et al., 2024a). These
challenges underline the importance of data selection methods, which enhance instruction tuning by systematically
choosing relevant, high-quality data to cultivate specific target capabilities in LLMs. In practice, LLMs fine-tuned on
selected subsets of data can outperform those trained on the
full dataset (Wang et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2024).

Curating data for instruction tuning is crucial
for enhancing the performance of large language
models (LLMs). This work aims to select training
data for instruction tuning to improve the LLM
performance on specific tasks. Existing methods
often rely on next-token prediction (NTP) loss as
a proxy for target task performance due to the nondifferentiable nature of performance evaluation
metrics. They select training data points that are
most helpful in reducing validation loss. However,
there is a discrepancy between minimizing NTP
loss and maximizing performance (e.g., code pass
rate in code generation). To remedy this, we introduce a novel Non-differentiable evaluation metricbased InfluenCe Estimation (NICE), which leverages the policy gradient to select the training data
that improves the performance. Moreover, NICE
can perform data selection in the absence of labels
(ground-truth responses) when the evaluation metrics do not require labels (e.g., a reward model can
output reward scores without supervision from
labels). Experimental results show that our approach outperforms existing data selection baselines that use NTP loss in diverse and realistic scenarios. Notably, subsets selected by NICE often
produce models that outperform those trained on
the full dataset. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/JTWang2000/NICE.

Loss-based influence estimation methods (Kwon et al.,
2024; Xia et al., 2024; Yeh et al., 2022) have been demonstrated to be effective in data selection. It estimates the effect
of each training data on the validation loss (e.g., Next-Token
Prediction (NTP) loss) via the gradient of the validation loss,
then selects the subset of data with the most positive influence. However, many instruction-following tasks require
generating long-form responses, which are evaluated using
non-differentiable metrics (instead of the differentiable validation loss). These evaluation metrics, such as the code
pass rate (Chen et al., 2021), LLM-judge (Dubois et al.,
2023; Zheng et al., 2023) and reward model (Ouyang et al.,
2022), cannot directly provide useful gradient information
to estimate the influences due to their non-differentiable
nature. Moreover, minimizing NTP loss may poorly align
with maximizing the evaluation metrics due to overfitting to
surface-level patterns (e.g., n-grams) and ignoring alternative correct generations (Brown et al., 2020; Gloeckle et al.,
2024; Tay et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2024). For instance, in
code generation (Chen et al., 2021), there are multiple ways
of writing ‘correct’ code for a problem, but NTP loss is only
measured w.r.t one such way. This mismatch between the
NTP loss and the true evaluation metric poses a significant
challenge to data selection for instruction tuning. Therefore,
existing approaches that rely on the influence of NTP loss
may fail to select the dataset that improves the metrics used
in specific tasks.

1. Introduction
Instruction tuning (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022) is
a fine-tuning paradigm that enables large language models
1

National University of Singapore 2 Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore 3 Singapore-MIT Alliance for
Research and Technology 4 University of Washington 5 Centre for
Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang Low <lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

