Leveraging Skills from Unlabeled Prior Data for Efficient Online Exploration

Max Wilcoxson * 1 Qiyang Li * 1 Kevin Frans 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract

2018) and vision (He et al., 2022). Pretrained models can be adapted efficiently to new tasks with few examples, and often generalize better than models trained
from scratch (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020).
However, in contrast to supervised learning, reinforcement
learning (RL) presents a unique challenge in that finetuning does not involve further mimicking task-specific
data, but rather exploring and finding the solution through
iterative self-improvement. Thus, the key challenge to address in pretraining for RL is not simply to learn good representations, but to learn an effective exploration strategy
for solving downstream tasks.

Unsupervised pretraining has been transformative in many supervised domains. However,
applying such ideas to reinforcement learning
(RL) presents a unique challenge in that finetuning does not involve mimicking task-specific
data, but rather exploring and locating the solution through iterative self-improvement. In
this work, we study how unlabeled offline trajectory data can be leveraged to learn efficient
exploration strategies. While prior data can be
used to pretrain a set of low-level skills, or as
additional off-policy data for online RL, it has
been unclear how to combine these ideas effectively for online exploration. Our method
SUPE (Skills from Unlabeled Prior data for
Exploration) demonstrates that a careful combination of these ideas compounds their benefits.
Our method first extracts low-level skills using a
variational autoencoder (VAE), and then pseudolabels unlabeled trajectories with optimistic rewards and high-level action labels, transforming prior data into high-level, task-relevant examples that encourage novelty-seeking behavior. Finally, SUPE uses these transformed examples as additional off-policy data for online
RL to learn a high-level policy that composes
pretrained low-level skills to explore efficiently.
In our experiments, SUPE consistently outperforms prior strategies across a suite of 42 longhorizon, sparse-reward tasks. Code: https:
//github.com/rail-berkeley/supe.

Pretraining benefits greatly from the breadth of the data.
Unlabeled trajectories (i.e., those collected from previous policies whose objectives are unknown, or from taskagnostic data collection policies) are the most abundantly
available, but using them to solve specific tasks can be difficult. It is not enough to simply copy behaviors, which can
differ greatly from the current task. There is an entanglement problem – general knowledge of the environment is
mixed in with task-specific behaviors. A concrete example
is learning from unlabeled locomotion behavior: we wish
to learn how to move around the world, but not necessarily to the locations present in the pretraining data. We will
revisit this setting in the experimental section.
The entanglement problem can be alleviated through hierarchical decomposition. Specifically, trajectories can be
broken into segments of task-agnostic skills, which are
composed in various ways to solve various objectives. We
posit that unlabeled trajectories thus present a twofold benefit, (1) as a way to learn a diverse set of skills, and (2)
as off-policy examples of composing such skills. Notably,
prior online RL methods that leverage pretrained skills ignore the second benefit, and discard the offline trajectories
after the skills are learned (Ajay et al., 2021; Pertsch et al.,
2021; Hu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024). We instead argue that such trajectories are critical, and can greatly speed
up learning. We make use of a simple strategy of learning an optimistic reward model from online samples, and
pseudo-labeling past trajectories with an optimistic reward
estimate. The past trajectories can thus be readily utilized
as off-policy data, allowing for quick learning even with a
very small number of online interactions.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised pretraining has been transformative in many
supervised domains, such as language (Devlin et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Max Wilcoxson <mwilcoxson@berkeley.edu>,
Qiyang Li <qcli@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

