TeDS: Joint Learning of Diachronic and Synchronic Perspectives in
Quaternion Space for Temporal Knowledge Graph Completion

Jiujiang Guo 1 2 3 Mankun Zhao 1 2 3 Wenbin Zhang 1 2 3 Tianyi Xu 1 2 3 Linying Xu 1 Jian Yu 1 2 3 Mei Yu 1 2 3
Ruiguo Yu 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are a technology that expresses
knowledge in a structured form, which is generally classified into static knowledge graphs (SKGs) and temporal
knowledge graphs (TKGs). SKGs and TKGs store facts as
triples and quadruples. Existing KGs (e.g., ICEWS (Lautenschlager et al., 2015), NELL, and OpenIE) contain a vast
amount of information, and many have been successfully
applied in various domains, including community detection
(Li et al., 2024), failure KGs for offshore wind power (Ding
et al., 2025), and industry-oriented KGs.

Existing research on temporal knowledge graph
completion treats temporal information as supplementary, without simulating various features
of facts from a temporal perspective. This work
summarizes features of temporalized facts from
both diachronic and synchronic perspectives: (1)
Diachronicity. Facts often exhibit varying characteristics and trends across different temporal
domains; (2) Synchronicity. In specific temporal contexts, various relations between entities
influence each other, generating latent semantics.
To track above issues, we design a quaternionbased model, TeDS, which divides timestamps
into diachronic and synchronic timestamps to support dual temporal perception: (a) Two composite
quaternions fusing time and relation information
are generated by reorganizing synchronic timestamp and relation quaternions, and Hamilton operator achieves their interaction. (b) Each time
point is sequentially mapped to an angle and converted to scalar component of a quaternion using
trigonometric functions to build diachronic timestamps. We then rotate relation by using Hamilton
operator between it and diachronic timestamp. In
this way, TeDS achieves deep integration of relations and time while accommodating different
perspectives. Empirically, TeDS significantly outperforms SOTA models on six benchmarks.

With exponential growth of data, KGs consistently encounter issues such as incompleteness, sparsity, and imbalance. To provide sustainable solutions, researchers focus
extensively on knowledge graph completion (KGC), developing a variety of robust models. However, most models
focus on SKGs, with less attention to TKGs with temporal
information (Guo et al., 2024). Unlike SKGs, TKGs align
more closely with real-world scenarios due to inclusion of
time dimension, making completion process significantly
more challenging. Existing temporal knowledge graph completion (TKGC) research regards temporal information as
supplementary, failing to observe various features and trajectories that facts can present from a temporal perspective.
To uncover characteristics of facts from temporal perspective, we summarize features of temporalized facts from both
diachronic and synchronic perspectives: (a) Diachronicity.
Facts often exhibit varying characteristics and developmental trends across different temporal domains. For example,
as shown in Figure 1, in March, James is friends with Emma
and Sophia. By May and June, James starts dating Emma,
and their relation progresses smoothly into a romantic one
by July. Meanwhile, James remains ordinary friends with
Sophia. (b) Synchronicity. In specific temporal contexts,
various relations between entities often influence each other,
thereby generating latent semantics. For example, as shown
in Figure 1, in May and June, relation between Emma and
James noticeably becomes closer, showing signs of ambiguity. Meanwhile, during this period, James and Sophia only
have one call, remaining ordinary friends. The above perspectives are not entirely independent, they often mutually

*
Equal contribution 1 College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354, China 2 Tianjin Key Laboratory of Advanced Networking, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354,
China 3 Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354, China. Correspondence
to: Ruiguo Yu <rgyu@tju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

