Task-Agnostic Pre-training and Task-Guided Fine-tuning
for Versatile Diffusion Planner
Chenyou Fan 1 Chenjia Bai 2 3 Zhao Shan 2 4 Haoran He 5 Yang Zhang 2 4 Zhen Wang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
There has been a long-standing pursuit to develop agents
capable of performing multiple tasks (Reed et al., 2022; Lee
et al., 2022). Although traditional RL methods have made
significant strides in training agents to master individual
tasks (Silver et al., 2016; OpenAI et al., 2019), expanding
this capability to handle diverse tasks remains a significant
challenge due to the diversity of task variants and optimization directions with different rewards. Multi-task RL aims
to address this by developing agents via task-conditioned
optimization (Yu et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022) or parametercompositional learning (Sun et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023).
However, existing approaches often struggle with policy representation since they assume shared latent structures across
tasks, which causes issues when tasks have significantly different dynamics and rewards, limiting their ability to capture
the multi-modal distribution of optimal behaviors across diverse task spaces. Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020), originally designed for generative
tasks, provide a powerful framework to address these difficulties. Their capacity to capture complex, multi-modal
distributions within high-dimensional data spaces (Podell
et al., 2024; Ho et al., 2022; Jing et al., 2022) makes them
well suited to represent the broad variability encountered in
multi-task environments.

Diffusion models have demonstrated their capabilities in modeling trajectories of multi-tasks.
However, existing multi-task planners or policies
typically rely on task-specific demonstrations via
multi-task imitation, or require task-specific reward labels to facilitate policy optimization via
Reinforcement Learning (RL). They are costly
due to the substantial human efforts required to
collect expert data or design reward functions.
To address these challenges, we aim to develop
a versatile diffusion planner capable of leveraging large-scale inferior data that contains taskagnostic sub-optimal trajectories, with the ability to fast adapt to specific tasks. In this paper,
we propose SODP, a two-stage framework that
leverages Sub-Optimal data to learn a Diffusion
Planner, which is generalizable for various downstream tasks. Specifically, in the pre-training
stage, we train a foundation diffusion planner that
extracts general planning capabilities by modeling
the versatile distribution of multi-task trajectories,
which can be sub-optimal and has wide data coverage. Then for downstream tasks, we adopt RLbased fine-tuning with task-specific rewards to
quickly refine the diffusion planner, which aims
to generate action sequences with higher taskspecific returns. Experimental results from multitask domains including Meta-World and Adroit
demonstrate that SODP outperforms state-of-theart methods with only a small amount of data for
reward-guided fine-tuning.

Motivated by this, existing methods have employed diffusion models to mimic expert behaviors derived from human
demonstrations on various tasks (Pearce et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023). However, acquiring taskspecific demonstrations is often time-consuming and costly,
especially in environments requiring specialized domain
expertise. Alternative approaches attempt to optimize diffusion models with return guidance (He et al., 2023; Liang
et al., 2023) or conventional RL paradigm (Wang et al.,
2023), which demands a large volume of data with reward labels for each task. To address the above limitations, we wonder whether a generalized diffusion planner can be learned
from a large amount of low-quality trajectories without reward labels, with the ability to adapt quickly to various
downstream tasks. We only require the inferior data to
comprise a mixture of sub-optimal state-action pairs from
various tasks, which can be easily obtained in the real world.

1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Institute of Artificial
Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom 3 Shenzhen Research Institute
of Northwestern Polytechnical University 4 Tsinghua University
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Chenjia Bai <baicj@chinatelecom.cn>, Zhen Wang
<w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

