Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent
Reinforcement Learning

Austin A. Nguyen 1 Anri Gu 1 Michael P. Wellman 1

Abstract

paradigm of centralized training decentralized execution
(Rashid et al., 2020; Lowe et al., 2017).

Iterative extension of empirical game models
through deep reinforcement learning (RL) has
proved an effective approach for finding equilibria in complex games. When multiple equilibria exist, we may have preferences among solutions. We address this equilibrium selection issue
in the context of Policy Space Response Oracles
(PSRO), a flexible game-solving framework based
on deep RL, by skewing strategy generation towards higher-welfare solutions. At each iteration,
we create an exploration policy that imitates high
welfare-yielding behavior and train a response to
the current solution, regularized to be similar to
the exploration policy. With no additional simulation expense, our approach, named Ex2 PSRO,
tends to find higher welfare equilibria than vanilla
PSRO in two benchmarks: a sequential bargaining game and a social dilemma game. Further experiments demonstrate Ex2 PSRO’s composability
with other PSRO variants and illuminate the relationship between exploration policy choice and
algorithmic performance.

When the agents are independently controlled, it makes
sense to frame the problem in terms of solving a game. In
a game formulation, non-stationarity can be understood as
arising from strategic interactions among agent decisions.
Our work builds on a standard framework in this genre
called Policy Space Response Oracles (PSRO) (Lanctot
et al., 2017). PSRO uses a form of population-based training,
where the set of available policies (strategies) is iteratively
extended by deriving best responses to the evolving game
model. PSRO can also be viewed as a form of empirical
game-theoretic analysis (EGTA) (Wellman et al., 2025), as
the game model is estimated through agent-based simulation.
PSRO addresses scalability and non-stationarity by focusing
on an enumerated set of strategies from a large space and
training one agent at a time in a context where other agents’
strategies are fixed.
The efficacy of such iterative methods depends on the ability
to identify strategies that cover the relevant game features
and contribute to game solutions. Alternative approaches to
strategy exploration (Jordan et al., 2010) generate different
sequences of game models and thus determine how quickly a
solution is found (Wang et al., 2022). The method of strategy
exploration can also shape which solution is found, that is,
influence equilibrium selection for games with multiple
strategic equilibria (Wang & Wellman, 2024).

1. Introduction
Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) research
addresses two core challenges: scalability and nonstationarity. Scalability refers to how the relevant search
space for training grows exponentially with the number
of players and strategies. Non-stationarity describes how
agents’ learning contexts change as their observations and
rewards depend on the evolving strategies of other agents.
If the goal is to specify policies for distributed agents under
unified control, these challenges can be addressed under the

This work addresses equilibrium selection by steering strategy exploration toward solutions with desirable characteristics. Specifically, we extend PSRO by leveraging the
simulation data already generated by the algorithm to identify policy elements that seem promising for high-welfare
solutions. Using behavior cloning, we train an exploration
policy that reflects the promising behavior found in simulation traces. We then modify the process of training a
best-response strategy, by adding a regularization term that
biases the output to be similar to the exploration policy. This
explicit form of controlled exploration in policy space gives
the algorithm its name: Ex2 PSRO.

1
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. Correspondence to:
Austin A. Nguyen <ngaustin@umich.edu>, Anri Gu <anrigu@umich.edu>.

The primary contribution of this work is a method based on
policy-level regularization for strategy exploration in service

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

