Sampling Binary Data by Denoising through Score Functions

Francis Bach 1

Saeed Saremi 2

Abstract

chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a general-purpose class of
gradient-based algorithms for sampling from a distribution
µ in the Euclidean space Rd , whose convergence properties are studied extensively with the assumption that µ is
log-concave (Dalalyan, 2017; Durmus & Moulines, 2017;
Cheng et al., 2018; Chewi, 2024). Recently, Gaussian
smoothing was effectively used for mapping the general
problem of sampling in Euclidean space to log-concave
sampling (Saremi et al., 2024). Inspired by this line of
work, we approach the problem of sampling binary data
with a “smoothing philosophy,” where Bernoulli noise plays
a prominent role.

Gaussian smoothing combined with a probabilistic framework for denoising via the empirical
Bayes formalism, i.e., the Tweedie-Miyasawa
formula (TMF), are the two key ingredients in
the success of score-based generative models in
Euclidean spaces. Smoothing holds the key for
easing the problem of learning and sampling in
high dimensions, denoising is needed for recovering the original signal, and TMF ties these together via the score function of noisy data. In
this work, we extend this paradigm to the problem of learning and sampling the distribution of
binary data on the Boolean hypercube by adopting Bernoulli noise, instead of Gaussian noise,
as a smoothing device. We first derive a TMFlike expression for the optimal denoiser for the
Hamming loss, where a score function naturally
appears. Sampling noisy binary data is then
achieved using a Langevin-like sampler which
we theoretically analyze for different noise levels. At high Bernoulli noise levels sampling becomes easy, akin to log-concave sampling in Euclidean spaces. In addition, we extend the sequential multi-measurement sampling of Saremi
et al. (2024) to the binary setting where we can
bring the “effective noise” down by sampling multiple noisy measurements at a fixed noise level,
without the need for continuous-time stochastic
processes. We validate our formalism and theoretical findings by experiments on synthetic data
and binarized images.

In Euclidean space one can ease the sampling problem by
opting for sampling noisy data. In particular, instead of the
random variable x, we opt for sampling the random variable
y = x + ε, where ε ∼ N(0, σ 2 I) follows a Gaussian distribution. This scheme involves a single hyperparameter, the
standard deviation σ. Algebraically, this is akin to sampling
from the smoother density νσ of y, which is the convolution
of the distribution µ of x with the Gaussian distribution.
From a geometric perspective, the noise effectively “fills
up” the space with probability mass (the degree of which
one controls with σ) thus navigating the space becomes
easier. One can then “clean up” the mass that is added to
the space using denoising. In particular, classical results in
statistics (Robbins, 1956; Miyasawa, 1961) state:
E[x|y] = y + σ 2 ∇ log νσ (y),
which we refer to as the Tweedie-Miyasawa formula (TMF).
Note that E[x|y] is the least-squares estimator of clean
data x given a noisy observation y, and ∇ log νσ is known
as the score function (Hyvärinen, 2005).
In the generative modeling setting, where the distribution is
unknown but we have access to data {x(i) }ni=1 , one can turn
TMF into a supervised least-squares denoising objective
for learning the score function of noisy data, where the
noisy data y = x + ε, ε ∼ N(0, σ 2 I) is the input and the
clean data x is the target (Hyvärinen, 2005; Vincent, 2011;
Saremi & Hyvärinen, 2019). One can then use Langevin
MCMC (“walk”) to sample from the learned νσ (y); the
noisy samples can be cleaned up with the learned denoiser
(“jump”). This sampling scheme was referred to as the walkjump sampling which we denote by WJS-1 (“1” anticipates
the extension we discuss below). There is a clear trade-off

1. Introduction
We would like to draw samples from a distribution p
on the Boolean hypercube {−1, 1}d . Langevin Markov
1
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research, University,
Paris, France 2 Frontier Research, Prescient Design, Genentech.
Correspondence to: Francis Bach <francis.bach@inria.fr>, Saeed
Saremi <saremi.saeed@gene.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

