Online Clustering of Dueling Bandits

Zhiyong Wang 1 Jiahang Sun 2 Mingze Kong 3 Jize Xie 4 Qinghua Hu 5 John C.S. Lui 1 Zhongxiang Dai 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
The contextual multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a widely
used method in real-world applications requiring sequential
decision-making under uncertainty, such as recommendation systems, computer networks, among others (Li et al.,
2010; Wang et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024b). In a contextual
MAB problem, a user faces a set of K arms (i.e., context
vectors) in every round, selects one of these K arms, and
then observes a corresponding numerical reward (Lattimore
& Szepesvári, 2020). In order to select the arms to maximize the cumulative reward (or equivalently minimize the
cumulative regret), we often need to consider the trade-off
between the exploration of the arms whose unknown rewards are associated with large uncertainty and exploitation
of the available observations collected so far. To carefully
handle this trade-off, we often model the reward function
using a surrogate model, such as a linear model (Chu et al.,
2011) or a neural network (Zhou et al., 2020).

The contextual multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a
widely used framework for problems requiring sequential decision-making under uncertainty, such
as recommendation systems. In applications involving a large number of users, the performance
of contextual MAB can be significantly improved
by facilitating collaboration among multiple users.
This has been achieved by the clustering of bandits (CB) methods, which adaptively group the
users into different clusters and achieve collaboration by allowing the users in the same cluster to
share data. However, classical CB algorithms typically rely on numerical reward feedback, which
may not be practical in certain real-world applications. For instance, in recommendation systems, it
is more realistic and reliable to solicit preference
feedback between pairs of recommended items
rather than absolute rewards. To address this limitation, we introduce the first ”clustering of dueling bandit algorithms” to enable collaborative
decision-making based on preference feedback.
We propose two novel algorithms: (1) Clustering of Linear Dueling Bandits (COLDB) which
models the user reward functions as linear functions of the context vectors, and (2) Clustering of
Neural Dueling Bandits (CONDB) which uses a
neural network to model complex, non-linear user
reward functions. Both algorithms are supported
by rigorous theoretical analyses, demonstrating
that user collaboration leads to improved regret
bounds. Extensive empirical evaluations on synthetic and real-world datasets further validate the
effectiveness of our methods, establishing their
potential in real-world applications involving multiple users with preference-based feedback.

Some important applications of contextual MAB, such as
recommendation systems, often involve a large number (e.g.,
in the scale of millions) of users, which opens up the possibility of further improving the performance of contextual
MAB via user collaboration. To this end, the method of
online Clustering of Bandits (CB) has been proposed, which
adaptively partitions the users into a number of clusters and
leverages the collaborative effect of the users in the same
cluster to achieve improved performance (Gentile et al.,
2014; Wang et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2019).
Classical CB algorithms usually require an absolute realvalued numerical reward as feedback for each arm (Wang
et al., 2024a). However, in some crucial applications of contextual MAB, it is often more realistic and reliable to request
the users for preference feedback. For example, in recommendation systems, it is often preferable to recommend a
pair of items to a user and then ask the user for relative
feedback (i.e., which item is preferred) (Yue et al., 2012).
As another example, contextual MAB has been successfully
adopted to optimize the input prompt for large language
models (LLMs), which is often referred to as prompt optimization (Lin et al., 2024a;b). In this application, instead of
requesting an LLM user for a numerical score as feedback,
it is more practical to show the user a pair of LLM responses
generated by two candidate prompts and ask the user which

1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tongji University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 4 Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology 5 Tianjin University. Correspondence to: Zhongxiang Dai <daizhongxiang@cuhk.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

