ITBench: Evaluating AI Agents across
Diverse Real-World IT Automation Tasks
Saurabh Jha * 1 Rohan Arora * 1 Yuji Watanabe * 1 Takumi Yanagawa 1 Yinfang Chen 2 Jackson Clark 2
Bhavya Bhavya 1 Mudit Verma 1 Harshit Kumar 1 Hirokuni Kitahara 1 Noah Zheutlin 1 Saki Takano 1
Divya Pathak 1 Felix George 1 Xinbo Wu 2 Bekir O Turkkan 1 Gerard Vanloo 1 Michael Nidd 1 Ting Dai 1
Oishik Chatterjee 1 Pranjal Gupta 1 Suranjana Samanta 1 Pooja Aggarwal 1 Rong Lee 1 Jae-wook Ahn 1
Debanjana Kar 1 Amit Paradkar 1 Yu Deng 1 Pratibha Moogi 1 Prateeti Mohapatra 1 Naoki Abe 1
Chandrasekhar Narayanaswami 1 Tianyin Xu 2 Lav R. Varshney 2 Ruchi Mahindru 1 Anca Sailer 1
Laura Shwartz 1 Daby Sow 1 Nicholas C. M. Fuller 1 Ruchir Puri 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Modern IT systems are driving many facets of our economy.
They have grown significantly in complexity with the adoption of cloud computing and agile development practices
(Harvard Business Review Research Report, 2022; Trask,
2025). Effective management of these systems is becoming extremely challenging as corporations struggle to keep
up with this growing complexity. Various IT personas—
ranging from Chief Information Officers to Site Reliability
Engineers and Security and Compliance officers—and IT
engineers in general are struggling to ensure resiliency, reliability, security, and cost effective operations of IT Systems.

Realizing the vision of using AI agents to automate critical IT tasks depends on the ability to
measure and understand effectiveness of proposed
solutions. We introduce ITBench, a framework
that offers a systematic methodology for benchmarking AI agents to address real-world IT automation tasks. Our initial release targets three
key areas: Site Reliability Engineering (SRE),
Compliance and Security Operations (CISO), and
Financial Operations (FinOps). The design enables AI researchers to understand the challenges
and opportunities of AI agents for IT automation
with push-button workflows and interpretable metrics. ITBench includes an initial set of 102 realworld scenarios, which can be easily extended by
community contributions. Our results show that
agents powered by state-of-the-art models resolve
only 11.4% of SRE scenarios, 25.2% of CISO scenarios, and 25.8% of FinOps scenarios (excluding
anomaly detection). For FinOps-specific anomaly
detection (AD) scenarios, AI agents achieve an
F1 score of 0.35. We expect ITBench to be a key
enabler of AI-driven IT automation that is correct,
safe, and fast. ITBench, along with a leaderboard
and sample agent implementations, is available at
https://github.com/ibm/itbench.

The recent CrowdStrike outage highlighted these challenges
as it brought down our society’s most critical systems—
from hospital services to air travel—and was estimated to
cost US Fortune 500 companies a staggering $5.4 billion
(Kerner, 2024). This incident underlined the critical need
for intelligent IT incident resolution, with compliance and
risk management capabilities, a topic also addressed in the
Digital Operational Resiliency Act (DORA) in Europe (Parliament and the Council of the European Union, 2024).
The rising popularity of AI agents and their projected ability
to handle intricate tasks have increased the demand for AI
agents managing IT systems (John, 2024; Miguel Carreon,
2024; Pujar et al., 2023). Given the complexity of IT tasks,
a major hurdle for this research is establishing systematic
methods to assess the effectiveness of AI agents prior to
their production deployment (Bogin et al., 2024; Kapoor
et al., 2024). Consequently, there is an urgency to develop
methods for evaluation of AI agents based on real IT tasks
and their corresponding environments.

*

1
Equal contribution
IBM 2 University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to:
Saurabh Jha
<Saurabh.Jha@ibm.com>.

This paper addresses this critical need and presents ITBench,
a first-of-its-kind framework that is both comprehensive and
visionary for benchmarking real-life IT automation tasks.
The goal of ITBench is to measure the performance of AI

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

