Primphormer: Efficient Graph Transformers with Primal Representations

Mingzhen He 1 Ruikai Yang 1 Hanling Tian 1 Youmei Qiu 1 Xiaolin Huang 1

Abstract

which allow each node to globally attend to all other nodes
is proposed to enable the learning of long-range dependencies within the graph (Rampasek et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2022). While GTs are a promising approach, they suffer
from a significant drawback: their quadratic complexity
caused by pair-wise computations in self-attention mechanisms, which limits their practical applicability.

Graph Transformers (GTs) have emerged as
a promising approach for graph representation
learning. Despite their successes, the quadratic
complexity of GTs limits scalability on large
graphs due to their pair-wise computations. To
fundamentally reduce the computational burden
of GTs, we propose a primal-dual framework that
interprets the self-attention mechanism on graphs
as a dual representation. Based on this framework, we develop Primphormer, an efficient GT
that leverages a primal representation with linear complexity. Theoretical analysis reveals that
Primphormer serves as a universal approximator for functions on both sequences and graphs,
while also retaining its expressive power for
distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs. Extensive experiments on various graph benchmarks
demonstrate that Primphormer achieves competitive empirical results while maintaining a more
user-friendly memory and computational costs.

The key to reducing the quadratic complexity is to use computationally efficient attention mechanisms. Linear attentions like Performer (Choromanski et al., 2021) and BigBird (Zaheer et al., 2020) have been integrated into GTs.
However, they need to introduce additional computational
overhead, which becomes the dominating source of computation for medium-sized graphs (Rampasek et al., 2022).
An alternative approach is sparse attention. Shirzad et al.
(2023) introduced Exphormer whose efficiency benefits
from the sparsity of graphs. However, the complexity increases to quadratic with the number of nodes as graphs
become denser, thereby still limiting its scalability.
To fundamentally enhance the scalability of GTs, it is crucial to avoid pair-wise computations, prompting us to consider the primal-dual relationship in kernel machines. Examples of models leveraging this relationship include the
support vector machine (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995), the least
squares support vector machine (Suykens & Vandewalle,
1999), and the kernel principal component analysis (Mika
et al., 1999). The primal-dual relationship represents pairwise and symmetric similarity in duality as an inner product
of feature mappings in the primal space. By solving optimization problems in the primal space with these feature
mappings, quadratic complexity can be avoided.

1. Introduction
Graph representation learning has been successfully applied in various fields, including social network analysis
(Li et al., 2023), traffic prediction (Dong et al., 2023),
drug discovery (Liu et al., 2023), and more. Much of the
research in graph representation learning has focused on
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) which rely
on local message-passing mechanisms. Although MPNNs
have emerged as a powerful approach to short-range tasks
that require information exchange among nodes in neighborhoods, MPNNs face inherent limitations such as oversmoothing (Nguyen et al., 2023), over-squashing (Giraldo
et al., 2023) in long-range tasks (Dwivedi et al., 2022b).

When constructing the primal representation of the selfattention mechanism, we encounter an essential problem
that attention scores are inherently asymmetric, violating
Mercer’s condition (Mercer, 1909), which causes the classical primal-dual discussion to fail. Recent research on
primal-dual relationships has sought to explore methods for
accommodating asymmetry in kernel machines (Suykens,
2016; He et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2023). Chen et al.
(2023) interpreted the primal-dual relationship of the selfattention on sequences through asymmetric kernel singular
value decomposition. This approach collects data information through uniformly sampling the sequence under an in-

To overcome the limitations, Graph Transformers (GTs)
1

Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Xiaolin Huang <xiaolinhuang@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

