PPDiff: Diffusing in Hybrid Sequence-Structure Space for Protein-Protein
Complex Design

Zhenqiao Song * 1 Tianxiao Li 2 Lei Li 1 Martin Renqiang Min 2

Abstract

spanning therapeutic development (Nelson et al., 2010), diagnostics (Brennan et al., 2010) and imaging reagents (Stern
et al., 2013). Empirical selection methods, such as screening
high-complexity random libraries of antibodies (Chao et al.,
2006) or alternative scaffolds (Hackel et al., 2008), have
demonstrated the ability to generate binders for specific
targets. While effective, these approaches require considerable experimental effort, making them both time-consuming
and resource-intensive. Traditional computational methods
leveraging physicochemical properties offer a more efficient
alternative, enabling the design of binders by focusing on
specific surface patches of the protein target (Chevalier et al.,
2017; Silva et al., 2019). However, these approaches are
often limited by the lack of obvious surface pockets on many
target proteins, thereby restricting their applicability to a
narrow set of binding interactions.

Designing protein-binding proteins with high
affinity is critical in biomedical research and
biotechnology. Despite recent advancements targeting specific proteins, the ability to create highaffinity binders for arbitrary protein targets on demand, without extensive rounds of wet-lab testing,
remains a significant challenge. Here, we introduce PPDiff, a diffusion model to jointly design
the sequence and structure of binders for arbitrary protein targets in a non-autoregressive manner. PPDiff builds upon our developed Sequence
Structure Interleaving Network with Causal attention layers (SSINC), which integrates interleaved
self-attention layers to capture global amino acid
correlations, k-nearest neighbor (kNN) equivariant graph layers to model local interactions in
three-dimensional (3D) space, and causal attention layers to simplify the intricate interdependencies within the protein sequence. To assess
PPDiff, we curate PPBench, a general proteinprotein complex dataset comprising 706,360 complexes from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). The
model is pretrained on PPBench and finetuned on
two real-world applications: target-protein minibinder complex design and antigen-antibody complex design. PPDiff consistently surpasses baseline methods, achieving success rates of 50.00%,
23.16%, and 16.89% for the pretraining task and
the two downstream applications, respectively.

In parallel with advances in traditional computational binder
design, deep learning methods have achieved remarkable
accuracy in predicting and designing protein-protein interactions (Evans et al., 2021; Bennett et al., 2023; Zambaldi
et al., 2024). These approaches have made it possible to
design binders for specific targets without relying on highthroughput screening (Goudy et al., 2023). In certain cases,
such as peptides (Vázquez Torres et al., 2024) and disordered targets (Wu et al., 2024), high binding affinity has
been achieved without the need for extensive experimental
optimization. Despite these successes, the overall success
rate remains low due to two primary failure modes: the
designed sequence may not fold into the intended structure,
and the designed structure may not bind to the target protein.
Moreover, most existing approaches are highly specialized
for particular interaction types, leaving many target proteins
intractable.

1. Introduction

To address these challenges, we present PPDiff, a diffusion model building upon our developed Sequence Structure
Interleaving Network with Causal attention layers (SSINC),
to co-design the sequence and structure of binders for arbitrary protein targets in a non-autoregressive manner. In
this framework, proteins are represented as residue point
sets in 3D space, with each residue linked to a 3D Cartesian
coordinate. The model employs a diffusion process for both
continuous residue coordinates and discrete residue types,

Designing proteins with high affinity and specificity to target proteins is important in biomedicine, with applications
*
Work done during the internship at NEC Laboratories America.
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
NEC Laboratories America. Correspondence to: Zhenqiao Song
<zhenqiaosong@cmu.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

