FuseUNet: A Multi-Scale Feature Fusion Method for U-like Networks
Quansong He * 1 Xiangde Min * 2 Kaishen Wang 3 Tao He 1

Abstract

neberger et al., 2015) is a milestone network architecture in
this field, characterized by its symmetric encoder-decoder
convolutional network structure and the skip connections
for integrating features from different scales.

Medical image segmentation is a critical task in
computer vision, with UNet serving as a milestone architecture. The typical component of
UNet family is the skip connection, however, their
skip connections face two significant limitations:
(1) they lack effective interaction between features at different scales, and (2) they rely on simple concatenation or addition operations, which
constrain efficient information integration. While
recent improvements to UNet have focused on
enhancing encoder and decoder capabilities, these
limitations remain overlooked. To overcome these
challenges, we propose a novel multi-scale feature
fusion method that reimagines the UNet decoding process as solving an initial value problem
(IVP), treating skip connections as discrete nodes.
By leveraging principles from the linear multistep
method, we propose an adaptive ordinary differential equation method to enable effective multiscale feature fusion. Our approach is independent
of the encoder and decoder architectures, making it adaptable to various U-Net-like networks.
Experiments on ACDC, KiTS2023, MSD brain tumor, and ISIC2017/2018 skin lesion segmentation
datasets demonstrate improved feature utilization,
reduced network parameters, and maintained high
performance. The code is available at https:
//github.com/nayutayuki/FuseUNet.

The emergence of UNet laid the foundation for segmentation
networks, influencing the design of many existing architectures. For simplicity, we refer to these networks as “U-Nets”.
Recently popular U-Nets improvement strategies have primarily focused on enhancing the information processing
capabilities of the encoder and decoder, such as UNETR
(Hatamizadeh et al., 2021), Swin-UNet (Cao et al., 2022),
and their variants like Swin-UNETR (Tang et al., 2022),
MetaUNETR (Lyu et al., 2024) which incorporate Transformer (Vaswani, 2017); VM-UNet (Ruan & Xiang, 2024),
UltraLight VM-Unet (Wu et al., 2024), and LKM-UNet
(Wang et al., 2024a) which incorporate Mamba (Gu & Dao,
2023); and Rolling-UNet (Liu et al., 2024), DHMF-MLP
(Cheng & Wang, 2023), which improve multi-layer perceptrons (MLP). However, the skip connections in U-Nets are
limited to feature fusion within the same scale, lacking interaction across different scales, which is a clear limitation.
Additionally, the feature fusion strategy in U-Nets relies
solely on simple addition or concatenation, which makes it
difficult to effectively integrate feature information.
Unfortunately, there has been little research on skip connections in recent years. The most recent notable studies
addressing this issue are UNet++ (Zhou et al., 2020) and
UNet3+ (Huang et al., 2020). UNet++ introduced many
intermediate nodes and dense skip connections, using feature summation to integrate features from different scales.
UNet3+ built on UNet++ by proposing a full-scale skip
connection, where each decoder processes all scales of skip
connections. Their experimental results demonstrate the
benefits of adding multi-scale information interaction in the
UNet structure. In fact, the idea behind U-Nets is quite
analogous to the numerical solution of ordinary differential
equation (ODE). In U-Nets, the decoder simulates functional relationships based on multiple known encoder output feature nodes to obtain the corresponding results. This
process is similar to computing approximate values of a
function at discrete points in ODE. However, the aforementioned networks still follow UNet’s approach for feature
fusion, which relies on simple concatenation or addition.
This straightforward method is analogous to the explicit

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation is a crucial branch of computer
vision, and with the development of deep learning, many
excellent segmentation methods have emerged. UNet (Ron*
Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China 2 Tongji Hospital Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, America. Correspondence to: Tao He
<tao he@scu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

