Reducing Variance of Stochastic Optimization for Approximating Nash
Equilibria in Normal-Form Games

Linjian Meng 1 Wubing Chen 1 Wenbin Li 1 Tianpei Yang 1 Youzhi Zhang 2 Yang Gao 1

Abstract

equilibrium (NE), where no player gains by unilaterally deviating from it. However, computing an NE often involves a
complex, non-convex optimization problem. Theoretically,
computing an NE is known to be PPAD-complete and thus
computationally intractable (Daskalakis et al., 2009).

Nash equilibrium (NE) plays an important role
in game theory. How to efficiently compute an
NE in NFGs is challenging due to its complexity and non-convex optimization property. Machine Learning (ML), the cornerstone of modern
artificial intelligence, has demonstrated remarkable empirical performance across various applications including non-convex optimization. To
leverage non-convex stochastic optimization techniques from ML for approximating an NE, various
loss functions have been proposed. Among these,
only one loss function is unbiased, allowing for
unbiased estimation under the sampled play. Unfortunately, this loss function suffers from high
variance, which degrades the convergence rate.
To improve the convergence rate by mitigating
the high variance associated with the existing unbiased loss function, we propose a novel surrogate loss function named Nash Advantage Loss
(NAL). NAL is theoretically proved unbiased and
exhibits significantly lower variance than the existing unbiased loss function. Experimental results
demonstrate that the algorithm minimizing NAL
achieves a significantly faster empirical convergence rates compared to other algorithms, while
also reducing the variance of estimated loss value
by several orders of magnitude.

Machine Learning (ML) (Mitchell & Mitchell, 1997) is a
predominant technology in contemporary artificial intelligence, demonstrating remarkable performance in diverse
real-world applications including non-convex optimization
problems such as image and speech recognition (Deng et al.,
2014), natural language processing (Achiam et al., 2023),
autonomous vehicles (Bojarski et al., 2016), and financial
modeling (Heaton et al., 2017). Since NE computation is
known to be a non-convex optimization problem (Gemp
et al., 2024), leveraging ML for NE computation presents a
promising research direction. However, the application of
ML to NE computation remains largely unexplored.
A significant challenge in applying ML to compute an NE is
designing an appropriate loss function. Specifically, for an
n-player, m-action, general-sum normal-form game (NFG),
storing the payoff matrix requires nmn entries. As m and
n increase, the storage complexity O(nmn ) grows exponentially, making it computationally prohibitive to load the
entire payoff matrix into memory for large-scale NFGs.
Thus, sampling a portion of the payoff matrix becomes necessary, i.e., minimizing the expectation of a random variable
using non-convex stochastic optimization techniques in ML.
However, most existing loss functions (Nikaidô & Isoda,
1955; Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008; Raghunathan et al.,
2019; Gemp et al., 2022; Duan et al., 2023) introduce bias
under the sampled play, which can be seen as the stochastic
optimization setting in ML, making it infeasible to compute
an NE under this setting. To address this bias, Gemp et al.
(2024) propose a loss function that can be unbiasedly estimated under the stochastic optimization setting. However, it
suffers from high variance, as its value is estimated via the
inner product of two independent and identically distributed
random variables, whose variance is the square of that of
estimating an individual random variable, thus significantly
degrading the convergence rate.

1. Introduction
Game theory is a powerful tool for modeling multi-agent interactions. A common goal in addressing games is the Nash
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Tianpei Yang
<tianpei.yang@nju.edu.cn>, Youzhi Zhang <youzhi.zhang@caircas.org.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To improve the convergence rate by mitigating the high variance associated with the existing unbiased loss function, we
1

