Scaling Laws for Floating–Point Quantization Training

Xingwu Sun * 1 2 Shuaipeng Li * † 1
Ruobing Xie Weidong Han Kan Wu 1 Zhen Yang 1 Yixing Li 1 3 An Wang 1 4 Shuai Li 1 Jinbao Xue 1
Yu Cheng 3 Yangyu Tao 1 Zhanhui Kang 1 Chengzhong Xu † 2 Di Wang † 1 Jie Jiang 1
1

1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Scaling laws of large language models (LLMs) could help
developers effectively select superior parameter settings
before experiments and accurately predict the model performance under different configurations. They are regarded as
excellent guidance in LLM training. The widely acknowledged scaling law efforts such as Kaplan et al. (2020), Hoffmann et al. (2022), and Li et al. (2024) mainly concentrated
on the central factors, i.e., model size and trained token size,
which significantly impact the performance of LLMs. With
the rapid growth of both model and data sizes, there has
been increasing attention to the efficiency and cost of LLM
training. Training and serving with lower precision becomes
a popular solution. Currently, lots of representative LLMs
were trained in BF16 and even lower precision (Dubey et al.,
2024; Sun et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024;
Ma et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023), aiming
to balance effectiveness and efficiency. Compared to integer quantization, floating-point (FP) quantization can better
maintain LLMs’ accuracy at extremely lower bit rates and
thus is often equipped in low-precision LLMs. Therefore,
exploring the scaling laws of LLM performance under different low precision settings with FP quantization becomes
essential to shed light on future low-precision LLM training.

Low-precision training is considered an effective
strategy for reducing both training and downstream inference costs. Previous scaling laws
for precision mainly focus on integer quantization, which pay less attention to the constituents
in floating-point (FP) quantization, and thus cannot well fit the LLM losses in this scenario. In
contrast, while FP quantization training is more
commonly implemented in production, it’s research has been relatively superficial. In this
paper, we thoroughly explore the effects of FP
quantization targets, exponent bits, mantissa bits,
and the calculation granularity of the scaling factor in FP quantization training performance of
LLM models. In addition to an accurate FP quantization unified scaling law, we also provide valuable suggestions for the community: (1) Exponent
bits contribute slightly more to the model performance than mantissa bits. We provide the optimal
exponent-mantissa bit ratio for different bit numbers, which is available for future reference by
hardware manufacturers; (2) We discover the formation of the critical data size in low-precision
LLM training. Too much training data exceeding
the critical data size will inversely bring in degradation of LLM performance; (3) The optimal FP
quantization precision is directly proportional to
the computational power, but within a wide computational power range. We estimate that the best
cost-performance precision should lie between
4-8 bits.

Recently, there was pioneer work that conducted in-depth
analyses and explorations on the LLM’s scaling laws for
precision in both training and inference (Kumar et al.,
2024), quantitatively measuring the degradation rules of
post-train quantization and quantized training. This scaling law provides an appropriate conclusion explaining the
potential damage of excessively increasing training data to
low-precision LLMs’ performance. However, Kumar et al.
(2024) directly adopted the bit width as the precision in its
low-precision scaling laws, which might lose finer-grained
modeling of the relationship between various parameter settings related to the FP quantization and the final loss of
LLMs. In practice, the key factors of FP quantization such
as the exponent, mantissa, and the block size of scaling
factors may have different impacts on the final loss. A more
comprehensive, precise, and practical scaling law for FP
quantized training related to the data size (D), model size

*

Equal contribution 1 Tencent Hunyuan 2 University of Macau
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Institute of Science Tokyo.
Correspondence to: Shuaipeng Li <shuaipengli@tencent.com>,
Chengzhong Xu <czxu@um.edu.mo>, Di Wang <diwang@tencent.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

