History-Guided Video Diffusion

Kiwhan Song* 1 Boyuan Chen* 1 Max Simchowitz 2 Yilun Du 3 Russ Tedrake 1 Vincent Sitzmann 1

Abstract

ables. Yet, another conditioning variable, namely the entire
collection of previous video frames, or history, deserves further exploration. In this paper, we investigate the following
question: Can we use different portions of history - variable
lengths, subsets of frames, and even different image-domain
frequencies - as a form of guidance for video generation?
Importantly, CFG with flexible history is incompatible with
existing diffusion model architectures and the most obvious
fix significantly degrades sample quality (see Section 3).

Classifier-free guidance (CFG) is a key technique
for improving conditional generation in diffusion
models, enabling more accurate control while enhancing sample quality. It is natural to extend
this technique to video diffusion, which generates video conditioned on a variable number of
context frames, collectively referred to as history.
However, we find two key challenges to guiding
with variable-length history: architectures that
only support fixed-size conditioning, and the empirical observation that CFG-style history dropout
performs poorly. To address this, we propose the
Diffusion Forcing Transformer (DFoT), a video
diffusion architecture and theoretically grounded
training objective that jointly enable conditioning
on a flexible number of history frames. We then
introduce History Guidance, a family of guidance methods uniquely enabled by DFoT. We
show that its simplest form, vanilla history guidance, already significantly improves video generation quality and temporal consistency. A more
advanced method, history guidance across time
and frequency further enhances motion dynamics,
enables compositional generalization to out-ofdistribution history, and can stably roll out extremely long videos. Project website: https:
//boyuan.space/history-guidance

1

To address these limitations, we propose the Diffusion Forcing Transformer (DFoT), a video diffusion framework that
enables flexible conditioning on any portion of the input
history. Extending the “noising-as-masking” paradigm in
Diffusion Forcing (Chen et al., 2024) to non-causal transformers, DFoT trains video diffusion models by applying
independent noise levels to each frame. During sampling,
portions of the history can be selectively masked with noise,
enabling flexible conditioning and guidance. For instance,
in CFG, the unconditional score corresponds to our model
with the entire history masked out. Notably, DFoT is compatible with existing architectures such as DiT (Peebles
& Xie, 2023) and U-ViT (Hoogeboom et al., 2023; 2024)
and can be efficiently implemented through fine-tuning of
pre-trained video diffusion models.
At sampling time, the DFoT facilitates a family of historyconditioned guidance methods, collectively referred to as
History Guidance (HG). The simplest of these, Vanilla History Guidance (HG-v), uses an arbitrary length of history
as the conditioning variable for CFG. Notably, even this
simple method significantly enhances video quality. We further introduce two advanced methods enabled by the DFoT:
Temporal History Guidance (HG-t) and Fractional History
Guidance (HG-f) . These extend history guidance beyond a
special case of CFG. Temporal History Guidance combines
scores from different history windows. Fractional History
Guidance conditions on history windows corrupted by varying levels of noise, effectively acting as a “low-pass filter”
on historical frames. With minor modifications, it can also
target specific frequency bandwidths to enhance the dynamic
degree of generated videos (hence the frequency-based terminology). Together, we compose HG-t and HG-f to create
a comprehensive history guidance paradigm, which we term
history guidance across time and frequency (HG-tf).

Introduction

Diffusion models are effective generative models in domains
such as image, sound, and video. Critical to their success
is classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022),
which trades off between sample quality and diversity by
jointly training a conditional and an unconditional diffusion
model and combining their score estimates when sampling.
In the realm of video generative models, CFG commonly
relies on either text or image prompts as conditioning vari*

Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 Carnegie Mellon University
Harvard University. Correspondence to: Kiwhan Song <kiwhan@mit.edu>, Boyuan Chen <boyuanc@mit.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The Diffusion Forcing Transformer and associated History
1

