BARK: A Fully Bayesian Tree Kernel for Black-box Optimization

Toby Boyne 1 Jose Pablo Folch 1 Robert Matthew Lee 2 Behrang Shafei 2 Ruth Misener 1

Abstract

such as the squared exponential and Matérn kernels are limited to continuous inputs and assume function stationarity.

We perform Bayesian optimization using a Gaussian process perspective on Bayesian Additive
Regression Trees (BART). Our BART Kernel
(BARK) uses tree agreement to define a posterior over piecewise-constant functions, and we
explore the space of tree kernels using a Markov
chain Monte Carlo approach. Where BART only
samples functions, the resulting BARK model
obtains samples of Gaussian processes defining
distributions over functions, which allow us to
build acquisition functions for Bayesian optimization. Our tree-based approach enables global
optimization over the surrogate, even for mixedfeature spaces. Moreover, where many previous
tree-based kernels provide uncertainty quantification over function values, our sampling scheme
captures uncertainty over the tree structure itself.
Our experiments show the strong performance of
BARK on both synthetic and applied benchmarks,
due to the combination of our fully Bayesian surrogate and the optimization procedure.

Tree regression provides a flexible model which is popular
due to strong empirical performance, natural regularization
and interpretability (Hill et al., 2020; Loh, 2011). Trees
allow for mixed inputs and can model non-stationary functions, with hierarchical dependencies. A tree model defines
a sequence of domain splits. A single input will go through
all the splits until a leaf node is reached which assigns a
value to the predictive model. A forest is an ensemble of
trees, where each tree is regularized to be a weak learner to
avoid overfitting. Despite their performance in regression
tasks, tree models have limited application to BO since they
lack explicit uncertainty quantification in their predictions,
instead relying on empirical variance.
Given an ensemble of m trees, and two inputs x and x′ , we
can define a function representing how often the trees agree
on the inputs belonging to the same leaf. This notion of tree
agreement can be used to construct a valid kernel for use
in a GP (Balog et al., 2016; Davies & Ghahramani, 2014;
Thebelt et al., 2022a). This allows us to use tree models in
applications which require well-calibrated estimates such
as Bayesian optimization. Tree kernels for model fitting
and BO have previously been explored (Balog et al., 2016;
Thebelt et al., 2022a), but they have always used a twostep fitting process: first, a tree model is fitted on the data,
and then the GP is trained using the tree kernel defined
by the tree model. While this heuristic gives good results
in a variety of benchmarks, it is not principled and hence
potentially sub-optimal.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO), which finds the optimal conditions of expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions (Frazier,
2018; Shahriari et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2023c), is a leading approach for data-driven design of experiments. BO
applications range from molecule design (Griffiths et al.,
2024) to battery and chemical reaction optimization (Folch
et al., 2023). BO relies on a probabilistic surrogate modeling our belief and uncertainty about the black-box function.
One class of surrogates are Gaussian processes (GPs), flexible models giving well-calibrated uncertainty estimates
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2005). The most important hyperparameter choice when using a GP is the kernel, which fully
defines the model’s covariance structure. Popular kernels

Since the tree structure has an infinite number of parameters,
it is at risk of overfitting when optimizing the log-marginal
likelihood (Rasmussen & Williams, 2005). To overcome this
challenge, we take inspiration from Bayesian tree methods
which impose a prior on the tree structure. We obtain a
posterior over the tree structure, from which we sample
using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
We motivate using tree-kernels by exploiting the strong
modeling power of tree-based approaches, which can be
used for mixed input spaces. Moreover, we can formulate
acquisition functions with these tree models as optimization
problems that can be solved globally, where gradient-based
methods often struggle with discrete inputs.

1

Imperial College London (London, UK) 2 BASF SE (Ludwigshafen, Germany).
Correspondence to: Toby Boyne
<t.boyne23@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

