Testing the Limits of Fine-Tuning for Improving
Visual Cognition in Vision Language Models

Luca M. Schulze Buschoff * 1 Konstantinos Voudouris * 1 Elif Akata 1 2
Matthias Bethge 2 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 3 Eric Schulz 1

Abstract

(Battaglia et al., 2012; Piloto et al., 2022), an ability that
is present very early in development and does not require
extensive learning or experience (Baillargeon et al., 1995;
Spelke, 1990; Spelke & Kinzler, 2007). Causal reasoning describes the ability to infer cause-effect relationships
(Waldmann, 2017; Pearl, 2009). There is growing evidence
that humans possess an intuitive capacity to infer and predict
causal relationships (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2009), and that
this ability emerges early in development (Kuhn, 2012; Sobel & Kirkham, 2006). In the psychology literature, intuitive
physics and causal reasoning have been studied most prominently in their relation to visual cognition—investigating
how humans and other animals reason about their physical environment and its causal structure through the visual
inputs they receive.

Pre-trained vision language models still fall short
of human visual cognition. In an effort to improve visual cognition and align models with human behavior, we introduce visual stimuli and
human judgments on visual cognition tasks, allowing us to systematically evaluate performance
across cognitive domains under a consistent environment. We fine-tune models on ground truth
data for intuitive physics and causal reasoning
and find that this improves model performance in
the respective fine-tuning domain. Furthermore,
it can improve model alignment with human behavior. However, we find that task-specific finetuning does not contribute to robust human-like
generalization to data with other visual characteristics or to tasks in other cognitive domains.

Vision language models (VLMs), which receive visual and
textual linguistic input and produce textual output, have
received recent attention for their apparently sophisticated
reasoning in visual and linguistic tasks (Liu et al., 2025).
However, recent work has established that VLMs are still
limited in their understanding of the physical world and its
causal structure (Jin et al., 2023; Balazadeh et al., 2024),
suggesting that they lack human-like intuitive physics and
causal reasoning. While VLMs perform reasonably well on
intuitive physics problems, such as predicting the stability
of block towers, they do not show a good fit with human
behavioral data. On tests of causal reasoning, such as predicting whether removing a block would cause a tower to
fall, VLMs perform poorly and again do not fit well with
human behavior (Schulze Buschoff et al., 2025). Beyond the
domains of intuitive physics and causal reasoning, VLMs
have also been shown to have a number of visual deficiencies, and they often struggle with simple visual tasks that
would be trivial for a human observer (Rahmanzadehgervi
et al., 2024; Schulze Buschoff et al., 2025; Balazadeh et al.,
2024). VLMs are prone to hallucinations, where the corresponding output does not sensibly correspond to the input
image (Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024). Ullman (2024)
shows that VLMs hallucinate visual illusions where there
are none, if the visual stimuli resemble canonical illusions
that were likely in their training data. Similarly, Zhang et al.
(2023) show that while the general alignment to human per-

1. Introduction
One of the main goals of machine learning research is to
build machines that think and behave like humans. To meet
this goal, Lake et al. (2017) proposed that human-like machine learning models must be capable of reasoning about
their physical and social environment and its causal structure. These capabilities are sometimes summarized as intuitive theories—the cognitive expectations humans and
other animals have about their environment from early on
in development that they use to behave adaptively.
In this paper, we focus on two classes of intuitive theory. Intuitive physics relates to the ability to predict and understand
the physical properties and interactions of inanimate objects
*
1
Equal contribution
Institute for Human-Centered
AI, Helmholtz Munich,
Oberschleißheim,
Germany
2
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 3 Department
of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Massachusetts,
USA. Correspondence to:
Luca M. Schulze Buschoff
<lucaschulzebuschoff@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

