SNS-Bench: Defining, Building, and Assessing Capabilities of
Large Language Models in Social Networking Services

Hongcheng Guo * 1 Yue Wang * 2 Shaosheng Cao 3 Fei Zhao 3 Boyang Wang 1 Lei Li 4 Liang Chen 5
Xinze Lyu 3 Zhe Xu 3 Yao Hu 3 Zhoujun Li 1

Abstract

In recent years, the development of Large Language Models
(LLMs) has significantly advanced our ability to understand
and generate content across various tasks (OpenAI, 2023;
DeepSeek-AI, 2024; Touvron et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024a;
Zhao et al., 2023), including text generation, sentiment analysis, dialogue systems, etc. Social Networking Services
(SNS), as key platforms for modern information dissemination, have become major venues for human communication,
expression of opinions, and emotional transmission. Content on SNS often embodies personal emotions and socialcultural expressions (Yang et al., 2024b; Jin et al., 2024).
Therefore, understanding contents requires not only accurate text interpretation but also a deep exploration of the
emotions and cultural contexts embedded within.

With the rapid advancement of Social Networking Services (SNS), the need for intelligent and
efficient interaction within diverse platforms has
become more crucial. Large Language Models
(LLMs) play an important role in SNS as they possess the potential to revolutionize user experience,
content generation, and communication dynamics. However, recent studies focus on isolated
SNS tasks rather than a comprehensive evaluation. In this paper, we introduce SNS-B ENCH,
specially constructed for assessing the abilities
of large language models from different Social
Networking Services, with a wide range of SNSrelated information. SNS-B ENCH encompasses
8 different tasks such as note classification, query
content relevance, and highlight words generation in comments. Finally, 6,658 questions of
social media text, including subjective questions,
single-choice, and multiple-choice questions, are
concluded in SNS-B ENCH. Further, we evaluate the performance of over 25+ current diverse
LLMs on our SNS-B ENCH. Models with different sizes exhibit performance variations, yet
adhere to the scaling law. Moreover, we hope provide more insights to revolutionize the techniques
of social network services with LLMs. https:
//github.com/HC-Guo/SNS-Bench.

Despite the success of LLMs across various domains (Xu
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b), evaluating their performance
in SNS remains challenging (Bandura). Recent studies have
explored LLMs in specific SNS applications (Jin et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024; Alhamed et al., 2024a; Qi, 2024; Yang et al.,
2024b; Chen et al., 2024), but these efforts focus on isolated tasks rather than providing a comprehensive evaluation
of SNS capabilities. Existing benchmarks lack systematic
frameworks, standardized metrics, and datasets that capture
the diversity of social media interactions, particularly emotional understanding, social interaction, and cultural context.
A comprehensive evaluation is crucial for assessing how
well LLMs navigate the nuanced and dynamic nature of
SNS, ensuring their effectiveness in real-world applications.
To address this gap, we introduce SNS-B ENCH, a benchmark specifically designed to evaluate the diverse abilities
of LLMs on Social Networking Services. SNS-B ENCH
contains 8 SNS-related tasks (e.g. Note Classcification, Sentiment Analysis, and Comment Interaction). Besides, we
propose specific metrics for each task. This holistic evaluation enables us to gain deeper insights into the social
attributes of LLMs in real-world social contexts, thereby
advancing related applications. The data is sourced from
a social platform with over 300M users (we have provided
valid data license), covering a wide range of domains such
as daily life, entertainment, and social issues. It includes
various text types, such as notes, posts, comments, and

1. Introduction
“The true art of socializing is not merely
conversing with others, but establishing
resonance with them.” – Carl Jung
1

CCSE, Beihang University 2 Nanjing University 3 Xiaohongshu
Inc. 4 The University of Hong Kong 5 Peking University. Correspondence to: Shaosheng Cao <caoshaosheng@xiaohongshu.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

