U NI M ATE: A Unified Model for Mechanical Metamaterial
Generation, Property Prediction, and Condition Confirmation

Wangzhi Zhan 1 Jianpeng Chen 1 Dongqi Fu 2 Dawei Zhou 1

Abstract
Example

Trinity Correlation in Metamaterial Design

Metamaterials are artificial materials that are designed to meet unseen properties in nature, such
as ultra-stiffness and negative materials indices.
In mechanical metamaterial design, three key
modalities are typically involved, i.e., 3D topology, density condition, and mechanical property.
Real-world complex application scenarios place
the demanding requirements on machine learning
models to consider all three modalities together.
However, a comprehensive literature review indicates that most existing works only consider
two modalities, e.g., predicting mechanical properties given the 3D topology or generating 3D
topology given the required properties. Therefore, there is still a significant gap for the stateof-the-art machine learning models capturing the
whole. Hence, we propose a unified model named
U NI M ATE, which consists of a modality alignment module and a synergetic diffusion generation module. Experiments indicate that U NI M ATE outperforms the other baseline models
in topology generation task, property prediction
task, and condition confirmation task by up to
80.2%, 5.1%, and 50.2%, respectively. We opensource our proposed U NI M ATE model and corresponding results at https://github.com/
wzhan24/UniMate.

Property

Topology

𝑟𝑟

L

δ

δ′

Topology
𝑟𝑟

Poisson’s Ratio

P
P

P
P

P

ΔX

A

F

Young’s Modulus

Density
ρ = 0.3

P
Shear Modulus

Density

Property
Young's Modulus:
[0.2185,0.2185,0.2185]
Shear Modulus:
[0.0998,0.0998,0.0998]
Poisson's Ratio:
[0.2723,0.2723,0.2723,
0.2723,0.2723,0.2723]

Low

High

Figure 1. Trinity Representation of Metamaterials.

their engineered structures rather than the chemical composition. These materials are revolutionizing various fields,
offering novel solutions for challenges in engineering, manufacturing, and materials science (Barchiesi et al., 2019).
Metamaterials can have many possible important merits
that classic materials do not have, like negative Poisson’s
ratio (Wang et al., 2020a) (favored for soft device), energy
absorption behavior (Yuan et al., 2019) (favored for cushioning device), tunability (Sheng & Varadan, 2007) (favored
for device with customized features), and extreme strengthto-weight ratio (Wang et al., 2020b) (favored for ultra-light
and strong device). With the unique and superior merits of
metamaterials, they have become an optimal choice in many
engineering fields like energy storage, biomedical, acoustics,
photonics, and thermal management (Surjadi et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Metamaterials are synthetic materials with unique properties, which are typically rarely observed in natural materials (Engheta & Ziolkowski, 2006). To be specific, mechanical metamaterials are a specific class of metamaterials
designed to achieve unusual mechanical properties through

Metamaterial design has a higher degree of freedom compared to traditional material design due to the possibility
of manipulating and engineering the properties at the subwavelength level. In traditional material design, owing to
natural laws, only a small amount of components can be
tailored, like the percentage of each element, the phase
of materials, etc. However, metamaterials can have artificially programmed structures as long as certain manufacturing requirements (e.g., periodicity) are satisfied (Sinha &
Mukhopadhyay, 2023). Therefore, the design tasks are mul-

1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Virginia, US 2 Meta AI. Correspondence
to: Dawei Zhou <zhoud@vt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

