Theoretical Performance Guarantees for Partial Domain Adaptation
via Partial Optimal Transport

Jayadev Naram 1 Fredrik Hellström 2 Ziming Wang 1 Rebecka Jörnsten 1 Giuseppe Durisi 1

Abstract

domains to be deployed on smaller domains, characterized
by a smaller label space. This motivates the framework of
unsupervised partial domain adaptation (PDA), wherein
the target label space is a subset of the source label space
(Cao et al., 2018).

In many scenarios of practical interest, labeled
data from a target distribution are scarce while
labeled data from a related source distribution
are abundant. One particular setting of interest
arises when the target label space is a subset of
the source label space, leading to the framework
of partial domain adaptation (PDA). Typical approaches to PDA involve minimizing a domain
alignment term and a weighted empirical loss
on the source data, with the aim of transferring
knowledge between domains. However, a theoretical basis for this procedure is lacking, and in
particular, most existing weighting schemes are
heuristic. In this work, we derive generalization
bounds for the PDA problem based on partial optimal transport. These bounds corroborate the use
of the partial Wasserstein distance as a domain
alignment term, and lead to theoretically motivated explicit expressions for the empirical source
loss weights. Inspired by these bounds, we devise
a practical algorithm for PDA, termed WARMPOT. Through extensive numerical experiments,
we show that WARMPOT is competitive with
recent approaches, and that our proposed weights
improve on existing schemes.

In PDA, the use of labeled source data from outlier classes
during training typically has an adverse effect on test
performance—a phenomenon termed negative transfer (Cao
et al., 2018). To alleviate this issue, several heuristic
schemes to weight the source data during training have
been proposed (Zhang et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2021; 2024). However, a theoretical
motivation is lacking for most weight selections.
In this work, we provide theoretically motivated algorithms
for PDA. Specifically, we derive generalization bounds on
the target population loss and devise training strategies that
minimize them. The bounds that we obtain involve a partial
Wasserstein distance between the empirical feature distributions for the source and target data (Caffarelli & McCann,
2010). This motivates the popular strategy of learning a
feature map that aligns source and target features, followed
by a predictor trained to classify the labeled source features.
We will refer to objectives that are minimized with this aim
as domain alignment terms. While the standard Wasserstein
distance has been widely used to analyze and design algorithms for domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2014; 2017b),
its partial counterpart is crucial to handle the existence of
outliers (Wang et al., 2024). Additionally, our bounds include weighted source training losses, where, in contrast
to all results available in the literature, the weights arise
constructively from the partial optimal transport problem associated with the partial Wasserstein distance. This enables
a principled weight selection for addressing negative transfer that, unlike the aforementioned heuristics, comes with a
clear theoretical motivation in terms of transport plans.

1. Introduction
In unsupervised domain adaptation, one has access to a set
of labeled source data and a set of unlabeled target data,
drawn from different but related distributions. The aim is to
use these data sets to learn a predictor that performs well on
new instances from the target data distribution (Redko et al.,
2019; Farahani et al., 2021). In contemporary practice, it is
common for classifiers that are pre-trained on large, diverse

Our bounds come in two flavors. First, similar to Shen et al.
(2018), one bound depends on the partial Wasserstein distance between the empirical distributions of the source and
target features. Second, building upon the work of Courty
et al. (2017a), we obtain a bound that incorporates estimates
of the unknown labels of the target samples. This yields a
partial transport problem involving the joint empirical distri-

1

Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden
University College London, London, England. Correspondence
to: Jayadev Naram <jayadev@chalmers.se>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

