Disparate Conditional Prediction in Multiclass Classifiers

Sivan Sabato 1 2 Eran Treister 2 Elad Yom-Tov 3

Abstract

able, due to inherent limitations of the distribution (Pleiss
et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Menon & Williamson,
2018; Wang et al., 2024), as well as practical constraints.
It is thus necessary to be able to quantify the deviation
from fairness of a given classifier. In addition, often the
classifier is proprietary (Dastin, 2022; Grandinetti, 2023)
and thus is not directly accessible for auditing. In other
cases, individual-level data that is required for auditing is
missing or insufficient. For instance, a health insurance company may use a proprietary classifier to decide on coverage
or on premium rates (Kafuria, 2022). Sabato & Yom-Tov
(2020) showed that for binary classifiers, it is possible to
provide fairness auditing without individual-level data, using only population-level information on the frequencies of
positive predictions and of true positive labels in each subpopulation, where a sub-population is the group of individuals who have the same value of the protected attribute(s).
They considered fairness in the sense of equalized odds
(Hardt et al., 2016), which defines a binary classifier as fair
if its false positive rate and its false negative rate are each
the same across all sub-populations. They proposed to quantify the deviation from equalized odds using a measure that
we will henceforth call Disparate Conditional Prediction
(DCP). DCP is the fraction of the population for which the
classifier predicts with conditional prediction probabilities
that differ from the closest common baseline.

We propose methods for auditing multiclass classifiers for fairness under multiclass equalized odds,
by estimating the deviation from equalized odds
when the classifier is not completely fair. We
generalize to multiclass classifiers the measure of
Disparate Conditional Prediction (DCP), originally suggested by Sabato & Yom-Tov (2020) for
binary classifiers. DCP is defined as the fraction
of the population for which the classifier predicts
with conditional prediction probabilities that differ from the closest common baseline. We provide
new local-optimization methods for estimating
the multiclass DCPunder two different regimes,
one in which the conditional confusion matrices
for each protected sub-population are known, and
one in which these cannot be estimated, for instance, because the classifier is inaccessible or
because good-quality individual-level data is not
available. These methods can be used to detect
classifiers that likely treat a significant fraction of
the population unfairly. Experiments demonstrate
the accuracy of the methods. Code is provided
at https://github.com/sivansabato/
DCPmulticlass.

The fairness notion of equalized odds was originally studied for binary classifiers. However, interest in fairness for
multiclass classifiers has gained traction in recent years (see,
e.g. Alghamdi et al., 2022; Rouzot et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2024). In multiclass scenarios, the multiclass equalized odds
criterion measures any differences in conditional prediction
probabilities between sub-populations. This includes not
only the difference in the rate of correct predictions as in
the binary case, but also the types of prediction mistakes.
For instance, if a patient’s heart attack is misdiagnosed as
an anxiety attack (which may mean the patient is denied
care), this is significantly different than being misdiagnosed
as a stroke (which may lead to delayed care). If some subpopulations incur more of a certain type of misdiagnosis
error, this could indicate bias in diagnosis, as well as lead to
undesired differences in treatment.

1. Introduction
Fairness of classifiers is a crucial property in many real-life
scenarios (see, e.g., Caton & Haas, 2024). In particular,
auditing classifiers for fairness is essential in a wide range
of applications and has been studied in many works (e.g.,
Saleiro et al., 2018; Angwin et al., 2022; Taskesen et al.,
2021; Cherian & Candès, 2024).
While it is desirable that a classifier accurately satisfies the
required fairness criterion, this is in many cases not achiev1

Department of Computing and Software, McMaster University; Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Vector Institute 2 Department
of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
3
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University. Correspondence to: Sivan Sabato <sabatos@mcmaster.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we study the auditing of multiclass classifiers for deviation from multiclass equalized odds, using
1

