Interpreting the Repeated Token Phenomenon in Large Language Models

Itay Yona 1 Ilia Shumailov 1 Jamie Hayes 1 Yossi Gandelsman 2

Abstract

has remained an open question up until now.
In this paper, we explain the reason behind the repeated
token divergence in LLMs. We link this behavior to the
mechanism of “attention-sinks” – a phenomenon where the
initial token in a sequence receives disproportionately high
attention, previously shown to be crucial for LLM fluency
(Xiao et al., 2024).

Large Language Models (LLMs), despite their
impressive capabilities, often fail to accurately repeat a single word when prompted to, and instead
output unrelated text. This unexplained failure
mode represents a vulnerability, allowing even
end users to diverge models away from their intended behavior. We aim to explain the causes
for this phenomenon and link it to the concept
of “attention sinks”, an emergent LLM behavior
crucial for fluency, in which the initial token receives disproportionately high attention scores.
Our investigation identifies the neural circuit responsible for attention sinks and shows how long
repetitions disrupt this circuit. We extend this finding to other nonrepeating sequences that exhibit
similar circuit disruptions. To address this, we
propose a targeted patch that effectively resolves
the issue without negatively impacting the overall
performance of the model. This study provides a
mechanistic explanation for an LLM vulnerability, demonstrating how interpretability can diagnose and address issues, and offering insights that
pave the way for more secure and reliable models.
Code is available here.

To demonstrate the link between attention sinks and repeated
token divergence, we take a Mechanistic Interpretability approach, analyzing the underlying mechanism of attention
sinks in LLMs. We identify two key stages consistently
observed across many models: First, the initial attention
layer identifies and “marks” the first token in the sequence.
Second, a single neuron in a later layer, triggered by this
mark, adds high-magnitude values to the hidden state of the
first token, creating the attention-sink. This high-magnitude
hidden state then attracts attention in subsequent layers, as
described by Xiao et al. (2024). We present empirical evidence for this two-stage mechanism across multiple LLMs.
Next, we examine how this mechanism interacts with repeating tokens. We find that the first attention layer, aiming
to identify the first token, fails to distinguish it from a sequence of identical tokens. Consequently, it marks both the
first token and the repeated tokens, activating neurons that
amplify their hidden states. This leads to abnormally high attention weights on the repeated tokens, causing the model’s
behavior to diverge and produce unexpected outputs.

1. Introduction

By analyzing the first attention layer implementation of
identifying the first token we were able to generate a new
exploit we call “ cluster attack”, that induces attention sinks
without using repeated tokens. This exploit would be able
to bypass surface level defenses that addresses repetitions
but not underlying vulnerability.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in various natural language tasks. However,
even state-of-the-art LLMs can exhibit surprising failures
on seemingly simple tasks. A prominent example is the
“repeated token divergence” phenomenon (Nasr et al., 2023;
Barbero et al., 2025), where LLMs struggle to accurately
repeat a single input token when prompted to do so. This
issue has been observed across a range of models, including:
ChatGPT, LLaMa1, LLaMa2 (OpenAI, 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023a;b). The underlying cause of this unexpected behavior
1

Finally, our analysis of the underlying mechanism suggests
a simple yet effective correction to mitigate the repeating
tokens divergence and its extensions.
Our contributions are:

2

Google DeepMind UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Itay
Yona <itayona@gmail.com>.

1. Mechanistic Explanation: We provide the first mechanistic explanation for the repeated token divergence in
LLMs, linking it to the attention-sink phenomenon and
identifying the responsible neural computation. We

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

