Geometry Informed Tokenization of Molecules for Language Model Generation

Xiner Li * 1 Limei Wang * 1 Youzhi Luo 1 Carl Edwards 2 Shurui Gui 1 Yuchao Lin 1 Heng Ji 2 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract

lined data processing and powerful generation capabilities,
have shown success across various domains, particularly
in natural language processing (NLP). Recently, large language models (LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2023b) show extraordinary capabilities in learning complex patterns (Zhang et al.,
2024) and generating meaningful outputs (Touvron et al.,
2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023). Despite their potential, the application of LLMs to the direct
generation of 3D molecules is largely under-explored. This
is primarily due to the fact that geometric graph structures
of molecular data are fundamentally different from texts.
However, 3D geometric information is crucial in molecular
tasks, since different conformations of the same molecule
topology have different properties, such as per-atom forces.
This gap reveals a unique challenge of how to make use of
the powerful pattern recognition and generative capabilities
of LLMs to handle complicated molecular graph structures,
especially geometries. On the other hand, solutions to this
challenge with model-level modifications cannot effectively
leverage the rapidly developing power of LMs. These solutions require specific module designs, which needs to be
done separately for each LM architecture and can be infeasible for modern LMs released via APIs.

We consider molecule generation in 3D space
using language models (LMs), which requires discrete tokenization of 3D molecular geometries.
Although tokenization of molecular graphs exists, that for 3D geometries is largely unexplored.
Here, we attempt to bridge this gap by proposing
the Geo2Seq, which converts molecular geometries into SE(3)-invariant 1D discrete sequences.
Geo2Seq consists of canonical labeling and invariant spherical representation steps, which together maintain geometric and atomic fidelity in
a format conducive to LMs. Our experiments
show that, when coupled with Geo2Seq, various
LMs excel in molecular geometry generation, especially in controlled generation tasks. Our code
has been released as part of the AIRS library
(https://github.com/divelab/AIRS/).

1. Introduction
The generation of novel molecules with desired properties is
an important step in drug discovery. Specifically, the design
of three-dimensional (3D) molecular geometries is particularly important because 3D information plays a critical role
in determining many molecular properties. Different generative models have been used for 3D molecule generation.
Early studies such as G-SchNet (Gebauer et al., 2019) use
autoregressive generative models to generate 3D molecules
by sequentially placing atoms in 3D space. It was observed
that these models often yield results with low chemical validity. Recently, diffusion models (Hoogeboom et al., 2022;
Xu et al., 2023a) achieve better performance in 3D molecule
generation tasks. However, they typically need thousands
of diffusion steps, resulting in long generation time.

In this work, we bridge this gap by applying LMs to the task
of 3D molecule generation. We employ a novel approach
translating the intricate geometry of molecules into a format
that can be effectively processed by LMs. This is achieved
by our proposed tokenization method Geo2Seq, which converts 3D molecular structures into SE(3)-invariant onedimensional (1D) discrete sequences. The transformation is
based on canonical labeling, which allows dimension reduction with no information loss outside graph isomorphism
groups, and invariant spherical representations, which guarantees SE(3)-invariance under the equivariant global frame.
By doing so, we harness the advanced sequence-processing
capabilities and efficiency of LMs while retaining essential
geometric and atomic information. Note that since Geo2Seq
operates solely on input data, our method is agnostic to the
subsequent LMs used. and can seamlessly adapt to any
state-of-the-art sequence model, maximizing LM capabilities while avoiding additional architecture design or redundant computations. When combined with powerful modern
LLMs, Geo2Seq can achieve highly accurate modeling of
3D molecular structures. In addition, Geo2Seq can benefit

Language models (LMs) (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al.,
2018; Brown et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2021), with their stream*

Equal contribution 1 Texas A&M University 2 University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji
<sji@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

