Non-Stationary Predictions May Be More Informative:
Exploring Pseudo-Labels with a Two-Phase Pattern of Training Dynamics

Hongbin Pei 1 Jingxin Hai 1 Yu Li 1 Huiqi Deng 1
Denghao Ma 2 Jie Ma 1 Pinghui Wang 1 Jing Tao 1 Xiaohong Guan 1

Abstract

partial label learning (Tian et al., 2024), to address the practical challenge of labeled data scarcity. This strategy uses
predicted labels of unlabeled samples as pseudo-labels to
augment training set, facilitating model training via reducing model uncertainty (also called epistemic uncertainty)
(Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021) and promoting a robust
decision boundary in low-density regions (Chapelle & Zien,
2005). Pseudo-labeling has achieved success in various
tasks, e.g., computer vision (Rizve et al., 2021), text mining
(Yang et al., 2023), and graph learning (Sun et al., 2020).

Pseudo-labeling is a widely used strategy in semisupervised learning. Existing methods typically
select predicted labels with high confidence scores
and high training stationarity, as pseudo-labels to
augment training sets. In contrast, this paper explores the pseudo-labeling potential of predicted
labels that do not exhibit these characteristics. We
discover a new type of predicted labels suitable for
pseudo-labeling, termed two-phase labels, which
exhibit a two-phase pattern during training: they
are initially predicted as one category in early
training stages and switch to another category in
subsequent epochs. Case studies show the twophase labels are informative for decision boundaries. To effectively identify the two-phase labels,
we design a 2-phasic metric that mathematically
characterizes their spatial and temporal patterns.
Furthermore, we propose a loss function tailored
for two-phase pseudo-labeling learning, allowing
models not only to learn correct correlations but
also to eliminate false ones. Extensive experiments on eight datasets show that our proposed
2-phasic metric acts as a powerful booster for
existing pseudo-labeling methods by additionally
incorporating the two-phase labels, achieving an
average classification accuracy gain of 1.73% on
image datasets and 1.92% on graph datasets.

High-quality pseudo-labels are essential to this strategy, yet
they are challenging to obtain. The confidence score is
the most commonly used and intuitive metric for selecting
pseudo-labels; however, it suffers from a poor calibration issue, especially on out-of-distribution data (Guo et al., 2017;
Kage et al., 2024). Recently, researchers discovered training
dynamics—i.e., the trajectory of model predictions during
training—contains rich information about prediction uncertainty (Swayamdipta et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2023). They
show that if a model makes consistent predictions for an
unlabeled sample throughout training, that predicted label is
highly likely to be correct. Consequently, training stationarity metric is proposed to identify these predicted labels to
act as pseudo-labels (Song et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021; Pleiss et al., 2020; Pei et al., 2024b).
In this paper, in contrast to existing works, we explore
pseudo-labeling potential of a new type of predicted labels
that do not exhibit high confidence score and high training
stationary, as illustrated by type II labels in Fig.1(A)1 . These
predicted labels are rarely exploited for pseudo-labeling, as
they are associated with atypical patterns and tend to have a
high risk of misclassification. Incorrect pseudo-labels can
significantly degrade model performance due to introducing
noise and misleading patterns (Wang et al., 2023). However, we find that despite their low correctness, correctly
predicted labels of this type could offer greater information
gain2 for pseudo-labeling, than the commonly used type

1. Introduction
Pseudo-labeling (Lee et al., 2013) is a widely employed strategy in many semi-supervised learning methods, e.g., selftraining (Amini et al., 2025), co-training (Blum & Mitchell,
1998), consistency regularization (Sohn et al., 2020), and
1
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China;
Beijing Information Science and Technology University, China.
Correspondence to: Jing Tao <jtao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>, Pinghui
Wang <phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>.
2

1
In Fig.1(A), we use an inverse indicator, non-stationary, which
can be easily calculated, as detailed in the Appendix A.
2
We quantify the information gain by measuring the gradient
change from pseudo labels, detailed in Appendix E.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

