On Linear Convergence in Smooth Convex-Concave Bilinearly-Coupled
Saddle-Point Optimization: Lower Bounds and Optimal Algorithms

Ekaterina Borodich 1 2 3 Alexander Gasnikov 4 3 Dmitry Kovalev 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

In this paper, we consider the following saddle-point optimization problem with a bilinear coupling function:
We revisit the smooth convex-concave bilinearlycoupled saddle-point problem of the form
minx maxy f (x) + ⟨y, Bx⟩ − g(y). In the highly
specific case where function f (x) is strongly convex and function g(y) is affine, or both functions
are affine, there exist lower bounds on the number
of gradient evaluations and matrix-vector multiplications required to solve the problem, as well
as matching optimal algorithms. A notable aspect of these algorithms is that they are able to
attain linear convergence, i.e., the number of iterations required to solve the problem is proportional
to log(1/ϵ). However, the class of bilinearlycoupled saddle-point problems for which linear
convergence is possible is much wider and can
involve general smooth non-strongly convex functions f (x) and g(y). Therefore, we develop the
first lower complexity bounds and matching optimal linearly converging algorithms for this problem class. Our lower complexity bounds are much
more general, but they cover and unify the existing results in the literature. On the other hand,
our algorithm implements the separation of complexities, which, for the first time, enables the
simultaneous achievement of both optimal gradient evaluation and matrix-vector multiplication
complexities, resulting in the best theoretical performance to date.

min max [F (x, y) = f (x) + ⟨y, Bx⟩ − g(y)] ,
x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where X = Rdx and Y = Rdy are finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces, B ∈ Rdy ×dx is a coupling matrix, and
f (x) : X → R and g(y) : Y → R are continuous functions. We aim to solve problem (1) in the fundamental
setting where both functions f (x) and g(y) are convex and
smooth.1
Saddle-point problems of the form (1) appear in various
fields such as economics (Von Neumann & Morgenstern,
1947), game theory (Roughgarden, 2010), and statistics
(Berger, 2013). Moreover, these problems have a wide range
of applications in machine learning, including supervised
learning (Zhang & Xiao, 2017; Wang & Xiao, 2017; Xiao
et al., 2019), reinforcement learning (Du et al., 2017), computer vision (Chambolle & Pock, 2011), robust optimization
(Ben-Tal & Nemirovski, 2002; Liu et al., 2017), distributed
optimization (Lan et al., 2020; Scaman et al., 2018; Kovalev et al., 2021; Yarmoshik et al., 2024; Kovalev et al.,
2024), and the training of generative adversarial networks
(Mescheder et al., 2017; Nagarajan & Kolter, 2017).
1.1. First-Order Methods and Linear Convergence
The majority of machine learning applications of problem (1) involve high-dimensional spaces X and Y. In this
scenario, the most widely used and often the only scalable optimization algorithms are first-order methods. These
methods implement an iterative process to find an approximate solution to the problem using the evaluation of the
gradients of the functions f (x) and g(y), as well as matrixvector multiplication with the matrices B and B⊤ . More
specifically, they perform iterative updates of the current estimate of the solution until it converges to the exact solution
up to a given accuracy. One of the main goals of our paper
is to develop efficient first-order optimization methods for

1
Higher School of Economics 2 Yandex Research 3 Ivannikov
Institute for System Programming, Trusted AI Research
Center 4 Innopolis University. Correspondence to: Dmitry
Kovalev <dakovalev1@gmail.com>, Ekaterina Borodich
<borodich.ed@phystech.edu>, Alexander Gasnikov <gasnikov@yandex.ru>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

A function is called smooth if it is differentiable and has a
Lipschitz-continuous gradient. See Section 2 for an equivalent
formal definition.

1

