Counting in Small Transformers:
The Delicate Interplay between Attention and Feed-Forward Layers

Freya Behrens 1 Luca Biggio 2 Lenka Zdeborová 1

Abstract

been a key factor in unleashing the potential of these models,
it is remarkable that their architecture still largely follows
the same simple template of the original transformer model
proposed by Vaswani et al. (2017). At its core, a single transformer block primarily alternates two basic components: the
token-mixing attention mechanism and a standard fully connected multi-layer perceptron. At a high level, the attention
mechanism mixes the tokens, while the multi-layer perceptron applies a nonlinear feature transformation identically
to each token. Despite the widespread use of transformers,
there is no clear consensus on the distinct roles of their
components, how they interact, or if they can be substituted
with alternative modules (Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Dordevic
et al., 2024; Gu & Dao, 2024). In particular, the specific
contribution of each architectural element to the model’s
hypothesis space –the range of algorithms it can learn and
implement in practice– remains opaque (Weiss et al., 2021;
Delétang et al., 2023; Abbe et al., 2023; Ouellette et al.,
2023).

Next to scaling considerations, architectural design choices profoundly shape the solution space
of transformers. In this work, we analyze the solutions simple transformer blocks implement when
tackling the histogram task: counting items in sequences. Despite its simplicity, this task reveals
a complex interplay between predictive performance, vocabulary and embedding sizes, tokenmixing mechanisms, and feed-forward layer capacity. We identify two theoretical counting
strategies transformers adopt, relation-based and
inventory-based counting, each defining distinct
learning regimes for the task. These strategies dictate how functionality is distributed between attention and feed-forward layers. We further show
that adding softmax and beginning-of-sequence
tokens allow for more robustness when embedding dimensions are comparatively small. Empirical introspection of trained models closely confirms both the learning regimes of the various
architectures and the formation of these strategies
during training. We demonstrate how a basic task
that requires only aggregation and selection is
significantly impacted by minor design changes.

In this work, we investigate this question for algorithms that
compare and aggregate information from a mechanistic perspective (Cammarata et al., 2020; Olah et al., 2020; Elhage
et al., 2021; Michaud et al., 2023; Ouellette et al., 2023)
and focus on the histogram task (Weiss et al., 2021) as a
prototypical problem. It consists of predicting the number
of appearances of each token in the input sequence processed by the model – counting - and solving it requires
both comparison and aggregation. Even modern language
models with up to 8B parameters currently fail to solve
this task robustly and efficiently in-weights, rather than via
chain-of-thought, (Appendix A). This failure, despite the
task’s apparent simplicity, motivates a study of the relative
role of different architectural components and their impact
on the final solutions implemented by the model in a controlled setting. To this end, we focus on models following
the architectural template of primitive transformer blocks,
i.e. alternating a token-mixing attention mechanism and a
multi-layer perceptron.

1. Introduction
Transformers are the key neural network behind many recent
deep learning advances, most notably large language models
(LLMs). Their success is partly due to their versatility in
processing diverse data types, including text, images, and
video, represented as sequences of tokens (Liu et al., 2021;
Girdhar et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). While scale has
1

Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory, Ècole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Department of Computing Sciences, Università Bocconi, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Freya Behrens
<freya.behrens@epfl.ch>.

In our analysis, we provide explicit theoretical constructions
(parameter configurations) for a range of such architectures
reaching perfect accuracy in a model-dependent hyperparameter regime. In a subsequent step, we compare these

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

