Partially Observable Reinforcement Learning with Memory Traces

Onno Eberhard 1 2 Michael Muehlebach 1 Claire Vernade 2
new memory

Abstract

Memory update:

Partially observable environments present a considerable computational challenge in reinforcement learning due to the need to consider long histories. Learning with a finite window of observations quickly becomes intractable as the window
length grows. In this work, we introduce memory
traces. Inspired by eligibility traces, these are
compact representations of the history of observations in the form of exponential moving averages.
We prove sample complexity bounds for the problem of offline on-policy evaluation that quantify
the return errors achieved with memory traces
for the class of Lipschitz continuous value estimates. We establish a close connection to the
window approach, and demonstrate that, in certain environments, learning with memory traces
is significantly more sample efficient. Finally,
we underline the effectiveness of memory traces
empirically in online reinforcement learning experiments for both value prediction and control.

old memory

new observation

+ (1 − λ)

=λ

t+1

+1
−1
−1

t+1

t

?
−1
−1
+1
+1

Memory traces during a trajectory (λ = 0.8):
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Figure 1. Illustration of the memory trace mechanism in the T-maze
environment. The agent starts in the leftmost tile and receives an
observation that reveals if the reward at the end of the corridor is
at the top or bottom. The agent has to remember this information
until the last step. It can be seen that this information has faded in
z8 (the final memory trace), but has not completely disappeared.

ods based on recurrent neural networks that learn directly
from the stream of observations (e.g., Ni et al., 2022), this
feature-based approach provides an analysis framework that
is mathematically tractable.
The archetypical feature in partially observable reinforcement learning (RL) is the length-m window, which truncates
the history and only keeps the m most recent observations.
In deep RL, this approach is known as frame stacking (Mnih
et al., 2015). Under certain assumptions, such as observability (Golowich et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022) or multi-step
decodability (Efroni et al., 2022), it can be shown that such
a window is sufficient for good behavior. However, in many
settings, the window would have to be very long to be useful,
which is problematic, as the complexity of learning general
functions of length-m windows scales exponentially in m.
To address this issue, this paper introduces a different feature that we call the memory trace. This feature is inspired
by eligibility traces, and consists of an exponential moving
average of the stream of observations. Thus, upon receiving
a new observation yt , the memory trace zt is moved closer
toward yt :
zt = λzt−1 + (1 − λ)yt ,
(1)

1. Introduction
Learning and acting in partially observable environments
requires memory. It is generally not enough to act simply
according to the most recent observation, and an agent must
therefore keep track of the past, as every piece of information is likely to be relevant for future actions. In the absence
of additional assumptions, optimal behavior requires the
agent to reason over its entire history of observations. This
space quickly becomes intractable, and just like with continuous state spaces in fully observed systems, it is therefore
necessary to resort to approximation. This article investigates the fundamental limitations and trade-offs arising
from these approximations. We focus on extracting features
from the history of observations and analyze the complexity
of learning functions of these features. In contrast to meth1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Tübingen. Correspondence to: Onno Eberhard <oeberhard@tue.mpg.de>.

where λ ∈ [0, 1) is a forgetting factor. This mechanism
is illustrated in Fig. 1 in the T-maze environment (Bakker,
2001), where we took inspiration from Allen et al. (2024).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our results are concerned with the problem of offline
on-policy evaluation, which is an ideal setting for studying
1

