A Physics-Augmented Deep Learning Framework for Classifying Single
Molecule Force Spectroscopy Data

Cailong Hua 1 Sivaraman Rajaganapathy 2 Rebecca A. Slick 3 Joseph Vavra 3 Joseph M. Muretta 3
James M. Ervasti 3 Murti V. Salapaka 1

Abstract

involving single molecules, multiple molecules,
and no molecules. Our model achieves state-ofthe-art performance, outperforming five baseline
methods on both simulated and experimental
datasets. It attains nearly 100% accuracy across
all simulated datasets and an average accuracy
of 79.6 ± 5.2% on experimental datasets, using
only ∼30 training samples, surpassing baseline
methods by 11.4%. Notably, even without expert
annotations on experimental data, the model
achieves an average accuracy of 72.0 ± 5.9%
when pre-trained on corresponding simulated
datasets. With our deep learning approach, the
time required to extract meaningful statistics
from single-molecule SMFS trials is reduced
from a day to under an hour. This work results in
SMFS experimental datasets from four important
protein molecules crucial to many biological
pathways. To support further research, we have
made our datasets publicly available and provided
a Python-based toolbox (https://github.
com/SalapakaLab-SIMBioSys/
SMFS-Identification).

Deciphering protein folding and unfolding
pathways under tension is essential for deepening
our understanding of fundamental biological
mechanisms. Such insights hold the promise
of developing treatments for a range of debilitating and fatal conditions, including muscular
disorders like Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy and
neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s
disease. Single molecule force spectroscopy
(SMFS) is a powerful technique for investigating
forces involved in protein domains folding and
unfolding. However, SMFS trials often involve
multiple protein molecules, necessitating filtering
to isolate measurements from single-molecule
trials. Currently, manual visual inspection is the
primary method for classifying single-molecule
data; a process that is both time-consuming and
requires significant expertise. Here, we both
apply state-of-the-art machine learning models
and present a novel deep learning model tailored
to SMFS data. The proposed model employs
a dual-branch fusion strategy; one branch
integrates the physics of protein molecules, and
the other operates independently of physical
constraints. This model automates the isolation
of single-molecule measurements, significantly
enhancing data processing efficiency. To train
and validate our approach, we developed a
physics-based Monte Carlo engine to simulate
force spectroscopy datasets, including trials

1. Introduction
Many biological processes depend on controlling mechanical forces achieved via the folding and unfolding of domains
in molecules like titin (Rief et al., 1997; 1998; Oberhauser
et al., 2001), dystrophin and its homologue utrophin (Rajaganapathy et al., 2019; Ramirez et al., 2023), neurotoxic proteins (Hervás et al., 2012), and extracellular matrix protein
tenascin (Oberhauser et al., 1998). For example, dystrophin
and utrophin work as molecular shock absorbers that limit
myofiber membrane damage when undergoing reversible
unfolding upon muscle stretching and contraction (Ervasti,
2007). Evidently, studying mechanical properties of single
molecules can provide vital insights into mechanisms of
debilitating diseases. Instruments such as optical tweezers
(Ashkin et al., 1986) and atomic force microscopes (AFMs)
(Binnig et al., 1986) have enabled single molecule force
spectroscopy (SMFS), where molecular forces in the femto

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905 3 Department of Biochemistry,
Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455. Correspondence to: Cailong Hua <hua00023@umn.edu>, Murti V. Salapaka <murtis@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

