A Unified View on Learning Unnormalized Distributions
via Noise-Contrastive Estimation
J. Jon Ryu 1 Abhin Shah 1 Gregory W. Wornell 1

Abstract

NCE (f -CondNCE; Sec. 2.2). With this unifying view
on different estimators, we clarify previously unrecognized and/or potentially misleading connections among
existing estimators proposed for learning unnormalized
distributions, as well as provide unified analysis.

This paper studies a family of estimators based on
noise-contrastive estimation (NCE) for learning
unnormalized distributions. The main contribution of this work is to provide a unified perspective on various methods for learning unnormalized distributions, which have been independently
proposed and studied in separate research communities, through the lens of NCE. This unified
view offers new insights into existing estimators.
Specifically, for exponential families, we establish the finite-sample convergence rates of the
proposed estimators under a set of regularity assumptions, most of which are new.

2. Specifically, via the lens of α-CentNCE, we reveal that
several different estimators for learning unnormalized
distributions can be connected and unified, including
MLE (Fisher, 1922), MC-MLE (Geyer, 1994), and GlobalGISO (Shah et al., 2023) as special instances. A local
version of centered NCE estimators subsumes pseudo
likelihood (Besag, 1975) and interaction screening objectives (ISO) (Vuffray et al., 2016; 2021; Ren et al., 2021;
Shah et al., 2021a), which were proposed for learning
exponential families corresponding to Markov random
fields (MRFs).

1. Introduction

3. For f -CondNCE, we show that, in contrast to the original
claim in (Ceylan & Gutmann, 2018), the behavior of the
f -CondNCE estimator does not converge to the score
matching (SM) estimator (Hyvärinen, 2005) in a small
noise regime. In fact, we show that the variance of f CondNCE diverges in the vanishing noise regime, if the
number of conditional samples is not sufficiently large.

Unnormalized distributions, also known as energy-based
models, arise in various applications, such as generative
modeling, density estimation, and reinforcement learning;
we refer an interested reader to a comprehensive overview
paper (Song & Kingma, 2021) and references therein. Such
distributions capture complex dependencies and provide
representational flexibility, making them attractive in fields
ranging from statistical physics to machine learning. Despite their widespread use, estimating parameters within
these models poses significant challenges due to the intractability of their normalization constants.

4. As a concrete consequence of such connections, we establish the finite-sample convergence guarantees of the
proposed estimators for learning bounded exponential
family distributions, by building upon the analysis of
GlobalGISO by (Shah et al., 2023). To the best of our
knowledge, such guarantees are the first of the type for
almost all the NCE estimators considered in this paper.

In this paper, we consider the problem of parameter estimation for unnormalized distributions, through the lens of the
noise-contrastive estimation (NCE) framework (Gutmann &
Hyvärinen, 2012). Our contributions are as follows:

1.1. Related Work
While the celebrated maximum likelihood estimator (MLE),
advocated by Fisher (1922), is arguably the de facto standard for parameter estimation problems, it is not directly
applicable for high-dimensional unnormalized distributions
due to the computational intractability of calculating the normalization constant. Several methods have been proposed
as alternatives, including MLE with Monte-Carlo approximation of partition function (MC-MLE) (Geyer, 1994; RiouDurand & Chopin, 2018; Jiang et al., 2023), score match-

1. As variants of the f -NCE (Pihlaja et al., 2010) (Sec. 1.2),
we study a family of NCE-based estimators, the αcentered NCE (α-CentNCE; Sec. 2.1) and f -conditional
1
Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Correspondence to: J. Jon Ryu <jongha.ryu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

