C ODE S YNC: Synchronizing Large Language Models with Dynamic Code
Evolution at Scale
Chenlong Wang * 1 Zhaoyang Chu * 1 Zhengxiang Cheng * 1 Xuyi Yang 2 Kaiyue Qiu 1 Yao Wan 1
Zhou Zhao 3 Xuanhua Shi 1 Hai Jin 1 Dongping Chen 1 †

Abstract

v2.0.0

update

torch.autograd.Function.
forward(ctx, *args)

Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited
exceptional performance in software engineering
yet face challenges in adapting to continually
evolving code knowledge, particularly the
frequent updates of third-party library APIs.
This limitation, rooted in the static pre-training
datasets, often results in non-executable code
or implementations with suboptimal safety
and efficiency. To this end, we introduce
C ODE S YNC, a data engine to identify outdated
code patterns and collect real-time code
knowledge updates from Python third-party
libraries at scale. Building upon C ODE S YNC, we
develop C ODE S YNC B ENCH, a comprehensive
benchmark for assessing LLMs’ ability to stay
synchronized with code evolution, which covers
real-world updates for 220 APIs from six Python
libraries. Our benchmark offers 3,300 test
cases spanning three evaluation tasks and an
update-aware instruction tuning dataset of 2,200
training samples. Extensive experiments on 14
LLMs reveal that they struggle with dynamic
code evolution, even with the support of advanced
knowledge updating methods (e.g., DPO, ORPO,
and SimPO). Our C ODE S YNC lays a strong
foundation for developing more effective and
robust methods for real-time and large-scale
code knowledge updating in the future. The
experimental code is available at: https://
github.com/CGCL-codes/naturalcc/
tree/main/examples/codesync.

v2.5.0

torch.autograd.Function.
forward(ctx, *args)

sync

Please help me complete this custom class:

Developer

class SmoothReLU(torch.autograd.Function):
@staticmethod
def forward(

def forward(ctx, input):
ctx.save_for_backward(input)
......

Deployed LLM

TypeError: forward() takes 1 positional
Interpreter

argument but 2 were given.

def forward(*args):
ctx = args[0]; input = args[1]
ctx.save_for_backward(input)

Interpreter

update

Updated LLM

Execution Successfully!

Figure 1: LLMs struggle to adapt to API updates, leading
to potential compatibility issues in generated code. For
example, the device parameter was removed from the
full function in numpy version 2.1.0, making LLM failed
to provide correct invocation. It highlights the need for API
knowledge updating to synchronize LLM with the latest API
changes and correctly generate updated API invocations.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), exemplified by DeepSeekR1 (Guo et al., 2025), CodeLlama (Roziere et al., 2023),
and GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024), have demonstrated remarkable
performance in automating software development through
generating executable code (Jiang et al., 2024). However,
due to static pre-training datasets, they often struggle to
adapt to the rapidly evolving knowledge in programming,
especially the frequent updates of external library APIs (Tao
et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2020).

*

Equal contribution 1 National Engineering Research Center
for Big Data Technology and Systems, Services Computing
Technology and System Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing
Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 Wuhuan
University 3 Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Yao Wan
<wanyao@hust.edu.cn>.

As illustrated in Figure 1, when prompted to create an array
on a CUDA device, the LLM is unaware of the removal
of the device parameter in the updated numpy.full
function. This oversight results in an error, i.e., “TypeError:
full() got an unexpected keyword argument ‘device’”.
The pitfalls of generating code containing outdated APIs
can lead to parameter compatibility issues, which cause

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

