It’s My Data Too: Private ML for Datasets with Multi-User Training Examples

Arun Ganesh 1 Ryan McKenna 1 Brendan McMahan 1 Adam Smith 2 Fan Wu 3

Abstract

ples and then using it as an example gradient in an algorithm
like DP-SGD (this is exactly the DP-FedSGD algorithm introduced in (McMahan et al., 2017)). However, without
additional assumptions this approach only provides provable protections when an example’s attributee is the sole
person whose privacy is affected by leakage of that example;
this is often untrue in practice. For example, a SMS or email
message may contain privacy-sensitive information about
both the sender and receivers, but might only be attributed
to the sender in the single-attribution model.

We initiate a study of algorithms for model
training with user-level differential privacy (DP),
where each example may be attributed to multiple
users, which we call the multi-attribution model.
We first provide a carefully chosen definition of
user-level DP under the multi-attribution model.
Training in the multi-attribution model is facilitated by solving the contribution bounding problem, i.e. the problem of selecting a subset of the
dataset for which each user is associated with a
limited number of examples. We propose a greedy
baseline algorithm for the contribution bounding
problem. We then empirically study this algorithm for a synthetic logistic regression task and a
transformer training task, including studying variants of this baseline algorithm that optimize the
subset chosen using different techniques and criteria. We find that the baseline algorithm remains
competitive with its variants in most settings, and
build a better understanding of the practical importance of a bias-variance tradeoff inherent in
solutions to the contribution bounding problem.

Motivated by this gap, we propose and study the stronger
and more flexible multi-attribution model: in addition to
multiple examples being attributed to the same user, each example is potentially attributed to multiple users. This strictly
generalizes the single-attribution model and extends to other
practical settings not previously covered, but comes with
a number of algorithmic difficulties. First, even defining
DP in the multi-attribution model requires extra care. Even
with an appropriate definition, user-to-example reductions
for algorithms like DP-FedSGD can’t be directly applied to
multi-attribution data due to the overlap in users’ data, and
more nuanced data selection algorithms are required.
Figure 1 compares the multi-attribution setting we consider
to other more standard settings, where training examples are
formed from emails sent among different users (perhaps to
train a language model or spam classifier).

1. Introduction
We study private model training with user-level differential
privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2010), where each example is
associated with multiple users (and in particular, might contain privacy-sensitive information for any or all associated
users). This goes beyond previously-studied settings for
user-level DP which (implicitly) adopt the single-attribution
model, where each example is attributed to a single user.
This assumption greatly simplifies the problem, as it allows
one to reduce to algorithms tailored to example-level DP, by
e.g. computing the average gradient for each user’s exam-

1.1. Our Contributions
Defining DP with multi-attribution: In Section 2, we propose a definition for DP with multiply attributed data, which
we dub fixed-graph DP. In this model, we have a hypergraph where vertices represent users, and each hyperedge
is associated with an example attributed to its vertices. Our
definition protects against changing the content of examples
associated with hyperedges adjacent to a single vertex. More
precisely, our adjacency definition considers two datasets
adjacent if they have the same hypergraph, but differ in
(potentially) all of the data associated with a single vertex.
We compare our approach to several alternatives, including a generalization of node privacy to hypergraphs (Fang
et al., 2022). Continuing with the example of email data,
our approach allows a data curator to make statements to
users like: “Even if every email you ever sent or received

*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Seattle, USA 2 Boston
University and Google DeepMind, Cambridge, USA 3 University
of Illinois, Champaign–Urbana, USA. Part of this work done while
the author was an intern at Google Research.. Correspondence to:
Arun Ganesh <arunganesh@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

