Improved Expressivity of Hypergraph Neural Networks through
High-Dimensional Generalized Weisfeiler-Leman Algorithms

Detian Zhang 1 Chengqiang Zhang 1 Yanghui Rao 2 Qing Li 3 Chunjiang Zhu 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Hypergraphs have gained increasing attention in recent
years, because of their ability to naturally model a wide
range of systems where high-order relationships exist among
their constituting parts. In hypergraphs, a hyperedge allows
the connection of an arbitrary number of nodes and can easily abstract high-order relationships in social systems (Lotito
et al., 2022), biology (Sanchez-Gorostiaga et al., 2019), coauthorship collaboration networks (Wu et al., 2022), ecology
(Grilli et al., 2017), and neuroscience (Xiao et al., 2019).
Despite the powerful expressiveness, hypergraph research,
such as representation learning (Antelmi et al., 2023) and
isomorphism test (Feng et al., 2024), has been underexplored compared to the graph counterpart because of the
inherent complexity and the lack of popular tools. In addition, simply transforming hypergraphs to simple graphs
either leads to an inevitable loss of information (Zhou et al.,
2006) or adds significantly many auxiliary nodes/edges that
increase space and time requirements in downstream tasks
(Yang et al., 2019; Yoon et al., 2020). It is demanding to
develop hypergraph isomorphism test and representation
learning algorithms. The two topics are closely related as
the expressivity of hypergraph neural networks (HNNs),
i.e., what functions the HNN models can approximate, can
resort to the power of isomorphism test in distinguishing
non-isomorphic hypergraphs (Morris et al., 2023).

The isomorphism problem is a key challenge in
both graph and hypergraph domains, crucial for
applications like protein design, chemical pathways, and community detection. Hypergraph isomorphism, which models high-order relationships
in real-world scenarios, remains underexplored
compared to the graph isomorphism. Current algorithms for hypergraphs, like the 1-dimensional
generalized Weisfeiler-Lehman test (1-GWL), lag
behind advancements in graph isomorphism tests,
limiting most hypergraph neural networks to 1GWL’s expressive power. To address this, we
propose the high-dimensional GWL (k-GWL),
generalizing k-WL from graphs to hypergraphs.
We prove that k-GWL reduces to k-WL for simple
graphs, and thus develop a unified isomorphism
method for both graphs and hypergraphs. We
also successfully establish a clear and complete
understanding of the GWL hierarchy of expressivity, showing that (k+1)-GWL is more expressive
than k-GWL with illustrative examples. Based
on k-GWL, we develop a hypergraph neural network model named k-HNN with improved expressive power of k-GWL, which achieves superior
performance on real-world datasets, including a
6% accuracy improvement on the Steam-Player
dataset over the runner-up. Our code is available
at https://github.com/talence-zcq/
KGWL.

In hypergraph representation learning, HGNN (Feng et al.,
2019) used the clique expansion technique to approximate
hypergraphs as graphs, and then ran graph convolution (Kipf
& Welling, 2016) but cannot recover hypergraph structures
with hyperedges in another hyperedge. HyperGCN (Yadati
et al., 2019) replaced each hyperedge with an incomplete
clique. Then HyperSAGE (Arya et al., 2020) first learned
to embed hypergraphs directly by propagating messages
in a two-stage procedure, which can be described as passing messages from vertices to hyperedges, and then back
to vertices from hyperedges. UniGNN (Huang & Yang,
2021) unified the two-stage hypergraph learning by generalizing several Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to HNNs,
pointing out that its expressive power is bounded by the
1-dimensional generalized Weisfeiler-Leman test (1-GWL).
Subsequent works, such as AllSetTransformer (Chien et al.,

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China 2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 3 Department
of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
4
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina
at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC. Correspondence to: Chunjiang
Zhu <c zhu3@uncg.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

