The Batch Complexity of Bandit Pure Exploration

Adrienne Tuynman 1 Rémy Degenne 1

Abstract

delay between giving a treatment to a patient and seeing
the effect can be on the order of months. It is not possible
to use a fully sequential algorithm, which would take too
long. Moreover, adapting at each time step can have a high
computational cost.

In a fixed-confidence pure exploration problem in
stochastic multi-armed bandits, an algorithm iteratively samples arms and should stop as early as
possible and return the correct answer to a query
about the arms distributions. We are interested in
batched methods, which change their sampling behaviour only a few times, between batches of observations. We give an instance-dependent lower
bound on the number of batches used by any sample efficient algorithm for any pure exploration
task. We then give a general batched algorithm
and prove upper bounds on its expected sample
complexity and batch complexity. We illustrate
both lower and upper bounds on best-arm identification and thresholding bandits.

This motivates looking into batched algorithms: the algorithm pulls multiple arms within a single batch, and can only
observe the results at the end of the batch. An advantage is
that all arms in a batch can be pulled in parallel, reducing
greatly the length of the test in applications with large delay.
Its lessened adaptivity also reduces the computational cost.
Of course, being less adaptive than a typical bandit method
could lead to worse algorithms. The key question is then
how few batches one can use while keeping a performance
comparable to a fully sequential algorithm.
1.1. Fixed Confidence Pure Exploration
We study K-armed bandit models, which we represent by a
vector of real distributions ν = (νi )i∈[K] with finite means,
with the vector of means denoted by µ = (µi )i∈[K] . At
each timestep t ∈ N, an agent interacts with the bandit
by choosing an arm it ∈ [K] to sample. It then observes
Xt,it a realization of νit and proceeds to the next step. One
common objectiveP
is regret minimization, where the agent
must maximize E[ t Xt,it ]. See (Bubeck et al., 2012; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) for extensive surveys. We focus
on another goal, pure exploration, in which the agent must
answer a question about ν, such as identifying the arm with
the highest mean (Even-Dar et al., 2002; Kaufmann et al.,
2016). In pure exploration problems, we have a set I of possible answers, and a function µ 7→ i⋆ (µ) ∈ I that depends
on the means of the distributions and provides the unique
correct answer for that instance. For a given pure exploration problem and a vector of means µ, we denote by Altµ
the set of vectors of means µ′ such that i⋆ (µ′ ) ̸= i⋆ (µ).
Essentially, Altµ is the set of means that disagree with µ.

1. Introduction
A Multi Armed Bandit (MAB) is a model of a sequential
interaction that was introduced in (Thompson, 1933) to create better medical trials. This framework has since been
expanded to various fields, and has seen applications to online advertising and recommendation systems. In a MAB,
an algorithm chooses at each time an arm among a finite
number (it pulls it) and then observes a sample from a probability distribution associated with the arm. The goal of the
interaction will be to identify quickly which arm has the
distribution with highest mean.
By making use of past observed rewards to continuously
update the way they sample, MAB algorithms reach their
objective faster than traditional fixed randomized trials. For
applications like online advertising, obtaining feedback can
be quick, if for example the feedback is a click on an advertisement. Adapting after almost each interaction is then
feasible. However in applications like clinical trials, the

A pure exploration algorithm samples arms in a bandit interaction (following a sampling rule) until a time at which
it decides to stop (with a stopping rule). Once it stops, it
returns an answer î ∈ I. A good pure exploration algorithm should have low probability of error Pν {î ̸= i⋆ (µ)}
and stop quickly (use few samples). When the number of
samples is fixed and the objective is to minimize the proba-

1

Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France. Correspondence to: Adrienne Tuynman <adrienne.tuynman@inria.fr>, Rémy Degenne
<remy.degenne@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

