EcoMapper: Generative Modeling for Climate-Aware Satellite Imagery

Muhammed Goktepe * 1 Amir Hossein Shamseddin * 1 Erencan Uysal 1 Javier Muinelo Monteagudo 1
Lukas Drees 2 Aysim Toker 3 Senthold Asseng 4 Malte von Bloh 4

Abstract

2025; Hussain et al., 2022) to agriculture (Khanal et al.,
2020), archaeology (Marı́n-Buzón et al., 2021), resource
exploration (Shirmard et al., 2022), and human development mapping (Burke et al., 2021b). It provides valuable
spatial and temporal data, often serving as the primary or
supplementary source for prediction and analysis models,
including crop yield forecasting (Khaki et al., 2021; Muruganantham et al., 2022; von Bloh et al., 2023), forestry
surveillance (Fassnacht et al., 2024), and disaster management (Burke et al., 2021a). In many regions of the world,
satellite data is the only feasible means of acquiring near
real-time information about environmental conditions.

Satellite imagery is essential for Earth observation, enabling applications like crop yield prediction, environmental monitoring, and climate
change assessment. However, integrating satellite
imagery with climate data remains a challenge,
limiting its utility for forecasting and scenario
analysis. We introduce a novel dataset of 2.9 million Sentinel-2 images spanning 15 land cover
types with corresponding climate records, forming the foundation for two satellite image generation approaches using fine-tuned Stable Diffusion
3 models. The first is a text-to-image generation
model that uses textual prompts with climate and
land cover details to produce realistic synthetic imagery for specific regions. The second leverages
ControlNet for multi-conditional image generation, preserving spatial structures while mapping
climate data or generating time-series to simulate
landscape evolution. By combining synthetic image generation with climate and land cover data,
our work advances generative modeling in remote
sensing, offering realistic inputs for environmental forecasting and new possibilities for climate
adaptation and geospatial analysis.

However, the use of remote sensing is hampered by significant challenges, including cloud coverage, atmospheric
distortions, and temporal resolution constraints (Dubovik
et al., 2021). Cloud coverage, in particular, renders satellite
imagery unusable for large parts of the world, disrupting
satellite observations in cloud-prone areas for days or even
weeks, depending on the season (King et al., 2013; Mercury
et al., 2012). These operational challenges not only hinder
real-time monitoring but also raise a critical conceptual gap:
the need to integrate satellite imagery with future climate
scenarios to enhance prediction accuracy. While various
datasets support machine learning applications to address
these challenges, most are task-specific or regionally constrained, limiting their generalizability (Clasen et al., 2024;
Christie et al., 2018; Schneider et al., 2023; Van Etten et al.,
2018). To address this, we introduce a comprehensive remote sensing dataset—one of the largest to date—featuring
over 2.9 million Sentinel-2 RGB images linked with climate data, enabling more robust and scalable applications
across diverse environmental conditions. Recent advances
in multimodal foundation models for remote sensing have
significantly improved generation of synthetic satellite imagery across domains (Hong et al., 2024; Khanna et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024a; Yu et al., 2024b). But a key gap
remains in generative models capable of producing locationspecific satellite imagery conditioned on future climatic
conditions. This limitation hinders predictive applications
such as seasonal crop yield forecasting and the assessment
of climate change impacts on land cover (Iizumi et al., 2018;
Zachow et al., 2024). These models rely on detailed weather
and climate projections to improve their accuracy, but often

1. Introduction
Satellite imagery is a critical resource for a variety of research and industrial applications, ranging from environmental monitoring and climate research (de Araújo et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Munich, School of
Computation, Information and Technology, Germany 2 University
of Zurich, Department of Mathematical Modeling and Machine
Learning, EcoVision Lab, Switzerland 3 Technical University of
Munich, School of Computation, Information and Technology, Dynamic Vision and Learning Group, Germany 4 Technical University
of Munich, School of Life Sciences, Department of Life Science
Engineering, HEF World Agricultural Systems Center, Chair of
Digital Agriculture, Germany. Correspondence to: Malte von Bloh
<malte.von.bloh@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

