Beyond the Permutation Symmetry of Transformers:
The Role of Rotation for Model Fusion
Binchi Zhang * 1 Zaiyi Zheng * 1 Zhengzhang Chen 2 Jundong Li 1

Abstract

2021; Simsek et al., 2021; Entezari et al., 2022; Grigsby
et al., 2023; Lim et al., 2024b; Ziyin et al., 2024; 2025).
One of the most studied forms of parameter space symmetry
is permutation symmetry (Ainsworth et al., 2023; Entezari
et al., 2022). For instance, in a two-layer MLP, permuting
the rows of the weight matrix in the first layer and applying
the corresponding inverse permutation to the second layer
results in a functionally equivalent model, i.e., the outputs
of the original and permuted models remain identical for
any given input (Ainsworth et al., 2023). All functionally
equivalent models corresponding to weight permutations
form an equivalence set, which provides theoretical insights
into neural network optimization, such as the linear mode
connectivity of loss landscapes (Entezari et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2023c; Ferbach et al., 2024). In addition, permutation symmetry has also proven helpful in advancing neural
network applications, such as model fusion (Singh & Jaggi,
2020; Ainsworth et al., 2023) and optimization (Zhao et al.,
2024; Zamir et al., 2025).

Symmetry in the parameter space of deep neural
networks (DNNs) has proven beneficial for various deep learning applications. A well-known
example is the permutation symmetry in MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs), where permuting the
rows of weight matrices in one layer and applying
the inverse permutation to adjacent layers yields a
functionally equivalent model. While permutation
symmetry fully characterizes the equivalence set
for MLPs, its discrete nature limits its utility for
transformers. In this paper, we introduce rotation
symmetry, a novel form of parameter space symmetry for transformers that generalizes permutation symmetry by rotating parameter matrices in
self-attention layers. Unlike permutation symmetry, rotation symmetry operates in a continuous domain, thereby significantly expanding the equivalence set for transformers. Based on this property, we propose a theoretically optimal parameter
matching algorithm as a plug-and-play module to
enhance model fusion. We evaluate our approach
using pre-trained transformers across diverse natural language and vision tasks. Experimental
results demonstrate that our rotation symmetrybased matching algorithm substantially improves
model fusion, highlighting the potential of parameter space symmetry to facilitate model fusion.
Our code is available on https://github.
com/zhengzaiyi/RotationSymmetry.

Although parameter space symmetry has been extensively
studied in classical neural network architectures, such as
MLPs and CNNs, the understanding of its application in
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) remains limited. Transformers have seen rapid advancements in recent years,
achieving remarkable success in a wide range of applications (Yun et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020;
Clark et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; He et al., 2024; Zhu
et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Wei
& Liu, 2025). The transformer architecture is built upon
two primary submodules: feedforward networks and selfattention layers. The feedforward network, which is structurally similar to MLPs, naturally inherits the permutation
symmetry that has been extensively studied in the existing
literature. Self-attention layers, on the other hand, involve
a unique attention mechanism powered by matrix products
of queries, keys, and values, which introduce additional
potentials for symmetry beyond permutations. Permutation
symmetries limit the equivalence set of neural networks to
discrete operations, which aligns well with MLPs due to
their element-wise activations (e.g., ReLU (Glorot et al.,
2011)). In contrast, the continuous nature of the matrix
operations in self-attention layers necessitates more flexible
operations to fully characterize their equivalence set.

1. Introduction
Parameter space symmetry is an intriguing property of neural networks that has garnered increasing attention in recent
years (Du et al., 2018; Armenta & Jodoin, 2021; Kunin et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Virginia 2 NEC Laboratories America. Correspondence to: Jundong Li <jundong@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

