Prediction via Shapley Value Regression

Amr Alkhatib 1 Roman Bresson 2 Henrik Boström 2 Michalis Vazirgiannis 2 3

Abstract

Machine learning explanation methods employ a variety of
strategies to produce explanations, e.g., the use of local interpretable surrogate models (Ribeiro et al., 2016), generation
of counterfactual examples (Karimi et al., 2020; Dandl et al.,
2020; Mothilal et al., 2020; Van Looveren & Klaise, 2021;
Guo et al., 2021; Guyomard et al., 2022), selection of important features (Chen et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2019; Jethani
et al., 2021), and approximation of Shapley values (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Lundberg et al., 2020; Frye et al., 2021;
Covert & Lee, 2021; Jethani et al., 2022). Methods that generate explanations based on Shapley values are prominent
since they offer a unique solution that meets a set of theoretically established, desirable properties. The computation of
Shapley values can, however, be computationally expensive.
Recent work has therefore focused on reducing the running
time (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Lundberg et al., 2020; Jethani
et al., 2022) and enhancing the accuracy of approximations
(Frye et al., 2021; Aas et al., 2021; Covert & Lee, 2021;
Mitchell et al., 2022; Kolpaczki et al., 2024). However, the
Shapley values are computed post-hoc, and hence entail a
computational overhead, even when approximated, e.g., as
in the case of FastSHAP (Jethani et al., 2022). Generating instance-based explanations or learning a pre-trained
explainer always demands further data, time, and resources.
Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, computing Shapley values as a means to form predictions has not yet been
considered.

Shapley values have several desirable, theoretically well-supported, properties for explaining
black-box model predictions. Traditionally, Shapley values are computed post-hoc, leading to additional computational cost at inference time. To
overcome this, a novel method, called ViaSHAP,
is proposed, that learns a function to compute
Shapley values, from which the predictions can be
derived directly by summation. Two approaches
to implement the proposed method are explored;
one based on the universal approximation theorem
and the other on the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem. Results from a large-scale empirical investigation are presented, showing that
ViaSHAP using Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
performs on par with state-of-the-art algorithms
for tabular data. It is also shown that the explanations of ViaSHAP are significantly more accurate
than the popular approximator FastSHAP on both
tabular data and images.

1. Introduction
The application of machine learning algorithms in some
domains requires communicating the reasons behind predictions with the aim of building trust in the predictive models
and, more importantly, addressing legal and ethical considerations (Lakkaraju et al., 2017; Goodman & Flaxman,
2017). Nevertheless, many state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms result in black-box models, precluding the
user’s ability to follow the reasoning behind the predictions.
Consequently, explainable machine learning methods have
gained notable attention as a means to acquire needed explainability without sacrificing performance.

The main contributions of this study are:
• a novel machine learning method, ViaSHAP, that trains
a model to simultaneously provide accurate predictions
and Shapley values
• multiple implementations of the proposed method are
explored, using both the universal approximation theorem and the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem, which are evaluated through a large-scale empirical investigation

1

Örebro University, School of Science and Technology, Sweden 2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology, School of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Sweden 3 École Polytechnique, IP Paris, France. Correspondence to: Amr Alkhatib
<amr.alkhatib@oru.se>.

In the following section, we cover fundamental concepts
about the Shapley value and, along the way, introduce our
notation. Section 3 describes the proposed method. In
Section 4, results from a large-scale empirical investigation
are presented and discussed. Section 5 provides a brief
overview of the related work. Finally, in the concluding

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

