SWE-Lancer: Can Frontier LLMs Earn $1 Million
from Real-World Freelance Software Engineering?

Samuel Miserendino 1 * Michele Wang 1 * Tejal Patwardhan 1 Johannes Heidecke 1

Abstract

tinues to accelerate, benchmarks that rigorously evaluate
and forecast software engineering (SWE) capabilities will
be crucial in assessing economic impacts and agentic safety
(OpenAI, 2023; Anthropic, 2024; DeepMind, 2024).

We introduce SWE-Lancer, a benchmark of over
1,400 freelance software engineering tasks from
Upwork, valued at $1 million USD total in realworld payouts. SWE-Lancer encompasses both
independent engineering tasks — ranging from
$50 bug fixes to $32,000 feature implementations — and managerial tasks, where models
choose between technical implementation proposals. Independent tasks are graded with endto-end tests triple-verified by experienced software engineers, while managerial decisions are
assessed against the choices of the original hired
engineering managers. We evaluate model performance and find that frontier models are still
unable to solve the majority of tasks. To facilitate future research, we open-source a unified
Docker image and a public evaluation split, SWELancer Diamond (https://github.com/
openai/SWELancer-Benchmark).
By
mapping model performance to monetary value,
we hope SWE-Lancer enables greater research
into the economic impact of AI model development.

Prior coding benchmarks have focused on self-contained
tasks like program synthesis (Chen et al., 2021) and competitive programming (Hendrycks et al., 2021). The most
realistic benchmarks are currently SWE-Bench (Jimenez
et al., 2024) and SWE-Bench Verified (Chowdhury et al.,
2024), which focus on isolated, self-contained tasks. In
the real world, however, software engineers operate across
the full technology stack and must reason about complex
inter-codebase interactions and tradeoffs.
To better measure the real-world software engineering capabilities and impact of AI models, we introduce SWELancer. Our benchmark evaluates frontier language models
on 1,488 freelance software engineering jobs from Upwork,
collectively worth $1,000,000 USD in payouts. The evaluation includes Individual Contributor (IC) SWE tasks,
where models generate code patches to resolve real-world
issues, and SWE Manager tasks, where models act as technical leads by selecting the best implementation proposal
for a given problem.
• IC SWE tasks range in difficulty from 15-minute bug
fixes to new feature requests that took weeks to close
out. Unlike prior benchmarks, which grade model performance with unit tests, SWE-Lancer evaluates IC
SWE tasks using end-to-end tests created by a team
of professional software engineers. These end-to-end
tests use browser automation to verify application behavior and mirror the real-world freelance review process, and have been triple-verified for quality by experienced software engineers.
• SWE Manager tasks direct models to review competing proposals submitted by freelancers in response to
job postings, and select the best one. They are then
assessed against the choices of the original engineering managers. These tasks require a deep technical
understanding of both the issue and the proposals; it is
often the case that multiple proposals are technically
correct, and identifying the winning proposal requires
considering context from the entire repository.

1. Introduction
In just two years, language models have advanced from
solving basic textbook computer science problems to winning gold medals in international programming competitions (OpenAI, 2024a; Quan et al., 2025). When OpenAI
announced SWE-Bench Verified in August 2024, GPT-4o
scored 33%; today, their o3 reasoning model achieves SOTA
at 72% (OpenAI, 2024b), highlighting the need for unsaturated evaluations that reflect the complexity of real-world
software engineering. As AI research and development con*

Equal contribution 1 OpenAI. Correspondence to: Samuel
Miserendino <samuelgm@openai.com>, Michele Wang
<michele@openai.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

