Proactive Agents for Multi-Turn Text-to-Image Generation Under Uncertainty

Meera Hahn * 1 Wenjun Zeng 1 Nithish Kannen 1 Rich Galt 1 Kartikeya Badola 1 Been Kim 1 Zi Wang * 1

Abstract
User prompts for generative AI models are often
underspecified, leading to a misalignment between the user intent and models’ understanding.
As a result, users commonly have to painstakingly
refine their prompts. We study this alignment
problem in text-to-image (T2I) generation and
propose a prototype for proactive T2I agents
equipped with an interface to (1) actively ask
clarification questions when uncertain, and (2)
present their uncertainty about user intent as an
understandable and editable belief graph. We
build simple prototypes for such agents and
propose a new scalable and automated evaluation
approach using two agents, one with a ground
truth intent (an image) while the other tries to
ask as few questions as possible to align with
the ground truth. We experiment over three
image-text datasets: ImageInWords (Garg et al.,
2024), COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and DesignBench,
a benchmark we curated with strong artistic
and design elements. Experiments over the
three datasets demonstrate the proposed T2I
agents’ ability to ask informative questions and
elicit crucial information to achieve successful
alignment with at least 2 times higher VQAScore (Lin et al., 2024) than the standard T2I
generation. Moreover, we conducted human
studies and observed that at least 90% of
human subjects found these agents and their
belief graphs helpful for their T2I workflow,
highlighting the effectiveness of our approach.
Code and DesignBench can be found at https:
//github.com/google-deepmind/
proactive_t2i_agents.

Figure 1. Our proactive T2I agent clarifies a user prompt with
questions, incorporates user feedback, and expresses its uncertainty
and understanding as an editable belief graph.

1. Introduction
A fundamental challenge in the development of AI agents
is how to foster effective and efficient multi-turn communication and collaboration with human users to achieve
user-defined goals, especially when faced with the common
issue of vague or incomplete instructions from humans.
As a testbed for the communication problem, this work
uses text-to-image (T2I) generation, where recent advancements (Baldridge et al., 2024; Betker et al., 2023; Podell
et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023) have enabled the creation of
stunning images from complex text descriptions. T2I exemplifies the challenge of moving from low-information
(prompts) to high-information (images), forcing models to
make implicit assumptions to resolve prompt uncertainty.
Moreover, T2I offers well-defined metrics and a clear problem scope, enabling comprehensive automatic evaluation.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Zi Wang <wangzi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Interpretations of prompts can vary significantly across di1

