Optimizing Robustness and Accuracy in Mixture of Experts:
A Dual-Model Approach

Xu Zhang 1 Kaidi Xu 2 Ziqing Hu 3 Ren Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Mixture of Experts (MoE) have shown remarkable
success in leveraging specialized expert networks
for complex machine learning tasks. However,
their susceptibility to adversarial attacks presents
a critical challenge for deployment in robust applications. This paper addresses the critical question of how to incorporate robustness into MoEs
while maintaining high natural accuracy. We begin by analyzing the vulnerability of MoE components, finding that expert networks are notably
more susceptible to adversarial attacks than the
router. Based on this insight, we propose a targeted robust training technique that integrates a
novel loss function to enhance the adversarial robustness of MoE, requiring only the robustification of one additional expert without compromising training or inference efficiency. Building on
this, we introduce a dual-model strategy that linearly combines a standard MoE model with our
robustified MoE model using a smoothing parameter. This approach allows for flexible control
over the robustness-accuracy trade-off. We further provide theoretical foundations by deriving
certified robustness bounds for both the single
MoE and the dual-model. To push the boundaries of robustness and accuracy, we propose
a novel joint training strategy JTDMoE for the
dual-model. This joint training enhances both
robustness and accuracy beyond what is achievable with separate models. Experimental results
on CIFAR-10 and TinyImageNet datasets using
ResNet18 and Vision Transformer (ViT) architectures demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/TIML-Group/
Robust-MoE-Dual-Model.

The Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture has emerged as
a powerful framework in machine learning, enabling models
to capture complex patterns by combining the strengths of
multiple specialized expert networks. Originally introduced
to enhance model capacity without a proportional increase
in computational cost, the MoE framework operates in a
straightforward but effective way: different components of
the model, known as experts, specialize in distinct tasks or
features of the data (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan & Jacobs,
1994). MoE leverage a router to dynamically assign input
data to the most appropriate expert (Shazeer et al., 2017).
Such mechanism makes them particularly valuable in largescale applications such as natural language processing (Du
et al., 2022) and computer vision (Riquelme et al., 2021).
Despite their success in achieving high accuracy, MoE, similar to other deep learning models, are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Adversarial examples, which are input samples
perturbed by imperceptible noise, can induce deep learning
models to produce incorrect predictions with high confidence (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Carlini & Wagner, 2017;
Papernot et al., 2016), posing significant risks in safetycritical applications (Finlayson et al., 2019; Li et al., 2023).
The same modular structure that empowers MoE renders
them particularly susceptible to adversarial attacks, as each
expert presents a potential vulnerability. Our experiments in
Section 4.1 confirm that targeting MoE experts can be an effective strategy for compromising the model, underscoring
the need for enhanced robustness measures in MoE.
Adversarial Training (AT) and its variants have been extensively researched to defend against adversarial attacks,
attracting considerable research interest (Madry et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020a; Wong et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2021; 2023). However, these methods predominantly focus on standard architectures and don’t directly
address the unique challenges of MoE. The heterogeneous
structure of MoE, comprising a router and multiple expert
networks, complicates the application of traditional robustness techniques. A few existing works have explored adversarial robustness in MoE architectures (Puigcerver et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2023). Nonetheless, they often fail to
analyze the robustness of each component and typically only

1
Illinois Institute of Technology 2 Drexel University 3 Perplexity
AI. Correspondence to: Ren Wang <rwang74@iit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

