Penalizing Infeasible Actions and Reward Scaling
in Reinforcement Learning with Offline Data

†

†

Jeonghye Kim2,1 Yongjae Shin2,1 Whiyoung Jung 1 Sunghoon Hong 1
Deunsol Yoon 1 Youngchul Sung 2 Kanghoon Lee 1 Woohyung Lim 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning with offline data suffers
from Q-value extrapolation errors. To address
this issue, we first demonstrate that linear extrapolation of the Q-function beyond the data range
is particularly problematic. To mitigate this, we
propose guiding the gradual decrease of Q-values
outside the data range, which is achieved through
reward scaling with layer normalization (RS-LN)
and a penalization mechanism for infeasible actions (PA). By combining RS-LN and PA, we
develop a new algorithm called PARS. We evaluate PARS across a range of tasks, demonstrating
superior performance compared to state-of-theart algorithms in both offline training and online
fine-tuning on the D4RL benchmark, with notable
success in the challenging AntMaze Ultra task.

Figure 1: Comparison of PARS and prior SOTA, with scores
normalized to each task’s maximum performance.
mated, limiting the overall performance (Kumar et al., 2020;
Kostrikov et al., 2022; Mao et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

We first demonstrate that a key factor behind extrapolation error in RL with offline data is the tendency for linear
extrapolation beyond the data range. ReLU-based MLPs
often converge to linear functions outside the observed data
(Agarap, 2018; Xu et al., 2021; Yue et al., 2024), leading to
persistent boundary trends. When this trend is upward, it
causes Q overestimation for OOD actions. To mitigate this,
recent studies (Ball et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2024) propose
applying layer normalization (LN; Ba et al., 2016) to the
Q-function. Ball et al. (2023) shows that LN constrains
Q-function predictions by bounding them to the norm of
weight layers. However, while LN provides this bound, it
does not sufficiently control Q-values outside the data range,
leaving the problem unresolved without online interaction.

Reinforcement learning (RL) enables agents to develop optimal decision-making strategies through real-time interactions. However, these interactions with real-world environments can expose the agent to considerable risks. To
mitigate these risks, Offline RL, which derives optimal policies from pre-collected data, has emerged as a critical area
of research (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Tarasov et al., 2024). Additionally, agents trained with offline RL can be deployed in
real-world environments to further acquire knowledge, leading to the development of offline-to-online RL approaches
(Lee et al., 2022; Nakamoto et al., 2024; LEI et al., 2024).
However, due to the limited coverage of offline data, these
methods often suffer from extrapolation error, where the
Q-values of out-of-distribution (OOD) actions are overesti†

Therefore, RL with offline data requires methods that not
only bound but also effectively reduce Q-values outside the
data range. To address this, we propose two approaches:
(1) reward scaling with layer normalization (RS-LN)
and (2) penalizing infeasible actions (PA). Our analysis
shows that increasing the reward scale with LN reduces the
perceived similarity by the function approximator between
actions within the data range and those outside it. As a

1

Work done during an internship at LG AI Research. LG AI
Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to:
Woohyung Lim <w.lim@lgresearch.ai>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

