When to retrain a machine learning model

Florence Regol 1 2 Leo Schwinn 3 Kyle Sprague 2 Mark Coates 1 Thomas Markovich 2

Abstract

the form of a missed opportunity. However, retraining a new
model, fθ′ , on a more up-to-date dataset, D′ , is also costly.
Beyond the obvious costs of computational resources and
energy (Strubell et al., 2020), there are human resource costs
associated with assigning experts to deploy and maintain
the model, as well as collecting and cleaning data. Deploying a new model also generally comes with a higher risk.
Therefore, the optimal retraining schedule depends on this
comprehensive cost of retraining, on the cost of making mistakes, and on future model performance. Figure 1 provides
a visualization of the task.

A significant challenge in maintaining real-world
machine learning models is responding to the continuous and unpredictable evolution of data. Most
practitioners are faced with the difficult question:
when should I retrain or update my machine learning model? This seemingly straightforward problem is particularly challenging for three reasons:
1) decisions must be made based on very limited
information - we usually have access to only a
few examples, 2) the nature, extent, and impact
of the distribution shift are unknown, and 3) it
involves specifying a cost ratio between retraining and poor performance, which can be hard
to characterize. Existing works address certain
aspects of this problem, but none offer a comprehensive solution. Distribution shift detection falls
short as it cannot account for the cost trade-off;
the scarcity of the data, paired with its unusual
structure, makes it a poor fit for existing offline
reinforcement learning methods, and the online
learning formulation overlooks key practical considerations. To address this, we present a principled formulation of the retraining problem and
propose an uncertainty-based method that makes
decisions by continually forecasting the evolution
of model performance evaluated with a bounded
metric. Our experiments addressing classification
tasks show that the method consistently outperforms existing baselines on 7 datasets.

Although this retraining problem is ubiquitous in industry (Gama et al., 2014), there are few works in the machine
learning literature that tackle it directly. It has been framed
as an application of the distribution shift detection problem (Bifet & Gavaldà, 2007), where the conventional strategy involves triggering retraining whenever a substantial
shift is detected (Bifet & Gavaldà, 2007; Cerqueira et al.,
2021; Pesaranghader & Viktor, 2016). However, this approach overlooks retraining costs. This can be particularly
problematic when training is expensive, as demonstrated in
our experiments. Others have reduced the need for retraining
by incorporating robustness to distribution shifts (Schwinn
et al., 2022) or adapting to them (Filos et al., 2020), but
these methods have limits on the extent of the shift they
can handle. Other related areas include online, adaptive,
life-long, and transfer learning (Hoi et al., 2021), which
aim to update models to new or evolving data distributions.
However, these methods are primarily concerned with maximal model performance, while the goal of our work is to
explicitly minimize the overall cumulative cost. In particular, continual learning approaches and the like cannot delay
updates due to future cost considerations. Moreover, in
practice, the cost of retraining can go beyond the number of
gradient updates or sample complexity, as discussed above.
Finally, because this is a sequential decision problem, it can
be framed within the offline reinforcement learning framework (Levine et al., 2020). In theory, offline RL methods
should be applicable, but few, if any, are designed for very
low-data settings. They require substantial amounts of data
for training and hyperparameter tuning, and are therefore
largely unsuitable to use in this context.

1. Introduction
In many industrial machine learning settings, data are continuously arriving and evolving (Gama et al., 2014). This
means that a model, fθ , that was trained on a fixed dataset,
D, will become outdated. This usually translates to a cost in
1

McGill University, Canada 2 Block, Toronto, Canada
Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence to:
Florence Regol <florencer@block.xyz>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

A direct treatment of the cost consideration in the retraining
problem is presented by Žliobaitė et al. (2015) and by Ma1

