Language Models as Implicit Tree Search

Ziliang Chen 1 Zhao-Rong Lai 2 Yufeng Yang 3 Liangda Fang 2 Zhanfu Yang 4 Liang Lin 1 3

Abstract

replicated by RLHF and DPO alone: the emulation often necessitates synergistic integration with other techniques, i.e.,
meticulous prompt engineering (Wei et al., 2022), processbased reward modeling (Lightman et al., 2023), and Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Xie et al., 2024a). Among these
complementary approaches, MCTS stands out as essentially
promising, due to its exploration of complex decision spaces
in achieving high-level reasoning tasks such as game Go (Silver et al., 2017b). Massive leading research were proposed
to combine MCTS with preference optimization, whereas
their MCTS procedures inevitably require the value function learned by RL for executing the search principles of
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB). It is noteworthy that the
critical advantage of DPO is to skip the value learning to
achieve faster and more stable preference optimization than
RLHF. The standard MCTS’s reliance on an RL-learned
value function directly conflicts with DPO’s core strength of
bypassing RL entirely, showing a significant hurdle for their
seamless integration. It implies the necessity to reconcile
MCTS methodologies with the RL-free nature behind DPO.

Despite advancing language model (LM) alignment, direct preference optimization (DPO) falls
short in LM reasoning with the free lunch from reinforcement learning (RL). As the breakthrough,
this work proposes a new RL-free preference optimization method aiming to achieve DPO along
with learning another LM, whose response generation policy holds the asymptotic equivalence with
AlphaZero-like search, the apex of algorithms for
complex reasoning missions like chess Go. While
circumventing explicit value and reward modeling, the neural implicit tree search executed by the
extra LM remains seeking to equip DPO with reasoning procedure technically akin to AlphaZero.
Our experiments demonstrate that our methodology outperforms both regular DPO variants in human preference alignment, and MCTS-based LMs
in mathematical reasoning and planning tasks.

Rather than the regular MCTS, this paper started from its
theoretical variant derived from (Grill et al., 2020b), where
AlphaZero-like MCTS can be treated as a stochastic policy
solved by the state-specific local optimization regularized
by the reverse KL-divergence. With this regard, each statespecific local tree search decision asymtotically converges
to AlphaZero-like MCTS decision with the gap bounded by
the empirical visit counts, thus, lifting the expressiveness of
MCTS limited by the integer-count probability and sparse
tree width. Regretfully, the local solution of this stochastic
policy involves the parameter only solvable by dichotomic
search per state. In terms of the exponentially complex state
space in token-level language generation, this implicit tree
search (ITS) is hardly applied in MCTS-based LM research.

1. Introduction
Preference optimization paradigms, notably Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Bai et al., 2022)
and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al.,
2024b), are foundational to modern Language Model (LM)
alignment, aiming to imbue these models with human’s behavioral characteristics, inclination, and value. In particular,
DPO circumvent reward modeling so as to directly optimize
LMs with preferential response pairs, thereby reinforcement
learning (RL)’s complexities and instability avoided to yield
more efficiently and stably aligned models.
Distinct from preference alignment, sophisticated reasoning capabilities underlying human brains are not typically

Contributions. We propose a new RL-free preference optimization paradigm aiming to approximate ITS by LMs.
Specifically,

1
Research Institute of Multiple Agents and Embodied Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory; 2 Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China; 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yatsen University, Guangzhou, China; 4 Department of Computer
Science, Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Liang Lin
<linlng@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

• Beyond the original token-selection policy in DPO, we
propose another LM to learn the global policy of ITS
with regards to neural universal approximation. The
preference optimization built on top of DPO, without
dichotomic search and any other RL elements, inherits
the critical advantages of the DPO family.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

