Regression for the Mean: Auto-Evaluation and Inference with Few Labels
through Post-hoc Regression

Benjamin Eyre 1 * David Madras 2

Abstract

systematic errors (DeGrave et al., 2021). Accurate evaluation in the era of large language models (LLMs) presents a
scaling challenge. Traditional evaluation schemes involve
collecting several annotated samples from human labellers,
and with ML systems quickly changing (Tu et al., 2023),
the repeated collection of this data can quickly exhaust time
and resources.

The availability of machine learning systems that
can effectively perform arbitrary tasks has led to
synthetic labels from these systems being used in
applications of statistical inference, such as data
analysis or model evaluation. The Prediction Powered Inference (PPI) framework provides a way
of leveraging both a large pool of pseudo-labelled
data and a small sample with real, high-quality
labels to produce a low-variance, unbiased estimate of the quantity being evaluated for. Most
work on PPI considers a relatively sizable set of
labelled samples, which can be resource intensive
to obtain. However, we find that when labelled
data is scarce, the PPI++ method can perform
even worse than classical inference. We analyze
this phenomenon by relating PPI++ to ordinary
least squares regression, which also experiences
high variance with small sample sizes, and use
this regression framework to better understand
the efficacy of PPI. Motivated by this, we present
two new PPI-based techniques that leverage robust regressors to produce even lower variance
estimators in the few-label regime.

Recent advances in the development of LLMs have resulted
in the widespread availability of reasonably strong predictive models for arbitrary tasks. The proliferation of these
models has made the practice of replacing human-annotated
labels with the outputs of an LLM for the sake of evaluation,
or automatic evaluation, more feasible. Inherent bias in
these LLM predictions leads to potentially inaccurate evaluations, even in the case where many examples are available
(Angelopoulos et al., 2023a). Proposed frameworks such
as Prediction Powered Inference (PPI) (Angelopoulos et al.,
2023a) offer a way to remove the statistical bias of these
predictions with a small pool of labelled data.
While previous works studying the PPI framework have
focussed on circumstances where 50 or more (usually 200+)
labelled examples are available (Boyeau et al., 2024; Angelopoulos et al., 2023b; Zrnic & Candès, 2024b;a), the
applicability of PPI in the few-label regime has not been
thoroughly investigated — in this work, we find that empirically, PPI performs poorly (sometimes worse than classical
inference) when very few labelled examples are available.
We argue this is an important case, as many developers of
ML systems will rarely have access to a large evaluation set
for every criteria they wish to evaluate their system for, e.g.
when developing generative models, important evaluations
are often highly qualitative and potentially time-consuming.
In these cases, developers may wish to use a small pool of
hand-labelled examples as a way to guide design decisions.

1. Introduction
The deployment of machine learning (ML) systems into several areas of modern life has the potential to lead to several
positive outcomes, such as faster and more precise medical
care (Rajpurkar et al., 2017), improved educational tools
(Jaiswal & Arun, 2021; Lee, 2024), and a wide variety of
professional assistive technologies (Dehaerne et al., 2022).
However, the ever increasing integration of these systems
has resulted in a more drastic need for effective evaluation
techniques for determining when these systems suffer from

With this in mind, ensuring evaluation with few labels is
as efficient and accurate as possible is important for the
development of reliable ML systems. Specifically in the
case of generative model evaluation, the PPI framework is
a natural candidate, as the large set of unlabelled data PPI
requires can be directly generated by the model itself. Efficient inference with few labels is also relevant to research in
the sciences, where collecting more data may be costly but

* Work partially completed while this author was at Google
DeepMind. 1 Columbia University 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Benjamin Eyre <beneyre@cs.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

