An Empirical Study on Configuring In-Context Learning Demonstrations for
Unleashing MLLMs’ Sentimental Perception Capability

Daiqing Wu 1 2 Dongbao Yang 1 Sicheng Zhao 3 Can Ma 1 Yu Zhou 4

Abstract

80

Unacceptable
Performance Gap

Fully-Supervised Models

78.8

-23.8

The advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have enabled various
multimodal tasks to be addressed under a zeroshot paradigm. This paradigm sidesteps the cost
of model fine-tuning, emerging as a dominant
trend in practical application. Nevertheless, Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA), a pivotal challenge in the quest for general artificial intelligence,
fails to accommodate this convenience. The zeroshot paradigm exhibits undesirable performance
on MSA, casting doubt on whether MLLMs can
perceive sentiments as competent as supervised
models. By extending the zero-shot paradigm to
In-Context Learning (ICL) and conducting an indepth study on configuring demonstrations, we
validate that MLLMs indeed possess such capability. Specifically, three key factors that cover
demonstrations’ retrieval, presentation, and distribution are comprehensively investigated and
optimized. A sentimental predictive bias inherent
in MLLMs is also discovered and later effectively
counteracted. By complementing each other, the
devised strategies for three factors result in average accuracy improvements of 15.9% on six
MSA datasets against the zero-shot paradigm and
11.2% against the random ICL baseline.

Average Accuracy

75

Boost Performance
with a Minimal Cost

70

+15.9

70.9
Few-Shot Models
MLLMs’ ICL with Judicious
68.3
Demonstrations (Ours)

65

60

59.7

55.0

55

MLLMs’ ICL with Random
Demonstrations
Laborious
Annotation

MLLMs’ ZeroShot Paradigm

50
None

16 Samples

< 200 Samples
(1% Training Set)

> 3000 Samples
(Full Training Set)

Requirement for Annotated Data

Figure 1. Comparison of fully-supervised models, few-shot models, and MLLMs based on average accuracy and annotated data
requirement across six MSA datasets. The MLLMs’ zero-shot
paradigm, although avoiding the laborious annotation, exhibits a
substantial performance gap compared to fully-supervised models.
With proper demonstration configuration, this gap can be notably
narrowed by In-Context Learning (ICL).

mains have flourished. Among them, Multimodal Sentiment
Analysis (MSA) aims to classify the sentiment polarity embedded in multimodal data. As corroborated by empirical
(Zadeh et al., 2017) and theoretical (Huang et al., 2021)
evidence, the synergy between modalities facilitates more
comprehensive modeling of sentiment clues compared to
unimodal data. This superiority has led to growing interest
in MSA from academia and industry (Zhang et al., 2018a;
Yue et al., 2019).
In this paper, we focus on MSA with the input form of
image-text posts, whose number grows exponentially thanks
to the prosperity of social media. The current research landscape can be broadly grouped into two streams: post-level
branch (Xu & Mao, 2017), which identifies the overall sentiment of posts, and aspect-level branch (Xu et al., 2019),
which probes the sentiment associated with specific aspect
terms within the context of posts. Leveraging elaborate modules and a large volume of annotated data, both streams have
attained remarkable achievements. Entering the era of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), various multimodal tasks can be reformulated as filling textual prompts
and properly accomplished by MLLMs in a zero-shot manner (Yin et al., 2023). This emerging paradigm avoids timeintensive fine-tuning and task-specific annotation. However,
recent surveys (Yang et al., 2023b; Lian et al., 2024) have

1. Introduction
Equipping models with emotional intelligence has been a
fascinating yet vital challenge over the past few decades
(Zhao et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023). Studies on various facets of emotions and sentiments in numerous do1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chineses Academy
of Sciences 2 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences 3 Tsinghua University 4 VCIP & TMCC &
DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University. Correspondence to: Dongbao Yang <yangdongbao@iie.ac.cn>, Yu
Zhou <yzhou@nankai.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

