Fair Clustering via Alignment

Kunwoong Kim 1 Jihu Lee 1 Sangchul Park 2 Yongdai Kim 1

Abstract

Ingold & Soper, 2016; Damodaran et al., 2018; Mehrabi
et al., 2019). Moreover, non-discrimination laws are also
increasingly emphasizing the importance of fair decision
making based on AI systems (Hellman, 2019). Specifically,
group fairness is a category within algorithmic fairness that
ensures models do not discriminate against certain protected
groups, which are defined by specific sensitive attributes
(e.g., race). In response, a large amount of research has been
conducted to develop algorithms for mitigating such biases
in various supervised learning tasks such as classification
(Zafar et al., 2017; Donini et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2018;
Quadrianto et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020) and regression
(Agarwal et al., 2019; Chzhen et al., 2020).

Algorithmic fairness in clustering aims to balance the proportions of instances assigned to
each cluster with respect to a given sensitive attribute. While recently developed fair clustering
algorithms optimize clustering objectives under
specific fairness constraints, their inherent complexity or approximation often results in suboptimal clustering utility or numerical instability in
practice. To resolve these limitations, we propose
a new fair clustering algorithm based on a novel
decomposition of the fair K-means clustering objective function. The proposed algorithm, called
Fair Clustering via Alignment (FCA), operates
by alternately (i) finding a joint probability distribution to align the data from different protected
groups, and (ii) optimizing cluster centers in the
aligned space. A key advantage of FCA is that
it theoretically guarantees approximately optimal
clustering utility for any given fairness level without complex constraints, thereby enabling highutility fair clustering in practice. Experiments
show that FCA outperforms existing methods by
(i) attaining a superior trade-off between fairness
level and clustering utility, and (ii) achieving nearperfect fairness without numerical instability.

Along with supervised learning, algorithmic fairness for
unsupervised learning tasks, such as clustering, has also
gathered significant interest. Clustering algorithms have
long been employed as fundamental unsupervised learning
methods for machine learning, such as recommendation
systems (Widiyaningtyas et al., 2021), image processing (Le,
2013; Guo et al., 2020; Mittal et al., 2022), and language
modeling (Butnaru & Ionescu, 2017; Zhang et al., 2023).
Related works for Fair Clustering (FC) Combining algorithmic fairness and clustering, the notion of Fair Clustering (FC) was initially introduced in Chierichetti et al.
(2017). FC operates under the goal that the proportion of
each protected group within each cluster should be similar to that in the population. To achieve this goal, various
algorithms have been developed to minimize a given clustering objective under pre-specified fairness constraints (Bera
et al., 2019; Kleindessner et al., 2019; Backurs et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2020; Esmaeili et al., 2021; Ziko et al., 2021; Zeng
et al., 2023), to name a few.

1. Introduction
As artificial intelligence (AI) technology has advanced and
been successfully applied to diverse domains and tasks, the
requirement for AI systems to make fair decisions (i.e., algorithmic fairness) has emerged as an important societal
issue. This requirement is particularly necessary when observed data possess historical biases with respect to specific
sensitive attributes, leading to unfair outcomes of learned
models based on such biased data (Angwin et al., 2016;

We can roughly categorize the existing FC algorithms into
three: (i) pre-processing, (ii) in-processing, and (iii) postprocessing. Pre-processing methods (Chierichetti et al.,
2017; Backurs et al., 2019) involve transforming instances
into a fair space based on the concept of fairlets. Fairlets
are small subsets that satisfy (perfect) fairness, and thus
performing standard clustering on the fairlet space yields a
fair clustering. In-processing methods (Kleindessner et al.,
2019; Ziko et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; Zeng et al., 2023)
aim to simultaneously find both the cluster centers and assignments of the fair clustering by solving constrained op-

1
Department of Statistics, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea 2 School of Law, Seoul National University,
Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Yongdai Kim <ydkim0903@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

