Diffusion-based Adversarial Purification
from the Perspective of the Frequency Domain

Gaozheng Pei 1 Ke Ma 1 Yingfei Sun 1 Qianqian Xu 2 Qingming Huang 3 2 4

Abstract

frequencies. Empirical evidence from extensive
experiments demonstrates that our method significantly outperforms most current defense methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/
GaozhengPei/FreqPure.

The diffusion-based adversarial purification methods attempt to drown adversarial perturbations
into a part of isotropic noise through the forward process, and then recover the clean images
through the reverse process. Due to the lack of
distribution information about adversarial perturbations in the pixel domain, it is often unavoidable to damage normal semantics. We turn to the
frequency domain perspective, decomposing the
image into amplitude spectrum and phase spectrum. We find that for both spectra, the damage
caused by adversarial perturbations tends to increase monotonically with frequency. This means
that we can extract the content and structural information of the original clean sample from the frequency components that are less damaged. Meanwhile, theoretical analysis indicates that existing
purification methods indiscriminately damage all
frequency components, leading to excessive damage to the image. Therefore, we propose a purification method that can eliminate adversarial
perturbations while maximizing the preservation
of the content and structure of the original image.
Specifically, at each time step during the reverse
process, for the amplitude spectrum, we replace
the low-frequency components of the estimated
image’s amplitude spectrum with the corresponding parts of the adversarial image. For the phase
spectrum, we project the phase of the estimated
image into a designated range of the adversarial image’s phase spectrum, focusing on the low

1. Introduction
Adversarial purification (Nie et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022;
Lee & Kim, 2023; Bai et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024; Zollicoffer et al., 2025) is a data preprocessing technique aimed
at transforming adversarial images back into their original
clean images during the testing phase. Compared to adversarial training (Gosch et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Singh
et al., 2024), it offers advantages such as decoupling training
and testing, and strong generalization. The main challenge
faced by adversarial purification is how to eliminate adversarial perturbations while preserving the original semantic
information as much as possible. Therefore, it is essential to
explore how adversarial perturbations damage the images.
Current research (Chen et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2020; Han
et al., 2021; Maiya et al., 2021; Han et al., 2021; Maiya et al.,
2023) studies the distribution of adversarial perturbations
in the frequency domain, but they lack quantitative analysis
and typically do not distinguish between amplitude spectrum and phase spectrum. Due to the different distribution
characteristics of amplitude spectrum and phase spectrum,
in this paper, we further decompose images into amplitude
spectrum and phase spectrum. We statistically analyze the
variations in amplitude spectrum and phase spectrum of
original clean images and adversarial images across multiple models, attack methods, and different perturbation radii
(more experimental results and details in the Appendix C).
From Figure 1 we find that for both the amplitude spectrum
and the phase spectrum, the degradation caused by adversarial perturbations exhibits an approximately monotonically
increasing trend with frequency.

1
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, UCAS, Beijing. 2 Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology,
CAS, Beijing. 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, UCAS, Beijing. 4 Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, UCAS, Beijing.. Correspondence to: Ke Ma <make@ucas.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang
<qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

Existing methods of diffusion-based adversarial purification attempt to drown adversarial perturbations as part of
isotropic noise through the forward process, and then recover clean images through the reverse process. However,
we theoretically prove that this strategy will destroy all fre-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

