Contextual Linear Bandits with Delay as Payoff

Mengxiao Zhang 1 Yingfei Wang 2 Haipeng Luo 3

Abstract

years, considerable investigation has been given to the realistic situations where the agent observes the payoff (either
reward or loss) of an arm only after a certain delayed period
of time. However, most work assumes that the delays are
payoff-independent. Namely, while the delay may depend
on the chosen arm, it is sampled independently from the
stochastic payoff of the chosen arm.

A recent work by Schlisselberg et al. (2025) studies a delay-as-payoff model for stochastic multiarmed bandits, where the payoff (either loss or
reward) is delayed for a period that is proportional to the payoff itself. While this captures
many real-world applications, the simple multiarmed bandit setting limits the practicality of their
results. In this paper, we address this limitation
by studying the delay-as-payoff model for contextual linear bandits. Specifically, we start from
the case with a fixed action set and propose an
efficient algorithm whose regret overhead compared to the standard no-delay case is at most
D∆max log T , where T is the total horizon, D is
the maximum delay, and ∆max is the maximum
suboptimality gap. When payoff is loss, we also
show further improvement of the bound, demonstrating a separation between reward and loss similar to Schlisselberg et al. (2025). Contrary to
standard linear bandit algorithms that construct
least squares estimator and confidence ellipsoid,
the main novelty of our algorithm is to apply a
phased arm elimination procedure by only picking actions in a volumetric spanner of the action
set, which addresses challenges arising from both
payoff-dependent delays and large action sets. We
further extend our results to the case with varying
action sets by adopting the reduction from Hanna
et al. (2023). Finally, we implement our algorithm and showcase its effectiveness and superior
performance in experiments.

Lancewicki et al. (2021) address this limitation by studying a setting where the delay and the reward are drawn
together from a joint distribution. Later, Tang et al. (2024)
consider a special case where the delay is exactly the reward.
Their motivation stems from response-adaptive clinical trials that aim at maximizing survival outcomes. For example,
progression-free survival (PFS)—defined as the number of
days after treatment until disease progression or death—is
widely used to evaluate the effectiveness of a treatment. Notably, in this context, the “delays” in observing the PFS are
the PFS itself. Schlisselberg et al. (2025) build on and refine
this investigation, extending the study to the case where
delay is the loss itself. Taken together, this delay-as-payoff
framework effectively captures many real-world scenarios
involving time-to-event data across many domains. For example, postoperative length of stay (PLOS) is one example
of time-to-event data that specifies the length of stay after
surgery. Potential surgical procedures and postoperative
care can be modeled as arms. The delay—defined as the
time until the patient is discharged—can be interpreted as
the loss that we aim to minimize. As another example, in
advertising, common metrics, including Average Time on
Page (ATP) and Time to Re-engagement (that tracks the
time elapsed between a user’s initial interaction with an ad
and subsequent engagement such as returning to the website), can be modeled as reward or loss inherently delayed
by the same duration.

1. Introduction

Despite such recent progress, the current consideration of
payoff-dependent delay remains limited to the simple multiarmed bandit (MAB) setting. While MAB frameworks are
foundational in decision-making problems, they have notable practical limitations. Specifically, they fail to account
for the influence of covariates that drive heterogeneous responses across different actions. This makes them less
suitable for scenarios involving a large number of (potentially dynamically changing) actions and/or situations where
context is crucial in shaping outcomes.

Stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a well-studied theoretical framework for sequential decision making. In recent
1

University of Iowa 2 University of Washington 3 University
of Southern California. Correspondence to: Mengxiao Zhang
<mengxiao-zhang@uiowa.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

