Potemkin Understanding in Large Language Models

Marina Mancoridis 1 Bec Weeks 2 Keyon Vafa 3 Sendhil Mullainathan 4

Abstract
What is an ABAB rhyming scheme?

Large language models (LLMs) are regularly evaluated using benchmark datasets. But what justifies making inferences about an LLM’s capabilities based on its answers to a curated set of questions? This paper first introduces a formal framework to address this question. The key is to note
that the benchmarks used to test LLMs—such
as AP exams—are also those used to test people.
However, this raises an implication: such benchmarks are only valid tests if LLMs misunderstand
concepts in ways that mirror human misunderstandings. Otherwise, success on benchmarks
only demonstrates potemkin understanding: the
illusion of understanding driven by answers irreconcilable with how any human would interpret
a concept. We present two procedures for quantifying the existence of potemkins: one using a
specially designed benchmark in three domains,
the other using a general procedure that provides
a lower-bound on their prevalence. We find that
potemkins are ubiquitous across models, tasks,
and domains. We also find that these failures reflect not just incorrect understanding, but deeper
internal incoherence in concept representations.

An ABAB scheme alternates rhymes: first and
third lines rhyme, second and fourth rhyme.
Correct

Fill in the blank so that the resultant poem uses
the ABAB rhyming scheme:
Wondrous winter calls out
Shivering under the frost
Lies a lonely cat, sitting ___
?
Alone but hardly lost
Lies a lonely cat, sitting soft
Potemkin

Does out rhyme with soft?
No
Correct

Figure 1. Illustration of potemkin understanding in a large language model. This example shows GPT-4o’s failure to apply its
own conceptual explanation of an ABAB rhyming scheme.

vision—we only draw inferences for its performance on specific distributions, inferences that are limited by distribution
shift. What justifies interpreting benchmark performance
this way for LLMs?

1. Introduction
There has been a marked change in how we interpret machine learning evaluations. Today, large language models
(LLMs) are evaluated on benchmark datasets: curated questions with rubrics for grading. Success on these questions
is treated as evidence of broader conceptual understanding.
Previously, while benchmarks were also used to evaluate
supervised learning models, success was interpreted more
narrowly. A pathology classifier that performs well on Xray classification is not credited with an understanding of

This paper first introduces a framework that justifies using
benchmarks to measure concept understanding in LLMs.
The central insight is simple: we already use analogous tests
to assess humans. AP exams, AIME math competitions, and
coding challenges are credible measures precisely because
humans cannot excel on these benchmarks without a true
grasp of the required concepts. This is because the ways in
which a human might misunderstand a concept are small
and structured; there is no human who can do well on an
AP math exam without understanding basic math concepts.

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Chicago
Harvard University 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Marina Mancoridis <marinam@mit.edu>.
3

This framework also raises an implication: that human
benchmarks are only valid tests for LLMs if LLMs misunderstand concepts in the same way that humans do. If
LLM misunderstandings diverge from human patterns, models can succeed on benchmarks without truly understanding

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

