Visual Generation Without Guidance
Huayu Chen* 1 Kai Jiang* 1 2 Kaiwen Zheng 1 Jianfei Chen 1 Hang Su 1 Jun Zhu 1 2
𝛽
s

(b) GFT (ours)

(a) CFG Training

Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) has been a default technique in various visual generative models, yet it requires inference from both conditional and unconditional models during sampling.
We propose to build visual models that are free
from guided sampling. The resulting algorithm,
Guidance-Free Training (GFT), matches the performance of CFG while reducing sampling to a
single model, halving the computational cost. Unlike previous distillation-based approaches that
rely on pretrained CFG networks, GFT enables
training directly from scratch. GFT is simple to
implement. It retains the same maximum likelihood objective as CFG and differs mainly in
the parameterization of conditional models. Implementing GFT requires only minimal modifications to existing codebases, as most design
choices and hyperparameters are directly inherited from CFG. Our extensive experiments across
five distinct visual models demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of GFT. Across domains of diffusion, autoregressive, and maskedprediction modeling, GFT consistently achieves
comparable or even lower FID scores, with similar
diversity-fidelity trade-offs compared with CFG
baselines, all while being guidance-free. Code:
https://github.com/thu-ml/GFT.

ℒ𝜃𝑐
Cond loss

𝑝𝜃𝑐

[Dog]

𝑝𝜃𝑠

[MASK]

ℒ𝜃𝑢

𝑝𝜃𝑢

Uncond loss

𝛽

ℒ𝜃𝑐

s

[Dog]
[Mask]

[MASK]

Abstract

𝑝𝜃𝑢

1−𝛽

1−

Positive

Cond loss

Implicit conditional model

Guided Sampling
𝑝𝜃𝑐

Guidance-Free Generation

1+𝑆

[MASK]

𝑝𝜃𝑢

…

[Dog]

𝑝𝜃𝑠

s

[Dog]

Positive data 𝑝
Negative data 𝑝

𝑆

𝛽

(a) Training batc

Figure 1: Comparison of GFT and CFG method. GFT shares
CFG’s training objective but has a different parameterization
technique for the conditional model. This enables direct
training of an explicit sampling model.
By altering the guidance scale s, it can flexibly trade off
image fidelity and diversity, while significantly improving
the sample quality. Due to its effectiveness, CFG has been
adopted as a default technique for a wide spectrum of visual
generative models, including diffusion (Ho et al., 2020),
autoregressive (AR) (Chen et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2024),
and masked-prediction models (Chang et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023).
However, CFG is not problemless. First, the reliance on
an extra unconditional model doubles the sampling cost
compared with a vanilla conditional generation. Second,
this reliance complicates the post-training of visual models
– when distilling pretrained diffusion models (Meng et al.,
2023; Luo et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2024) for fast inference
or applying RLHF techniques (Black et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2024b), the extra unconditional model needs to be
specially considered in the algorithm design. Third, this also
renders a sharp difference from low-temperature sampling
in language models (LMs), where a single model is sufficient to represent the sampling distributions across various
temperatures. Similarly following LMs’ approach to divide
model output by a constant temperature value is generally
ineffective in visual sampling (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021),
even for visual AR models with similar architecture to LMs

1. Introduction
Low-temperature sampling is a critical technique for enhancing generation quality by focusing only on the model’s
high-likelihood areas. Visual models mainly achieve this via
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022). As
illustrated in Fig. 1 (left), CFG jointly optimizes the target
conditional model and an extra unconditional model during
training, and combines them to define the sampling process.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University 2 ShengShu, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

[MASK]

Implicit sampling model

