HyperIMTS: Hypergraph Neural Network for Irregular Multivariate Time
Series Forecasting

Boyuan Li 1 Yicheng Luo 1 Zhen Liu 1 Junhao Zheng 1 Jianming Lv 1 Qianli Ma† 1

Abstract

ing has been extensively studied (Nie et al., 2022; Zhang
& Yan, 2022; Zhou et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2024; Yi et al.,
2023), these methods typically assume the input to be fully
observed and pay less attention to potential sensor malfunctions, varying sampling sources, or human factors in reality.
These factors can result in Irregular Multivariate Time Series
(IMTS), which are characterized by irregular time intervals
within each variable and unaligned observations across variables. These characteristics make it challenging to provide
accurate forecasting on IMTS for informed decision-making
and planning.

Irregular multivariate time series (IMTS) are characterized by irregular time intervals within variables and unaligned observations across variables,
posing challenges in learning temporal and variable dependencies. Many existing IMTS models either require padded samples to learn separately from temporal and variable dimensions, or
represent original samples via bipartite graphs
or sets. However, the former approaches often need to handle extra padding values affecting efficiency and disrupting original sampling
patterns, while the latter ones have limitations
in capturing dependencies among unaligned observations. To represent and learn both dependencies from original observations in a unified
form, we propose HyperIMTS, a Hypergraph
neural network for Irregular Multivariate Time
Series forecasting. Observed values are converted
as nodes in the hypergraph, interconnected by
temporal and variable hyperedges to enable message passing among all observations. Through
irregularity-aware message passing, HyperIMTS
captures variable dependencies in a time-adaptive
way to achieve accurate forecasting. Experiments
demonstrate HyperIMTS’s competitive performance among state-of-the-art models in IMTS
forecasting with low computational cost. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
qianlima-lab/PyOmniTS.

In studies for IMTS, one category of methods pads the
series in the sample space to have same length across variables (Rubanova et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021; Tashiro
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a; 2024), as illustrated in Figure 1 (a) and (b). Padded series are either time-aligned or
patch-aligned, allowing for effective capturing of dependencies along both temporal and variable dimensions. However,
such padding scheme can increase the amount of data to
be processed, primarily because observation timestamps for
different variables can span widely separated time periods.
Furthermore, some methods rely on relative positions of
observations instead of timestamps to represent temporal
information, which might disrupt the original sampling pattern. It should be noted that padding refers to adding zeros
or predicted values in the sample space before inputting
IMTS into the neural network, differing from the continuous latent space used in ODE-based methods (Rubanova
et al., 2019; Biloš et al., 2021; Mercatali et al., 2024).
Instead of relying on padded series, another category of
IMTS analysis methods proposes using sets or bipartite
graphs to represent original IMTS samples, as illustrated
in Figure 1 (c) and (d). Set-based methods view observations as unordered tuples in a set (Horn et al., 2020),
while bipartite graph approaches represent channels and
timepoints as disjoint nodes connected by edges (Yalavarthi
et al., 2024), both of which only express observed values
for high efficiency. However, sets typically do not account
for correlations among observations, and bipartite graphs
are unable to propagate messages between variables without
shared timestamps. These methods still have limitations in
capturing dependencies on original IMTS.

1. Introduction
Multivariate Time Series (MTS) are prevalent in various
fields such as healthcare, weather, and biomechanics (Zhang
et al., 2023b; Shukla & Marlin, 2021). While MTS forecast1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Qianli Ma <qianlima@scut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

