WGFormer: An SE(3)-Transformer Driven by Wasserstein Gradient Flows for
Molecular Ground-State Conformation Prediction
Fanmeng Wang 1 Minjie Cheng 1 Hongteng Xu 1 2 3

Abstract

minimized state on the potential energy surface. It determines many important molecular properties (Xu et al., 2023)
and thus plays a crucial role in various downstream applications like molecular docking (Chatterjee et al., 2023; Paggi
et al., 2024) and molecular property prediction (Moon et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2024). Traditionally, molecular groundstate conformation can be obtained through various energybased simulation methods, e.g., molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation (Hollingsworth & Dror, 2018) and density functional theory (DFT) calculation (Pracht et al., 2020). However, these methods are too expensive and computationally
slow to meet the growing enormous demands (Wang et al.,
2023a; Cen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a). Although some
cheminformatic tools like RDKit (Landrum et al., 2013)
have been developed to generate molecular conformations
efficiently, they suffer from undesired precision when obtaining ground-state conformations.

Predicting molecular ground-state conformation
(i.e., energy-minimized conformation) is crucial
for many chemical applications such as molecular
docking and property prediction. Classic energybased simulation is time-consuming when solving this problem, while existing learning-based
methods have advantages in computational efficiency but sacrifice accuracy and interpretability.
In this work, we propose a novel and effective
method to bridge the energy-based simulation and
the learning-based strategy, which designs and
learns a Wasserstein gradient flow-driven SE(3)Transformer, called WGFormer, for ground-state
conformation prediction. Specifically, our method
tackles this task within an auto-encoding framework, which encodes low-quality conformations
by the proposed WGFormer and decodes corresponding ground-state conformations by an MLP.
The architecture of WGFormer corresponds to
Wasserstein gradient flows — it optimizes conformations by minimizing an energy function
defined on the latent mixture models of atoms,
thereby significantly improving performance and
interpretability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art competitors, providing a new and
insightful paradigm to predict ground-state conformation. The code is available at https://
github.com/FanmengWang/WGFormer.

Recently, with the significant advancement of artificial intelligence in the scientific field (Wang et al., 2023b; Abramson
et al., 2024), learning-based methods have emerged as a
promising solution to tackle this task (Kim et al., 2025).
Early methods like ConfVAE (Xu et al., 2021b) employ various generative models to generate multiple potential lowenergy conformations and then still require screening the
energy-minimized conformation among them, which lack
the guarantee of obtaining ground-state conformations due
to the uncertainty of the two-stage process (Xu et al., 2023).
In this context, subsequent efforts have shifted to design
specialized methods to predict molecular ground-state conformation directly (Xu et al., 2021d). Among them, some
state-of-the-art methods, e.g., ConfOpt (Guan et al., 2022),
formulate ground-state conformation prediction as an optimization problem, which takes low-quality conformations
as input and optimizes these conformations accordingly. Essentially, these methods aim to apply neural networks to
predict the gradient field of the conformational energy landscape and thus imitate gradient descent to update the input
conformations. However, their neural networks are designed
empirically, making the feedforward computations generally not correspond to minimizing a physically meaningful
energy function of conformations. Therefore, such empirical neural network architectures not only harm the model
interpretability but also lead to sub-optimal performance.

1. Introduction
Molecular ground-state conformation represents the most
stable 3D molecular structure corresponding to the energy1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 3 Engineering Research Center of
Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE.
Correspondence to: Hongteng Xu <hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

