Approximate Forest Completion and Learning-Augmented Algorithms
for Metric Minimum Spanning Trees

Nate Veldt 1 Thomas Stanley 1 Benjamin W. Priest 2 Trevor Steil 2 Keita Iwabuchi 2 T.S. Jayram 2
Geoffrey Sanders 2

Abstract

problems (Held & Karp, 1970), and feature selection (Labbé
et al., 2023). The problem also has a very well-known connection to hierarchical clustering (Gower & Ross, 1969)
and has been used as a key step in clustering astronomical
data (Barrow et al., 1985; March et al., 2010), analyzing
gene expression data (Xu et al., 2002), document clustering (Xu & Uberbacher, 1997), and various image segmentation and classification tasks (Xu & Uberbacher, 1997; An
et al., 2000; La Grassa et al., 2022).

Finding a minimum spanning tree (MST) for n
points in an arbitrary metric space is a fundamental primitive for hierarchical clustering and
many other ML tasks, but this takes Ω(n2 ) time
to even approximate. We introduce a framework
for metric MSTs that first (1) finds a forest of
trees using practical heuristics, and then (2) finds
a small weight set of edges to connect disjoint
components in the forest into a spanning tree. We
prove that optimally solving step (2) still takes
Ω(n2 ) time, but we provide a subquadratic 2.62approximation algorithm. In the spirit of learningaugmented algorithms, we then show that if the
heuristic forest found in step (1) overlaps with an
optimal MST, we can approximate the original
MST problem in subquadratic time, where the
approximation factor depends on a measure of
overlap. In practice, we find nearly optimal spanning trees for a wide range of metrics, while being
orders of magnitude faster than exact algorithms.

This paper is motivated by challenges in efficiently computing metric MSTs in modern machine learning (ML) and
data mining applications. The most fundamental challenge
is simply the massive size of modern datasets. In theory
one can always find an MST for n points by computing all
O(n2 ) distances and running an existing MST algorithm.
However, this quadratic complexity is far too expensive both
in terms of runtime and memory for massive datasets. A second challenge is handling complicated metric spaces. Most
existing algorithms for metric MSTs are designed for Euclidean distances or other simple metric spaces, often with
a particular focus on small-length feature vectors (March
et al., 2010; Agarwal et al., 1990; Shamos & Hoey, 1975;
Vaidya, 1988; Arya & Mount, 2016; Wang et al., 2021).
While useful in certain settings, these are limited in their applicability to high-dimensional feature spaces and complex
distance functions. Many modern ML tasks focus on nonCartesian data (e.g., videos, images, text, nodes in a graph,
or even entire graphs) which must be classified, clustered,
or otherwise compared, possibly after being embedded into
some metric space. In these settings, even querying the
distance score between two data points becomes non-trivial
and often involves some level of uncertainty. Computing
distances for popular non-Euclidean metrics like Levenshtein distance or graph kernels is far more expensive than
computing Euclidean distances. This motivates a body of
research on minimizing the number of queries needed to
find a minimum spanning tree (Bateni et al., 2024; Erlebach
et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2008; Megow et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
Finding a minimum spanning tree of a graph is a classical
combinatorial problem with well-known algorithms dating
back to the early and mid 1900s (Borůvka, 1926; Prim,
1957; Kruskal, 1956). A widely-studied special case in theory and practice is the metric MST problem, where each
node corresponds to a point in a metric space and every pair
of points defines an edge with weight equal to the distance
between points. Finding a metric MST has widespread applications including network design (Loberman & Weinberger,
1957), approximation algorithms for traveling salesman
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University 2 Center for Applied Scientific Computing,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Correspondence to:
Nate Veldt <nveldt@tamu.edu>.

These applications and challenges motivate new approaches
for efficiently finding good spanning trees for a set of points
in an arbitrary metric space. Ideally, we would like an

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

