Supercharging Graph Transformers with Advective Diffusion

Qitian Wu 1 Chenxiao Yang 2 Kaipeng Zeng 3 Michael Bronstein 4 5

Abstract

and graph Transformers (Ying et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021;
Rampásek et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022b), which propagate
information among arbitrary node pairs through global attention. GNNs can be seen as discretized versions of local
diffusion equations on graphs (Atwood & Towsley, 2016;
Klicpera et al., 2019; Chamberlain et al., 2021a), while
graph Transformers can be considered as the counterparts
of non-local diffusion (Wu et al., 2023; 2024c). Linking
graph learning models with diffusion equations offers powerful tools from the domain of partial differential equations
(PDEs), allowing us to study the expressive power (Bodnar et al., 2022), behaviors such as over-smoothing (Rusch
et al., 2023) and over-squashing (Topping et al., 2022), the
settings of missing features (Rossi et al., 2022), and guide
architectural choices (Di Giovanni et al., 2022).

The capability of generalization is a cornerstone
for the success of modern learning systems. For
non-Euclidean data, e.g., graphs, that particularly involves topological structures, one important aspect neglected by prior studies is how machine learning models generalize under topological shifts. This paper proposes A DV DIFF ORMER,
a physics-inspired graph Transformer model designed to address this challenge. The model is
derived from advective diffusion equations which
describe a class of continuous message passing
process with observed and latent topological structures. We show that A DV DIFF ORMER has provable capability for controlling generalization error with topological shifts, which in contrast cannot be guaranteed by graph diffusion models,
i.e., the generalization of common graph neural
networks in continuous space. Empirically, the
model demonstrates superiority in various predictive tasks across information networks, molecular
screening and protein interactions1 .

While significant efforts have been devoted to understanding
the expressive power of graph learning models, the generalization capabilities of such methods are largely an open
question. Recent works attempt to study generalization of
graph learning models (particularly GNNs) from various
perspectives such as extrapolation in feature space (Xu et al.,
2021), subgroup fairness (Ma et al., 2021), invariance principle (Wu et al., 2022a), feature propagation (Yang et al.,
2023), causality (Wu et al., 2024a), and training dynamics (Yang et al., 2024). However, most of these works focus
on the distribution shifts of features and labels. In many
critical real-world settings, the training and testing graph
topologies can be generated from different distributions
(e.g., molecular structures with diverse drug likeness) (Koh
et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021; Bazhenov et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023), a phenomenon we refer to as “topological
distribution shift”. This can be a predominant nature of nonEuclidean data in contrast with commonly studied feature
and label shifts in Euclidean space. Despite its practical significance, how to enable graph learning models to generalize
under topological shifts still remains unclear.

1. Introduction
Learning representations for non-Euclidean data is essential
for geometric deep learning. Graph-structured data in particular has attracted increasing attention, as graphs are a very
popular mathematical abstraction for systems of relations
and interactions that can be applied from microscopic scales
(e.g. molecules) to macroscopic ones (social networks).
Common frameworks for learning on graphs include graph
neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2008; Gilmer et al.,
2017; Kipf & Welling, 2017), which operate by propagating
information between adjacent nodes of the graph networks,
1
Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 3 Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 4 University of Oxford 5 Aithyra. Correspondence
to: Qitian Wu <wuqitian@broadinstitute.org>.

In this paper, we aim to address generalization under topological shifts through the lens of a physics-inspired graph
learning model dubbed as Advective Diffusion Transformer
(A DV DIFF ORMER). The model is derived from advective
diffusion equations which describe a class of continuous
message passing process with observed and latent topological structures. On top of this, we connect advective
diffusion with a graph Transformer architecture for gener-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Codes are available at https://github.com/
qitianwu/AdvDIFFormer

1

