Feature Learning beyond the Lazy-Rich Dichotomy:
Insights from Representational Geometry

Chi-Ning Chou * 1 Hang Le * 1 Yichen Wang 2 SueYeon Chung 1 3

Abstract
Integrating task-relevant information into neural
representations is a fundamental ability of both
biological and artificial intelligence systems. Recent theories have categorized learning into two
regimes: the rich regime, where neural networks
actively learn task-relevant features, and the lazy
regime, where networks behave like random feature models. Yet this simple lazy–rich dichotomy
overlooks a diverse underlying taxonomy of feature learning, shaped by differences in learning
algorithms, network architectures, and data properties. To address this gap, we introduce an analysis framework to study feature learning via the
geometry of neural representations. Rather than
inspecting individual learned features, we characterize how task-relevant representational manifolds evolve throughout the learning process. We
show, in both theoretical and empirical settings,
that as networks learn features, task-relevant manifolds untangle, with changes in manifold geometry revealing distinct learning stages and strategies beyond the lazy–rich dichotomy. This framework provides novel insights into feature learning
across neuroscience and machine learning, shedding light on structural inductive biases in neural
circuits and the mechanisms underlying out-ofdistribution generalization.

Figure 1. Schematic illustration. a, We propose to investigate feature learning using representational geometry and task-relevant
manifolds. b, Feature learning (i.e., rich regime) can be viewed as
a process of untangling task-relevant manifolds—structuring the
neural activity space to improve separation among manifolds.

acquiring new cognitive tasks. These changes are reflected
in the incorporation of task-relevant features into neural representations (Olshausen & Field, 1996; Poort et al., 2015;
Niv, 2019; Reinert et al., 2021; Gurnani & Gajic, 2023).
Similarly, the remarkable success of deep learning is often attributed to the ability of neural networks to learn
problem-specific features1 . For example, in deep neural
networks (DNNs) (LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), the ability to learn rich feature hierarchies enables
superior image classification performance (Girshick et al.,
2014). Meanwhile, the seminal work of (Chizat et al., 2019)
demonstrated that neural networks can perform well even
when there are negligible changes in the weights of the networks. These observations raise important questions: Do
neural networks always need to learn task-relevant features?
How can we evaluate the quality of the features they learn?

1. Introduction
Learning induces changes in brain activity, whether it involves navigating a new city, adapting novel motor skills, or
*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Computational Neuroscience,
Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA 2 University of California, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA 3 Center for Neural
Science, New York University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Chi-Ning Chou <cchou@flatironinstitute.org>,
Hang Le <hle@flatironinstitute.org>, SueYeon Chung
<schung@flatironinstitute.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
In this paper, features broadly refer to measurable properties
or characteristics of patterns in data/input.

1

