C2IQL: Constraint-Conditioned Implicit Q-learning for Safe Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Zifan Liu 1 Xinran Li 1 Jun Zhang 1

Abstract

cable when such interactions are costly, risky, or impractical, such as in autonomous driving (Fang et al., 2022) and
robotics (Weerakoon et al., 2024). To address this challenge, offline RL (Fujimoto et al., 2019) has been proposed,
focusing on learning policies from pre-existing datasets
without further environmental interaction. A significant
challenge that arises in this offline setting is the out-ofdistribution (OOD) problem, where an agent may inaccurately estimate the value of state-action pairs not found in
the dataset. Various methods have been developed to tackle
this challenge, such as regularization (Fujimoto et al., 2019)
and constrained bootstrapping (Wu et al., 2020).

Safe offline reinforcement learning aims to develop policies that maximize cumulative rewards
while satisfying safety constraints without the
need for risky online interaction. However, existing methods often struggle with the out-ofdistribution (OOD) problem, leading to potentially unsafe and suboptimal policies. To address
this issue, we first propose Constrained Implicit
Q-learning (CIQL), a novel algorithm designed
to avoid the OOD problem. In particular, CIQL
expands the implicit update of reward value functions to constrained settings and then estimates
cost value functions under the same implicit policy. Despite its advantages, the further performance improvement of CIQL is still hindered
by the inaccurate discounted approximations of
constraints. Thus, we further propose ConstraintConditioned Implicit Q-learning (C2IQL). Building upon CIQL, C2IQL employs a cost reconstruction model to derive non-discounted cumulative
costs from discounted values and incorporates
a flexible, constraint-conditioned mechanism to
accommodate dynamic safety constraints. Experiment results on DSRL benchmarks demonstrate
the superiority of C2IQL compared to baseline
methods in achieving higher rewards while guaranteeing safety constraints under different threshold conditions.

While showing impressive achievements in reward-only
tasks, offline RL may lose its effectiveness in safety-critical
scenarios. For example, unsafe operations could harm patients in healthcare (Den Hengst et al., 2022), unsafe driving styles may lead to accidents (Fang et al., 2022), and
unsafe decisions may incur additional costs in financial investments (Froot et al., 1993). In these situations, safety is
categorized into the safe exploration process that prevents
agents from exploring risky states or actions, and safe optimal criterion that ensures constraint satisfaction of target
policies (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015). Although offline RL
naturally addresses the safe exploration process by avoiding online interaction, it is challenging to satisfy the safe
optimal criterion in offline settings due to the OOD problem
(Zheng et al., 2024). Thus, safe offline RL (SORL) (Le et al.,
2019), which incorporates safety constraints into the learning process, has been proposed by combining safe online
RL algorithms and offline RL algorithms. While existing
SORL methods (Xu et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022) have made
progress in mitigating the OOD problem and improving the
constraint satisfaction ability, further improvement is impeded by two key drawbacks: (1) the inability to avoid the
OOD problem in offline RL completely, and (2) the lack
of accurate and flexible constraint handling in safe RL. We
will elaborate on these in the following:

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
emerged as a robust framework to solve decision-making
problems through constant interactions with environments.
However, this “trial and error” approach may not be appli1

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
SAR, China. Correspondence to: Jun Zhang <eejzhang@ust.hk>.

From the perspective of offline RL, existing SORL methods
that leverage OOD detection or regularization can only mitigate the OOD problem but not avoid it. Specially, the agent
remains susceptible to encountering unseen state-action
pairs during model updates, which can lead to unsafe poli-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

