EvoControl: Multi-Frequency Bi-Level Control
for High-Frequency Continuous Control

Samuel Holt † 1 Todor Davchev 2 Dhruva Tirumala 2 Ben Moran 2 Atil Iscen 2 Antoine Laurens 2 Yixin Lin 2
Erik Frey 2 Markus Wulfmeier ‡ 2 Francesco Romano ‡ 2 Nicolas Heess 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

High-frequency control is paramount for ensuring the safety
and reliability of real-world robotic systems (Hogan, 1984;
Oh et al., 2014; Venkataraman & Gulati, 1993; Dantec et al.,
2022). Failures to respond in real-time to unexpected collisions, disturbances, or human interactions can lead to catastrophic consequences in safety-critical applications such
as surgery (Kuchenbecker et al., 2010), autonomous driving (Guo et al., 2019), and industrial automation (Vasic
& Billard, 2013). To achieve reliable performance, practical robotic systems commonly rely on low-level fixed controllers (e.g., proportional-derivative (PD) controllers) operating at high frequencies. However, this approach raises the
fundamental question of whether we can remove these lowerlevel fixed controllers entirely and instead directly control
motor torques at high frequency, potentially enabling faster
reactions and finer control.

High-frequency control in continuous action and
state spaces is essential for practical applications
in the physical world. Directly applying end-toend reinforcement learning to high-frequency control tasks struggles with assigning credit to actions
across long temporal horizons, compounded by
the difficulty of efficient exploration. The alternative, learning low-frequency policies that guide
higher-frequency controllers (e.g., proportionalderivative (PD) controllers), can result in a limited total expressiveness of the combined control
system, hindering overall performance. We introduce EvoControl, a novel bi-level policy learning
framework for learning both a slow high-level
policy (using PPO) and a fast low-level policy (using Evolution Strategies) for solving continuous
control tasks. Learning with Evolution Strategies for the lower-policy allows robust learning
for long horizons that crucially arise when operating at higher frequencies. This enables EvoControl to learn to control interactions at a high
frequency, benefitting from more efficient exploration and credit assignment than direct highfrequency torque control without the need to handtune PD parameters. We empirically demonstrate
that EvoControl can achieve a higher evaluation
reward for continuous-control tasks compared to
existing approaches, specifically excelling in tasks
where high-frequency control is needed, such as
those requiring safety-critical fast reactions.

Recent work falls into two main categories. First, directly
learning end-to-end high-frequency (often torque-based (Aljalbout et al., 2024)) policies, labeled direct torque control,
presents significant learning challenges as this increases
the number of state transitions within a fixed time window,
resulting in longer trajectories with complex temporal dependencies that hinder exploration and credit assignment
(Peng & Van De Panne, 2017; Sutton & Barto, 2018; Dabney et al., 2020)—and can often lead to suboptimal behavior
(Section 5.2).
Second, a common alternative is to learn a slower high-level
policy that outputs target positions or velocities, which are
then tracked by a faster (higher-frequency) low-level fixed
controller, such as a PD controller (Wei, 2019). This bilevel approach, labeled as fixed controllers, is prevalent in
real-world continuous control tasks (Aljalbout et al., 2024;
Song et al., 2019) and simplifies learning by reducing the
effective time horizon of the high-level policy (Sutton et al.,
1999). For real-time control, this composition affords the
high-level policy larger inference time, key for handling
rich observations, such as images (i.e., at 30Hz) or using
larger networks, such as Visual-Language-Models (Ma et al.,
2024). While composing with a low-level PD controller that
operates at higher-frequencies ∼ 500Hz on robotic plat-

†

Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind. ‡ Equal
advising. 1 University of Cambridge 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Samuel Holt <sih31@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

