F LAT Q UANT: Flatness Matters for LLM Quantization

Yuxuan Sun * 1 Ruikang Liu * 2 Haoli Bai † 1 Han Bao 1 Kang Zhao 1 Yuening Li 3
Jiaxin Hu 1 Xianzhi Yu 1 Lu Hou 1 Chun Yuan 1 Xin Jiang 1 Wulong Liu 1 Jun Yao 1

Abstract

creasing number of parameters (Achiam et al., 2023; Jiang
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024). However,
the growth of model size also incurs a significant increase
in computation and memory overhead. As a result, reducing the computational and memory demands of LLMs has
emerged as a critical research direction, and quantization is
one of the most effective solutions (Frantar et al., 2022; Lin
et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023).

Recently, quantization has been widely used for
the compression and acceleration of large language models (LLMs). Due to the outliers in
LLMs, it is crucial to flatten weights and activations to minimize quantization error with equally
spaced quantization points. Prior research explores various pre-quantization transformations to
suppress outliers, such as per-channel scaling and
Hadamard transformation. However, we observe
that these transformed weights and activations can
still exhibit steep and dispersed distributions. In
this paper, we propose F LAT Q UANT (Fast and
Learnable Affine Transformation), a new posttraining quantization approach that enhances the
flatness of weights and activations. Our approach
identifies optimal affine transformations for each
linear layer, calibrated in hours via a lightweight
objective. To reduce runtime overhead of affine
transformation, we apply Kronecker product with
two lightweight matrices, and fuse all operations
in F LAT Q UANT into a single kernel. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that F LAT Q UANT establishes a new state-of-the-art benchmark for
quantization. For example, it achieves less than
1% accuracy drop for W4A4 quantization on the
LLaMA-3-70B model, surpassing SpinQuant by
7.5%. Additionally, it provides up to 2.3x prefill
speedup and 1.7x decoding speedup compared to
the FP16 model. Code is available at: https://
github.com/ruikangliu/FlatQuant.

Quantization decreases the memory footprint and accelerates the inference, by reducing the precision of model parameters and activations. Quantization error is a commonly used
metric to measure the performance of quantization methods (Nagel et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021). One
key factor that affects the quantization error is the flatness
of weights and activations. Intuitively, when the distribution
of weights and activations is sharp and there exist multiple
outspread values, quantizing them to the same quantized
value usually incurs a large quantization error (Chmiel et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2024). Moreover, as LLMs generate outputs
layer by layer, a reduced quantization error also flattens the
error landscape propagated across Transformer layers.
Nevertheless, it is non-trivial to get a flat distribution of
weights and activations in LLMs. LLMs are known to have
extreme outliers over activations (Dettmers et al., 2022; Xiao
et al., 2023) and pivot tokens (Liu et al., 2024a; Sun et al.,
2024). To alleviate this problem, various pre-quantization
transformations are proposed to mitigate the impact of outliers (Xiao et al., 2023; Ashkboos et al., 2024; Liu et al.,
2024c; Ma et al., 2024). However, we revisit these transformations and find them still sub-optimal in promoting flatness. For instance, per-channel scaling (Xiao et al., 2023;
Shao et al., 2023) aims to balance the outliers between
weights and activations, but it falls short of distributing outliers over the non-outlier channels. The recent Hadamard
transformation (Ashkboos et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024)
attempts to solve this problem, while the individual characteristics of each linear layer are not considered. Moreover,
the linear transformation introduced by these methods inevitably introduces extra inference overhead that affects the
overall speedup of quantization.

1. Introduction
Recent large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success across a wide range of tasks with an in*
Equal contribution 1 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 3 The Chinese
University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Haoli Bai <baihaoli@huawei.com>.

In this work, we introduce F LAT Q UANT, a new post-training
quantization approach. The name has dual significance: it

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

