Position: Retrieval-augmented systems can be
dangerous medical communicators

Lionel Wong 1 2 Ayman Ali 3 Raymond Xiong 3 Shannon Shen 1 Yoon Kim 1 Monica Agrawal 3

Abstract

shows that almost a third of adults in the United States now
turn to generative AI as yet another source of health information, including from AI-generated summaries that are
automatically served to them in popular search engines like
Google and Bing (Vanessa Choy et al., 2024; Venkit et al.,
2024). Many AI-powered search engines specifically answer
queries using retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to
reference relevant external sources as a basis for generated
responses. By including direct attribution to trustworthy
original sources (Shuster et al., 2021), RAG systems aims to
provide more accurate information to users – an especially
important goal for sensitive and consequential queries, like
those involving health.

Patients have long sought health information online, and increasingly, they are turning to generative AI to answer their health-related queries.
Given the high stakes of the medical domain, techniques like retrieval-augmented generation and
citation grounding have been widely promoted
as methods to reduce hallucinations and improve
the accuracy of AI-generated responses and have
been widely adopted into search engines. This paper argues that even when these methods produce
literally accurate content drawn from source documents sans hallucinations, they can still be highly
misleading. Patients may derive significantly different interpretations from AI-generated outputs
than they would from reading the original source
material, let alone consulting a knowledgeable
clinician. Through a large-scale query analysis
on topics including disputed diagnoses and procedure safety, we support our argument with quantitative and qualitative evidence of the suboptimal
answers resulting from current systems. In particular, we highlight how these models tend to decontextualize facts, omit critical relevant sources, and
reinforce patient misconceptions or biases. We
propose a series of recommendations—such as the
incorporation of communication pragmatics and
enhanced comprehension of source documents—
that could help mitigate these issues and extend
beyond the medical domain.

However, in this paper, we analyze responses generated by
current RAG systems through the lens of their pragmatic
communicative implications, considering how context and
unspoken intentions influence people’s interpretations of language (Grice, 1975; Sumers et al., 2024; Goodman & Frank,
2016; Wilson & Sperber, 2006). We argue that today’s RAG
systems are often narrowly accurate but “pragmatically
misaligned”, producing text that references real sources but
unintentionally sends a highly misleading overall message;
to mitigate this, we propose that future systems should be designed to reason pragmatically about questions, sources,
and generated text to more safely and effectively answer
consequential queries. While this “pragmatic misalignment”
is broadly applicable, this paper focuses on medical queries,
as a use case with the potential for particularly dangerous
downstream implications.
To make this idea concrete, Figure 1 provides an example
of a realistic search query: imagine a patient with an upcoming surgery who is nervous about the procedure and
therefore searches for potential complications. The status quo for online health information seeking would be
reading websites surfaced by a classical vanilla search engine (Fig. 1.1); trusted sources often provide a balanced
overview of both the benefits and risks of a surgery. In
contrast, a retrieval-augmented search result often responds
by narrowly responding to the specific query and excerpting out-of-context only the risks of the surgery (Fig. 1.2).
Even factually accurate content can lead to confirmation
bias, where a user concerned about the surgery becomes

1. Introduction
Patients have been looking up medical information online
for decades, to supplement or even replace advice they receive from real clinicians (Jia et al., 2021). A recent survey
1

MIT CSAIL 2 Stanford University 3 Duke University. Correspondence to: Lionel Wong <liowong@stanford.edu>, Monica
Agrawal <monica.agrawal@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

