BAME: Block-Aware Mask Evolution for Efficient N:M Sparse Training

Chenyi Yang 1 Wenjie Nie 1 Yuxin Zhang 1 Yuhang Wu 1 Xiawu Zheng 1 Guannan Jiang 2 Rongrong Ji 1 3

Abstract

et al., 2016), object detection (He et al., 2017a), and semantic segmentation (Girshick et al., 2014), etc. These
progressions are chiefly driven by an augmented parameter
burden and an increasingly onerous computational cost. Regrettably, this tendency presents significant impediments for
the deployment of DNNs on resource-constrained edge devices like smartphones and various Internet of Things (IoT)
apparatuses. Consequently, there has been a proliferation
of interest in model compression research (Hubara et al.,
2016; Howard et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2020), with the explicit
objective of reducing the model’s computation and parameter complexity whilst preserving comparable performance
to the original model, thereby alleviating the deployment
tribulations experienced with DNNs.

N:M sparsity stands as a progressively important tool for DNN compression, achieving practical speedups by stipulating at most N non-zero
components within M sequential weights. Unfortunately, most existing works identify the N:M
sparse mask through dense backward propagation to update all weights, which incurs exorbitant training costs. In this paper, we introduce
BAME, a method that maintains consistent sparsity throughout the N:M sparse training process.
BAME perpetually keeps both sparse forward and
backward propagation, while iteratively performing weight pruning-and-regrowing within designated weight blocks to tailor the N:M mask.
These blocks are selected through a joint assessment based on accumulated mask oscillation frequency and expected loss reduction of mask adaptation, thereby ensuring stable and efficient identification of the optimal N:M mask. Our empirical results substantiate the effectiveness of
BAME, illustrating it performs comparably to or
better than previous works that fully maintaining dense backward propagation during training.
For instance, BAME attains a 72.0% top-1 accuracy while training a 1:16 sparse ResNet-50
on ImageNet, eclipsing SR-STE by 0.5%, despite achieving 2.37× training FLOPs reduction.
Code is released at https://github.com/
BAME-xmu/BAME.

Among these techniques, network sparsity has proven many
successes (Han et al., 2015; LeCun et al., 1989; Luo et al.,
2017) by zeroizing weights to yield lightweight, sparse networks at different granularity levels, from fine to coarse.
Fine-grained sparsity (unstructured sparsity) (LeCun et al.,
1989; Ding et al., 2019) removes individual weights and
is demonstrated to well retain performance even at high
sparsity rates. Regrettably, the deployment of such finegrained sparse networks onto mainstream hardware systems
becomes exceptionally challenging, given the irregular matrix patterns created by sparse weights. In contrast, coarsegrained sparsity, otherwise known as structured sparsity,
(He et al., 2017b; Lin et al., 2020) procures substantial acceleration, purging whole convolution filters in the process (Liu
et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020). Nevertheless, structured sparsity can experience severe performance degradation, especially under high sparsity conditions. Recent developments
indicate N:M sparsity as an auspicious avenue towards effectively balancing the dual requirements of acceleration
and performance retention (Zhou et al., 2021; Pool & Yu,
2021). By imposing a restriction of, at most, N non-zero
elements within M sequential weights throughout the input
channel dimension, N:M sparsity can substantially enhance
the performance of structured sparsity, while concurrently
assuring swift inference, ably facilitated by the N:M sparse
tensor core (Nvidia, 2020).

1. Introduction
In recent years, the vision community has precipitously bolstered the performance of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
across various tasks, including image classification (He
*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of
China, Xiamen University 2 Contemporary Amperex Technology
Co., Limited (CATL) 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen
University. Correspondence to: Rongrong Ji <rrji@xmu.edu.cn>.

The crux of maintaining the performance of N:M sparse
networks lies in identifying the optimal N:M sparsity mask.
To achieve this, prevalent methodologies involve updating
all weights during training to determine the most effective

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

