iN2V: Bringing Transductive Node Embeddings to Inductive Graphs

Nicolas Lell 1 Ansgar Scherp 1

Abstract

during training. In contrast, the transductive setting allows
access to the entire graph during training, while the test
node labels remain hidden. From a broader perspective, the
inductive setting resembles a single time step in a temporal
graph learning task. In temporal GNNs, the goal is to learn
representations over multiple snapshots of a graph or a graph
with temporal information attached to the nodes and edges,
respectively (Polleres et al., 2023; Longa et al., 2023).

Shallow node embeddings like node2vec (N2V)
can be used for nodes without features or to supplement existing features with structure-based information. Embedding methods like N2V are
limited in their application on new nodes, which
restricts them to the transductive setting where the
entire graph, including the test nodes, is available
during training. We propose inductive node2vec
(iN2V), which combines a post-hoc procedure
to compute embeddings for nodes unseen during
training and modifications to the original N2V
training procedure to prepare the embeddings for
this post-hoc procedure. We conduct experiments
on several benchmark datasets and demonstrate
that iN2V is an effective approach to bringing
transductive embeddings to an inductive setting.
Using iN2V embeddings improves node classification by 1 point on average, with up to 6 points
of improvement depending on the dataset and
the number of unseen nodes. Our iN2V is a
plug-in approach to create new or enrich existing embeddings. It can also be combined with
other embedding methods, making it a versatile
approach for inductive node representation learning. Code to reproduce the results is available at
https://github.com/Foisunt/iN2V.

Various methods exist to compute node embeddings solely
from graph edges (Perozzi et al., 2014; Grover & Leskovec,
2016; Donnat et al., 2018). This is important when node
features are unavailable or for enriching existing features.
When using text-based embeddings such as Bag of Words,
some embeddings might be missing. For example, due to
out-of-vocabulary words, the Citeseer dataset (Sen et al.,
2008) contains 15 nodes with empty embeddings. Other
reasons for new nodes include newly created social media
accounts that yet lack user-provided information.
Absent node features pose a challenge for GNNs. Messagepassing GNNs such as GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017)
can infer missing information from neighboring nodes.
MLP-based GNNs like Graph-MLP (Hu et al., 2021) and
GLNN (Zhang et al., 2022) rely solely on node features,
i. e., do not have message-passing, and cannot handle such
cases. A common approach to addressing missing features
is Feature Propagation (Rossi et al., 2022). It propagates
node features along graph edges, filling in missing features
while preserving existing features.

1. Introduction

We expand on this idea and introduce iN2V, a general and
simple post-hoc approach to using trained embeddings to
induce embeddings for nodes appearing in the inductive test
set. We modify the training process for the popular transductive embedding model node2vec (Grover & Leskovec,
2016) to foresee future embeddings. We propose a simple but effective post-hoc procedure for propagating and
updating embeddings for new nodes in the inductive setting, effectively enabling representation learning for unseen
nodes. Unlike Feature Propagation (FP), our iN2V adapts
the embeddings of training nodes during propagation, a
crucial feature to enable the inductive setting. Since iN2V
operates on N2V embeddings rather than raw node features provided by the datasets, it avoids relying on external
node-specific information. Furthermore, it can be combined

A graph neural network (GNN) may be trained without prior
knowledge about the data it will encounter after deployment.
This is because, in real-world graphs, new nodes and edges
appear or disappear over time. For example, papers appear
in citation networks, products are added to or removed from
co-purchase graphs, and users join social platforms, creating
new connections. These scenarios align with the inductive
setting in graph learning, where test data is entirely unseen
1

Research Group on Data Science and Big Data Analytics,
Ulm University, Ulm, Germany. Correspondence to: Nicolas Lell
<Nicolas.Lell@uni-ulm.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

