Recommendations with Sparse Comparison Data:
Provably Fast Convergence for Nonconvex Matrix Factorization

Suryanarayana Sankagiri 1 Jalal Etesami 2 Matthias Grossglauser 1

Abstract

learn users’ preferences based on the feedback that they
provide, e.g., the ratings on the items they have consumed.
A classical method of learning from ratings data is matrix completion, which is based on the following modeling
assumptions. Each user and item is endowed with a lowdimensional feature vector, and their inner product is taken
to be the user-item utility. The ratings are assumed to be
noisy reflections of this utility. By fitting this model to the
available rating data, the system can learn to predict users’
preferences over unseen items as well. This approach has
been immensely successful in practice (Koren et al., 2009)
and is also supported by strong theoretical foundations (Ge
et al., 2016).

In this paper, we consider a recommender system
that elicits user feedback through pairwise comparisons instead of ratings. We study the problem
of learning personalised preferences from such
comparison data via collaborative filtering. Similar to the classical matrix completion setting, we
assume that users and items are endowed with
low-dimensional latent features. These features
give rise to user-item utilities, and the comparison
outcomes are governed by a discrete choice model
over these utilities. The task of learning these features is then formulated as a maximum likelihood
problem over the comparison dataset. Despite the
resulting optimization problem being nonconvex,
we show that gradient-based methods converge
exponentially to the latent features, given a warm
start. Importantly, this result holds in a sparse
data regime, where each user compares only a few
pairs of items. Our main technical contribution
is to extend key concentration results commonly
used in matrix completion to our model. Simulations reveal that the empirical performance of
the method exceeds theoretical predictions, even
when some assumptions are relaxed. Our work
demonstrates that learning personalised recommendations from comparison data is both computationally and statistically efficient.

This work focuses on recommender systems that learn from
pairwise preference comparisons instead of ratings. One
reason to consider such a setting is that comparison data are
widely available as implicit feedback—for instance, when a
user clicks on one of four options, it suggests a preference
for the selected item over the others. Additionally, we believe explicitly collecting comparison feedback instead of
ratings can be beneficial for several reasons: (i) comparisons
naturally cancel out user biases in ratings (Shah et al., 2013);
(ii) they avoid the discretization issues of rating-based methods, where responses are typically binary or lie on a 1–5
star scale (Davenport et al., 2014); and (iii) comparing two
items is cognitively easier than rating them on an abstract
scale (Stewart et al., 2005). In fact, the advantages of ordinal (comparison) feedback over cardinal (rating) feedback
have been empirically demonstrated in small-scale tasks
(Shah et al., 2016). We ask whether it is possible to learn
personalized preferences from such comparison data in a
computationally and statistically efficient manner.

1. Introduction
Recommender systems are central to modern streaming
platforms and digital marketplaces, where they curate personalized selections for each user from the vast set of items
these platforms host. Algorithms powering such systems

To answer this question, it is natural to consider the following comparison-based recommender system model that
arises by combining the matrix completion assumptions
with a discrete choice model. Specifically, assume each user
u has a utility xu,i for every item i, where xu,i is defined as
the inner product of a low-dimensional user feature vector
u and item feature vector v. Thus the utility matrix X can
be factorized into feature matrices as follows: X = U V T .
Comparisons follow a noisy oracle: when presented with
two items i and j, the user u picks i over j with probability

1
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Switzerland 2 Department of Computer Science, TU Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Suryanarayana Sankagiri <suryanarayana.sankagiri@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

