Optimistic Algorithms for
Adaptive Estimation of the Average Treatment Effect

Ojash Neopane 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1 2 Aarti Singh 1

Abstract

However, our understanding of the challenges associated
with adaptive ATE estimation remains limited.

Estimation and inference for the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) is a cornerstone of causal inference and often serves as the foundation for developing procedures for more complicated settings.
Although traditionally analyzed in a batch setting,
recent advances in martingale theory have paved
the way for adaptive methods that can enhance
the power of downstream inference. Despite these
advances, progress in understanding and developing adaptive algorithms remains in its early stages.
Existing work either focus on asymptotic analyses that overlook exploration-exploitation tradeoffs relevant in finite-sample regimes or rely on
simpler but suboptimal estimators. In this work,
we address these limitations by studying adaptive
sampling procedures that take advantage of the
asymptotically optimal Augmented Inverse Probability Weighting (AIPW) estimator. Our analysis uncovers challenges obscured by asymptotic
approaches and introduces a novel algorithmic
design principle reminiscent of optimism in multiarmed bandits. This principled approach enables
our algorithm to achieve significant theoretical
and empirical gains compared to previous methods. Our findings mark a step forward in the advancement of adaptive causal inference methods
in theory and practice.

Classically, adaptive ATE estimation has been analyzed
in an asymptotic setting, where past work has focused on
designing adaptive sampling procedures that ensure that
the resulting ATE estimate achieves the smallest possible
asymptotic variance, that is, the semiparametric efficiency
bound. More recently, there has been growing interest in
developing algorithms that provide nonasymptotic performance guarantees. However, these works suffer from certain
drawbacks that lead to poor finite sample performance, an
issue that we discuss in detail in Sections 2 and 4.1.
In this work, we take a nonasymptotic perspective on adaptive ATE estimation, focusing on the Augmented Inverse
Propensity Weighting (AIPW) estimator. Our finite-sample
analysis reveals key aspects of algorithmic design that prior
work has overlooked. This enables us to propose a new algorithm with substantially improved theoretical and empirical
performance while also simplifying the analysis.
At the heart of our approach is the insight that initially oversampling arms that should eventually be under-sampled
according to the (unknown) optimal allocation can lead to
better estimates of the ATE. Interestingly, this idea can be
interpreted as an instance of the principle of optimism, a
well-established algorithmic design paradigm in the literature on regret minimization in multi-armed bandits (MAB)
and reinforcement learning. We discuss this connection in
more detail in Section 4.

1. Introduction

Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows:

The problem of estimating the average treatment effect
(ATE) is central to causal inference and has been extensively
studied. We have a precise understanding of the difficulty of
this problem in both asymptotic and nonasymptotic regimes.

1. We develop and analyze a new algorithm, Optimistic
Policy Tracking (OPTrack), for the adaptive estimation of ATE that enjoys significant theoretical improvements over previous approaches along with a significantly simplified analysis.

1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of Statistics & Data Science, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Ojash Neopane
<oneopane@andrew.cmu.edu>.

2. We perform simulations that demonstrate that our theoretical improvements translate into empirical improvements, especially in the small sample regime, which
is critical for applications such as randomized clinical
trials.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

