Safe Delta: Consistently Preserving Safety when Fine-Tuning LLMs
on Diverse Datasets

100

Abstract

BEA-10%
SafeInstr-10%
Fine-tuned Model
Original Model
Safe Delta (Our)

80

ASR (%)

Large language models (LLMs) have shown great
potential as general-purpose AI assistants across
various domains. To fully leverage this potential
in specific applications, many companies provide
fine-tuning API services, enabling users to upload
their own data for LLM customization. However,
fine-tuning services introduce a new safety threat:
user-uploaded data, whether harmful or benign,
can break the model’s alignment, leading to unsafe outputs. Moreover, existing defense methods
struggle to address the diversity of fine-tuning
datasets (e.g., varying sizes, tasks), often sacrificing utility for safety or vice versa. To address this
issue, we propose Safe Delta, a safety-aware posttraining defense method that adjusts the delta parameters (i.e., the parameter change before and after fine-tuning). Specifically, Safe Delta estimates
the safety degradation, selects delta parameters
to maximize utility while limiting overall safety
loss, and applies a safety compensation vector to
mitigate residual safety loss. Through extensive
experiments on four diverse datasets with varying settings, our approach consistently preserves
safety while ensuring that the utility gain from
benign datasets remains unaffected.

60
40
20
0

50

75

100

125

150

175

Harmful Dataset Size

200

Utility of Benign Fine-Tuning (F1)

Ning Lu 1 2 Shengcai Liu 1 Jiahao Wu 1 3 Weiyu Chen 2 Zhirui Zhang 4 Yew-Soon Ong 5 6 Qi Wang 7 Ke Tang 1
0.50
0.45
0.40

Safe LoRA
Resta
Original Model
Fine-tuned Model
Safe Delta (Our)

0.35
0.30
0

20

40

60

80

ASR of Harmful Fine-Tuning (%)

Figure 1. Existing defense methods struggle when fine-tuning
on diverse datasets, causing insufficient protection or utility
loss. Left: Data-based methods (BEA, SafeInstr) with 10% augmented safe examples fail to maintain safety as the size of harmful
fine-tuning datasets grows. Right: Weight modification methods
(Safe LoRA, Resta) fail to balance the utility gained from benign
fine-tuning with the need to preserve safety against harmful finetuning. ASR represents Attack Success Rate, where a higher value
indicates lower safety.

tion of models through fine-tuning is highly desirable. Many
companies provide a fine-tuning API to support fine-tuning
with user-provided data, such as OpenAI (Peng et al., 2024).
However, offering a fine-tuning service introduces new security threats. Recent works have demonstrated the unexpected vulnerability of aligned LLMs during fine-tuning (Qi
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023). The safety guardrails can be
dramatically compromised by fine-tuning with maliciously
crafted data, or even benign data. As a result, service users
could upload harmful or uncleaned benign data to degrade a
model’s safety, producing outputs that violate policy guidelines. Since providers remain responsible for these outputs,
they urgently need strategies to ensure safety.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed AI innovations, serving as critical foundations for a wide range
of real-world applications, e.g., ChatGPT (Achiam et al.,
2023). In practice, to fully tailor LLMs for specific use
cases, such as enhancing task performance, the customiza-

Furthermore, fine-tuning services often encounter diverse
datasets in practice, e.g., different sizes or task types. Service providers ideally need a defense method that universally works across all scenarios, without sacrificing the
utility gains from benign datasets. However, as illustrated
in Figure 1, existing defense methods struggle with this
goal. Data-based approach, which proportionally augment
fine-tuning datasets with safety examples (Bianchi et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024), degrade in effectiveness as the
size of harmful datasets grows. Weight modification methods (Bhardwaj et al., 2024; Hsu et al., 2024) struggle to
balance the trade-off: enhancing utility from benign fine-

1
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of CSE, SUSTech. 2 Department
of CSE, HKUST. 3 Department of CSE, PolyU. 4 Huawei Technologies CO. 5 CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR. 6 College of Computing and
Data Science, NTU. 7 Department of CSE, SUSTech. Correspondence to: Shengcai Liu <liusc3@sustech.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

