Adapter Naturally Serves as Decoupler for
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Jintao Tong 1 Ran Ma 1 Yixiong ZouB 1 Guangyao Chen 2 Yuhua Li 1 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract
Cross-domain few-shot segmentation (CD-FSS)
is proposed to pre-train the model on a sourcedomain dataset with sufficient samples, and then
transfer the model to target-domain datasets
where only a few samples are available for efficient fine-tuning. There are majorly two challenges in this task: (1) the domain gap and (2)
fine-tuning with scarce data. To solve these challenges, we revisit the adapter-based methods, and
discover an intriguing insight not explored in
previous works: the adapter not only helps the
fine-tuning of downstream tasks but also naturally
serves as a domain information decoupler. Then,
we delve into this finding for an interpretation, and
find the model’s inherent structure could lead to a
natural decoupling of domain information. Building upon this insight, we propose the Domain Feature Navigator (DFN), which is a structure-based
decoupler instead of loss-based ones like current
works, to capture domain-specific information,
thereby directing the model’s attention towards
domain-agnostic knowledge. Moreover, to prevent the potential excessive overfitting of DFN
during the source-domain training, we further design the SAM-SVN method to constrain DFN
from learning sample-specific knowledge. On target domains, we freeze the model and fine-tune
the DFN to learn target-specific knowledge specific. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method surpasses the state-of-the-art method in
CD-FSS significantly by 2.69% and 4.68% MIoU
in 1-shot and 5-shot scenarios, respectively.

Figure 1: Cross-domain few-shot segmentation (CD-FSS)
aims to transfer the source-domain-trained model to target domains for efficient learning with scarce data. By
inserting adapters into the common network structure (e.g.,
HSNet) for CD-FSS, we find an insight not explored in
previous works: adapter naturally serves as a domain information decoupler based on its structure instead of training
losses, which “grabs” domain information from the encoder+decoder structure and encourages the model to learn
domain-agnostic information on the source domain.
et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2017; Yuan et al., 2020) have driven
the rapid progress of large vision models (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020; Kirillov et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024), resulting in
impressive segmentation task outcomes. However, when
applied to downstream tasks, these models face significant
challenges when there is a substantial distributional difference between upstream pretraining data and downstream
data, where collecting downstream data may be difficult. To
address this issue, the Cross Domain Few-Shot Segmentation (CD-FSS) task (Lei et al., 2022) has been introduced
(see Figure 1 top). CD-FSS involves pre-train a model
on a source-domain dataset and then adapting it to generate pixel-level predictions for unseen categories in targetdomain datasets with only a few annotated samples, which
still remains challenging.

1. Introduction
In recent years, advancements in large-scale annotated
datasets and deep neural networks (Chen et al., 2014; Long
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Peking University. Correspondence to: B Yixiong Zou <yixiongz@hust.edu.cn>.

There are majorly two challenges in the CD-FSS task: (1) a
huge domain gap between source and target domains, making it difficult for the generalization from the source dataset
to the target dataset; and (2) extremely limited target domain

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

