Larger or Smaller Reward Margins to Select Preferences for LLM Alignment?

Kexin Huang 1 Junkang Wu 1 Ziqian Chen 2 Xue Wang 2 Jinyang Gao 2 Bolin Ding 2 Jiancan Wu 1
Xiangnan He 1 Xiang Wang 1

Abstract

Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020), which involves
iterative LLM fine-tuning and reward model training. To
address the complexity inherent in this multi-stage training
process, several offline methods — such as DPO (Rafailov
et al., 2024) and SimPO (Meng et al., 2024) — have been
proposed. They directly align LLMs using a static offline
preference dataset {(x, yw , yl )}, where yw and yl denote the
preferred (winning) and less preferred (losing) responses to
the input prompt x, respectively. Nevertheless, due to the
offline nature, these methods rely heavily on the quality of
the preference dataset, which can substantially impact the
alignment process (Liu et al., 2024a; Tajwar et al., 2024;
Xiong et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024).

Preference learning is critical for aligning large
language models (LLMs) with human values,
with the quality of preference datasets playing
a crucial role in this process. While existing
metrics primarily assess data quality based on
either explicit or implicit reward margins, their
single-margin focus often leads to contradictory
evaluations for the same data. To address this
issue, we propose a new metric of alignment potential, MAP , which integrates both margins to
quantify the gap from the model’s current implicit reward margin to the target explicit reward
margin, thereby estimating the model’s potential to align on the preference data. Empirical
results demonstrate that training on the data selected by MAP consistently enhances alignment
performance, surpassing existing metrics across
different base models and optimization objectives.
Furthermore, our method can be extended to selfplay data generation frameworks, where we use
this metric to identify high-quality data within the
self-generated content by LLMs. Under this data
generation scenario, our method surpasses current
state-of-the-art methods across various training
settings and demonstrates continuous improvements with increasing dataset size and training
iterations.

Recent research has focused on improving LLM alignment
by enhancing the quality of preference datasets, employing
strategies such as selecting high-quality data for training
(Khaki et al., 2024; Muldrew et al., 2024; Morimura et al.,
2024) and re-weighting the loss based on data quality (Xu
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b; Wu et al., 2024). These
approaches primarily rely on two metrics to assess the quality of preference pair (x, yw , yl ) in the offline dataset: the
explicit reward margin metric (Wang et al., 2024b):
Mr (x, yw , yl ) = |r(x, yw ) − r(x, yl )|,
based on the explicit reward r(x, ·) provided by an external
reward model; and the implicit reward margin metric (Yang
et al., 2024; Muldrew et al., 2024):
Mπ (x, yw , yl ) = |r̂θ (x, yw ) − r̂θ (x, yl )|,

1. Introduction
Learning from human feedback is essential for aligning
large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023) with human preference, ensuring they are helpful, honest, and harmless (Askell et al., 2021). A standard
method to achieve such alignment is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017;

based on the implicit reward (Rafailov et al., 2024)
θ (·|x)
r̂θ (x, ·) = β log ππref
(·|x) derived by the LLM policy πθ (·|x)
and a reference policy πref (·|x). While it has been demonstrated that selecting data with larger explicit reward margins (Wang et al., 2024b; Ye et al., 2024) or smaller implicit
reward margins (Yang et al., 2024) for training can improve
alignment performance, these two metrics could provide
conflicting guidance for the same data. To illustrate this conflict, we present two examples from the preference dataset
used in SimPO (Figure 1a), where the same preference pair
is deemed high quality by one metric but low quality by
the other. Such inconsistency in data quality evaluations
naturally raises a critical question:

1
MoE Key Lab of BIPC, University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, China 2 Independent Researcher. Correspondence
to: Xiangnan He <xiangnanhe@gmail.com>, Xiang Wang <xiangwang1223@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

