Revisiting Continuity of Image Tokens for Cross-Domain Few-shot Learning

Shuai Yi 1 2 Yixiong ZouB 1 Yuhua LiB 1 Ruixuan LiB 1

Abstract
Vision Transformer (ViT) has achieved remarkable success due to its large-scale pretraining on
general domains, but it still faces challenges when
applying it to downstream distant domains that
have only scarce training data, which gives rise to
the Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL)
task. Inspired by Self-Attention’s insensitivity to
token orders, we find an interesting phenomenon
neglected in current works: disrupting the continuity of image tokens (i.e., making pixels not
smoothly transited across patches) in ViT leads to
a noticeable performance decline in the general
(source) domain but only a marginal decrease in
downstream target domains. This questions the
role of image tokens’ continuity in ViT’s generalization under large domain gaps. In this paper,
we delve into this phenomenon for an interpretation. We find continuity aids ViT in learning
larger spatial patterns, which are harder to transfer than smaller ones, enlarging domain distances.
Meanwhile, it implies that only smaller patterns
within each patch could be transferred under extreme domain gaps. Based on this interpretation,
we further propose a simple yet effective method
for CDFSL that better disrupts the continuity of
image tokens, encouraging the model to rely less
on large patterns and more on smaller ones. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of our
method in reducing domain gaps and outperforming state-of-the-art works. Codes and models are
available at https://github.com/shuaiyi308/ReCIT.

Figure 1. (a) Four approaches are utilized to disrupt the continuity
of image tokens, i.e., making the pixels not smoothly transited
across patches. (b) We find an interesting phenomenon: although
disrupting the continuity of image tokens in the source domain
has a substantial impact on the performance of ViT-based models,
the model’s performance in the target domain, which undergoes
an equivalent level of continuity disruption, is only marginally
affected. In this paper, we will delve into this phenomenon for
an interpretation, explore the role of image tokens’ continuity in
model generalization, and propose methods based on it for better
cross-domain few-shot learning.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) has achieved great success across
numerous tasks (Yuan et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022) because
of its ability to learn from large-scale datasets (Naseer et al.,
2021), which makes it a prevailing option for downstream
applications by generalizing an upstream-pretrained ViT to
downstream expert tasks. However, in real-world scenarios, downstream tasks can be in domains distant from upstream large-scale datasets, and it may not be easy for downstream tasks to collect sufficient training samples, which
makes it challenging for the generalization and finetuning of
ViT (Zou et al., 2022; 2024b). To mitigate this issue, CrossDomain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) has been proposed,
aiming to transfer general knowledge from source domains,
such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), to target domains,
like medical datasets (Mohanty et al., 2016), that possess
only a scarcity of training samples (Oh et al., 2022).

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Yixiong Zou
<yixiongz@hust.edu.cn>, Yuhua Li <idcliyuhua@hust.edu.cn>,
Ruixuan Li <rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, the generalization of ViT under large domain
1

