Tensor Decomposition Based Memory-Efficient Incremental Learning

Yuhang Li 1 Guoxu Zhou 1 2 Zhenhao Huang 1 Xinqi Chen 1 Yuning Qiu 3 Qibin Zhao 3 1

Abstract

world, data is continuously generated and constantly changing (Gomes et al., 2017), resulting in a consistent delay
in incorporating new knowledge by those advanced models (e.g., large language models such as GPT-4 (Achiam
et al., 2023)). To address this, researchers have turned to
a promising approach known as “Class-Incremental Learning” (CIL) (Masana et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023b). CIL
aims to learn from streaming data continually without forgetting previously learned. Despite this vision, when the
model directly trains on new data, it tends to forget a substantial amount of previously captured knowledge, leading
to irreversible performance degradation—a phenomenon
known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989; Robins, 1993). Therefore, effectively combating catastrophic forgetting is the central challenge in developing CIL
methods.

Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) has gained considerable attention due to its capacity to accommodate new classes during learning. Replay-based
methods demonstrate state-of-the-art performance
in CIL but suffer from high memory consumption
to save a set of old exemplars for revisiting. To
address this challenge, many memory-efficient
replay methods have been developed by exploiting image compression techniques. However, the
gains are often bittersweet when pixel-level compression methods are used. Here, we present a
simple yet efficient approach that employs tensor
decomposition to address these limitations. This
method fully exploits the low intrinsic dimensionality and pixel correlation of images to achieve
high compression efficiency while preserving sufficient discriminative information, significantly
enhancing performance. We also introduce a hybrid exemplar selection strategy to improve the
representativeness and diversity of stored exemplars. Extensive experiments across datasets with
varying resolutions consistently demonstrate that
our approach substantially boosts the performance
of baseline methods, showcasing strong generalization and robustness.

Replay-based methods (Rebuffi et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz &
Ranzato, 2017; Isele & Cosgun, 2018; Zhao et al., 2020;
Bang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022a), inspired by human
learning processes (Robins, 1993; Kumaran et al., 2016;
Kudithipudi et al., 2022), have demonstrated state-of-theart performance in various incremental learning scenarios.
These methods explicitly store a subset of previously encountered data (exemplars) in memory. When training on
new tasks, the model can revisit these exemplars to help
mitigate catastrophic forgetting. While intuition suggests
that storing more old exemplars could enhance performance,
practical constraints, e.g., fixed memory capacity (Krempl
et al., 2014; Rebuffi et al., 2017), restrict only a few data can
be kept for replay. Consequently, there is a severe imbalance
between new and old data, with the training process always
dominated by new ones.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has achieved remarkable advancements, with neural networks reaching or even surpassing human-level performance in many domains (Silver et al.,
2016; Jumper et al., 2021). Traditionally, deep networks
rely heavily on offline training, requiring multiple epochs
over a static, pre-collected dataset. However, in the open

To alleviate the above problem, various Memory-Efficient
Replay Methods (Wang et al., 2024) have been proposed.
For instance, MECIL (Zhao et al., 2021) proposes using
low-fidelity samples instead of the original ones to transfer
old class knowledge. CIM (Luo et al., 2023) suggested
downsampling non-discriminative pixels (e.g., background)
while retaining discriminative pixels (e.g., foreground) in the
original image. MAE-CIL (Zhai et al., 2023) demonstrates
that Masked Autoencoders (MAE) (He et al., 2022) are
efficient incremental learners, which store random image
patches as exemplars and they can reconstruct high-quality
images from only partial information for replay. Although

1
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, CHINA 2 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Detection
and the Internet of Things in Manufacturing, Ministry of Education, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, JAPAN. Correspondence to: Guoxu Zhou
<gx.zhou@gdut.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

