Generation from Noisy Examples

Ananth Raman * 1 Vinod Raman * 2

Abstract

in the limit (Gold, 1967), introduced a theoretical model
of language generation called “Language Generation in the
Limit.” In this model, there is a countable set U of strings
and a countable language family C = {L1 , L2 , . . . }, where
Li ⊆ U for all i ∈ N. An adversary picks a language
K ∈ C and begins to enumerate the strings one by one to
the player in rounds t = 1, 2, . . . . After observing the string
wt in round t ∈ N, the player guesses a string ŵt ∈ U in the
hope that ŵt ∈ K \ {w1 , . . . , wt }. The player has generated
from K in the limit, if there exists a finite time step t ∈ N
such that for all s ≥ t, we have that ŵs ∈ K \{w1 , . . . , ws }.
The class C is generatable in the limit, if the player can generate from all K ∈ C. Unlike language identification in the
limit, Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024) prove that generation in the limit is possible for every countable language
family C.

We continue to study the learning-theoretic foundations of generation by extending the results
from Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024) and Li
et al. (2024) to account for noisy example streams.
In the noiseless setting of Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024) and Li et al. (2024), an adversary
picks a hypothesis from a binary hypothesis class
and provides a generator with a sequence of its
positive examples. The goal of the generator is to
eventually output new, unseen positive examples.
In the noisy setting, an adversary still picks a hypothesis and a sequence of its positive examples.
But, before presenting the stream to the generator,
the adversary inserts a finite number of negative
examples. Unaware of which examples are noisy,
the goal of the generator is to still eventually output new, unseen positive examples. In this paper,
we provide necessary and sufficient conditions for
when a binary hypothesis class can be noisily generatable. We provide such conditions with respect
to various constraints on the number of distinct
examples that need to be seen before perfect generation of positive examples. Interestingly, for
finite and countable classes we show that generatability is largely unaffected by the presence of a
finite number of noisy examples.

Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024)’s positive result has
spawned a surge of new work, extending the results of
Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024) in various ways (Kalavasis et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024; Charikar & Pabbaraju, 2024;
Kalavasis et al., 2024a). Of particular interest to us is the
work by Li et al. (2024). They frame the results of Kleinberg
& Mullainathan (2024) through a learning-theoretic lens by
taking the language family C to be a binary hypothesis class
H ⊆ {0, 1}X defined over some countable instance space
X . By doing so, Li et al. (2024) identify stronger notions of
generatability, termed “uniform” 1 and “non-uniform” generatability, and provide characterizations of which classes
are uniformly and non-uniformly generatable in terms of
new combinatorial dimensions.

1. Introduction
Generation is an important paradigm in machine learning
with promising applications to natural language processing
(Wolf et al., 2020), computer vision (Khan et al., 2022),
and computational chemistry (Vanhaelen et al., 2020). In
contrast to its practical applications, a strong theoretical
foundation of generation is largely missing from literature.
Recently, Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024), inspired by the
seminal work of E Mark Gold on language identification

A commonality of Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024) and
its follow-up work is the assumption that the adversary
presents to the player a “noiseless” stream of examples –
one where every example/string must be contained in the
hypothesis/language chosen by the adversary. In practice,
such an assumption is unrealistic, as one would still like
to generate well even if a few examples in the dataset are
imperfect. For example, Large Language Models (LLM) are
often trained using the potentially hallucinatory outputs of
other LLMs (Burns et al., 2023; Briesch et al., 2023). More
generally, one might want a generative model to be robust

*

Equal contribution 1 Bridgewater-Raritan Regional High
School 2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Correspondence
to: Vinod Raman <vkraman@umich.edu>.

1
Uniform generatability was also informally considered by
Kleinberg & Mullainathan (2024)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

