ParallelComp: Parallel Long-Context Compressor for Length Extrapolation
Jing Xiong * 1 Jianghan Shen * 2 Chuanyang Zheng 3 Zhongwei Wan 4 Chenyang Zhao 5 Chiwun Yang 6
Fanghua Ye 7 Hongxia Yang 8 Lingpeng Kong 1 Ngai Wong 1

Attention score

Extrapolating ultra-long contexts (text length >
128K) remains a major challenge for large language models (LLMs), as most training-free extrapolation methods are not only severely limited
by memory bottlenecks, but also suffer from the
attention sink, which restricts their scalability and
effectiveness in practice. In this work, we propose PARALLEL C OMP, a parallel long-context
compression method that effectively overcomes
the memory bottleneck, enabling 8B-parameter
LLMs to extrapolate from 8K to 128K tokens
on a single A100 80GB GPU in a training-free
setting. PARALLEL C OMP splits the input into
chunks, dynamically evicting redundant chunks
and irrelevant tokens, supported by a parallel
KV cache eviction mechanism. Importantly,
we present a systematic theoretical and empirical analysis of attention biases in parallel attention—including the attention sink, recency bias,
and middle bias—and reveal that these biases exhibit distinctive patterns under ultra-long context
settings. We further design a KV cache eviction
technique to mitigate this phenomenon. Experimental results show that PARALLEL C OMP enables an 8B model (trained on 8K context) to
achieve 91.17% of GPT-4’s performance under
ultra-long contexts, outperforming closed-source
models such as Claude-2 and Kimi-Chat. We
achieve a 1.76x improvement in chunk throughput, thereby achieving a 23.50x acceleration in
the prefill stage with negligible performance
loss and pave the way for scalable and robust
ultra-long contexts extrapolation in LLMs. We
release the code at https://github.com/
menik1126/ParallelComp.

Attention score

Abstract

Token ID

Token ID

(a) Normal Attention Distribution

(b) Parallel Attention Distribution

(c) Normal Attention

(d) Parallel Attention

Figure 1: Upper: Distribution of two types of attention.
Lower: Heatmaps of the two types of attention. The attention head shown here represents the distribution change
between normal attention and parallel attention for the 21st
head in layer 1, using the Llama-2-7b-chat-hf model.

1. Introduction
Extrapolating long-contexts is a core capability of large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023; Dubey et al., 2024). Achieving this requires effective
mechanisms for modeling positional relationships over extended sequences. Rotary position embedding (RoPE) (Su,
2023) are commonly employed in LLMs due to their ability
to efficiently encode relative positional information. However, extrapolating to lengths beyond the training range during inference remains a significant challenge. While retraining or fine-tuning the entire model is one possible solution,
it is not always feasible, particularly in resource-constrained
environments (Press et al., 2022; Chi et al., 2022; Peng et al.,
2023; Fu et al., 2024). This limitation prevents RoPE-based
models from generalizing to longer sequences without additional training, making them less adaptable to scenarios
requiring inference on inputs of unforeseen lengths.

*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Hong Kong, 2 Nanjing
University, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 The Ohio
State University, 5 The University of California, Los Angeles, 6 Sun
Yat-Sen University, 7 Tencent, 8 Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
Correspondence to: Jing Xiong < junexiong@connect.hku.hk>.

To address this, many researchers explore training-free approaches for context length extrapolation. One prominent
direction involves incorporating NTK-based methods (LocalLLaMA, 2023b;a; bloc97, 2023), which distinguish dimensions of different frequencies by their wavelengths and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

