An Architecture Search Framework for Inference-Time Techniques

Jon Saad-Falcon 1 Adrian Gamarra Lafuente 1 Shlok Natarajan 1 Nahum Maru 1 Hristo Todorov 1
Etash Guha 2 E. Kelly Buchanan 1 Mayee Chen 1 Neel Guha 1 Christopher Ré 1 Azalia Mirhoseini 1

Abstract
Inference-time techniques, such as repeated
sampling or iterative revisions, are emerging as
powerful ways to enhance large-language models
(LLMs) at test time. However, best practices for
developing systems that combine these techniques
remain underdeveloped due to our limited
understanding of the utility of each technique
across models and tasks, the interactions between
them, and the massive search space for combining
them. To address these challenges, we introduce
A RCHON, a modular and automated framework for
optimizing the process of selecting and combining
inference-time techniques and LLMs. Given a
compute budget and a set of available LLMs,
A RCHON explores a large design space to discover
optimized configurations tailored to target benchmarks. It can design custom or general-purpose
architectures that advance the Pareto frontier of
accuracy vs. maximum token budget compared
to top-performing baselines. Across instructionfollowing, reasoning, and coding tasks, we show
that A RCHON can leverage additional inference
compute budget to design systems that outperform
frontier models such as OpenAI’s o1, GPT-4o, and
Claude 3.5 Sonnet by an average of 15.1%.

Figure 1: A RCHON’s Performance Effectively Scales with
Increasing Inference Budget. Individual dataset analysis
included in Figure 8.

ensemble are queried in parallel, their responses are ranked,
and the best ones are fused into a single, higher quality output,
respectively (Jiang et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2024a). Other
types of inference-time techniques are based on querying a
single LLM successively (via repeated sampling) and using
a voting strategy or unit tests to select the top generation
(Brown et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a).
Recent work has made progress towards building robust
inference-time architectures: systems composed of one or
more large language models (LLMs) leveraging inferencetime techniques. Examples include Mixture-of-Agents
(MoA) (Wang et al., 2024a) and LLM-Blender (Jiang et al.,
2023b), as well as single-model systems like ADAS (Hu et al.,
2024) and AFlow (Zhang et al., 2024). However, our experiments show that these top-performing baselines have limitations in compute utilization and task generalization. (see
Section 4.2). We argue that designing effective and generalizable inference-time architectures requires the following:

1. Introduction
Inference-time techniques—strategies that use additional
compute during model inference—are gaining traction as
effective methods for improving model capabilities. LLMs,
such as OpenAI’s o1 (OpenAI, 2024), QwQ (Team, 2024),
and Sky-T1 (Team, 2025), utilize such techniques to translate
additional inference compute into better performance across
a broad set of tasks. Example techniques include generation
ensembling, ranking, and fusion, where models in the

• Understanding the Utilities of Inference-Time Techniques: Inference-time architectures typically delegate
their additional inference budget towards more model
sampling calls (Chen et al., 2024; Brown et al., 2024),
which can be effective for math and coding tasks. Other
tasks, such as following instructions and reasoning,
have been shown to benefit from additional techniques,

1

Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Jon Saad-Falcon
<jonsaadfalcon@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

