Optimal Information Retention for Time-Series Explanations

Jinghang Yue 1 Jing Wang 1 2 Lu Zhang 1 Shuo Zhang 1 Da Li 1 Zhaoyang Ma 1 Youfang Lin 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
The rapid advancements in deep learning have greatly improved the analysis of time-series data, excelling particularly in capturing intricate temporal patterns and managing
high-throughput datasets. However, their inherently multilayered and nonlinear architecture often renders them blackbox, prompting significant concerns regarding interpretability and reliability in sensitive domains, such as healthcare
(Alqaraawi et al., 2020) and finance (Mokhtari et al., 2019).
For instance, explaining the temporal patterns and complex
dynamics underpinning deep model predictions is essential
for understanding the physiological representation of diseases and enabling effective early warning systems (Di Martino & Delmastro, 2023).

Explaining deep models for time-series data is
crucial for identifying key patterns in sensitive
domains, such as healthcare and finance. However, due to the lack of a unified optimization
criterion, existing explanation methods often suffer from redundancy and incompleteness, where
irrelevant patterns are included or key patterns are
missed in explanations. To address this challenge,
we propose the Optimal Information Retention
Principle, where conditional mutual information
defines minimizing redundancy and maximizing
completeness as optimization objectives. We then
derive the corresponding objective function theoretically. As a practical framework, we introduce an explanation framework ORTE, learning
a binary mask to eliminate redundant information while mining temporal patterns of explanations. We decouple the discrete mapping process
to ensure the stability of gradient propagation,
while employing contrastive learning to achieve
precise filtering of explanatory patterns through
the mask, thereby realizing a trade-off between
low redundancy and high completeness. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that
the proposed principle significantly improves the
accuracy and completeness of explanations compared to baseline methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/moon2yue/ORTE public.

Research on improving the interpretability of deep models
for time series signals primarily focuses on local explanations, aiming to identify critical temporal patterns by locating significant positions in time series signals. These
approaches have attracted considerable interest due to their
ability to provide intuitive, data-driven insights, highlighting
which features are essential or irrelevant for specific downstream tasks. Some existing local explanation methods are
adaptations of approaches originally developed for computer
vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP). However, Ismail et al. (2020) illustrates that saliency-based methods, such as Integrated Gradients (Baehrens et al., 2010),
Deep SHAP (Scott et al., 2017), and Feature Occlusion
(Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), fail to reliably and accurately identify the temporal variation in feature importance within time
series data. Others are tailored specifically for time-series
data. For example, Dynamask (Crabbé & Van Der Schaar,
2021) incorporates temporal dependencies by learning the
effects of perturbation operators, enabling it to generate
instance-specific importance scores for each feature at every
time step. TIMEX (Queen et al., 2024) trains a surrogate
model to replicate the predictive behavior of a black-box
model, enabling the identification of important positions
and temporal patterns. However, these heuristic methods
lack a unified optimization framework and often overlook
the requirements for explanation completeness or low redundancy, posing challenges for identifying critical temporal
patterns. As illustrated in Figure 1, the mixing of redundant
patterns makes critical patterns unable to be highlighted,
while incompleteness may cause missing patterns or even

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong
University, Beijing, China 2 Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation (Beijing Jiaotong University),
Ministry of Education, Beijing, China 3 Beijing Key Laboratory of
Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Jing Wang <wj@bjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

