Contrastive Visual Data Augmentation

Yu Zhou 1 * Bingxuan Li 1 * Mohan Tang 1 * Xiaomeng Jin 2 Te-Lin Wu 1 Kuan-Hao Huang 2 3
Heng Ji 2 Kai-Wei Chang 1 Nanyun Peng 1

Abstract
Large multimodal models (LMMs) often struggle to recognize novel concepts, as they rely on
pre-trained knowledge and have limited ability
to capture subtle visual details. Domain-specific
knowledge gaps in training also make them prone
to confusing visually similar, commonly misrepresented, or low-resource concepts. To help
LMMs better align nuanced visual features with
language, improving their ability to recognize and
reason about novel or rare concepts, we propose
a Contrastive visual Data Augmentation (CoDA)
strategy. CoDA extracts key contrastive textual
and visual features of target concepts against the
known concepts they are misrecognized as, and
then uses multimodal generative models to produce targeted synthetic data. Automatic filtering
of extracted features and augmented images is implemented to guarantee their quality, as verified
by human annotators. We show the effectiveness
of CoDA on low-resource concept and diverse
scene recognition datasets including INaturalist
and SUN. We additionally collect NovelSpecies, a
benchmark dataset consisting of newly discovered
animal species that are guaranteed to be unseen
by LMMs. LLaVA-1.6 1-shot updating results on
these three datasets show CoDA significantly improves SOTA visual data augmentation strategies
by 12.3% (NovelSpecies), 5.1% (SUN), and 6.0%
(iNat) absolute gains in accuracy. Code and data
at contrastive-visual-data-augmentation.github.io

(b) Confusing Concept
Resupply Base

African Leopard

Wholesale Store

Bushy tail,

Elongated Spotted
slim body, marks,
…
Round ears,
…

Rosette
Patterns,
Muscular
build,
…

Plain décor,

Textual

Visual

Cardboard Carts,
boxes,
Shelves,
…
People in
uniform,
…

Colorful
décor,
People in
everyday
cloth,
…

CoDA
Generative
Data Aug

Clouded Tiger Cat

Resupply Base

Figure 1. CoDA uses diffusion-generated synthetic data to help
LMMs recognize novel and confusing concepts in the wild. The
“Clouded Tiger Cat (L. pardinoides)” is a new animal species first
described in April 2024, while ”Resupply Base” is an example of a
confusing concept for LMMs. Based on model failures (collected
from GPT4o-2024-08-06 and LLaVA-NeXT 34B), CoDA extracts
contrastive visual and textual features to generate synthetic image
data for model updating.

1. Introduction

remains a challenge for current state-of-the-art proprietary
and open-source models to robustly recognize novel visual
concepts (e.g.“Clouded Tiger Cat” Figure 1a) and confusing
/ low-resource / commonly misrepresented visual concepts
(e.g. “Resupply Base” Figure 1b).

Recent advancements in multimodal pre-training (OpenAI,
2023; Google, 2023; Hurst et al., 2024) and visual instruction tuning (Liu et al., 2023b;a; 2024c) have enabled impressive LMM abilities. However, as shown in Figure 1, it still
3

(a) Novel Concept
Clouded Tiger Cat

* Equal contribution, interchangeable ordering. 1 UCLA 2 UIUC
TAMU. Correspondence to: Yu Zhou <yuzhou@cs.ucla.edu>.

In order to help models better acquire new visual concepts
and distinguish confusable concepts, existing approaches
straightforwardly 1). Fine-tune text decoder on new textual
corpora to expand the concept base; and 2). Fine-tune both
vision and text components on new web image-text pairs

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

