Improved Learning via k-DTW: A Novel Dissimilarity Measure for Curves

Amer Krivošija 1 Alexander Munteanu 1 2 André Nusser 3 Chris Schwiegelshohn 4

Abstract

handwritten characters, can be sampled differently and can
therefore look very different at the data level, even though
they are similar in content and visual appearance.

This paper introduces k-Dynamic Time Warping
(k-DTW), a novel dissimilarity measure for polygonal curves. k-DTW has stronger metric properties than Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) and is
more robust to outliers than the Fréchet distance,
which are the two gold standards of dissimilarity
measures for polygonal curves. We show interesting properties of k-DTW and give an exact
algorithm as well as a (1 + ε)-approximation algorithm for k-DTW by a parametric search for
the k-th largest matched distance. We prove the
first dimension-free learning bounds for curves
and further learning theoretic results. k-DTW not
only admits smaller sample size than DTW for the
problem of learning the median of curves, where
some factors depending on the curves’ complexity
m are replaced by k, but we also show a surprising separation on the associated Rademacher and
Gaussian complexities: k-DTW admits strictly
√
smaller bounds than DTW, by a factor Ω̃( m)
when k ≪ m. We complement our theoretical
findings with an experimental illustration of the
benefits of using k-DTW for clustering and nearest neighbor classification.

Dissimilarity measures that involve transformations of one
curve into another are therefore studied across the literature.
Prominent examples are the Fréchet distance, arguably the
most popular measure in computational geometry, or the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) distance, which is often used
in the context of machine learning. Both can be computed
in near-quadratic time in terms of the number of vertices
representing the two curves (Alt & Godau, 1995; Eiter &
Mannila, 1994; Vintsyuk, 1968). There is also evidence
that the Fréchet distance as well as DTW cannot be computed in strongly subquadratic time, based on conditional
lower bounds that rely on widely accepted complexity theoretic conjectures (Bringmann, 2014; Bringmann & Mulzer,
2016; Abboud et al., 2015; Bringmann & Künnemann, 2015;
Buchin et al., 2019c). Hence, it is widely believed that only
small polylogarithmic improvements can be achieved (Agarwal et al., 2014; Gold & Sharir, 2018) over the quadratic
complexity of the natural dynamic programming approach.
Both dissimilarity measures have their caveats: while the
Fréchet distance is a metric, it is however very sensitive
to outlier vertices, to such a degree that the existence of a
single outlier completely determines the distance. DTW is
much less outlier-sensitive, but it is not a metric since it does
not satisfy the triangle inequality, which can be violated by
a large factor that depends on the length of the curve. These
problems can unfavorably affect the outcome when Fréchet
or DTW are applied for clustering or classification.

1. Introduction
Handwriting, panel data, time series, sensor-generated trajectories, and many more types of data are instances of
polygonal curves in Euclidean space. These curves are
input for learning processes, both supervised and unsupervised. To compare and quantify the distance of two curves,
a suitable dissimilarity measure is needed that reflects the
fact that similar curves that represent, for instance, the same

1.1. Our Contributions
We propose a novel dissimilarity measure k-DTW that provides the “best of both worlds”, while generalizing and
interpolating between the Fréchet, and the DTW distance.
k-DTW considers only a small subset of size k comprising the most important part of the transformation between
two curves, and ignores the remaining transformation that
matches only small deviations, which often correspond to
noise. We summarize our main contributions as follows:

1
TU Dortmund, Germany 2 University of Cologne, Germany
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Inria, France 4 Aarhus University,
Denmark. Correspondence to: A. Krivošija <amer.krivosija@tudortmund.de>, A. Munteanu <alexander.munteanu@tudortmund.de>, A. Nusser <andre.nusser@cnrs.fr>, C.
Schwiegelshohn <cschwiegelshohn@gmail.com>.
3

1) We prove that k-DTW provides a strengthened triangle
inequality compared to DTW and it is thus closer to a
proper metric, while retaining some robustness of DTW.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

