W ILD C HAT-50 M: A Deep Dive Into the Role of
Synthetic Data in Post-Training

Benjamin Feuer 1 Chinmay Hegde 1

Abstract

erful tool enabling reasoning models (DeepSeek-AI et al.,
2025). Unfortunately, the open source ecosystem supporting
post-training in general, and data curation in particular, is in
its infancy, with industry labs’ capabilities far outstripping
that of most academic labs (Weber et al., 2024; Feuer et al.,
2024b; Ivison et al., 2023).

Language model (LLM) post-training, from DPO
to distillation, can refine behaviors and unlock
new skills, but the open science supporting these
post-training techniques is still in its infancy. One
limiting factor has been the difficulty of conducting large-scale comparative analyses of synthetic
data generating models and LLM judges. To
close this gap, we introduce W ILD C HAT-50 M,
the largest public chat dataset to date. We extend the existing WildChat dataset to include responses not only from GPT, but from over 50 different open-weight models, ranging in size from
0.5B to 104B parameters. We conduct an extensive comparative analysis and demonstrate the
potential of this dataset by creating R E -W ILD,
our own public SFT mix, which outperforms the
recent Tulu-3 SFT mixture from Allen AI with
only 40% as many samples. Our dataset, samples
and code are available at https://github.
com/penfever/wildchat-50m.

A stark challenge for smaller labs, especially in academia,
has been the difficulty of acquiring publicly available synthetic datasets at large scale. This has posed barriers for
researchers who are interested in conducting careful comparative analyses of the synthetic data quality (SDQ) of
data generating models (DGMs), as measured by standard
academic ground-truth and LLM-as-a-judge benchmarks.
To close this gap and better understand the downstream
effects of DGM choice on synthetic data quality, we develop
W ILD C HAT-50 M, which is the largest and most diverse
publicly available dataset of chat transcripts to date. We also
show that W ILD C HAT-50 M is a particularly effective source
for post-training data for LLMs. Our core contributions in
this work are as follows:
1. We introduce W ILD C HAT-50 M, the largest publicly
available dataset of chat transcripts. Our dataset consists
a vast corpus of synthetically generated chat transcripts
using 50 different open-weight models. ranging in size
from 0.5B to 104B parameters, each participating in over
1M multi-turn conversations. Each model participates
in 2 or 3 turns per conversation on average, resulting
in approximately a dataset comprising over 125 million
chat transcripts in aggregate.
2. We conduct a thorough comparative analysis on the runtime and VRAM efficiency of these models, as well as
analyze the distinctive qualities of different model outputs. Our analysis may inform researchers on how to
scale up post-training data even further in the future.
3. We demonstrate the power of our dataset by using it as
the basis of R E -W ILD, a novel data mix for supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) of LLMs. When we fine-tune Llama3.1 8B Base on R E -W ILD, we show that our models
outperform the SFT mix proposed in Tulu-3 (Lambert
et al., 2024), along with several other existing, strong
SFT baselines on a range of post-training benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Large language model (LLM) post-training encompasses a
broad suite of algorithmic techniques, and is an active area
of current research. Improvements in LLM post-training
have led to many breakthrough accomplishments, ranging
from recent developments in test-time scaling from OpenAI
and Deepseek (OpenAI et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al.,
2025) to new algorithms for efficiently aligning LLMs to
human preferences (Rafailov et al., 2024). All of them
rely on synthetic data during post-training, sometimes in
the form of judgments through LLM judges or pairwise
comparative outputs. More recently, simple SFT on large
model outputs (also called distillation) has proven a pow1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, New York
University, New York City, USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin
Feuer <bf996@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

