N EMOTRON -C ORTEXA: Enhancing LLM Agents for Software Engineering
Tasks via Improved Localization and Solution Diversity

Atefeh Sohrabizadeh * 1 Jialin Song * 1 Mingjie Liu 1 Rajarshi Roy 1 Chankyu Lee 1 Jonathan Raiman 1
Bryan Catanzaro 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant potential in code generation by
following natural language instructions. Unfortunately, crucial real-world software engineering
tasks, such as debugging or repository-level feature implementation, involve processing extensive contexts beyond current LLM context sizes
and performing complex reasoning that is brittle using standard autoregressive decoding. Enhancing LLMs’ performance in these scenarios
requires careful consideration of the contextual
information provided to the model, optimizing
how the model leverages that, and identifying
tools that enable more effective navigation of the
development environment. To address these challenges, we introduce N EMOTRON -C ORTEXA, an
agentic system built on a predefined scaffold that
enhances LLMs’ ability to navigate and reason
efficiently in complex software engineering contexts. Specifically, we develop a novel code embedding model that retrieves the most relevant
files with greater precision, along with a localization agent that refines the granularity of the retrieval process. Additionally, we demonstrate that
providing diverse contextual information and utilizing different prompt formats enable the model
to identify and resolve issues more efficiently.
We evaluate N EMOTRON -C ORTEXA using SWEbench (Jimenez et al., 2023), a benchmark derived
from real-world GitHub issues. Compared to
the widely used Agentless framework (Xia et al.,
2024), N EMOTRON -C ORTEXA achieves a higher
issue resolution rate at a lower cost, highlighting its practical impact in addressing real-world
software engineering challenges.

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs)
have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various
domains, ranging from creative writing to analytical reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022; Gómez-Rodrı́guez
& Williams, 2023; Ahn et al., 2024). The influence of LLMs
on software engineering has been especially widespread and
recognized. Early models showcased their proficiency in
generating syntactically correct code and solving interviewstyle programming questions (Chen et al., 2021; Roziere
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024). Building on
this progress, recent efforts in LLM research on programming have shifted from snippet and function-level generation towards developing LLM coding agents capable of
tackling entire real-world software engineering tasks (Yang
et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Antoniades et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Xie et al., 2025). These
coding agents are equipped to utilize tools commonly used
by human engineers, including Command Line Interfaces
(CLI) and Integrated Development Environments (IDE),
to perform critical tasks such as debugging and applying
patches in a repository. A key benchmark for evaluating the
effectiveness of these LLM agents is SWE-bench (Jimenez
et al., 2023), which features real-world software engineering
problems derived from GitHub issues, aimed at generating
patches that successfully resolve them. The rapid improvements on the SWE-bench leaderboard highlight the growing
interest in building powerful LLM software agents and underscore their potential to automate software engineering
tasks. In this work, we propose several ways to simultaneously enhance the efficiency and accuracy of LLM agents
within this context, and use SWE-bench as a benchmark.
System design decisions play a crucial role in the end-to-end
performance of an LLM software agent, since real-world
software engineering tasks often involve processing a large
code repository and reasoning about relations among modules. A practical example of the impact of system design
can be found in the coding agents of OpenHands (Wang
et al., 2024a) and SWE-Agent (Yang et al., 2024): the authors allow an agent to perform free-form action sequences
guided by system prompts that outline the available action

*

1
Equal contribution
NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Atefeh Sohrabizadeh <asohrabizade@nvidia.com>, Jialin Song <jialins@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

