Instance Correlation Graph-based Naive Bayes

Chengyuan Li 1 Liangxiao Jiang 1 Wenjun Zhang 1 Liangjun Yu 2 Huan Zhang 3

Abstract

an attribute value vector < a1 , a2 , ..., aj , ..., am >, where
aj is the value of x on Aj . Let C represent the class variable
and c represent the value that C takes, Bayesian networks
use Eq. (1) to classify x:

Due to its simplicity, effectiveness and robustness,
naive Bayes (NB) has continued to be one of the
top 10 data mining algorithms. To improve its performance, a large number of improved algorithms
have been proposed in the last few decades. However, in addition to Gaussian naive Bayes (GNB),
there is little work on numerical attributes. At the
same time, none of them takes into account the
correlations among instances. To fill this gap, we
propose a novel algorithm called instance correlation graph-based naive Bayes (ICGNB). Specifically, it first uses original attributes to construct
an instance correlation graph (ICG) to represent
the correlations among instances. Then, it employs a variational graph auto-encoder (VGAE)
to generate new attributes from the constructed
ICG and uses them to augment original attributes.
Finally, it weights each augmented attribute to
alleviate the attribute redundancy and builds GNB
on the weighted attributes. The experimental
results on tens of datasets show that ICGNB
significantly outperforms its deserved competitors. Our codes and datasets are available at
https://github.com/jiangliangxiao/ICGNB.

ĉ(x) = arg max πc P (a1 , a2 , ..., aj , ..., am |c),

(1)

c∈C

where ĉ(x) is the class label of x predicted by Bayesian
networks and πc is the prior probability of c. Because directly estimating P (a1 , a2 , ..., aj , ..., am |c) is an NP-hard
problem (Chickering, 1995), naive Bayes (NB) proposes an
assumption that all attributes are fully independent given the
class, i.e. attribute conditional independence assumption.
Based on this assumption, NB uses Eq. (2) to classify x:
ĉ(x) = arg max πc
c∈C

m
Y

θaj |c ,

(2)

j=1

where θaj |c is the conditional probability of aj given c.
Despite its simplicity, NB has demonstrated remarkable
performance and continued to be one of the top 10 data
mining algorithms (Wu et al., 2008). Nevertheless, the attribute conditional independence assumption is difficult to
hold in reality, which limits the performance of NB. To
mitigate the attribute conditional independence assumption, numerous improved algorithms of NB have been proposed, which can be broadly divided into four categories:
structure-oriented, probability-oriented, attribute-oriented
and instance-oriented algorithms.

1. Introduction
Supervised classification is one of the most fundamental and
significant tasks in data mining (Han et al., 2011). Due to the
explicit interpretability and the powerful expression ability,
Bayesian networks (Pearl, 1989; Friedman et al., 1997; Tang
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2020a) are commonly used in supervised classification. Assume that A1 , A2 , ..., Aj , ..., Am
are m attribute variables, an instance x can be represented as

However, in addition to Gaussian naive Bayes (GNB), there
is little work on numerical attributes. At the same time,
none of them takes into account the correlations among
instances. To address these issues, we propose a novel algorithm called instance correlation graph-based naive Bayes
(ICGNB). Firstly, we construct an instance correlation graph
(ICG) using original attributes to represent the correlations
among instances. Then, we employ a variational graph
auto-encoder (VGAE) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) to generate
new attributes from the constructed ICG and use them to
augment original attributes. Finally, we weight each augmented attribute by maximizing the model’s conditional
log-likelihood (CLL) to alleviate the attribute redundancy
and then build GNB on the weighted attributes. In summary,
the contributions of this paper can be highlighted as:

1
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China 2 College of Computer, Hubei
University of Education, Wuhan 430074, China 3 School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou 450001, China. Correspondence to: Liangxiao Jiang
<ljiang@cug.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

