Non-Asymptotic Length Generalization

Thomas Chen 1 Tengyu Ma 1 Zhiyuan Li 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
The generalization of a trained model from shorter inputs
seen during training time to longer inputs seen at inference
time is a phenomenon called length generalization. The
question of when length generalization is possible is an
important question in the area of language modeling and
reasoning with Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown
et al., 2020). Real-world language understanding often requires handling longer contexts that exceed training-time
input lengths, such as long Chain-of-Thought for reasoning
problems, multi-turn conversations, lengthy documents, or
complex code. Many factors limit the ability to train on
long sequences directly, such as the increasing computational cost and memory requirement of training on longer
sequences and the fact that long sequences are rare. Successful length generalization does not only allow efficient
training for good long-context performance, but also is a
natural test on whether the model has robustly learned the
underlying language or reasoning patterns.

Length generalization is the ability of a learning
algorithm to learn a hypothesis which generalizes
to longer inputs than the inputs in the training
set. In this paper, we provide provable guarantees of length generalization for various classes
of functions in an idealized setting. First, we formalize the framework of non-asymptotic length
generalization, which requires a computable upper bound for the minimum input length that guarantees length generalization, as a function of the
complexity of ground-truth function under some
given complexity measure. We refer to this minimum input length to length generalize as length
complexity. We show the Minimum-Complexity
Interpolator learning algorithm achieves optimal
length complexity. We further show that whether
a function class admits non-asymptotic length generalization is equivalent to the decidability of its
language equivalence problem, which implies that
there is no computable upper bound for the length
complexity of Context-Free Grammars. On the
positive side, we show that the length complexity
of Deterministic Finite Automata is 2n − 2 where
n is the number of states of the ground-truth automaton. Our main results are upper bounds of
length complexity for a subset of a transformerrelated function class called C-RASP (Yang &
Chiang, 2024). We show that the length complexity of 1-layer C-RASP functions is O(T 2 ) when
the ground-truth function has precision T , and
that the length complexity of 2-layer C-RASP
functions is O(T O(K) ) when the ground-truth
function has precision T and K heads.

Prior works study length generalization in a controlled setting where Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are trained
on algorithmic tasks from scratch. In this context, length
generalization has been empirically observed for certain
algorithmic tasks but not others, and it appears that transformers cannot length generalize for most tasks. Tasks that
have been tested are arithmetic tasks like integer addition
(Nogueira et al., 2021; Nye et al., 2021; Anil et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2024), formal-language tasks like PARITY (Anil
et al., 2022), algorithmic tasks in the Chomsky Hierarchy
(Shaw et al., 2021; Delétang et al., 2023; Ruoss et al., 2023),
copying tasks, tasks involving a sequence of integers such
as sorting or finding the mode (Zhou et al., 2023), and deducing the end-assignment of a variable in a block of code
(Anil et al., 2022). Some of these tasks do not exhibit length
generalization in their vanilla form, but do exhibit length
generalization if certain modifications are made to the learning setup. These modifications include modifying the input
and output format (Zhou et al., 2023; 2024), adding positional embeddings (Jelassi et al., 2023), and adding access
to a scratchpad (Nye et al., 2021).

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA 2 Toyota Technological Institute at
Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Thomas Chen
<tchen@cs.stanford.edu>.

On the theoretical side, (Gold, 1967) provides a foundational result in the theory of length generalization, which is
originally stated in a more broad context of language iden-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

