One Example Shown, Many Concepts Known!
Counterexample-Driven Conceptual Reasoning in Mathematical LLMs

Yinghui Li * 1 Jiayi Kuang * 2 Haojing Huang * 1 Zhikun Xu * † 3 4 Xinnian Liang 5 Yi Yu 3 Wenlian Lu 3
Yangning Li 1 6 Xiaoyu Tan † 7 Chao Qu 7 Ying Shen † 2 8 Hai-Tao Zheng 1 6 Philip S. Yu 9

Abstract

We believe that our work offers new perspectives
on the community of mathematical LLMs.

Leveraging mathematical Large Language Models (LLMs) for proof generation is a fundamental
topic in LLMs research. We argue that the ability of current LLMs to prove statements largely
depends on whether they have encountered the relevant proof process during training. This reliance
limits their deeper understanding of mathematical theorems and related concepts. Inspired by
the pedagogical method of “proof by counterexamples” commonly used in human mathematics
education, our work aims to enhance LLMs’ ability to conduct mathematical reasoning and proof
through counterexamples. Specifically, we manually create a high-quality, university-level mathematical benchmark, C OUNTER MATH, which
requires LLMs to prove mathematical statements
by providing counterexamples, thereby assessing their grasp of mathematical concepts. Additionally, we develop a data engineering framework to automatically obtain training data for
further model improvement. Extensive experiments and detailed analyses demonstrate that
C OUNTER MATH is challenging, indicating that
LLMs, such as OpenAI o1, have insufficient
counterexample-driven proof capabilities. Moreover, our exploration into model training reveals
that strengthening LLMs’ counterexample-driven
conceptual reasoning abilities is crucial for improving their overall mathematical capabilities.

1. Introduction
Mathematics, as a fundamental aspect of reasoning, has
garnered significant research interest. Recent studies have
demonstrated that Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit
strong mathematical reasoning abilities (OpenAI, 2023;
Google, 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024; Ying
et al., 2024; Chern et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2024a). Enhancing the mathematical reasoning capabilities
of LLMs has become a prominent and fundamental topic
within the LLMs research community.
Currently, there are two main paradigms for enhancing the
mathematical reasoning capabilities of LLMs. The first
involves synthetic generation based on seed math questions (Yu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a). For example, WizardMath (Luo et al., 2023) introduces a variety of math
instructions to generate math questions of different complexities using GPT-3.5. The second approach leverages
formal mathematical languages to train LLM-based theorem provers, such as Lean 4 (Moura & Ullrich, 2021). For
instance, Draft-Sketch-Prove (Jiang et al., 2023), HunyuanProver (Li et al., 2024c), and Lean-STaR (Lin et al., 2024a)
interact with formal languages through informal proofs, automatic formalization, and natural language thoughts for
theorem proving.
The two methods above enable LLMs to develop problemsolving skills either by training on massive similar problems,
or by gaining proficiency through exposure to similar proof
processes (Mirzadeh et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024b). In
both cases, these approaches enhance LLMs’ mathematical
reasoning abilities through training, where proficiency is
achieved through familiarity, akin to “drill-based” learning
in human mathematics learning. However, relying solely on
intensive-practice by inundating LLMs with math problems
is neither sufficient nor essential for true mathematics learning. In other words, drill-based learning alone does not
foster a deep understanding of mathematical concepts
in either humans or LLMs.

*

Equal contribution.
Tsinghua University. E-mail: liyinghu20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Sun-Yat Sen University 3 School of Mathematical Science, Fudan University 4 ARC Lab, Arizona State University 5 Bytedance
Inc. 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory 7 INFLY TECH (Shanghai) Co.,
Ltd. 8 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fire Science
and Intelligent Emergency Technology, 9 University of Illinois
Chicago. Correspondence to: Ying Shen, Xiaoyu Tan, Zhikun
Xu <sheny76@mail.sysu.edu.cn, txywilliam1993@outlook.com,
zhikunxu@asu.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

