Empower Structure-Based Molecule Optimization with
Gradient Guided Bayesian Flow Networks

Keyue Qiu 1 2 Yuxuan Song 1 2 Jie Yu 3 Hongbo Ma 2 Ziyao Cao 1 2
Zhilong Zhang 4 Yushuai Wu 1 Mingyue Zheng 3 Hao Zhou 1 Wei-Ying Ma 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Structure-based drug design (SBDD) plays a critical role
in drug discovery by identifying three-dimensional (3D)
molecules that are favorable for protein targets (Isert et al.,
2023). While recent SBDD focuses on the initial identification of potential drug candidates, these compounds must
undergo a series of further modifications for optimized properties, a process that is both complex and time-consuming
(Hughes et al., 2011). Therefore, structure-based molecule
optimization (SBMO) has garnered increasing interest in
real-world drug design (Zhou et al., 2024a), emphasizing the
practical need to optimize for specific therapeutic criteria.

Structure-based molecule optimization (SBMO)
aims to optimize molecules with both continuous coordinates and discrete types against protein targets. A promising direction is to exert
gradient guidance on generative models given
their remarkable success in images, but it is challenging to guide discrete data and risks inconsistencies between modalities. To this end, we
leverage a continuous and differentiable space
derived through Bayesian inference, presenting Molecule Joint Optimization (MolJO), the
gradient-based SBMO framework that facilitates
joint guidance signals across different modalities while preserving SE(3)-equivariance. We
introduce a novel backward correction strategy
that optimizes within a sliding window of the
past, allowing for a seamless trade-off between
exploration and exploitation during optimization. MolJO achieves state-of-the-art performance
on CrossDocked2020 benchmark (Success Rate
51.3%, Vina Dock -9.05 and SA 0.78), more than
4× improvement in Success Rate compared to the
gradient-based counterpart, and 2× “Me-Better”
Ratio as high as 3D baselines. Furthermore, we
extend MolJO to a wide range of settings, including multi-objective optimization and challenging tasks in drug design such as R-group optimization and scaffold hopping, further underscoring its versatility. Code is available at https:
//github.com/AlgoMole/MolCRAFT.

Concretely, SBMO can be viewed as a more advanced task
within the broader scope of general SBDD, requiring precise control over molecular properties while navigating the
chemical space. Specifically, SBMO addresses two key aspects: (1) SBMO prioritizes targeted molecular property
enhancement according to expert-specified objectives, while
generative models for SBDD focus primarily on maximizing
the likelihood of data without special emphasis on property
improvement (Luo et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2022). Therefore,
these models can only produce outputs similar to their training data, limiting the ability to improve molecular properties.
(2) SBMO is capable of optimizing existing compounds with
3D structural awareness, addressing a critical gap left by
previous molecule optimization methods with 1D SMILES
or 2D graph representations (Bilodeau et al., 2022; Fu et al.,
2022), and allowing for a more nuanced control. The focus
on structure makes SBMO particularly suited for key design
tasks, such as R-group optimization and scaffold hopping.
Recent works have explored SBMO through evolutionarybased resampling and gradient-based methods. For instance,
DiffSBDD (Schneuing et al., 2022) uses a gradient-free evolutionary sampling method, and DecompOpt (Zhou et al.,
2024a) further introduces a fragment-conditioned 3D generative model for resampling. These approaches rely on
iterative, computationally expensive oracle calls to select
top-of-N candidates. One generalized and orthogonal solution is gradient guidance, eliminating the need for oracle
simulations while being flexible enough to be incorporated
into strong-performing generative models in a plug-and-play

1

Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy
of Sciences 4 Peking University. Correspondence to: Hao Zhou
<zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

