Score Matching with Missing Data

Josh Givens 1 Song Liu 1 Henry W J Reeve 2

Abstract

density itself. Furthermore, the validity of the score matching objective itself requires only very mild assumptions of
the family of proposed scores further ensuring this flexibility. Alongside the classical method (Hyvärinen, 2005), various adaptations of score matching have arisen to improve
performance, decrease computational cost, and extend the
approach to a wider range of settings (Hyvärinen, 2007;
Vincent, 2011; Song et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022).

Score matching is a vital tool for learning the distribution of data with applications across many
areas including diffusion processes, energy based
modelling, and graphical model estimation. Despite all these applications, little work explores
its use when data is incomplete. We address this
by adapting score matching (and its major extensions) to work with missing data in a flexible setting where data can be partially missing over any
subset of the coordinates. We provide two separate score matching variations for general use,
an importance weighting (IW) approach, and a
variational approach. We provide finite sample
bounds for our IW approach in finite domain settings and show it to have especially strong performance in small sample lower dimensional cases.
Complementing this, we show our variational approach to be strongest in more complex highdimensional settings which we demonstrate on
graphical model estimation tasks on both real and
simulated data.

In this work, we extend the score matching framework to
handle missing data at training time. Specifically, we learn
the full score function from partially missing multidimensional input data, a paradigm we term missing score matching. Crucially, our approach is compatible with any parameterised score model, enabling its application to both
explicit score formulations and more general approaches
such as neural networks (NNs). We propose two methods
to adapt the original score matching method as well as its
popular adaptations, truncated, sliced, and denoising score
matching (Hyvärinen, 2007; Vincent, 2011; Liu & Wang,
2017; Song et al., 2020). These two distinct but closely related methods complement each other allowing for a wide
range of problems to be tackled. The first method is a simpler importance weighting (IW) approach which we refer
to as marginal IW score matching. For this method we
obtain finite sample bounds in the bounded domain setting under certain conditions. We also provide experimental results demonstrating its efficacy in lower dimensional
settings and where less data is available. Our second approach is a more computationally sophisticated variational
approach which we refer to as marginal variational score
matching. We demonstrate the efficacy of this approach in
more complex, high dimensional settings by applying it to
the problem of graphical model estimation with both real
and synthetic datasets.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, score matching has established itself
as a powerful tool with downstream use in many areas of
machine learning. Examples include: energy based modelling (Swersky et al., 2011; Bao et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2019b), mode-seeking clustering (Sasaki et al., 2014), and
perhaps most prominently of all Diffusion processes (Song
& Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021b; Tashiro et al., 2021;
Song et al., 2021a; Huang et al., 2021). Score matching
aims to learn the score of a distribution which is the gradient of the log of the probability density function (PDF)
(s(x) = ∇x log p(x)). In contrast to modelling the density
directly, the score does not need to integrate to one meaning
there is no need to calculate a normalising constant. This
allows it to be much more more flexibly modelled than the

In section 2 we discuss relevant works for score matching
and related fields. In section 3 we will introduce our problem more formally including score matching and any notation used. Section 4 will be used to introduce our methods.
Section 5 will present results on some real and simulated
datasets. In Section 6 we give our conclusion.

1

School of Mathematics, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Josh Givens <josh.givens@bristol.ac.uk>.
2

2. Related Works

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

While there has been some work which utilises score
matching with missing data, these approaches mostly do so
1

