ConceptAttention: Diffusion Transformers Learn Highly Interpretable Features

Alec Helbling 1 Tuna Han Salih Meral 2 Benjamin Hoover 1 3 Pinar Yanardag 2 Duen Horng (Polo) Chau 1

Abstract
Do the rich representations of multi-modal diffusion transformers (DiTs) exhibit unique properties that enhance their interpretability? We introduce C ONCEPTATTENTION, a novel method
that leverages the expressive power of DiT attention layers to generate high-quality saliency
maps that precisely locate textual concepts within
images. Without requiring additional training,
C ONCEPTATTENTION repurposes the parameters
of DiT attention layers to produce highly contextualized concept embeddings, contributing the
major discovery that performing linear projections in the output space of DiT attention layers
yields significantly sharper saliency maps compared to commonly used cross-attention maps.
C ONCEPTATTENTION even achieves state-of-theart performance on zero-shot image segmentation benchmarks, outperforming 15 other zeroshot interpretability methods on the ImageNetSegmentation dataset. C ONCEPTATTENTION
works for popular image models and even seamlessly generalizes to video generation. Our work
contributes the first evidence that the representations of multi-modal DiTs are highly transferable
to vision tasks like segmentation.
Figure 1. C ONCEPTATTENTION produces saliency maps that
precisely localize the presence of textual concepts in images.
We compare Flux raw cross attention, DAAM (Tang et al., 2022)
with SDXL, and TextSpan (Gandelsman et al., 2024) for CLIP.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have recently gained widespread popularity, emerging as the state-of-the-art approach for a variety of
generative tasks, particularly text-to-image synthesis (Rombach et al., 2022). These models transform random noise
into photorealistic images guided by textual descriptions,
achieving unprecedented fidelity and detail. Despite the
impressive generative capabilities of diffusion models, our
understanding of their internal mechanisms remains limited. Diffusion models operate as black boxes, where the

relationships between input prompts and generated outputs
are visible, but the decision-making processes that connect
them are hidden from human understanding.
Existing work on interpreting T2I models has predominantly
focused on UNet-based architectures (Podell et al., 2023;
Rombach et al., 2022), which utilize shallow cross-attention
mechanisms between prompt embeddings and image patch
representations. UNet cross attention maps can produce
high-fidelity saliency maps that predict the location of textual concepts (Tang et al., 2022) and have found numerous applications in tasks like image editing (Hertz et al.,
2022; Chefer et al., 2023). However, the interpretability

1
Georgia Tech 2 Virginia Tech 3 IBM Research. Correspondence
to: Alec Helbling <alechelbling@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Code: alechelbling.com/ConceptAttention/

1

