Position: General Intelligence Requires Reward-based Pretraining

Seungwook Han * 1 Jyothish Pari * 1 Samuel J. Gershman 2 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract

reasoning, math, and programming (Ho et al., 2022; Wei
et al., 2023; 2022; Lampinen et al., 2022; DeepSeek-AI,
2024; OpenAI, 2024; Meta, 2024). Their practical impact
makes them a compelling instance of artificial useful intelligence (AUI) – systems that assist humans in real-world
tasks. Nevertheless, a significant gap remains between AUI
and artificial general intelligence (AGI), systems capable
of robust, adaptive reasoning across diverse domains and
contexts like humans.
To illustrate this gap, we designed algorithmic tasks in
esoteric programming languages that isolate reasoning
from memorization. These tasks involve simple algorithmic
problems (e.g., printing, sorting) seen during pretraining
and easily solved in Python and Java, but presented in unfamiliar programming languages with different syntaxes. Our
results in Section 3 show that state-of-the-art LLMs struggle
to transfer their algorithmic understanding to coding in new
programming syntaxes. Notably, o1 (Jaech et al., 2024),
post-trained for reasoning with a combination reinforcement
learning (RL) and search, e.g., Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al.,
2023), performed the best. However, even o1’s performance
suffers, illustrating the limitation of current models in
flexibly transferring their reasoning to novel contexts.
We hypothesize that going beyond the reasoning ability
of current models requires a fundamental overhaul of the
pretraining paradigm. The dominant approach–supervised
pretraining with next-token prediction loss on passively collected Internet data, followed by RL-based post-training
(DeepSeek-AI, 2025; Lightman et al., 2023; Luong et al.,
2024; Zelikman et al., 2024; 2022)–closely mirrors AlphaGo’s methodology in the game of Go (Silver et al.,
2016). In AlphaGo, supervised pretraining on human
demonstrations and post-RL optimization were used to
surpass human playing abilities. However, this paradigm
was overturned by AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017), which
demonstrated that RL from scratch– without supervised
pretraining– achieved superior performance. By relying
solely on self-play and starting from random initialization,
AlphaZero surpassed AlphaGo, uncovering more efficient
and creative strategies through purely RL.
This paradigm shift from AlphaGo to AlphaZero motivates
our hypothesis that, even in current LLMs, reliance on supervised pretraining constrains models to a “local minimum”
of reasoning capabilities. Supervised pretraining on demon-

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive real-world utility, exemplifying
artificial useful intelligence (AUI). However, their
ability to reason adaptively and robustly – the
hallmarks of artificial general intelligence (AGI)
– remains fragile. While LLMs seemingly succeed in commonsense reasoning, programming,
and mathematics, they struggle to generalize algorithmic understanding across novel contexts. Our
experiments with algorithmic tasks in esoteric programming languages reveal that LLM’s reasoning
overfits to the training data and is limited in its
transferability. We hypothesize that the core issue underlying such limited transferability is the
coupling of reasoning and knowledge in LLMs.
To transition from AUI to AGI, we propose disentangling knowledge and reasoning through three
key directions: (1) pretaining to reason using RL
from scratch as an alternative to the widely used
next-token prediction pretraining, (2) using a curriculum of synthetic tasks to ease the learning of
a reasoning prior for RL that can then be transferred to natural language tasks, and (3) learning
more generalizable reasoning functions using a
small context window to reduce exploiting spurious correlations between tokens. Such a reasoning system coupled with a trained retrieval system
and a large external memory bank as a knowledge
store can overcome several limitations of existing architectures at learning to reason in novel
scenarios.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across diverse tasks, such as commonsense
*
Equal contribution 1 Improbable AI Lab, MIT 2 Department of
Psychology and Center for Brain Science, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Seungwook Han <swhan@mit.edu>, Jyothish
Pari <jyopari@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

