HALoS: Hierarchical Asynchronous Local SGD over Slow Networks
for Geo-Distributed Large Language Model Training

Geon-Woo Kim 1 Junbo Li 1 Shashidhar Gandham 2 Omar Baldonado 2 Adithya Gangidi 2 Pavan Balaji 2
Zhangyang Wang 1 Aditya Akella 1

Abstract

challenges. Today’s de facto standard distributed optimization approach to pretrain LLMs is fully synchronous
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), where the massive
amount of model states are synchronized across multiple
accelerators (e.g., GPUs and TPUs) after every training
step. To overcome this communication overhead, practitioners attempt to deploy homogeneous accelerators in close
proximity and connect them with highly optimized network
infrastructure (Dubey et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024). For
example, to pretrain Llama-3 405B, 16K H100 GPUs are
deployed within a single datacenter, each equipped with
400 Gbps network bandwidth and network connectivity with
latency in the tens of microseconds (Dubey et al., 2024).

Training large language models (LLMs) increasingly relies on geographically distributed accelerators, causing prohibitive communication costs
across regions and uneven utilization of heterogeneous hardware. We propose HALoS, a hierarchical asynchronous optimization framework
that tackles these issues by introducing local parameter servers (LPSs) within each region and
a global parameter server (GPS) that merges updates across regions. This hierarchical design
minimizes expensive inter-region communication,
reduces straggler effects, and leverages fast intraregion links. We provide a rigorous convergence
analysis for HALoS under non-convex objectives,
including theoretical guarantees on the role of
hierarchical momentum in asynchronous training. Empirically, HALoS attains up to 7.5× faster
convergence than synchronous baselines in geodistributed LLM training and improves upon existing asynchronous methods by up to 2.1×. Crucially, HALoS preserves the model quality of fully
synchronous SGD—matching or exceeding accuracy on standard language modeling and downstream benchmarks—while substantially lowering total training time. These results demonstrate
that hierarchical, server-side update accumulation
and global model merging are powerful tools for
scalable, efficient training of new-era LLMs in
heterogeneous, geo-distributed environments.

While a highly optimized homogeneous single-datacenter
setup is desirable, it faces significant scalability challenges
due to operational constraints, such as energy consumption
and power management, when deploying large numbers of
accelerators in one region (Gherghescu et al., 2024). Similarly, companies and researchers relying on cloud providers
often struggle to allocate sufficient GPUs in a single region
due to limited availability (Strati et al., 2024).
Consequently, there is a growing need to utilize accelerators
that are geo-distributed across multiple regions in training
LLMs (Yuan et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2024; Gandhi et al.,
2024; Jaghouar et al., 2024; Strati et al., 2024). This setup
presents new challenges: (1) inter-region communication is
orders of magnitude slower, with link bandwidths typically
ranging from 0.1 to 10 Gbps and network latency in milliseconds (Jaghouar et al., 2024; Gandhi et al., 2024; Yuan et al.,
2022), and (2) accelerators are highly heterogeneous, as
maintaining homogeneous hardware across multiple regions
is impractical (Li et al., 2022; Mei et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

Local SGD, a widely studied communication-efficient extension of synchronous SGD, allows workers1 to perform multiple local model updates before global synchronization, balancing computation and communication overhead (Zhang
et al., 2015; Stich, 2018; Lin et al., 2018). Recent efforts
have adapted this approach to address the challenges in

Large Language Models (LLMs) have rapidly revolutionized diverse domains (Dubey et al., 2024; Achiam et al.,
2023), but their training presents significant computational
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Meta. Correspondence to:
Aditya Akella <akella@cs.utexas.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, a worker represents a set of accelerators functioning as a data-parallel group, maintaining a model replica.

1

