Thinking LLMs: General Instruction Following with Thought Generation

Tianhao Wu 1 2 Janice Lan 1 Weizhe Yuan 1 3 Jiantao Jiao 2 Jason Weston 1 3 Sainbayar Sukhbaatar 1

Abstract

time and think before answering complex questions.

LLMs are typically trained to answer user questions or follow instructions similarly to how human experts respond. However, in the standard
alignment framework they lack the basic ability
of explicit thinking before answering. Thinking
is important for complex questions that require
reasoning and planning – but can be applied to
any task. We propose a training method for equipping existing LLMs with such thinking abilities
for general instruction following without use of
additional human data. We achieve this by an
iterative search and optimization procedure that
explores the space of possible thought generations, allowing the model to learn how to think
without direct supervision. For each instruction,
the thought candidates are scored using a judge
model to evaluate their responses only, and then
optimized via preference optimization. We show
that this procedure leads to superior performance
on AlpacaEval and Arena-Hard, and shows gains
from thinking on non-reasoning categories such
as marketing, health and general knowledge, in
addition to more traditional reasoning & problemsolving tasks.

One approach is to generate thoughts as text, which takes
advantage of the natural language capabilities of LLMs.
LLMs are pre-trained on text containing human-written
thoughts, which are hence encoded into the model. Chain-ofThought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) is a widely used prompting
technique that elicits such behavior by asking the model to
write down its reasoning steps. However, the usage of CoT
has been mostly limited to math and reasoning tasks. Metaanalysis by Sprague et al. (2024) found CoT methods to be
unhelpful on tasks that do not involve math and logic.
In this paper, we focus on general instruction following
instead of focusing on math or logic tasks. We argue that
“thinking” should have broad utility. For example, in a
creative writing task, internal thoughts can be used to plan
overall structure and characters. In other tasks, internal
thoughts can be used for understanding the user instruction
better. Of course, it is likely that less thinking is required
for simpler tasks, and more thinking for more complex
ones. In general, we hypothesize that such Thinking LLMs
will have an advantage on all sufficiently complex tasks.
The emergence of models like OpenAI-O1 (OpenAI) and
DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025) also support our motivation.
However, it is challenging to train a model to think due to the
lack of supervised training data. Although pre-training data
does contain valuable information, coverage can be limited
in certain domains as internal thoughts are often omitted
in human writing. Existing post-training datasets typically
consist of human responses, or preferences over responses,
with no information on thought processes. The same is true
for existing reward models. Combined with the difficulty
and cost considerations of collecting human thought data,
these factors impose a barrier in training Thinking LLMs.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) that predicts the
next token at each step. Each token takes the same amount
of compute, so when LLMs are prompted with a user instruction, they have a fixed compute budget to generate the first
response token regardless of the instruction’s complexity.
One way to increase the compute budget for harder instructions is to allow LLMs to think internally before outputting
an response. This is similar to humans who will take more

The goal of this paper is to investigate the possibility of converting existing LLMs into Thinking LLMs that work across
a wide variety of tasks, without any additional data. To this
end, we introduce Thought Preference Optimization (TPO)
that further trains an instruction-tuned LLM to make it capable of having internal thoughts. Our method is simple and
reuses many parts of existing training pipelines. The LLM
is first instructed to produce an output sequence that can be
divided into thought and response parts. The thought part
is considered internal, and not part of the response shown

1
Meta FAIR 2 University of California, Berkeley
New York University.
Correspondence to:
Tianhao
Wu <thw@berkeley.edu>, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar <sainbar@meta.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

