Expressive Power of Graph Neural Networks for (Mixed-Integer) Quadratic
Programs

Ziang Chen * 1 Xiaohan Chen * 2 Jialin Liu * 3 Xinshang Wang 2 Wotao Yin 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Quadratic programming (QP) is an important type of
optimization problem with applications (Vogelstein et al.,
2015; Markowitz, 1952; Rockafellar, 1987). It aims to
minimize a quadratic objective function while satisfying
specified constraints. When all the constraints are linear, we
call a QP problem a linearly constrained quadratic program
(LCQP). When they also involve quadratic inequalities, we
call the problem a quadratically constrained quadratic program (QCQP). When some variables are restricted to integers, the problem becomes a mixed-integer QP. This study
focuses on LCQP and its mixed-integer variant, MI-LCQP.

Quadratic programming (QP) is the most widely
applied category of problems in nonlinear programming. Many applications require realtime/fast solutions, though not necessarily with
high precision. Existing methods either involve
matrix decomposition or use the preconditioned
conjugate gradient method. For relatively large
instances, these methods cannot achieve the realtime requirement unless there is an effective preconditioner. Recently, graph neural networks
(GNNs) opened new possibilities for QP. Some
promising empirical studies of applying GNNs for
QP tasks show that GNNs can capture key characteristics of an optimization instance and provide
adaptive guidance accordingly to crucial configurations during the solving process, or directly
provide an approximate solution. However, the
theoretical understanding of GNNs in this context
remains limited. Specifically, it is unclear what
GNNs can and cannot achieve for QP tasks in theory. This work addresses this gap in the context
of linearly constrained QP tasks. In the continuous setting, we prove that message-passing GNNs
can universally represent fundamental properties
of convex quadratic programs, including feasibility, optimal objective values, and optimal solutions. In the more challenging mixed-integer
setting, while GNNs are not universal approximators, we identify a subclass of QP problems that
GNNs can reliably represent.

In many applications, finding solutions quickly is prioritized
over perfect precision. For instance, ride-hailing platforms
like Uber or Lyft require quick driver-passenger matching to
reduce wait times, even without optimal solutions. Similarly,
financial trading algorithms must rapidly adjust portfolios
to market changes, prioritizing speed over optimality.
Unfortunately, existing methods for QP often rely on computationally expensive techniques such as matrix decomposition and the preconditioned conjugate gradient method
(PCG). For example, LU decomposition typically requires
O(n3 ) operations for a n × n matrix (Golub & Van Loan,
2013), though advanced algorithms can achieve lower complexities. The PCG method requires O(n2 ) operations per
iteration, with slow convergence for ill-conditioned matrices (Shewchuk, 1994). These challenges highlight the need
for novel approaches to meet real-time application demands.
Machine learning brings new chances to QP. Recent research
shows that deep neural networks (DNNs) can significantly
improve the efficiency when solving QP. Based on DNNs’
role, these studies can be categorized as: (Type I). DNNs
generate adaptive configurations for QP solvers, tailored
to specific QP instances, thereby accelerating the solving
process. (Bonami et al., 2018; 2022; Ichnowski et al., 2021;
Getzelman & Balaprakash, 2021; Jung et al., 2022; King
et al., 2024). This approach requires DNNs to capture indepth features of QP instances and provide customized guidance to the solver. (Type II). DNNs replace or warm-start a
QP solver. Here, DNNs take in a QP and directly output an
approximate solution. These solutions can be used as final

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States
2
Decision Intelligence Lab, Damo Academy, Alibaba US, Bellevue, WA, United States 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, United States. Correspondence to: Jialin Liu <jialin.liu@ucf.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

