Multi-Armed Bandits with Interference:
Bridging Causal Inference and Adversarial Bandits

Su Jia 1 Peter Frazier 2 Nathan Kallus 2

Abstract

Most previous work on experimentation with interference
focused on the quality of the final output, such as the meansquared error of the estimator (e.g., Ugander et al. 2013)
or p-value (e.g., Athey et al. 2018). On the other hand,
the cumulative performance is also important in practice,
considering the scale of experiments on modern platforms,
but this perspective is often overlooked.

Experimentation with interference poses a significant challenge in contemporary online platforms. Prior research on experimentation with
interference has concentrated on the final output of a policy. Cumulative performance, while
equally important, is less well understood. To
address this gap, we introduce the problem of
Multi-armed Bandits with Interference (MABI),
where the learner assigns an arm to each of N
experimental units over T rounds. The reward of
each unit depends on the treatments of all units,
and this dependence decays in distance. The reward functions, chosen by an adversary, may vary
arbitrarily over space and time. We first show that
a switchback√policy achieves an optimal expected
regret of Õ( T ) against the best fixed-arm policy; however, the regret as a random variable suffers high variance. We propose a policy based on
a novel clustered randomization scheme, whose
regret (i) is optimal in expectation and (ii) admits
a high-probability bound that vanishes in N .

This motivates us to study cumulative reward maximization
in A/B testing with interference. We employ a batched
adversarial bandits framework. Given a set U ⊆ R2 of N
units representing, for example, users in an online platform,
each with a known, fixed location. We are also given a set
[k] := {1, . . . , k} of arms and a time horizon with T rounds.
In each round, the learner assigns one arm to each unit
and collects an observable reward, governed by a reward
function secretly chosen by an adversary beforehand.
To capture interference, the mean reward of each unit depends on the treatments of all units. Formally, this means
that each reward function is defined on [k]U instead of on
[k] (as in ordinary bandits). Similarly to causal inference
with interference, efficient learning is impossible without additional structures. In this work, we employ a rather general
assumption from Leung 2022 that the unit-to-unit interference decreases in their distance. Specifically, for any two
treatment assignments z, z ′ ∈ [k]N , if they are identical on
a neighborhood of u ∈ U , then their rewards on u are close;
Moreover, the larger this neighborhood, the closer they are.

1. Introduction
A/B tests have become a standard practice to evaluate the
impact of a new product or service change before wide-scale
release. A naive A/B test may fail in the presence of interference, i.e., the Stable Unit Treatment Values Assumption
(SUTVA, Rubin 1978) is violated, where the treatment of
one unit affects the outcome of another. For example, if a
ride-sharing firm assigns half of the drivers to a new pricing
algorithm, these drivers will alter their behaviors, which
impacts the common pool of passengers, and consequently
the drivers not assigned the new algorithm.

On the technical level, we build upon the EXP3 framework
for adversarial bandits, integrating with a novel HorvitzThompson estimator with Implicit eXploration (HT-IX). By
choosing different hyperparameters, this estimator “interpolates” between the estimator for the average treatment
effect (ATE) under spatial interference (Leung, 2022) and
for the unobserved rewards in adversarial bandits (Kocák
et al., 2014; Neu, 2015).

1
Center for Data Science for Enterprise and Society, Cornell
University 2 School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Su Jia <jiasu1225@gmail.com>.

From a practical standpoint, a “pure” switchback policy —
where the entire system switches between treatment and
control — is rarely used in practice. Instead, platforms typically partition the space into clusters and independently
assign treatment or control to each cluster in each period;
see, e.g., DoorDash’s “clustered” switchback experiments

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

