Generating Hypotheses of Dynamic Causal Graphs in Neuroscience:
Leveraging Generative Factor Models of Observed Time Series

Zachary C. Brown 1 David Carlson 1 2

Abstract

regions by using Granger causality on time series recorded
from each region (Seth, 2007), which can be extended to
many brain regions to capture more complete network relationships. Granger causality describes whether the history
of one variable can help predict future information about
another variable (Löwe et al., 2022; Assaad et al., 2022).
Granger causal models are more statistical in nature than
causal (Pearl, 2009); however, we seek to generate hypotheses about causal relationships to then inform causal inference / assays, hence the use of Granger causal models.

The field of hypothesis generation promises to reduce costs in neuroscience by narrowing the range
of interventional studies needed to study various
phenomena. Existing machine learning methods
can generate scientific hypotheses from complex
datasets, but many approaches assume causal relationships are static over time, limiting their applicability to systems with dynamic, state-dependent
behavior, such as the brain. While some techniques attempt dynamic causal discovery through
factor models, they often restrict relationships to
linear patterns or impose other simplifying assumptions. We propose a novel method that models dynamic graphs as a conditionally weighted
superposition of static graphs, where each static
graph can capture nonlinear relationships. This
approach enables the detection of complex, timevarying interactions between variables beyond linear limitations. Our method improves f1-scores
of predicted dynamic causal patterns by roughly
22-28% on average over baselines in some of our
experiments, with some improvements reaching
well over 60%. A case study on real brain data
demonstrates our method’s ability to uncover relationships linked to specific behavioral states,
offering valuable insights into neural dynamics.

Current machine learning (ML) methods do not capture the
brain’s full complexity, which has well-documented nonlinear interactions and dynamic causal graphs that vary by state
and task. Existing discovery methods tend to assume that
either a) (potentially dynamic) linear models are sufficient
for modeling causal behavior (Huang et al., 2019; Gallagher
et al., 2021) or that b) causal graphs between variables are
static and not state-dependent (Zhang et al., 2017b; Sadeghi
et al., 2024). These limitations reflect a gap in existing
ML methodology, with implications outside neuroscience
for any field seeking to automate hypothesis generation for
potentially nonlinear, state-dependent dynamical systems.
Thus, we focus on generating hypotheses about mechanisms
governing nonlinear and state-dependent (or “dynamic”)
behavior in time series systems (hereafter referred to as
“temporal systems” or simply “systems” to conserve space).
While understandable concerns may be raised about the
detectability of such mechanisms in even simple systems
(see our discussion on identifiability in Appendix A.1), prior
literature has demonstrated that using automated hypothesis generation for these mechanisms can still yield useful
insights which aid scientific discovery (Mague et al., 2022).
Indeed, we accurately estimate causal graphs in observed
systems without making restrictive assumptions as to the
state-dependence or linearity/nonlinearity of causal relationships. We do this by combining key concepts from both
factor-based and nonlinear models of causal time series.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery methods applied to brain dynamics hold
great promise for designing targeted interventions in various neurological diseases. A typical approach is to generate hypotheses about causal relationships between brain
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC 15213, USA 2 Departments of Civil and
Environmental Engineering; Biostatistics and Bioinformatics; and
Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, NC 15213, USA.
Correspondence to: Zachary C. Brown <zac.brown@duke.edu>,
David Carlson <david.carlson@duke.edu>.

In summary, we seek to reduce the space of hypotheses that
must be tested before a causal relationship is successfully
identified. As such, we present 1) a novel approach to hypothesis generation for dynamic causal graphs using a deep
generative factor model, 2) methods for including auxiliary

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

