FRUGAL: Memory-Efficient Optimization by Reducing State Overhead for
Scalable Training

Philip Zmushko 1 2 Aleksandr Beznosikov 2 3 4 1 Martin Takáč 5 Samuel Horváth 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) such as
GPT (OpenAI, 2023) and LLaMA-3 (Dubey et al., 2024)
have demonstrated remarkable performance across various disciplines (Brown, 2020; Yang et al., 2024; RomeraParedes et al., 2024). However, a critical factor in achieving
these results is the size of these models (Hoffmann et al.,
2022). Increasing the number of parameters leads to higher
computational and memory costs. For example, an 8 billion parameter LLaMA-3 model in 16-bit format requires
32GB just for parameters and gradients. Using the standard
Adam optimizer (Kingma, 2014) adds another 32GB for m
and v statistics. Moreover, achieving high-quality results
often requires 32-bit precision for weights and optimizer
states (Zamirai et al., 2020), pushing memory requirements
beyond even high-end GPUs like the A100-80GB.

With the increase in the number of parameters
in large language models, the training process increasingly demands larger volumes of GPU memory. A significant portion of this memory is typically consumed by the optimizer state. To overcome this challenge, recent approaches such as
low-rank adaptation (LoRA), low-rank gradient
projection (GaLore), and blockwise optimization
(BAdam) have been proposed. However, in all
these algorithms, the effective rank of the weight
updates remains low-rank, which can lead to a
substantial loss of information from the gradient. This loss can be critically important, especially during the pre-training stage. In this paper,
we introduce FRUGAL (Full-Rank Updates with
GrAdient spLitting), a new memory-efficient optimization framework. FRUGAL leverages gradient splitting to perform low-dimensional updates using advanced algorithms (such as Adam),
while updates along the remaining directions
are executed via state-free methods like SGD or
signSGD. Our framework can be integrated with
various low-rank update selection techniques, including GaLore and BAdam. We provide theoretical convergence guarantees for our framework
when using SGDM for low-dimensional updates
and SGD for state-free updates. Additionally,
our method consistently outperforms concurrent
approaches, achieving state-of-the-art results in
pre-training and fine-tuning tasks while balancing
memory efficiency and performance metrics.

Numerous research projects have been aimed at reducing
these significant costs. These approaches include engineering solutions like gradient checkpointing (Chen et al., 2016)
and memory offloading (Rajbhandari et al., 2020), which do
not change the training trajectory. There are also methods
that adjust the training algorithm by decreasing the number
of trainable parameters (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Horváth
et al., 2024) or their bit precision (Wortsman et al., 2023), as
well as optimizer statistics (Dettmers et al., 2021; Shazeer
& Stern, 2018; Zhang et al., 2024c).
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods, such as
LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) and Dora (Liu et al., 2024b) reduce
memory costs by training a relatively small number of parameters compared to the size of the original model, while
the remaining modules are frozen. This approach has proven
effective for the task of efficient fine-tuning of pre-trained
models. However, PEFT methods have a fundamental limitation: parameter updates always lie in a low-dimensional
subspace L, which prevents the use of these methods for
pre-training (Lialin et al., 2023) and may restrict their capabilities in fine-tuning (Zhang et al., 2024a).

1

Yandex, Russia 2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology,
Russia 3 Ivannikov Institute for System Programming RAS, Russia
4
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia 5 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE. Correspondence to: Philip Zmushko <zmushko.ph.a@gmail.com>.

Recent works, such as GaLore (Zhao et al., 2024a),
ReLoRA (Lialin et al., 2023) and BAdam (Luo et al., 2024)
offer a solution to this problem. These methods enable
higher-dimensional full-parameter learning by periodically

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

