A Theoretical Framework For Overfitting In Energy-based Modeling

Giovanni Catania 1 Aurélien Decelle 1 2 Cyril Furtlehner 3 Beatriz Seoane 1

Abstract

architecture and optimization, employing various implicit
regularization mechanisms (Belkin, 2021). Finding the optimal balance between maximizing data utility, preserving
generalization, and ensuring the privacy of training data represents a critical trade-off that can be challenging to pinpoint.
In supervised learning tasks like classification, overfitting
is readily identified using standard practices. Metrics like
test-set accuracy, particularly when augmented by crossvalidation in data-scarce scenarios, clearly signal overfitting,
enabling strategies like early stopping, regularization, and
hyperparameter tuning to mitigate it. Furthermore, training
and generalization performance in regression and classification tasks are now well understood in certain simplified
regimes, such as high-dimensional ridge (Atanasov et al.,
2024; Advani et al., 2020; Saxe et al., 2014; Tomasini et al.,
2022) or logistic (Mai et al., 2019; Loffredo et al., 2024)
regression or numerous more complex setting of non-linear
regression in various scaling regime (see for instance (Mei
et al., 2018; Arnaboldi et al., 2023; Saad & Solla, 1995)
among many other recent works). This gives the possibility to assess some simple indicator like the generalized
cross-validation (GCV) (Golub et al., 1979), an exact relation between train/test errors valid for the ridge regression
that can be derived using a leave-one-out argument (see
e.g. (Furtlehner, 2023)). This methodology is also relevant
in deep learning contexts (Wei et al., 2022), particularly in
over-parameterized regimes where it aligns with observed
stochastic gradient descent behaviors (Patil et al., 2024).

We investigate the impact of limited data on training pairwise energy-based models for inverse
problems aimed at identifying interaction networks. Utilizing the Gaussian model as testbed,
we dissect training trajectories across the eigenbasis of the coupling matrix, exploiting the independent evolution of eigenmodes and revealing that the learning timescales are tied to the
spectral decomposition of the empirical covariance matrix. We see that optimal points for early
stopping arise from the interplay between these
timescales and the initial conditions of training.
Moreover, we show that finite data corrections
can be accurately modeled through asymptotic
random matrix theory calculations and provide
the counterpart of generalized cross-validation in
the energy based model context. Our analytical
framework extends to binary-variable maximumentropy pairwise models with minimal variations.
These findings offer strategies to control overfitting in discrete-variable models through empirical
shrinkage corrections, improving the management
of overfitting in energy-based generative models.
Finally, we propose a generalization to arbitrary
energy-based models by deriving the neural tangent kernel dynamics of the score function under
the score-matching algorithm.

Recent advancements in training and architecture have
greatly enhanced the generative capabilities of neural network models across various fields (Bengesi et al., 2024), enabling the creation of photorealistic images, credible speech
synthesis, and biologically functional synthetic proteins (Wu
et al., 2021). Despite this progress, selecting optimal models from a pool remains challenging due to noisy training
data often leading to undetected overfitting. Yet, detecting
overfitting in unsupervised learning settings, particularly for
generative modeling, is elusive but crucial, especially with
sensitive datasets like human genomic data (Yelmen et al.,
2021; 2023) and copyrighted content. Unlike supervised
learning, unsupervised learning lacks clear overfitting indicators, complicating model development and validation.
While some theoretical insights on optimal regularization
tuning for simple energy-based models exist (Fanthomme

1. Introduction
Controlling overfitting is basic in machine learning, particularly as modern, over-parameterized architectures enhance learning capabilities. To prevent learning noise or
irrelevant patterns, numerous empirical solutions have been
proposed that modulate the model’s implicit bias through its
1

Departamento de Fı́sica Teórica, Universidad Complutense de
Madrid, Spain. 2 Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros Industriales, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain 3 Inria-Saclay,
Université Paris-Saclay, LISN, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.. Correspondence to: Giovanni Catania <gcatania@ucm.es>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

