Geometric Feature Embedding for
Effective 3D Few-Shot Class Incremental Learning

Xiangqi Li * 1 2 Libo Huang * 1 Zhulin An 1 Weilun Feng 1 2 Chuanguang Yang 1 Boyu Diao 1 Fei Wang 1
Yongjun Xu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Capturing the 3D shapes of objects from point clouds has
become increasingly critical across a wide range of fields,
including robotic automation, healthcare, and autonomous
driving (Xiao et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023;
An et al., 2024b;a). In these applications, there is a growing need for models that can continuously adapt to new
object characteristics with limited samples while retaining
the ability to recognize previously encountered objects (Zhu
et al., 2021; Ahmadi et al., 2024; Xing et al., 2025; Huang
et al., 2024b; Wu et al., 2025). This growing demand has
spurred the development of few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL) techniques specifically designed for 3D point
clouds (Tan & Xiang, 2024; Cheraghian et al., 2025). However, 3D FSCIL faces unique challenges, including catastrophic forgetting, overfitting to new data, and domain gaps
between synthetic training data and real-world scans (Tan
& Xiang, 2024; Huang et al., 2024a). These challenges
significantly increase the complexity of applying FSCIL to
3D point clouds (Chowdhury et al., 2022; Cheraghian et al.,
2025).

3D few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL)
aims to learn new point cloud categories from
limited samples while preventing the forgetting
of previously learned categories. This research
area significantly enhances the capabilities of
self-driving vehicles and computer vision systems. Existing 3D FSCIL approaches primarily utilize multimodal pre-trained models to extract the semantic features, heavily dependent
on meticulously designed high-quality prompts
and fine-tuning strategies. To reduce this dependence, this paper proposes a novel method for
3D FSCIL with Embedded Geometric features
(3D-FLEG). Specifically, 3D-FLEG develops a
point cloud geometric feature extraction module
to capture category-related geometric characteristics. To address the modality heterogeneity issues
that arise from integrating geometric and text features, 3D-FLEG introduces a geometric feature
embedding module. By augmenting text prompts
with spatial geometric features through these modules, 3D-FLEG can learn robust representations of
new categories even with limited samples, while
mitigating forgetting of the previously learned
categories. Experiments conducted on several
publicly available 3D point cloud datasets, including ModelNet, ShapeNet, ScanObjectNN,
and CO3D, demonstrate 3D-FLEG’s superiority
over existing state-of-the-art 3D FSCIL methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/
lixiangqi707/3D-FLEG.

To address these challenges, Microshape (Chowdhury et al.,
2022) proposed a universal description language to mitigate distribution differences. While this approach reduces
knowledge forgetting and somewhat addresses data distribution discrepancies, it struggles with learning new categories. Cross-Domain (Tan & Xiang, 2024) introduced
distinct recognition methods for new and old categories by
incorporating soft and hard-label replay strategies, further
alleviating forgetting and enhancing learning capabilities for
new categories. Given the extremely limited training sample available for new categories, researchers have explored
leveraging pre-trained foundation models to improve learning while minimizing the forgetting of previously learned
information (Zhou et al., 2025). The C3PR method investigated how the knowledge from the CLIP model could be
applied to 3D point cloud data by projecting point clouds
into depth images from optimal angles and integrating a
model reprogramming paradigm, offering a new way to
handle 3D objects using CLIP (Cheraghian et al., 2025).
However, 2D foundation models like CLIP were not de-

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 158 Beiqing Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100095, China 2 No. 19(A) Yuquan Road, Shijingshan District, Beijing, China, 100049. Correspondence to: Zhulin
An <anzhulin@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

