Skip the Equations: Learning Behavior of Personalized Dynamical Systems
Directly From Data

Krzysztof Kacprzyk 1 Julianna Piskorz 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

ied, for instance, in bifurcation theory (Blanchard et al.,
2012)), but we emphasize the fact that we usually have
many such parameters, we can observe them, and they are
often linked to personal characteristics of individual people. A primary example of a personalized dynamical system
(PDS) is the human body, which exhibits a lot of variability
when it comes to drug metabolisms, disease progressions,
or treatment effects. Beyond physiological systems, other
examples of PDS may involve the atmosphere (e.g., temperature or pollution) based on a particular location or the
animal population in a particular environment.

While black-box approaches are commonly used
for data-driven modeling of dynamical systems,
they often obscure a system’s underlying behavior and properties, limiting adoption in areas such
as medicine and pharmacology. A two-step process of discovering ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) and their subsequent mathematical analysis can yield insights into the system’s dynamics. However, this analysis may be infeasible for
complex equations, and refining the ODE to meet
certain behavioral requirements can be challenging. Direct semantic modeling has recently been
proposed to address these issues by predicting the
system’s behavior, such as the trajectory’s shape,
directly from data, bypassing post-hoc mathematical analysis. In this work, we extend the
original instantiation, limited to one-dimensional
trajectories and inputs, to accommodate multidimensional trajectories with additional personalization, allowing evolution to depend on auxiliary
static features (e.g., patient covariates). In a series of experiments, we show how our approach
enables practitioners to integrate prior knowledge,
understand the dynamics, ensure desired behaviors, and revise the model when necessary.

1
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence
to: Krzysztof Kacprzyk <kk751@cam.ac.uk>.

Discovery of Closed-Form ODEs In practice, it is often essential to ensure the model’s behavior aligns with
domain-specific requirements. For instance, when developing drugs, researchers must verify that the pharmacokinetic
model (Mould & Upton, 2012) is biologically plausible
(e.g., ensuring non-negativity and eventual decay of drug
concentrations). Moreover, dosing recommendations may
depend on the drug’s maximum concentration and its timing
(Han et al., 2018). An effective way to achieve this level
of understanding is through the discovery of closed-form
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Bongard & Lipson,
2007), where an algorithm identifies a concise mathematical representation that can then be analyzed by experts.
More formally, a closed-form function is a function that can
be represented by a mathematical expression consisting of
a finite number of variables, constants, arithmetic operations (+, −, ×, ÷), and some well-known functions such as
trigonometric functions. Initial approaches to ODE discovery (Bongard & Lipson, 2007; Schmidt & Lipson, 2009)
employed genetic programming (Koza, 1992) to search the
space of possible equations. More recently, ODEs are often
represented as linear combinations of terms from a prespecified library (Brunton et al., 2016b) which makes the
search much more efficient. This approach (generally called
SINDy) has been extended to various settings, including
implicit equations (Kaheman et al., 2020), equations with
control (Brunton et al., 2016a), and partial differential equations (Rudy et al., 2017). The extended discussion about
related works can be found in Appendix E.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Limitations of Two-Step Modeling Traditionally, to understand a dynamical system’s behavior, an ODE needs to

1. Introduction
Personalized Dynamical Systems In machine learning
(ML), modeling dynamical systems is a core activity with
extensive applications in fields such as physics (Rudy et al.,
2017), biology (Chen et al., 2019), engineering (Brunton
& Kutz, 2022), and medicine (Lee et al., 2020). We call
a dynamical system personalized when its evolution function depends on certain observable features. It is similar
to dynamical systems that depend on a parameter (as stud-

1

