Neurosymbolic World Models for Sequential Decision Making

Leonardo Hernández Cano 1 Maxine Perroni-Scharf 1 Neil Dhir 2 Arun Ramamurthy 2
Armando Solar-Lezama 1
Reward
Trajectory

Abstract
New
POMDP

We present Structured World Modeling for Policy
Optimization (SWMPO), a framework for unsupervised learning of neurosymbolic Finite State
Machines (FSM) that capture environmental structure for policy optimization. SWMPO models
the environment as a FSM, where each state corresponds to a specific region of the state space
with distinct dynamics (e.g., water and land).
This structured representation can be leveraged
for tasks like policy optimization. Our proposed
FSM synthesis algorithm operates in an unsupervised manner, leveraging low-level features from
unprocessed, non-visual data to learn non-linear
models, making it adaptable across various domains. The synthesized FSM models are expressive enough to be used in a model-based Reinforcement Learning scheme that leverages offline
data to efficiently synthesize environment-specific
world models. We demonstrate the advantages of
SWMPO by benchmarking its environment modeling capabilities in a number of simulation tasks.

Ofﬂine data

Collect data

NeuralPrimitives()

FSMSynth()

(1) Neural worldmodel primitives

(2) MDP-speciﬁc
neurosymbolic
world-model

Initial state
Env. modes
(e.g., water, land)

(3) Model-based
RL

Control
policy

Figure 1. Proposed policy-optimization framework: (1) data is collected from the input POMDP by interacting with the environment
in a standard RL loop; (2) a world-model specific to the POMDP is
synthesized leveraging neural primitives; (3) the world model and
the POMDP’s reward function are used to perform model-based
optimization. These steps are repeated until a termination condition is met. The neural primitives are learned from data from
previous POMDPs. The output is a policy for the new POMPD.

environments, these modes may appear in different configurations (e.g., one environment may be a lake surrounded
by land, another may be mostly land separated by a small
stream). Instead of modeling each environment from scratch,
a better approach might be to first construct ‘primitives’ for
water and land, and then, given a specific environment, assemble those two primitives into a complete model. This
only requires the identification of the boundaries between
the two modes relevant to a task, which in principle requires
less effort than the construction of the model from scratch.

1. Introduction
This work focuses on learned approximations of environment dynamics —known as world models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018)— in the special case where these models must
explicitly encode the high-level structure of the environment
dynamics.

Following this reasoning, our goal is to develop a method
that (1) learns a set of world-model primitives in an unsupervised manner from offline data and (2) reuses those
primitives in the synthesis of a model specific to a new environment. This model should be accurate enough to be
used for model-based policy-optimization. We focus on
environments with continuous, low-level and non-visual
observations (e.g., LiDAR measurements or joint positions).

We are motivated by the observation that structured-world
models may facilitate the reuse of components across different environments. For example, consider modeling a
LiDAR-based amphibious robot that must navigate both
water and land—which we call modes. Across different
1

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute Of Technology, Massachusetts, United
States of America 2 SIEMENS, New Jersey, United States of
America. Correspondence to: Leonardo Hernández Cano
<leohc@mit.edu>.

To this end, we propose Structured World Modeling for Policy Optimization (SWMPO), a neurosymbolic framework
for model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL). SWMPO
first uses offline data to learn a set of neural world-model
primitives (e.g., water and land). SWMPO then assembles
these primitives into a complete world model specific to
a new environment. Finally, SWMPO uses this model for

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

