GeoPixel

: Pixel Grounding Large Multimodal Model in Remote Sensing

Akashah Shabbir 1 Mohammed Zumri 1 Mohammed Bennamoun 2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan 1 3 Salman Khan 1 4

Abstract

Can you give a thorough description of this image, including interleaved
segmentation masks to highlight key objects?
The image is an aerial view of a sports
complex featuring a running track and a
swimming pool. The track has multiple
lanes, and the field is marked for
various sports. The surrounding area
includes roads, buildings, and green
spaces. The ground track field at the
center is a large athletic venue with a
multi lane running track encircling a
grassy field marked for various sports.
The swimming pool at the top is large,
rectangular, and filled with a blue
substance, likely water. Numerous small
vehicles can be seen at different
locations. A soccer field within the
sports complex features a rectangular
pitch with goals at each end, surrounded
by a running track. The image gives a
static and undisturbed appearance as no
people or moving objects are visible.

Recent advances in large multimodal models
(LMMs) have recognized fine-grained grounding
as an imperative factor of visual understanding
and dialogue. However, the benefits of such representation in LMMs are limited to the natural
image domain, and these models perform poorly
for remote sensing (RS). The distinct overhead
viewpoint, scale variation, and presence of small
objects in high-resolution RS imagery present
a unique challenge in region-level comprehension. Moreover, the development of the grounding conversation capability of LMMs within RS
is hindered by the lack of granular, RS domainspecific grounded data. Addressing these limitations, we propose GeoPixel - the first endto-end high-resolution RS-LMM that supports
pixel-level grounding. This capability allows finegrained visual perception by generating interleaved masks in conversation. GeoPixel supports
up to 4K HD resolution in any aspect ratio, ideal
for high-precision RS image analysis. To support the grounded conversation generation (GCG)
in RS imagery, we curate a visually grounded
dataset GeoPixelD through a semi-automated
pipeline that utilizes set-of-marks prompting and
spatial priors tailored for RS data to methodically
control the data generation process. GeoPixel
demonstrates superior performance in pixel-level
comprehension, surpassing existing LMMs in
both single-target and multi-target segmentation
tasks. Our methodological ablation studies validate the effectiveness of each component in the
overall architecture. https://github.com/mbzuaioryx/GeoPixel.

Figure 1. An example of visually grounded detailed descriptions
generated by the proposed GeoPixel, highlighting its ability to interpret and segment high-resolution remote sensing imagery with
fine-grained precision. The model applies distinct masks to key
objects (ground track field, swimming pool, soccer field) and semantic mask to smaller objects (vehicles). It effectively identifies
spatial positions (center, top) and relationships (within the sports
complex) while distinguishing between the global context (buildings, roads, green spaces) and localized structures.

1. Introduction
Recent large multimodal models (LMMs) (Liu et al., 2024a;
Dai et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2024b)
have utilized the foundational capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023; Chiang et al.,
2023; Javaheripi et al.; Bai et al., 2023a) and successfully expanded their horizon to the visual modality with
promising capabilities. These LMMs can not only perform visual recognition, but also excel in advanced perception and reasoning required for vision-language tasks
such as visual question answers, image captioning, visual
grounding, and referring expression segmentation. Grounding LMMs (Rasheed et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2025; Zhao
et al., 2023) have further advanced the fine-grained contextaware interpretation of complex visual information by allowing textual outputs to be associated with object instances.
Facilitated by large-scale data in the natural images domain, grounding multimodal models pre-trained on extensive datasets have shown impressive capabilities, achieving
performance levels comparable to specialist models.

1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
The University of Western Australia 3 Linköping University
4
Australian National University. Correspondence to: Akashah
Shabbir <akashah.shabbir@mbzuai.ac.ae>, Mohammed Zumri
<mohammed.zumri@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
2

However, with increasing granularity of vision and language
understanding, these general domain models exhibit significant limitations in adequately supporting complex earth
observation tasks. The performance degradation is influ-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

