Improving Diversity in Language Models:
When Temperature Fails, Change the Loss

Kunhao Zheng

24

Alexandre Verine * 1 Florian Le Bronnec * 2 3
Alexandre Allauzen 2 Yann Chevaleyre 2 Benjamin Negrevergne 2

Abstract

models. Namely, several works have proposed to study two
kind of errors these models can make (Pillutla et al., 2021;
Shao et al., 2017; Le Bronnec et al., 2024):

Increasing diversity in language models is a challenging yet essential objective. A common approach is to raise the decoding temperature. In
this work, we investigate this approach through
a simplistic yet common case to provide insights
into why decreasing temperature can improve
quality (Precision), while increasing it often fails
to boost coverage (Recall). Our analysis reveals
that for a model to be effectively tunable through
temperature adjustments, it must be trained toward coverage. To address this, we propose rethinking loss functions in language models by
leveraging the Precision-Recall framework. Our
results demonstrate that this approach achieves
a substantially better trade-off between Precision and Recall than merely combining negative
log-likelihood training with temperature scaling.
These findings offer a pathway toward more versatile and robust language modeling techniques.

1. The LM generates texts unlikely under the true distribution of language, leading to outputs of limited quality.
2. The LM focuses on producing a limited set of patterns
or phrases, thereby reducing diversity in the outputs.
The analysis of these errors in generative models has been
formalized through the Precision–Recall (P&R) framework,
introduced by Sajjadi et al. (2018). Precision measures the
proportion of generated samples that are plausible under a
reference distribution, thereby assessing the quality of the
model. Recall quantifies the proportion of the reference
distribution that is covered by the generated samples, reflecting the model’s coverage. Recall captures more than just
sample diversity, it evaluates the diversity of samples that
are likely under the reference distribution. This contrasts
with metrics that operate independently of the reference
distribution, such as those based on entropy (Theis et al.,
2016; Friedman & Dieng, 2023) or vocabulary distinctiveness (Zhu et al., 2018), which may indicate high diversity
even for random-like samples.

1. Introduction

The P&R trade-off is crucial and varies by application domain. In code generation, high Precision is essential for
producing runnable code, whereas in open-ended creative
tasks, high Recall is key to generating diverse and engaging
content. Independently of the P&R framework, the need
to tune this trade-off has motivated the development of a
variety of post-training corrective methods (Holtzman et al.,
2020a). Among them, one of the simplest and most widely
used methods is to adjust the decoding temperature (Fan
et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2024). Increasing the temperature
directly increases the entropy i.e., the diversity of the model,
however its impact on the Recall is not well understood. In
this work, we aim to answer the following question:

Autoregressive language models (LMs) (Bengio et al., 2000)
have demonstrated impressive capabilities in modeling natural language. By scaling both the data and the number of
parameters, current transformer-based approaches (Touvron
et al., 2023; DeepSeek-AI, 2024) are now able to produce
expressive language models, capable of generating texts
close to human-written ones. With these advances, evaluation has become a critical issue, and new metrics have been
developed to better assess the generative abilities of these
*

Equal contribution 1 École Normale Supérieure, Université
PSL, DIENS, Paris, France 2 Miles, LAMSADE, Université ParisDauphine-PSL, Paris, France 3 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR,
Paris, France 4 Meta FAIR, Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Alexandre Verine <alexandre.verine@ens.fr>, Florian Le Bronnec <florian.le-bronnec@dauphine.psl.eu>.

Question 1: What is the impact of adjusting the temperature
of a LM in terms of Precision and Recall?
We address this question by showing that temperature adjustments have a mixed impact on the P&R trade-off. While
lowering the temperature can improve Precision, increasing

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

