Topology-aware Neural Flux Prediction Guided by Physics

Haoyang Jiang 1 Jindong Wang 1 Xingquan Zhu 2 Yi He 1

Abstract

flow transitions, or abrupt flux variations, only propagate in
specific directions (Sagaut, 2005; LeVeque, 2002; Canuto,
2007). Yet, GNNs typically yield similar performance
whether the original edge directions are maintained, reversed, or randomly perturbed. This directional insensitivity mainly results from the message-passing mechanism
in GNNs, which implicitly acts as a low-pass filter (Kesting
& Treiber, 2013; Sagaut, 2005). While this filtering enables
GNNs to capture low-frequency patterns, such as seasonal
trends in river networks, it suppresses high-frequency variations that arise from rapid or local changes (Sun et al., 2022;
Bo et al., 2021; Hoang et al., 2021).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) often struggle in
preserving high-frequency components of nodal
signals when dealing with directed graphs. Such
components are crucial for modeling flow dynamics, without which a traditional GNN tends to treat
a graph with forward and reverse topologies equal.
To make GNNs sensitive to those high-frequency
components thereby being capable to capture detailed topological differences, this paper proposes
a novel framework that combines 1) explicit difference matrices that model directional gradients
and 2) implicit physical constraints that enforce
messages passing within GNNs to be consistent
with natural laws. Evaluations on two real-world
directed graph data, namely, water flux network
and urban traffic flow network, demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposal. The code for this
paper is available at https://github.com/
HaoyangJiang-WM/PhysicsNFP.

In this paper, we mainly explore two key research questions:
i) why are GNNs insensitive to edge directions and ii) how
can their directional awareness be improved.
We hypothesize that the low-pass filtering nature of message
passing is the main cause of this limitation. To validate this,
we formulate an inverse problem for flux prediction in river
networks, where the task is to infer upstream fluxes based on
downstream observations. This ill-posed setup leads to instability by amplifying high-frequency components (Fisher
et al., 2020; Ferrari et al., 2018), where small numerical errors can result in significant variations in inferred upstream
conditions, making the problem highly sensitive to local flux
changes. Yet, standard GNNs fail to capture these amplified
high-frequency signals, resulting in poor performance when
modeling directional dependencies.

1. Introduction
Directed graphs are frequently used to model various physical and engineering systems, due to their strength in capturing spatial dependencies and complex interactions between components. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
emerged as powerful tools for modeling such graphs, particularly in applications like water flux prediction and traffic
flow analysis (Kratzert et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2023). However, recent studies (Kirschstein & Sun, 2024) have revealed
a critical limitation, that GNNs often struggle in modeling
physics-based flow dynamics due to their insensitivity to
edge directions.

To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel physicsguided neural flux prediction (PhyNFP) framework that
integrates physical laws into GNN training, preserving highfrequency components for better flow dynamics modeling.
Our framework has two main components: 1) At local level,
PhyNFP replaces traditional adjacency matrices with discretized difference matrices, which encode local variations
and directional dependencies between nodes. These matrices capture directional gradients, allowing the GNN to retain
high-frequency information and distinguish flow directions.
2) At global level, PhyNFP incorporates physical equations
that describe flow dynamics, e.g., conservation of momentum, directly in GNN training. This physics-guided regularization ensures that predictions remain consistent with
underlying physical principles. Note, our PhyNFP framework is generalizable in the sense that different physical

In real systems, flow dynamics follow strict physical laws,
where local and rapid changes, e.g., turbulent eddies, sharp
1
Department of Data Science, William & Mary, Williamsburg,
VA, USA 2 College of Engineering & Computer Science, Florida
Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA. Correspondence to: Dr.
Yi He <yihe@wm.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

