Streamline Without Sacrifice - Squeeze out Computation Redundancy in LMM

Penghao Wu 1 Lewei Lu 2 Ziwei Liu 1

Abstract
Large multimodal models excel in multimodal
tasks but face significant computational challenges due to excessive computation on visual
tokens. Unlike token reduction methods that focus on token-level redundancy, we identify and
study the computation-level redundancy on vision tokens to ensure no information loss. Our key
insight is that vision tokens from the pretrained
vision encoder do not necessarily require all the
heavy operations (e.g., self-attention, FFNs) in
decoder-only LMMs and could be processed more
lightly with proper designs. We designed a series of experiments to discover and progressively
squeeze out the vision-related computation redundancy. Based on our findings, we propose
ProxyV, a novel approach that utilizes proxy vision tokens to alleviate the computational burden
on original vision tokens. ProxyV enhances efficiency without compromising performance and
can even yield notable performance gains in scenarios with more moderate efficiency improvements. Furthermore, the flexibility of ProxyV is
demonstrated through its combination with token
reduction methods to boost efficiency further. The
code will be made public here.

Figure 1. ProxyV retains or increases the fine-grained benchmark
performance while effectively reducing the computational cost.
ProxyV-L12 and ProxyV-L16 denote applying ProxyV from layers
12 and 16, respectively.

computation-level redundancy exists in the processing of vision tokens and can be squeezed out through proper designs
without sacrificing performance.
Current mainstream LMMs adopt a typical decoder-only
architecture, exemplified by LLaVA-style (Liu et al., 2024b)
pipelines, usually comprising: 1) A pretrained vision encoder extracting vision features, 2) A lightweight projection
module projecting vision features into LLMs’ input space
3) An LLM jointly processing the concatenated vision and
text tokens through multiple layers of self-attention and
feed-forward networks (FFNs). Though simple and effective, this structure faces a significant challenge: the high
computational cost incurred by vision tokens, which typically far outnumber text tokens. Since self-attention scales
quadratically with sequence length, the problem becomes
even more severe as top-performing LMMs (Li et al., 2024b;
Wang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b) usually process highresolution images, resulting in thousands of tokens per image. Moreover, LMMs are now being extended to process
video frames (Lin et al., 2023a; Maaz et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2024a; Xue et al., 2024) or multiple images (Li et al.,
2024c; Jiang et al., 2024a) within the same structure, further
increasing the length of visual token sequences.

1. Introduction
Large multimodal models (LMMs) have demonstrated powerful capabilities by combining visual information with large
language models (LLMs), but their computational overhead
can be immense due to the large number of vision tokens.
To mitigate this, most existing efforts address token-level
redundancy by pruning or merging vision tokens with the
risk of discarding fine-grained details. In this paper, we
instead tackle the computation-level redundancy on vision tokens, an often-overlooked dimension. We find that
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime
Research.
Correspondence to:
Penghao Wu <penghao001@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Ziwei Liu <ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

A popular and intuitive solution to this problem is to reduce the number of vision tokens via pruning and merging
1

