Testing Conditional Mean Independence Using Generative Neural Networks

Yi Zhang * 1 Linjun Huang * 1 Yun Yang 2 Xiaofeng Shao 3

Abstract

variables. In machine learning, CMI testing has broad applications in areas like interpretable machine learning (Murdoch et al., 2019), representation learning (Bengio et al.,
2013; Huang et al., 2024) and transfer learning (Maqsood
et al., 2019; Zhuang et al., 2020).

Conditional mean independence (CMI) testing is
crucial for statistical tasks including model determination and variable importance evaluation.
In this work, we introduce a novel population
CMI measure and a bootstrap-based testing procedure that utilizes deep generative neural networks
to estimate the conditional mean functions involved in the population measure. The test statistic is thoughtfully constructed to ensure that even
slowly decaying nonparametric estimation errors
do not affect the asymptotic accuracy of the test.
Our approach demonstrates strong empirical performance in scenarios with high-dimensional covariates and response variable, can handle multivariate responses, and maintains nontrivial power
against local alternatives outside an n−1/2 neighborhood of the null hypothesis. We also use numerical simulations and real-world imaging data
applications to highlight the efficacy and versatility of our testing procedure.

In this paper, we address the problem of CMI testing for
multivariate response variables and covariates. Specifically,
for random vectors X ∈ RdX , Y ∈ RdY , and Z ∈ RdZ ,
we test the null hypothesis H0 that Y is conditionally mean
independent of X given Z, i.e., E[Y |X = x, Z = z] =
E[Y |Z = z], a.e. (x, z) ∈ RdX +dZ . For example, consider
predicting age Y from a facial image. To test whether Y
can be predicted using images with a specific facial region
(potentially containing sensitive information) covered in
black, X can represent the covered region and Z the remaining facial image. Similarly, to test whether Y can be
predicted using a low-resolution version or extracted features of a facial image, X can represent the original image
and Z a low-dimensional feature vector derived from X
using standard extraction methods (e.g., Autoencoder, Average pooling, or PCA (Berahmand et al., 2024)). Under
H0 , removing X from the predictive model f (X, Z), where
f : RdX +dZ → RdY denotes the nonparametric regression
function, does not reduce prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction

For machine learning tasks, identifying which (functions
of) covariates contribute to predicting the response is particularly important, as deep neural networks (DNNs) often
process high-dimensional data, such as images and text, that
may include irrelevant features (Li et al., 2017; Van Landeghem et al., 2010). Performing dimensionality reduction
before DNN training provides several advantages: it enhances interpretability, improves prediction accuracy, and
reduces computational costs (Cai et al., 2018). In evaluating
DNN training, covariate significance is typically assessed
by comparing performance metrics, such as mean squared
error or classification accuracy, for DNNs trained with and
without specific covariates (Dai et al., 2022; Williamson
et al., 2023). As discussed in Section 2.3 of Williamson
et al. (2023), many common performance metrics, such
as the coefficient of determination (R2 ) for regression and
empirical risk with cross-entropy or 0-1 loss for binary classification, are functionals of the conditional mean functions
of Y , which means H0 will imply that the covariates are not
significant. Thus, CMI testing provides a valuable tool for

Conditional mean independence (CMI) testing is a fundamental tool for model simplification and assessing variable
importance, and plays a crucial role in statistics and machine learning. In traditional statistical applications, such
as nonparametric regression, CMI testing identifies subsets or functions of covariates that meaningfully predict the
response variable. This is essential for improving model efficiency, accuracy, and interpretability by avoiding redundant
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA.
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. 3 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, and Department of Economics, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA. Correspondence
to: Yi Zhang <yiz19@illinois.edu>, Linjun Huang <linjunh2@illinois.edu>, Yun Yang <yy84@umd.edu>, Xiaofeng
Shao <shaox@wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

