KIND: Knowledge Integration and Diversion for Training Decomposable Models

Fixed-size Pretrained
Model
Model

(b)

Targe

Deploy

Limited Resources

(c)

Targe

Domain Shift

…

Decomposable
Model

Tailor

…

Knowledge Diversion

Learn
-gene

Pre-trained models have become the preferred
backbone due to the increasing complexity of
model parameters. However, traditional pretrained models often face deployment challenges
due to their fixed sizes, and are prone to negative
transfer when discrepancies arise between training tasks and target tasks. To address this, we
propose KIND, a novel pre-training method designed to construct decomposable models. KIND
integrates knowledge by incorporating Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) as a structural constraint, with each basic component represented
as a combination of a column vector, singular
value, and row vector from U , Σ, and V ⊤ matrices. These components are categorized into learngenes for encapsulating class-agnostic knowledge
and tailors for capturing class-specific knowledge, with knowledge diversion facilitated by a
class gate mechanism during training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that models pretrained with KIND can be decomposed into learngenes and tailors, which can be adaptively recombined for diverse resource-constrained deployments. Moreover, for tasks with large domain shifts, transferring only learngenes with
task-agnostic knowledge, when combined with
randomly initialized tailors, effectively mitigates
domain shifts. Code will be made available
at https://github.com/Te4P0t/KIND.

Traditional Pretraining

Dataset

(a)

Abstract

Dataset

Yucheng Xie 1 2 Fu Feng 1 2 Ruixiao Shi 1 2 Jing Wang 1 2 Yong Rui 3 Xin Geng 1 2

…

Recombine

Direct

Wrong Size

All Knowledge

Task-agnostic
Lora

Redundancy (Random)

Tailor
(Random)

Figure 1. (a) Traditional pre-training prioritizes maximizing performance on training datasets, often producing fixed-size models
and making them prone to negative transfer. In contrast, KIND
redefines the training objective to pre-train models that are both
structure- and knowledge-decomposable. (b) Consequently, KIND
enables pre-trained models to be adaptively restructured, facilitating deployment in diverse resource-constrained scenarios. (c) Additionally, the task-agnostic knowledge encapsulated in learngenes
can effectively mitigate domain shifts.

stone of modern machine learning (Qiu et al., 2020; Han
et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2025b). These pre-trained models
have proven highly effective, especially when combined
with parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques such
as LoRA (Hu et al., 2022; Hayou et al., 2024) and its variants (Zhang et al., 2023; Valipour et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2024). However, traditional pre-training approaches primarily focus on optimizing performance for specific training
datasets, often neglecting their transferability to downstream
tasks and adaptability to diverse deployment scenarios.

1. Introduction
The increasing size of models has significantly increased
computational costs, making pre-trained models a corner1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education,
China 3 Lenovo Research. Correspondence to: Jing Wang
<wangjing91@seu.edu.cn>, Xin Geng <xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

As a result, pre-trained models typically have a fixed, large
size, designed to encapsulate as much knowledge as possible from the training data. This design, however, presents
significant challenges for practical deployment, which is
often constrained by factors like memory usage, processing
power, and response time (Zhang et al., 2022). More importantly, when downstream tasks differ significantly from
the pre-training datasets, the transferred knowledge can

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

