Large Language Models to Diffusion Finetuning

Edoardo Cetin 1 Tianyu Zhao 1 Yujin Tang 1

Abstract
We propose a new finetuning method to provide
pre-trained large language models (LMs) the ability to scale test-time compute through the diffusion framework. By increasing the number of
diffusion steps, we show our finetuned models
achieve monotonically increasing accuracy, directly translating to improved performance across
downstream tasks. Furthermore, our finetuned
models can expertly answer questions on specific topics by integrating powerful guidance techniques, and autonomously determine the compute
required for a given problem by leveraging adaptive ODE solvers. Our method is applicable to any
foundation model pre-trained with cross-entropy
and does not modify any of its original weights,
fully preserving its strong single-step generation
capabilities. We show our method can be more
effective and is fully compatible with traditional
finetuning and search approaches, introducing an
orthogonal new direction to unify the strengths of
the autoregressive and diffusion frameworks.

Figure 1. Test-time compute scaling with L2D. Our framework
empowers LMs with the scaling properties of diffusion, yielding
increasingly higher inference performance with additional steps.

Established as the predominant approach in visual domains,
the diffusion framework offers properties that appear particularly complementary to the LM paradigm (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021; Peluchetti, 2023; Esser et al., 2024). For instance, the iterative nature of diffusion allows to adaptively
scale compute to the difficulty of a specific task or any level
of accuracy demanded by the user, regardless of the generated output’s length. However, despite these useful properties, diffusion models trained for language currently lag
significantly behind their autoregressive counterparts (Lou
et al., 2024; Gat et al., 2024; Gulrajani & Hashimoto, 2024)
putting into question their inductive bias and scalability
when applied to this highly relevant domain.

1. Introduction
The scalability of autoregressive large language models
(LMs) is a pivotal component of the current generation of
foundation models (Team et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023;
Dubey et al., 2024). However, despite their unprecedented
capabilities, LMs inherently lack many valuable properties
that could be expected of an “artificial general intelligence,”
such as the ability to scale computation for their most critical decisions (Sutton, 2019). Efforts to address this limitation primarily focused on eliciting more nuanced responses
through prompting and targeted searches over the space
of possible completions (Feng et al., 2023; Kumar et al.,
2024; Trinh et al., 2024; Jaech et al., 2024), anchoring the
reasoning process in the space of generated tokens.

In this work, we aim to unite the strengths of these frameworks by introducing LM to Diffusion (L2D): a new finetuning method powering pre-trained LMs with the scaling properties and potential of diffusion (Karras et al., 2022; Uehara
et al., 2025). Rather than learning a diffusion model from
scratch, our method harnesses the large amount of “system 1”
understanding efficiently acquired during autoregressive pretraining by casting LMs as single-step diffusions. Then, by
introducing a small fraction of new parameters – comparable
to modern parameter-efficient approaches (Hu et al., 2021) –
we imbue the model with a new set of multi-step “reasoning”
skills, the ability to scale computation on-demand, and the
potential to incorporate powerful guidance techniques (Ho
& Salimans, 2022), all without compromising its original

1

Sakana AI, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Edoardo Cetin
<edo@sakana.ai>, Tianyu Zhao <tianyu@sakana.ai>, Yujin
Tang <yujintang@sakana.ai>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

