Causal Attribution Analysis for Continuous Outcomes

Shanshan Luo 1 Yixuan Yu 1 Chunchen Liu 2 Feng Xie * 1 Zhi Geng 1

Abstract

uate whether the development of hypertension was caused
by dietary habits, exercise routines, and physical characteristics. Additionally, such questions are also very common
in developmental toxicity risk studies, where researchers in
clinical trials aim to determine whether abnormal weight
loss in pups is caused by potentially toxic agents, organ
disease, or other risk factors.

Previous studies have extensively addressed the
attribution problem for binary outcome variables.
However, in many practical scenarios, the outcome variable is continuous, and simply binarizing it may result in information loss or biased
conclusions. To address this issue, we propose
a series of posterior causal estimands for retrospectively evaluating multiple correlated causes
from a continuous outcome. These estimands
include posterior intervention effects, posterior
total causal effects, and posterior natural direct
effects. Under assumptions of sequential ignorability, monotonicity, and perfect positive rank, we
show that the posterior causal estimands of interest are identifiable and present the corresponding
identification equations. We also provide a simple
but effective estimation procedure and establish
asymptotic properties of the proposed estimators.
An artificial hypertension example and a real developmental toxicity dataset are employed to illustrate our method.

To explain such retrospective studies, researchers need to
use counterfactual scenarios that imagine what would have
happened if certain conditions experienced previously had
been different (Lu et al., 2023). For example, for a patient
with high blood pressure who never exercises, it is inferred
what his blood pressure would have been like if there had
been an intervention to make him exercise regularly. Similarly, for a pup exposed to a toxic reagent and abnormally
thin, it is inferred how its body weight would have changed
if it had received a placebo instead. Pearl (2000) introduced
a three layer causal hierarchy, comprising association, intervention, and counterfactual levels. Retrospective causal
analysis, which assesses the causes of observed effects, falls
under the third level of this framework. The first two levels primarily involve predicting or evaluating the effects
of interventions. In contrast, the third level focuses on determining whether observed outcomes can be attributed to
prior interventions or exposures (Pearl, 2015; Dawid et al.,
2014; 2015).

1. Introduction
In social science (VanderWeele, 2012), health risk assessment (Khoury et al., 2004), legal contexts (Sanders et al.,
2021), and explainable artificial intelligence (Galhotra et al.,
2021), researchers are interested not only in assessing the
effects of causes (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Robins et al.,
1994; Angrist et al., 1996; Bang & Robins, 2005; Ding et al.,
2011; Zhao et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2016; Fan Li & Zaslavsky, 2018; Yang et al., 2020), but also in inferring causes
from specific outcomes (Pearl, 1995; Dawid, 2000; Tian &
Pearl, 2000; Kuroki & Cai, 2011; Dawid & Musio, 2022;
Pearl, 2022; Lu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023). For instance, for
hypertensive patients, researchers may retrospectively eval-

While randomized experiments and standard assumptions
effectively address the first two levels of causation (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Pearl, 2014), they are not enough to
address the challenges posed by the third level (Dawid &
Musio, 2022). This limitation presents a significant challenge for traditional causal inference methods when dealing
with such retrospective analysis problems. To formally
answer such questions, Pearl (1999) outlined three counterfactual definitions of causal relationships to capture the
necessity or sufficiency of a cause for a given binary effect.
Additionally, Dawid et al. (2014) introduced the probability of causation to infer the cause for a given binary effect.
When there are multiple potentially correlated causes, Lu
et al. (2023) and Li et al. (2023) introduced posterior causal
effects under observed post-treatment variables to retrospectively deduce causes from a single effect and multiple
effects, respectively. In many clinical trials, the outcome
variables of interest may be continuous, such as weight,

1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Beijing Technology and
Business University, Fangshan District, Beijing, China 2 LingYang
Co.Ltd, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Feng Xie <fengxie@btbu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

