When Can Proxies Improve the Sample Complexity of Preference Learning?

Yuchen Zhu 1 Daniel Augusto de Souza 1 Zhengyan Shi 1 Mengyue Yang 2 Pasquale Minervini 3
Matt J. Kusner 4 5 Alexander D’Amour 6

Abstract

In many cases, this preference data is a proxy for the ground
truth. For example, humans raters tend to prefer longer
answers to a question, even if the answer is less informative
(Zhou et al., 2024). In this case, ‘response length’ is a proxy
for the true helpfulness of an answer. If an LLM is trained
on this proxy data alone it leads to a ‘length-bias’ (Shen
et al., 2023; Singhal et al., 2023), as LLMs fine-tuned with
this preference data generate longer and better formatted
responses to appear more helpful (Chen et al., 2024). This
is an example of the well-known phenomenon of reward
hacking1 : a model optimised to perform well with respect to
a proxy reward function, performs poorly with respect to a
ground truth reward function (Casper et al., 2023). Reward
hacking is a fundamental problem in learning that has been
observed in optimised circuits listening in on the oscillators of other computers when instead tasked to build their
own (Bird & Layzell, 2002), universities rejecting the most
qualified applicants to boost their ratings (Golden, 2001),
and many other cases in game playing (Clark & Amodei,
2016), autonomous driving (Knox et al., 2023), and text
summarisation (Paulus et al., 2018).

We address the problem of reward hacking, where
maximising a proxy reward does not necessarily
increase the true reward. This is a key concern
for Large Language Models (LLMs), as they are
often fine-tuned on human preferences that may
not accurately reflect a true objective. Existing
work uses various tricks such as regularisation,
tweaks to the reward model, and reward hacking
detectors, to limit the influence that such proxy
preferences have on a model. Luckily, in many
contexts such as medicine, education, and law, a
sparse amount of expert data is often available. In
these cases, it is often unclear whether the addition of proxy data can improve policy learning.
We outline a set of sufficient conditions on proxy
feedback that, if satisfied, indicate that proxy data
can provably improve the sample complexity of
learning the ground truth policy. These conditions can inform the data collection process for
specific tasks. The result implies a parameterisation for LLMs that achieves this improved sample
complexity. We detail how one can adapt existing architectures to yield this improved sample
complexity.

To address reward hacking in LLMs, prior work largely designs tweaks to the model, data, and optimization procedure.
This includes regularisation towards an initial policy (Schulman et al., 2017; Rafailov et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024),
changing properties of the reward model (Gao et al., 2023;
Coste et al., 2024), using soft labels (Zhu et al., 2024), adjusting optimization hyperparameters (Singhal et al., 2023),
reward hacking detection mechanisms (Pan et al., 2022;
Miao et al., 2024), and introducing additional tools specialised to counteract length bias (Chen et al., 2024). The
reasoning behind this comes from the makeup of proxy data.
We can think of proxy data as having two parts: (i) a true
part that brings a policy closer to the ground truth policy
during learning and (ii) a false part that moves it farther
away. Prior work limits learning to reduce the impact that
the false part has on the final model.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionised machine learning with their surprising capabilities, surpassing
human-level performance in law, medicine, and other examinations (Achiam et al., 2023; Amin et al., 2023). A large
part of their success is their ability to incorporate human
preferences to learn complex objectives such as trustworthiness (Yu et al., 2024), sentiment preferences (Chakraborty
et al., 2024), and value alignment (Ji et al., 2023).
1
Department of Computer Science, University College London
University of Bristol 3 University of Edinburgh 4 Polytechnique
Montréal 5 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 6 Google Deepmind. Correspondence to: Yuchen Zhu <yuchen.zhu.18@ucl.ac.uk>.

Without any further information on proxy preferences or
the ground truth, we are restricted to methods such as
these, i.e., methods that are blind to the true and false
parts of proxy data, to reduce the impact of reward hack-

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

This is also sometimes referred to as reward over-optimisation.

