Finite-Sample Convergence Bounds for Trust Region Policy Optimization in
Mean-Field Games
Antonio Ocello 1 Daniil Tiapkin 1 2 Lorenzo Mancini 1 Mathieu Laurière 3 Eric Moulines 1 4

Abstract

A powerful framework to model these adaptive decision
agents is Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL),
which enables agents to learn optimal strategies through
interaction with both the environment and other agents (see,
e.g., Zhang et al., 2021; Gronauer & Diepold, 2022). However, MARL faces two major challenges: scalability and
non-stationarity. As the number of agents increases, the
joint state-action space grows exponentially, making learning computationally prohibitive. Additionally, because all
agents are simultaneously updating their policies, the environment becomes non-stationary from the perspective of
each individual agent, severely hindering convergence and
stability. To address these issues, many techniques have
been considered, like Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) (Foerster et al., 2018) and attention
approaches (Iqbal & Sha, 2019). While these methods improve stability and learning efficiency, it comes at a significant computational cost, limiting its scalability in large-scale
systems.

We introduce Mean-Field Trust Region Policy
Optimization (MF-TRPO), a novel algorithm designed to compute approximate Nash equilibria for ergodic Mean-Field Games (MFG) in finite state-action spaces. Building on the wellestablished performance of TRPO in the reinforcement learning (RL) setting, we extend its methodology to the MFG framework, leveraging its stability and robustness in policy optimization. Under
standard assumptions in the MFG literature, we
provide a rigorous analysis of MF-TRPO, establishing theoretical guarantees on its convergence.
Our results cover both the exact formulation of
the algorithm and its sample-based counterpart,
where we derive high-probability guarantees and
finite sample complexity. This work advances
MFG optimization by bridging RL techniques
with mean-field decision-making, offering a theoretically grounded approach to solving complex
multi-agent problems.

Under the assumptions of homogeneity and anonymity, complex multi-agent games can be effectively approximated using Mean-Field Games (MFG). MFG provide an asymptotic
approximation of exchangeable particle systems as the number of agents grows. Originally introduced by Lasry & Lions
(2006a;b; 2007) and Huang et al. (2003; 2005; 2006a;b),
MFG replace direct agent-to-agent interactions with a representative agent interacting with the statistical distribution
of the population. Due to their analytical tractability and
broad applicability, MFG have been widely adopted across
various domains, including economic modeling (Bassière
et al., 2024), finance (Lavigne & Tankov, 2023; Carmona
et al., 2015), public health dynamics (Doncel et al., 2022),
and energy storage (Alasseur et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
In an increasingly interconnected world, autonomous systems capable of adaptive decision-making have become
indispensable. Their range of applications is vast and continuously expanding, spanning from autonomous driving (see,
e.g., Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016) to energy market control (Samvelyan et al., 2019), and from traffic light optimization (Wiering et al., 2000) to advanced robotic systems (Matignon et al., 2007; Kober et al., 2013).
1
CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique
de Paris, 91120 Palaiseau, France 2 Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS,
LMO, 91405, Orsay, France 3 Shanghai Frontiers Science Center
of Artificial Intelligence and Deep Learning at NYU Shanghai and
NYU-ECNU Institute of Mathematical Sciences, 567 West Yangsi
Road, Pudong New District, Shanghai, China 200124 4 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE. Correspondence to: Antonio Ocello <antonio.ocello@polytechnique.edu>.

In particular, Mean-Field Reinforcement Learning (MFRL)
arises as the scaling limit of many MARL problems, positioning itself at the intersection of MFG and Reinforcement
Learning (RL). In this setting, RL techniques are employed
to solve equilibrium problems in large-scale multi-agent systems. At the core of this framework, each agent optimizes
its objective while treating the mean-field distribution as
fixed. This structure closely resembles CTDE in the MARL
setting, but its computational cost is significantly reduced
due to the mean-field approximation. In turn, the distribu-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

