LapSum – One Method to Differentiate Them All:
Ranking, Sorting and Top-k Selection

Łukasz Struski 1 Michał B. Bednarczyk 1 2 Igor T. Podolak 1 Jacek Tabor 1

Abstract

3

We present a novel technique for constructing
differentiable order-type operations, including
soft ranking, soft top-k selection, and soft permutations. Our approach leverages an efficient
closed-form formula for the inverse of a function LapSum, defined as a sum of Laplace distributions. This formulation ensures low computational and memory complexity in selecting
the highest activations, enabling losses and gradients to be computed in O(n log n) time. Moreover, LapSum can easily be parallelized, both
with respect to time and memory. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art techniques for highdimensional vectors and large k values. Furthermore, we provide efficient implementations for
both CPU and CUDA environments, underscoring the practicality and scalability of our method
for large-scale ranking and differentiable ordering
problems.

p0 + p1 + p2 = k
p2 = b f(x r2)dx
8

6

r2

(b, k)

p0 = b f(x r0)dx p1 =
2

0

r0

2

k
2

b

1

f(x r1)dx
b r1

6

8

Figure 1. Scheme depicting the procedure for calculating the probabilities pi in the soft top-k selection algorithm for LapSum, given
n centers of Laplace distributions ri and a value k < n. All the
formulae have a closed form and can be computed, jointly with
derivatives, in O(n log n) time and O(n) memory.

them, relaxations or approximations are needed to make
such tasks compatible with neural network training. This
can be achieved by smoothing the objective functions, introducing uncertainty into algorithms, softening constraints, or
adding variability. The known methods include smoothed
approximations (Berrada et al., 2018; Garcin et al., 2022),
optimal based (Cuturi et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020), permutations (Petersen et al., 2022b). Some of these solutions are
often not closed form.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are trained using data through gradient
descent, which requires models to be differentiable. However, common ordering tasks such as sorting, ranking, or
top-k selection are inherently non-differentiable due to their
piecewise constant nature. This typically prevents the direct application of gradient descent, which is essential for
efficient learning from data. These challenges have become
increasingly relevant in recent years (Lapin et al., 2016;
Blondel et al., 2020; Petersen et al., 2022b). To address

Challenges in addressing order related tasks arise from several factors. Among them are abrupt changes and instabilities when traversing regions. Time and memory issues
often limit the solutions for large n and k values, where
the aim lies in computing soft differenitiable top-k for large
sequences of size n. There might also issues with scalability, parallel and batch processing. Techniques employed
to solve these problems include relaxations and estimators,
ranking regularizers, even learning-based ranking solutions.
However, some problems remain unsolved or the existing
methods are incomplete. E.g., efficiency in terms of time
and memory usage may still be inadequate, impeding the
solution of certain tasks (Xie et al., 2020). Frequently, there
is a speed-precision trade-off. Several methods lack closedform solutions, confining one to approximations or complicated calculations. Some methods do not yield probabilities (Blondel et al., 2020). Several do not yet support
easy-to-use GPU methods.

*

Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
2
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Łukasz Struski <lukasz.struski@uj.edu.pl>,
Michał B. Bednarczyk <michalb3@illinois.edu>, Igor
T. Podolak <igor.podolak@uj.edu.pl>,
Jacek Tabor
<jacek.tabor@uj.edu.pl>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

