The Case for Learned Provenance-based System Behavior Baseline

Yao Zhu * 1 Zhenyuan Li * 1 2 Yangyang Wei 2 Shouling Ji 1

Abstract

ponents as nodes and their interactions as edges, for example, PROCESS A.exe READ FILE B.txt. These
edges are further enriched with temporal data, enhancing
the graph’s ability to chronologically trace system actions.
Crucially, the inherent causal structure of these graphs ensures that only prior actions can affect subsequent behaviors,
providing a robust framework for analyzing and predicting
system events.

Provenance graphs describe data flows and causal
dependencies of host activities, enabling to track
the data propagation and manipulation throughout the systems, which provide a foundation for
intrusion detection. However, these Provenancebased Intrusion Detection Systems (PIDSes) face
significant challenges in storage, representation,
and analysis, which impede the efficacy of machine learning models such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in processing and learning from
these graphs. This paper presents a novel learningbased anomaly detection method designed to efficiently embed and analyze large-scale provenance
graphs. Our approach integrates dynamic graph
processing with adaptive encoding, facilitating
compact embeddings that effectively address outof-vocabulary (OOV) elements and adapt to normality shifts in dynamic real-world environments.
Subsequently, we incorporate this refined baseline
into a tag-propagation framework for real-time detection. Our evaluation demonstrates the method’s
accuracy and adaptability in anomaly path mining, significantly advancing the state-of-the-art
in handling and analyzing provenance graphs for
anomaly detection.

Intrusion detection requires immediate responses due to the
urgent nature of the task. While provenance graphs offer
considerable benefits for security analysis, they face several
challenges that impair their effectiveness (Alahmadi et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2021). The constant growth of system logs
generates vast and intricate provenance graphs, featuring
many nodes and edges, along with a high average node degree. This complexity renders the graphs computationally
intensive to manage and analyze. Additionally, although
the rich semantic and contextual information within these
graphs aids in understanding system behaviors, it also significantly increases computational overhead (Wang et al.,
2022). Moreover, system logs are typically gathered continuously, incorporating new entities and relationships frequently. This dynamic nature often results in an out-ofvocabulary (OOV) problem during event encoding, which
affects the accuracy and effectiveness of the graph representations and presents adaptability challenges.
To address these shortcomings, we propose a novel learningbased anomaly detection approach that more effectively captures system behaviors from provenance graphs. Anomaly
detection in dynamic graphs is a crucial aspect of network analysis, especially in the intrusion detection scenario (Zeng et al., 2022). Existing frequency databases
extract and record the frequency of each system event from
logs, allowing a decoupled approach to handling provenance
graphs (Hassan et al., 2019). Inspired by these databases, as
well as learned storage techniques that optimize the storage
and retrieval of large-scale graph data, our method begins by
decoupling provenance graphs into individual system events
along with their frequencies.

1. Introduction
Recently, Provenance-based Intrusion Detection Systems
(PIDSes) that utilize provenance graphs for threat modeling gain widespread attention from both industry and
academia (Rehman et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2023). Originating from system audit logs, provenance graphs capture detailed behaviors within operating systems through
causally linked relationships (Gehani & Tariq, 2012). Provenance graphs model system activities by representing com*
Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 College of Software
Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China. Correspondence
to: Zhenyuan Li <lizhenyuan@zju.edu.cn>.

We employ an embedding model to convert these events
into vectors, which serve as inputs for a lightweight learning
model. This model is trained to recognize patterns based
on the frequency of occurrences, addressing the dynamic

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

