Cavia: Camera-controllable Multi-view Video Diffusion
with View-Integrated Attention

Dejia Xu 1 * Yifan Jiang 2 Chen Huang 2 Liangchen Song 2 Thorsten Gernoth 2 Liangliang Cao 2
Zhangyang Wang 1 Hao Tang 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The rapid development of diffusion models has enabled significant advancements in video generative models. Early
efforts have explored various approaches, either training a
video model from scratch or by fine-tuning pre-trained image generation models with additional temporal layers (Stability, 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Ho et al., 2022b; Singer
et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022a; Nan et al., 2024). The training data of these video models typically consists of a curated mixture of image (Schuhmann et al., 2022) and video
datasets (Bain et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023b;a; Nan et al.,
2024). While substantial progress has been made in improving model architectures and refining training data, relatively
little research has been conducted on the 3D consistency
and camera controllability of generated videos.

In recent years, there have been remarkable breakthroughs in image-to-video generation. However, the 3D consistency and camera controllability of generated frames have remained unsolved. Recent studies have attempted to incorporate camera control into the generation process,
but their results are often limited to simple trajectories or lack the ability to generate consistent
videos from multiple distinct camera paths for
the same scene. To address these limitations, we
introduce Cavia, a novel framework for cameracontrollable, multi-view video generation, capable of converting an input image into multiple
spatiotemporally consistent videos. Our framework extends the spatial and temporal attention
modules into view-integrated attention modules,
improving both viewpoint and temporal consistency. This flexible design allows for joint training
with diverse curated data sources, including scenelevel static videos, object-level synthetic multiview dynamic videos, and real-world monocular
dynamic videos. To the best of our knowledge,
Cavia is the first framework that enables users to
generate multiple videos of the same scene with
precise control over camera motion, while simultaneously preserving object motion. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that Cavia surpasses
state-of-the-art methods in terms of geometric
consistency and perceptual quality. Project page:
https://ir1d.github.io/Cavia/

*

To tackle this issue, several recent works (Wang et al.,
2023c; He et al., 2024; Bahmani et al., 2024; Xu et al.,
2024; Hou et al., 2024) have attempted to introduce camera
controllability in video generation, aiming to ensure that
generated frames adhere to viewpoint instructions, thereby
improving 3D consistency. These works either enhance
viewpoint control through better conditioning signals (Wang
et al., 2023c; He et al., 2024; Bahmani et al., 2024) or by
utilizing geometric priors, such as epipolar constraints (Xu
et al., 2024) or explicit 3D representations (Hou et al.,
2024). However, despite these efforts, the generated videos
often lack precise 3D consistency or are restricted to
static scenes with little to no object motion. Moreover, it
remains challenging for monocular video generators to
produce multi-view consistent videos of the same scene
from different camera trajectories.
Since independently sampling multiple sequences often results in significantly inconsistent scenes, generating multiple
video sequences simultaneously is desirable. However, this
remains extremely challenging due to the scarcity of multiview video data in the wild, leading to multi-view generations limited to inconsistent near-static scenes or synthetic
objects. A concurrent work, CVD (Kuang et al., 2024),
builds on multi-view static videos (Zhou et al., 2018) and
warping-augmented monocular videos (Bain et al., 2021),
but it can only generate videos with limited baselines, yield-

This work was performed while Dejia Xu interned at Apple. 1 The
University of Texas at Austin 2 Apple. Correspondence to: Hao
Tang <hao tang@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

