Nested Expectations with Kernel Quadrature

Zonghao Chen 1 Masha Naslidnyk 1 François-Xavier Briol 2

Abstract

et al., 2024), of acquisition functions in active learning and
Bayesian optimisation (Ginsbourger and Le Riche, 2010;
Yang et al., 2024), of objectives in distributionally-robust
optimisation (Shapiro et al., 2023; Bariletto and Ho, 2024;
Dellaporta et al., 2024), and of statistical divergences (Song
et al., 2020; Kanagawa et al., 2023). Computing nested
expectations is also a key task beyond machine learning,
including in fields ranging from value of information for
decision making (Giles and Goda, 2019; Mala, 2024) to finance and insurance (Gordy and Juneja, 2010; Giles and
Haji-Ali, 2019), manufacturing (Andradóttir and Glynn,
2016) and geology (Goda et al., 2018).

This paper considers the challenging computational task of estimating nested expectations. Existing algorithms, such as nested Monte Carlo or
multilevel Monte Carlo, are known to be consistent but require a large number of samples at both
inner and outer levels to converge. Instead, we
propose a novel estimator consisting of nested
kernel quadrature estimators and we prove that
it has a faster convergence rate than all baseline methods when the integrands have sufficient
smoothness. We then demonstrate empirically
that our proposed method does indeed require
fewer samples to estimate nested expectations on
real-world applications including Bayesian optimisation, option pricing, and health economics.

The estimation of nested expectations is particularly challenging since there are two levels of intractability: the inner conditional expectation, and the outer expectation, both
of which must be approximated accurately in order to approximate the nested expectation I accurately. The most
widely used algorithm for this problem is nested Monte
Carlo (NMC) (Lee and Glynn, 2003; Hong and Juneja,
2009; Rainforth et al., 2018). It approximates the inner and
outer expectations using Monte Carlo estimators with N
and T samples respectively. NMC is consistent under mild
conditions, but has a relatively slow rate of convergence.
Depending on the regularity of the problem, existing results
indicate that we require either O(∆−3 ) or O(∆−4 ) evaluations of g to obtain a root mean squared error smaller or
equal to ∆. This tends to be prohibitively expensive; for
example, we would expect in the order of either 1 or 100
million observations to obtain an error of ∆ = 0.01. This is
infeasible for many applications where obtaining samples
or evaluating g is expensive.

1. Introduction
We consider the computational task of estimating a nested
expectation, which is the expectation of a function that
itself depends on another unknown conditional expectation. More precisely, let Q be a Borel probability measure
with density q on Θ and Pθ a Borel probability measure
with density pθ on X ⊆ RdX which is parameterized by
θ ∈ Θ ⊆ RdΘ . Given integrable functions f : R → R and
g : X × Θ → R, we are interested in estimating:
I := Eθ∼Q [f (EX∼Pθ [g(X, θ)])]
(1)
!
Z
Z
=
f
g(x, θ)pθ (x)dx q(θ)dθ .
Θ
X
{z
}
|

This issue has led to the development of a number of methods aiming to reduce the cost. Bartuska et al. (2023) proposed replacing the Monte Carlo estimators with quasiMonte Carlo (QMC) (Dick et al., 2013). This algorithm,
called nested QMC (NQMC), requires only O(∆−2.5 )
function evaluations to obtain an error of size ∆ (so that
we only need in the order of 100, 000 observations for an
error of ∆ = 0.01). However, NQMC requires strong regularity assumptions which may not hold in practice (a monotone second and third derivative for f ). Separately, Bujok
et al. (2015); Giles and Haji-Ali (2019); Giles and Goda
(2019) proposed to use multi-level Monte Carlo (MLMC)
and showed that this can further reduce the number of func-

inner conditional expectation

|

{z

outer expectation

}

Nested expectations arise within a wide range of tasks, such
as the computation of objectives in Bayesian experimental design (Beck et al., 2020; Goda et al., 2020; Rainforth
1
Department of Computer Science, University College
London 2 Department of Statistical Science, University College London. Correspondence to: Zonghao Chen <zonghao.chen.22@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

