Beyond Cropped Regions: New Benchmark and Corresponding Baseline for
Chinese Scene Text Retrieval in Diverse Layouts

Gengluo Li 1 2 Huawen Shen 1 2 Yu Zhou 3

Abstract
Query
“封顶大吉”
Horizontal

Chinese scene text retrieval is a practical task that
aims to search for images containing visual instances of a Chinese query text. This task is extremely challenging because Chinese text often
features complex and diverse layouts in real-world
scenes. Current efforts tend to inherit the solution
for English scene text retrieval, failing to achieve
satisfactory performance. In this paper, we establish a Diversified Layout benchmark for Chinese
Street View Text Retrieval (DL-CSVTR), which
is specifically designed to evaluate retrieval performance across various text layouts, including
vertical, cross-line, and partial alignments. To address the limitations in existing methods, we propose Chinese Scene Text Retrieval CLIP (CSTRCLIP), a novel model that integrates global visual information with multi-granularity alignment
training. CSTR-CLIP applies a two-stage training
process to overcome previous limitations, such as
the exclusion of visual features outside the text region and reliance on single-granularity alignment,
thereby enabling the model to effectively handle diverse text layouts. Experiments on existing
benchmark show that CSTR-CLIP outperforms
the previous state-of-the-art model by 18.82% accuracy and also provides faster inference speed.
Further analysis on DL-CSVTR confirms the superior performance of CSTR-CLIP in handling
various text layouts. The dataset and code will be
publicly available to facilitate research in Chinese
scene text retrieval.

Text
Detector

Text
Detector

Vertical

Text
Detector

Cross-Line

Partial

Visual
Embeding

Text
Eembding
“BANK”
(a) English scene text retrieval

Visual
Embeding

Text
Eembding
“封顶大吉”
(b) Previous Chinese scene text retrieval

Visual
Embeding

Text
Eembding
“封顶大吉”
(c) Ours

Figure 1. Pipeline comparison between (a) English scene text retrieval, (b) Chinese scene text retrieval adopted in previous work,
and (c) Our proposed Chinese scene text retrieval framework that
is based on full image information and multi-granularity alignment.
The patterns in the circles represent the text layout forms.

1. Introduction
Text is an important object in scene images, and scene text
related research topics including detection (Wang et al.,
2022; Cao et al., 2025), recognition (Yang et al., 2025;
Zhang et al., 2025), spotting (Lyu et al., 2025a; Wei et al.,
2022), understanding (Shen et al., 2025; Zeng et al., 2023)
and processing (Zeng et al., 2024b; Shu et al., 2025) have
drawn increasing attention in recent years. Among them,
scene text retrieval is an important topic of information
retrieval, which involves searching for images that contain
visual instances of a given query text within a collection
of natural images (Mishra et al., 2013; Mafla et al., 2020).
As texts in images generally convey valuable information,
this task has been widely used in many applications, such
as multimedia content retrieval, product recommendation,
and automatic navigation (Karaoglu et al., 2016; Bai et al.,
2018; Song et al., 2019).

1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 2 School of Cyber Security, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 VCIP & TMCC &
DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin,
China. Correspondence to: Yu Zhou <yzhou@nankai.edu.cn>.

In recent years, scene text retrieval has witnessed tremendous progress, while most of the existing methods focus on
the language patterns of English. Whether these methods
can be transferred to other language scenarios (especially

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

