Distributionally Robust Policy Learning under Concept Drifts

Jingyuan Wang 1 Zhimei Ren 2 Ruohan Zhan 3 Zhengyuan Zhou 1 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
In a wide range of fields, the abundance of user-specific
historical data provides opportunities for learning efficient
individualized policies. Examples include learning the optimal personalized treatment from electronic health record
data (Murphy, 2003; Kim et al., 2011; Chan et al., 2012), or
obtaining an individualized advertising strategy using past
customer behavior data (Bottou et al., 2013; Kallus & Udell,
2016). Driven by such a practical need, a line of works
have been devoted to developing efficient policy learning
algorithms using historical data — a task often known as offline policy learning (Dudík et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012;
Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015a;b;c; Kitagawa & Tetenov,
2018; Athey & Wager, 2021; Zhou et al., 2023; Zhan et al.,
2023; Bibaut et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2021; 2022a).

Distributionally robust policy learning aims to
find a policy that performs well under the worstcase distributional shift, and yet most existing
methods for robust policy learning consider the
worst-case joint distribution of the covariate and
the outcome. The joint-modeling strategy can be
unnecessarily conservative when we have more
information on the source of distributional shifts.
This paper studies a more nuanced problem — robust policy learning under the concept drift, when
only the conditional relationship between the outcome and the covariate changes. To this end, we
first provide a doubly-robust estimator for evaluating the worst-case average reward of a given
policy under a set of perturbed conditional distributions. We show that the policy value estimator
enjoys asymptotic normality even if the nuisance
parameters are estimated with a slower-than-rootn rate. We then propose a learning algorithm
that outputs the policy maximizing the estimated
policy value within a given policy class Π, and
show that the sub-optimality gap of the proposed
algorithm is of the order κ(Π)n−1/2 , where κ(Π)
is the entropy integral of Π under the Hamming
distance and n is the sample size. A matching
lower bound is provided to show the optimality of
the rate. The proposed methods are implemented
and evaluated in numerical studies, demonstrating
substantial improvement compared with existing
benchmarks.

Most existing methods for offline policy learning deliver
performance guarantees under the premise that the target environment remains the same as that from which the historical
data is collected. It has been widely observed, however, that
such a condition is hardly met in practice (see e.g., Recht
et al. (2019); Namkoong et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023); Jin
et al. (2023) and the references therein). Under distribution shift, a policy learned in one environment often shows
degraded performance when deployed in another environment. To address this issue, there is an emerging body of
research on robust policy learning, which aims at finding
a policy that still performs well when the target distribution is perturbed. Pioneering works in this area consider
the case where the joint distribution of the covariates and
the outcome is shifted from the training distribution, and
researchers devise algorithms that output a policy achieving
reliable worst-case performance under the aforementioned
shifts (Si et al., 2023; Kallus et al., 2022). The joint modeling approach, however, ignores the type of distributional
shifts, and the resulting worst-case value can be unnecessarily conservative in practice.

1

Stern School of Business, New York University 2 Department
of Statistics and Data Science, University of Pennsylvania
3
IEDA, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Arena Technologies. Correspondence to: Zhengyuan Zhou
<zhengyuanzhou24@gmail.com>.

Indeed, distributional shifts can be categorized into two
classes by their sources: (1) the shift in the covariate X,
and/or (2) the shift in the conditional relationship between
the outcome Y and the covariate X. The two types of
distributional shifts are different in nature, have different
implications on the objectives, and call for distinct treatment (Namkoong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Jin et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

