Ensemble Distribution Distillation via Flow Matching

Jonggeon Park * 1 Giung Nam * 1 Hyunsu Kim 1 Jongmin Yoon 1 Juho Lee 1

Abstract

EnDD

FED

EDFM

0.85
0.75
0.65
0.35
NLL

Neural network ensembles have proven effective in improving performance across a range
of tasks; however, their high computational cost
limits their applicability in resource-constrained
environments or for large models. Ensemble distillation, the process of transferring knowledge
from an ensemble teacher to a smaller student
model, offers a promising solution to this challenge. The key is to ensure that the student model
is both cost-efficient and achieves performance
comparable to the ensemble teacher. With this in
mind, we propose a novel ensemble distribution
distillation method, which leverages flow matching to effectively transfer the diversity from the
ensemble teacher to the student model. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method compared to existing ensemble distillation approaches.

0.30
0.25
0.20
TRN
(0.0018)

w/ mixup
(0.0355)

w/ mixup and RA
(0.0948)

AUX
(0.1436)

Figure 1. How good is ensemble distribution distillation? It illustrates how effectively different ensemble distribution distillation methods learn the diversity of the ensemble teacher. The xaxis represents the teacher diversity under different diversification
strategies (§ 5.1), while the y-axis shows the performance of the
distilled student in each setting (NLL; lower is better). The size
of each circle marker indicates the level of diversity learned by
the student, demonstrating how well each distillation method absorbs the teacher diversity and mimics the ensemble behavior of
producing diverse predictions (§ 5.2). Our proposed EDFM approach effectively learns teacher diversity as it becomes more pronounced, continually absorbing it and outperforming baselines.

1. Introduction
The concept of ensembling neural networks has long been
a foundational approach in machine learning (Hansen and
Salamon, 1990), based on the idea of constructing a strong
hypothesis by combining multiple weaker ones (Kearns,
1988). Interestingly, ensemble methods remain highly relevant in the era of deep learning, offering a simple but effective way to improve the performance of deep neural networks (Ciresan et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012). However, despite its benefits, a notable drawback of the ensemble method becomes more pronounced with deep neural
networks: “many ensembles are large and slow” (Buciluǎ
et al., 2006). To address this, the machine learning community has naturally gravitated toward compressing the ensembles into a single, more efficient model (Buciluǎ et al.,
2006; Ba and Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2014).

Ensemble distillation is a specific form of knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2014), where the teacher model is an
ensemble. Unlike the typical knowledge distillation setup,
in which a single teacher model provides one prediction per
training instance, ensemble distillation incorporates predictions from multiple teacher models, introducing diversity.
While this diversity is a key distinguishing feature, simply
adopting the basic knowledge distillation objective (Ba and
Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2014), i.e., averaging the distillation losses or teacher predictions, overlooks the diversity within the ensemble teacher. Consequently, the main
goal in the ensemble distillation literature is to effectively
leverage the multiple predictions, or the empirical predictive distribution, produced by the ensemble teacher (Cui et
al., 2020; Malinin et al., 2020; Penso et al., 2022).

*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Juho Lee
<juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.

Despite recent advances, a significant performance gap remains between ensemble teachers and their distilled students. This gap arises primarily from two key limitations:
First, deep neural networks are typically trained to achieve
near-zero training errors, causing ensemble models to produce highly correlated predictions on the training set. As a

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

