G-Sim: Generative Simulations with Large Language Models
and Gradient-Free Calibration
Samuel Holt * 1 Max Ruiz Luyten * 1 Antonin Berthon 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

uating interventions or stress tests without bearing the risk,
cost, or challenges of real-world experiments (Oliver, 2023).

Constructing robust simulators is essential for
asking “what if?” questions and guiding policy in critical domains like healthcare and logistics. However, existing methods often struggle,
either failing to generalize beyond historical data
or, when using Large Language Models (LLMs),
suffering from inaccuracies and poor empirical
alignment. We introduce G-Sim, a hybrid framework that automates simulator construction by
synergizing LLM-driven structural design with
rigorous empirical calibration. G-Sim employs an
LLM in an iterative loop to propose and refine a
simulator’s core components and causal relationships, guided by domain knowledge. This structure is then grounded in reality by estimating its
parameters using flexible calibration techniques.
Specifically, G-Sim can leverage methods that
are both likelihood-free and gradient-free with
respect to the simulator, such as gradient-free
optimization for direct parameter estimation or
simulation-based inference for obtaining a posterior distribution over parameters. This allows it
to handle non-differentiable and stochastic simulators. By integrating domain priors with empirical evidence, G-Sim produces reliable, causallyinformed simulators, mitigating data-inefficiency
and enabling robust system-level interventions for
complex decision-making.

Yet, manually building these simulations is often a timeconsuming, resource-intensive process demanding substantial expert knowledge. The rise of Large Language Models
(LLMs), with their vast general knowledge and reasoning
capabilities (Bommasani et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021),
coupled with the increasing availability of observational
data—albeit often fragmented—presents a compelling opportunity to automate simulator construction. Yet, despite
this potential, a comprehensive framework to fully realize it
has remained elusive.
Existing automated approaches, often termed “world models” (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Tang et al., 2024), typically focus on model-based reinforcement learning. They
estimate environment transitions and rewards to improve
planning (Luo et al., 2024), primarily answering questions
such as, “What if the actor follows policy [X]?”.
Toward General-Purpose, Intervenable Simulators. In
contrast, a truly general-purpose simulator must enable
deeper investigations into the environment’s dynamics, addressing questions such as: “What if this underlying component changes?” or “Is the system robust under this structural stress-test?”. Answering these requires a new class
of simulators supporting flexible, (P0) System-wide Experimentation. These simulators must integrate diverse
data sources, handle uncertainty, and generalize effectively.
To be effective, such simulators must possess several key
properties:

1. Introduction

(P1) Plausible Generalization: Align with domain insights, even out-of-distribution.
(P2) Empirical Alignment: Match available observational data.
(P3) Data Form Consistency: Preserve the nature (continuous, discrete, stochastic) of real-world components,
since knowing a distribution can lead to drastically different conclusions than using just the mean, especially in
high-stakes scenarios.

Simulations are essential for testing decisions, developing
policies, and optimizing resource allocation in domains ranging from healthcare to supply-chain management (Law &
Kelton, 2000; Banks, 1998; Banks et al., 2010). A wellconstructed simulator allows asking “what if ...?” and eval*
Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge. Correspondence
to: Samuel Holt <sih31@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

These properties ensure the simulator is both scientifically
valid and practically useful.
1

