am-ELO: A Stable Framework for Arena-based LLM Evaluation
Zirui Liu 1 Jiatong Li 1 Yan Zhuang 1 Qi Liu * 1 2 Shuanghong Shen 2 Jie Ouyang 1 Mingyue Cheng 1
Shijin Wang 1 3

1050

Arena-based evaluation is a fundamental yet significant evaluation paradigm for modern AI models, especially large language models (LLMs). Existing framework based on ELO rating system suffers from the inevitable instability problem due to
ranking inconsistency and the lack of attention to
the varying abilities of annotators. In this paper,
we introduce a novel stable arena framework to
address these issues by enhancing the ELO Rating System. Specifically, we replace the iterative
update method with a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) approach, m-ELO, and provide
theoretical proof of the consistency and stability
of the MLE approach for model ranking. Additionally, we proposed the am-ELO, which modify
the Elo Rating’s probability function to incorporate annotator abilities, enabling the simultaneous
estimation of model scores and annotator reliability. Experiments demonstrate that this method
ensures stability, proving that this framework offers a more robust, accurate, and stable evaluation
method for LLMs.

1025

ELO Score

Abstract

Anno 9965
Anno 257

Anno 13046
Anno 3820

1000
975
950
925
900
wiz-13b

koala-13b

vicuna-7b

gpt-13b

mpt-7b

Figure 1. An example of ELO score. The error bar represents
the standard deviation and the error line represents the difference
between the maximum or minimum value and the mean value. The
line chart represents the ELO scores estimated from the records of
the specific annotator.

assessing the relative capabilities of competitors in games,
forms the theoretical foundation for the evaluation systems
in most existing model arenas (Bai et al., 2022; Boubdir
et al., 2023).

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center,
Hefei, China 3 iFLYTEK Co., Ltd, Hefei, China. Correspondence
to: Qi Liu <qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn>.

A significant issue with the current ELO method is its instability, which can be attributed to two main factors: 1) From
an algorithmic perspective, the existing ELO method treats
the data as dynamic, making the results highly sensitive to
the order in which the data is presented (Aldous, 2017; Li
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). In other words, when the
same records are shuffled and re-evaluated, the ELO method
often yields inconsistent scores. For instance, as shown in
Figure 1, the significant error (highlighted in gray) complicates the comparison of models with similar abilities. 2)
The judgment of human annotators varies across different aspects such as quality, relevance, and importance of texts. For
example, in the line chart in Figure 1, different annotators
provide inconsistent ELO scores for each model. However,
the arena-based evaluation paradigm, which involves human
participation, overlooks these individual differences among
humans (Welinder & Perona, 2010; Raykar & Yu, 2011).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Ignoring this variability introduces biases and instability
into the evaluation process, further undermining the credibility of both the results and the decisions derived from

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs)
(Jin et al., 2024b; Ouyang et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025)
has led to the proliferation of “model arenas”—platforms
designed to compare and evaluate multiple models, identifying their relative strengths and weaknesses (Chiang et al.,
2024). These arenas play a critical role in driving innovation and shaping the deployment of cutting-edge LLMs
across diverse applications. The ELO rating system (Elo,
1967), a well-established methodology for quantitatively
1

1

