Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables
Improve Health Predictions

Eray Erturk * 1 Fahad Kamran * 2 Salar Abbaspourazad 2 Sean Jewell 2 Harsh Sharma 2 Yujie Li 2
Sinead Williamson 2 Nicholas J Foti † 2 Joseph Futoma † 2

Abstract

about a person’s current health state. An important aspect
of health monitoring is detecting a static health state – for
instance, whether someone has a history of smoking, has
a past diagnosis of hypertension, or is on a beta-blocker.
Another crucial problem is detecting a transient health state,
such as the quality of someone’s sleep or whether someone
is currently pregnant. A key property of the data required
for these predictions is that they are typically at the temporal
resolution of human behavior (e.g., days and weeks) rather
than at the lower-level time scales (e.g., seconds) at which
raw sensor data is collected from wearables.

Wearable devices record physiological and behavioral signals that can improve health predictions.
While foundation models are increasingly used for
such predictions, they have been primarily applied
to low-level sensor data, despite behavioral data
often being more informative due to their alignment with physiologically relevant timescales and
quantities. We develop foundation models of such
behavioral signals using over 2.5B hours of wearable data from 162K individuals, systematically
optimizing architectures and tokenization strategies for this unique dataset. Evaluated on 57
health-related tasks, our model shows strong performance across diverse real-world applications
including individual-level classification and timevarying health state prediction. The model excels
in behavior-driven tasks like sleep prediction, and
improves further when combined with representations of raw sensor data. These results underscore
the importance of tailoring foundation model design to wearables and demonstrate the potential
to enable new health applications.

Though a majority of past work has considered modeling low-level sensor data (or simple features thereof) (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024b; Narayanswamy et al., 2024; Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a; Yuan et al., 2024), higher-level
behavioral information from wearables such as physical activity, cardiovascular fitness, and mobility metrics, are the
natural data type to help solve these detection tasks. Unlike
raw sensors, these higher-level behavioral metrics are calculated using carefully validated algorithms derived from
the raw sensors. These metrics are intentionally chosen
by experts to align with physiologically relevant quantities
and health states. Importantly, these data are sensitive to
an individual’s behaviors, rather than being driven purely
by physiology. These characteristics make behavioral data
particularly promising for such health detection tasks. For
example, mobility metrics that characterize walking gait and
overall activity levels may be important behavioral factors
to help detect a changing health state such as pregnancy.

1. Introduction
Consumer wearables, such as smartwatches and fitness
trackers, provide rich information across diverse health domains, including cardiovascular health (Moshawrab et al.,
2023), sleep (Bianchi, 2018), diabetes (Ahmed et al., 2022),
mental health (Gomes et al., 2023), respiratory health
(Channa et al., 2021), reproductive health (Lyzwinski et al.,
2024), and more. A common type of prediction problem
in wearables is detection, where a set of physiological, behavioral, and/or sensor data are used to predict information

However, behavioral data present unique challenges, including irregular sampling, missing data, and variable sampling
rates across features, requiring specialized approaches for
modeling. Moreover, it is common to have massive quantities of unlabeled, real-world wearable data, but only have
higher-quality labels on a small curated subset. This motivates the need for approaches to learn useful representations
of these behavioral wearable data in the absence of labels.

*

Equal contribution †Equal senior authors 1 USC (Work done
during an internship at Apple.) 2 Apple Inc. Correspondence to:
Joseph Futoma <jfutoma@apple.com>.

As such, these data naturally align with foundation models
(Bommasani et al., 2021), where pre-training on large, diverse datasets enables transfer learning to new tasks with
limited labels. Foundation models can capture complex,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

