Do Not Mimic My Voice:
Speaker Identity Unlearning for Zero-Shot Text-to-Speech

TaeSoo Kim * 1 2 Jinju Kim * 1 3 Dongchan Kim 1 Jong Hwan Ko 1 Gyeong-Moon Park 4

Abstract

Wang et al., 2025) have demonstrated ground-breaking
performance, enabling models to replicate and synthesize
speech in any given speaker identity. Among the prominent
methods in ZS-TTS, VALL-E (Wang et al., 2025) represents speech as discrete tokens to train a language model,
while VoiceBox (Le et al., 2024) uses a masked prediction learning technique to effectively handle both ZS-TTS
and audio-infilling tasks. Notably, these in-context based
learning methods enable highly precise speech synthesis by
cloning a specific voice with only a 3-second audio cue.

The rapid advancement of Zero-Shot Text-toSpeech (ZS-TTS) technology has enabled highfidelity voice synthesis from minimal audio cues,
raising significant privacy and ethical concerns.
Despite the threats to voice privacy, research to
selectively remove the knowledge to replicate unwanted individual voices from pre-trained model
parameters has not been explored. In this paper,
we address the new challenge of speaker identity unlearning for ZS-TTS systems. To meet
this goal, we propose the first machine unlearning frameworks for ZS-TTS, especially TeacherGuided Unlearning (TGU), designed to ensure the
model forgets designated speaker identities while
retaining its ability to generate accurate speech
for other speakers. Our proposed methods incorporate randomness to prevent consistent replication of forget speakers’ voices, assuring unlearned
identities remain untraceable. Additionally, we
propose a new evaluation metric, speaker-Zero
Retrain Forgetting (spk-ZRF). This assesses the
model’s ability to disregard prompts associated
with forgotten speakers, effectively neutralizing
its knowledge of these voices. The experiments
conducted on the state-of-the-art model demonstrate that TGU prevents the model from replicating forget speakers’ voices while maintaining
high quality for other speakers.

Given that a person’s voice is a key biometric characteristic used for identification (Nautsch et al., 2019a;b), these
rapid advances in ZS-TTS raise significant ethical concerns,
especially regarding the potential misuse of synthesizing
speech from an individual’s voice without consent. These
concerns are further amplified by regulations such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
(Regulation, 2016) and the Right To Be Forgotten (RTBF)
(Mantelero, 2013), which emphasize the importance of protecting personally identifiable information. Hence, many
state-of-the-art ZS-TTS models remain closed or restricted
(Le et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025).
From a service provider’s perspective, it is crucial to ensure
that the voice data of individuals who opt out—particularly
those with sensitive identities—cannot be regenerated under any circumstances. Simply anonymizing or filtering
speaker representations is often insufficient because advanced attacks and techniques (e.g., model inversion, voice
re-synthesis, or targeted fine-tuning) can still recover identifiable traits from seemingly anonymized embeddings. To
address these threats, machine unlearning (MU) can serve as
an effective solution by selectively removing certain knowledge by modifying model weights itself. Since generative AI models easily create new content, they are particularly susceptible to privacy breaches (Panariello et al., 2024;
Tomashenko et al., 2024), and thus MU has gained traction
across various fields of generative AI. In computer vision,
MU has focused on removing and preventing the synthesis
of specific concepts (Gandikota et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2024;
Seo et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), while in natural language
processing, it is utilized to unlearn undesirable sequences or
identity-specific knowledge (Maini et al., 2024; Jang et al.,

1. Introduction
Significant advancements in Zero-Shot Text-to-Speech (ZSTTS) (Le et al., 2024; Casanova et al., 2022; Ju et al., 2024;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University 2 KT Corporation
3
Visiting fellow at Carnegie Mellon University 4 Department of
Artificial Intelligence, Korea University. Correspondence to:
Jong Hwan Ko <jhko@g.skku.edu>, Gyeong-Moon Park <gmpark@korea.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

