Visual Abstraction: A Plug-and-Play Approach for Text-Visual Retrieval

Guofeng Ding 1 Yiding Lu 1 Peng Hu 1 Mouxing Yang 1 Yijie Lin† 1 Xi Peng† 1 2
https://github.com/XLearning-SCU/2025-ICML-VISA

Abstract

cess, we observe that traditional VLMs struggle to satisfy
the precise and diverse retrieval demands of users, due to
limitations in both training strategies and data. Specifically,

Text-to-visual retrieval often struggles with semantic redundancy and granularity mismatches
between textual queries and visual content. Unlike existing methods that address these challenges during training, we propose VISual Abstraction (VISA), a test-time approach that enhances retrieval by transforming visual content
into textual descriptions using off-the-shelf large
models. The generated text descriptions, with
their dense semantics, naturally filter out lowlevel redundant visual information. To further
address granularity issues, VISA incorporates a
question-answering process, enhancing the text
description with the specific granularity information requested by the user. Extensive experiments demonstrate that VISA brings substantial
improvements in text-to-image and text-to-video
retrieval for both short- and long-context queries,
offering a plug-and-play enhancement to existing
retrieval systems.

i) Training Strategy Aspect. Retrieval tasks require the
model to focus on core semantic elements of an image based
on the query while disregarding superfluous details. However, VLMs like CLIP typically contrast text and images
at a global level to emphasize overall relationships. This
global strategy inevitably incorporates low-level visual elements such as snow textures or tree branches, which are
irrelevant to high-level semantics. These redundant features
can hinder the model’s ability to understand key concepts,
causing it to incorrectly attend to unimportant patches, such
as the tire tracks (see red rectangle in Query 1 of Fig. 1(a)).
ii) Training Data Aspect. As the saying goes, “an image is
worth a thousand words”. While images inherently exhibit
unlimited granularity (Tang et al., 2023), the web-crawled
image descriptions are often brief and coarse (Xiao et al.,
2024), failing to capture the multi-granular concepts in images. However, retrieval tasks require models to dynamically adjust their focus based on the granularity of the user
query. This mismatch prevents the model from effectively
matching user queries of varying granularities with the corresponding image content. As shown in Queries 2 and 3
with different granularities in Fig. 1(a), VLM predominantly
focuses on the main action, skiing, but fails to capture finegrained details such as the hat and jacket.

1. Introduction
The purpose of abstraction is not to be vague, but to create a new
semantic level in which one can be absolutely precise.
Edsger Wybe Dijkstra

To address these challenges, early works (Li et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2018) utilize object detection
techniques (Ren et al., 2016) to extract key visual concepts,
filtering out low-level details to cover the essential semantics of an image. However, these methods are inherently
limited by a finite number of objects (Li et al., 2022a) and
cannot explicitly represent relationships, actions, or scenes.
Recent works (Zheng et al., 2024) attempt to address the
varying granularity demands by leveraging large multimodal
models (Liu et al., 2024a; Hurst et al., 2024) to generate finegrained captions, enriching text data with multi-granularity
information (Cao et al., 2024).

Text-to-visual retrieval (TVR) attempts to identify relevant
images or videos based on a textual query. In this field,
vision-language pre-training models (VLMs) (Radford et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021) have made significant progress by
employing contrastive learning on large-scale paired data
to construct a cross-modal joint space. Despite their suc1

School of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China 2 National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and
Models for Engineering Numerical Simulation, Sichuan University,
China. † Correspondence to: Yijie Lin <linyijie.gm@gmail.com>,
Xi Peng <pengx.gm@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, the above methods require training VLMs from
scratch, which is a complex and non-trivial endeavor. Un1

