Position: Rethinking Explainable Machine Learning as Applied Statistics

Sebastian Bordt 1 Eric Raidl 2 Ulrike von Luxburg 1

Abstract

2011; Cox, 2018; Franconeri et al., 2021). Both explainable
machine learning and applied statistics aim to summarize
the behaviour of high-dimensional objects — functions in
explainability, and datasets and their respective probability
distributions in statistics (Wasserman, 2004). Moreover,
both fields share a common goal: determining how relevant
questions about the real world can be answered using such
summaries.

In the rapidly growing literature on explanation algorithms, it often remains unclear what precisely
these algorithms are for and how they should be
used. In this position paper, we argue for a novel
and pragmatic perspective: Explainable machine
learning needs to recognize its parallels with applied statistics. Concretely, explanations are statistics of high-dimensional functions, and we should
think about them analogously to traditional statistical quantities. Among others, this implies that
we must think carefully about the matter of interpretation, or how the explanations relate to intuitive questions that humans have about the world.
The fact that this is scarcely being discussed in
research papers is one of the main drawbacks of
the current literature. Moving forward, the analogy between explainable machine learning and
applied statistics suggests fruitful ways for how
research practices can be improved.

The advantage of our perspective is that applied statistics
is a fairly established field of research, which means that
research practices in explainable machine learning can be
improved by drawing appropriate analogies. In this paper,
we argue that it is especially important to distinguish between the following two concepts:
(a) The mathematical form and properties of an explanation algorithm.
(b) The matter of its interpretation.
Mathematically, explanation algorithms have the form of a
functional — a function of functions (Rudin, 1991). They
take a function and map it to a simpler object, often a vector. One might say that the functional “explains” a function
by reducing its complexity. However, not all dimensionreducing functionals have explanatory value. For this to
be the case, the functional also needs to formalize an intuitive concept, a nuanced matter debated in the philosophy
of science (Justus, 2012). If this is the case, then we say
that the functional has an interpretation. Traditional statistical quantities like the p-value, confidence intervals and
visualizations usually have an interpretation.

1. Introduction
Despite a growing literature on explanation algorithms, their
use cases, and evaluation, the field of explainable machine
learning remains in a pre-paradigmatic state. This is because there is no agreement on the meaning of the basic
terminology in the field — what is an explanation? when is
a model interpretable? — as has been repeatedly noted in
different papers (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2018;
Murdoch et al., 2019; Freiesleben & König, 2023).

In the current literature on explainable machine learning,
papers often introduce novel explanation algorithms without
discussing their interpretation. This is problematic in itself
because “explanations” without an interpretation miss the
point. It is additionally problematic since historically,
even relatively simple statistics that have an interpretation
have frequently been misinterpreted, especially by applied
scientists and decision-makers (Wasserstein & Lazar,
2016). Consequently, it is not surprising that the outputs of
explanation algorithms have frequently been misinterpreted
as well (Molnar et al., 2020).

In this position paper, we argue for a novel perspective on
explainable machine learning: The field needs to recognize
its parallels with applied statistics. By applied statistics,
we mean the use of statistical theory, methods, and tools
to analyze data and solve real-world problems (Wilcox &
Rousselet, 2023; Angrist & Pischke, 2009; Cox & Donnelly,
1

University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center, Germany
University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Sebastian
Bordt <sebastian.bordt@uni-tuebingen.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

