Counting atoms faster: policy-based nuclear magnetic resonance pulse
sequencing for atomic abundance measurement

Rohan Shenoy* 1 2 Evan A. Coleman* 1 Hans Gaensbauer 1 Elsa A. Olivetti 1

Abstract

impurities management, and emissions monitoring (Norris
et al., 2020). With such a simplification, this accounting
process can be applied as an objective function for controlrelated tasks, which prevent those atoms from achieving
wasteful or pollutant fates in industrial processes. The carbon credit marketplace is a macroscopic example, as it seeks
to commodify carbon atoms by assigning a cost to their release (as greenhouse gases, or GHGs) and a reward to their
sequestration (as e.g. carbonates, organic compounds, or
pressurized gases) (Probst et al., 2024). However, such decarbonization strategies face a major challenge: accurately
and verifiably monitoring these elemental transactions in a
globally-scalable fashion (Coleman et al., 2023; Macfarlane
et al., 2024). Many techniques are commonly employed
to effectively count atoms (measure atomic abundances)
through chemical reactions and other destructive processes
under controlled conditions, but these techniques share fundamental limitations that hinder their effectiveness for climate objectives broadly.

Quantifying the elemental composition of a material is a general scientific challenge with broad
relevance to environmental sustainability. Existing techniques for the measurement of atomic
abundances generally require laboratory conditions and expensive equipment. As a result, they
cannot be deployed in situ without significant capital investment, limiting their proliferation. Measurement techniques based on nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) hold promise in this setting
due to their applicability across the periodic table, their non-destructive manipulation of samples, and their amenability to in silico optimization. In this work, we learn policies to modulate NMR pulses for rapid atomic abundance
quantification. Our approach involves three interoperating agents which (1) rapidly align nuclear
spins for measurement, (2) quickly force relaxation to equilibrium, and (3) toggle control between agents (1) and (2) to minimize overall measurement time. To demonstrate this technique, we
consider a specific use case of low-magnetic-field
carbon-13 quantification for low-cost, portable
analysis of foodstuffs and soils. We find significant performance improvements relative to traditional NMR pulse sequencing, and discuss limitations on the applicability of this approach.

These limitations motivate the development of a measurement alternative which can meet the needs of climate change
solutions. In this work, we propose a scalable data-driven
method for rapid atomic abundance measurement in challenging measurement environments. Our contribution is
threefold. First, we train policies by reinforcement which
shape and sequence magnetic field pulses for use in a simplified (low-field) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscope. Unlike incumbent procedures, this method is nondestructive, uses inexpensive and small-scale hardware, and
generalizes to nuclear isotopes of many different elements.
Secondly, we present a fast, robust simulator for generating
large quantities of NMR spectroscopy data which is capable
of reproducing the nuclear spin dynamics of many different samples in parallel when they are manipulated by an
arbitrary magnetic field. Lastly, we present a novel method
to manipulate these spins for atomic abundance measurement, by training three inter-operating agents to orchestrate
an NMR pulse sequence. We demonstrate its performance
on the task of carbon-13 (13 C) abundance measurement in
caffeinated water, using a simulated dataset derived from
laboratory NMR spectra, and find a significant performance
improvement relative to incumbent techniques.

1. Introduction
Developing scientific solutions to mitigate climate change
can, in certain cases, be reduced to the task of budgeting
or counting atoms of specific elements. These interpretations are commonly leveraged in multiple areas related to
sustainability, including soil health measurement, material
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 2 University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
. Correspondence to: Evan A. Coleman <ecol@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

