SDMG: Smoothing Your Diffusion Models for Powerful Graph Representation
Learning

Junyou Zhu 1 2 Langzhou He 3 Chao Gao 4 Dongpeng Hou 4 Zhen Su 1 Philip S. Yu 3 Jürgen Kurths 1
Frank Hellmann 1

Abstract

Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have recently demonstrated impressive generative capabilities. There is emerging evidence that their
sample reconstruction ability can yield meaningful representations for recognition tasks. In this
paper, we demonstrate that the objectives underlying generation and representation learning are
not perfectly aligned. Through a spectral analysis, we find that minimizing the mean squared
error (MSE) between the original graph and its
reconstructed counterpart does not necessarily optimize representations for downstream tasks. Instead, focusing on reconstructing a small subset of
features, specifically those capturing global information, proves to be more effective for learning
powerful representations. Motivated by these insights, we propose a novel framework, the Smooth
Diffusion Model for Graphs (SDMG), which introduces a multi-scale smoothing loss and lowfrequency information encoders to promote the
recovery of global, low-frequency details, while
suppressing irrelevant t high-frequency noise. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
our method, suggesting a promising direction for
advancing diffusion models in graph representation learning.

(a) No Noise

(b) With Noise

Figure 1. Impact of reconstructing various proportions of lowfrequency components on node classification for Photo. (a) We
sort the frequency components (derived from the graph Laplacian)
in ascending order and reconstruct only the lowest fraction (e.g.,
5%) of the frequency components. This partial reconstruction
already achieves high accuracy, while restoring the full spectrum
(100%) overfits high-frequency noise. (b) Under Gaussian noise,
focusing on a narrow low-frequency band remains robust, whereas
full-spectrum reconstruction collapses in performance.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is transforming representation learning by reducing our reliance on massive labeled
datasets (Yu et al., 2024b; Xiao et al., 2024; Kalantidis et al.,
2020; Zhu et al., 2022). Among its many variants, generative diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) (Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021) have emerged as particularly powerful: by reconstructing clean signals from corrupted inputs,
these models capture rich semantic insights. Recent vision
research shows that stronger diffusion models yield more
expressive embeddings (Hudson et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2023; Wei et al., 2023). This has also spurred adoption in
more general graph domains. A pioneering example, the
DDM (Yang et al., 2024), deploys directional perturbations
to denoise node features, revealing how diffusion-based
techniques can elegantly handle complex, anisotropic graph
structures.

1
Department of Complexity Science, Potsdam Institute for
Climate Impact Research, 14473 Potsdam, Germany 2 Machine
Learning Group, Technical University of Berlin, 10587 Berlin,
Germany 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA 4 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China. Correspondence to:
Chao Gao <cgao@nwpu.edu.cn>.

Despite the growing popularity of diffusion-based graph
representation methods, existing approaches (Yang et al.,
2024) adopt off-the-shelf DPMs tailored for generation (Niu
et al., 2020), leaving open the question of whether the generation goal to fully reconstruct every detail of a graph truly
enhances the discriminative power of representations. However, our empirical findings (Figure 1(a)) suggest: focusing

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

