DISCO: learning to DISCover an evolution Operator
for multi-physics-agnostic prediction

Rudy Morel 1 Jiequn Han 1 Edouard Oyallon 1 2

Abstract

In this paper, we consider dynamical systems described by
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). The conventional
data-driven approach typically involves “learning” a fixed
dynamic model from a large number of trajectories obtained
from various initializations, which is often referred to as
Neural Operator learning (Kovachki et al., 2023; Boullé
& Townsend, 2023). However, in many practical scenarios, the exact governing physical laws are unknown and
may vary across different trajectories, making such methods
unsuitable and requiring more flexibility.

We address the problem of predicting the next
states of a dynamical system governed by unknown temporal partial differential equations
(PDEs) using only a short trajectory. While
standard transformers provide a natural blackbox solution to this task, the presence of a wellstructured evolution operator in the data suggests
a more tailored and efficient approach. Specifically, when the PDE is fully known, classical numerical solvers can evolve the state accurately with only a few parameters. Building on this observation, we introduce DISCO,
a model that uses a large hypernetwork to process a short trajectory and generate the parameters of a much smaller operator network, which
then predicts the next states through time integration. Our framework decouples dynamics estimation — i.e., DISCovering an evolution Operator from a short trajectory — from state prediction — i.e., evolving this operator. Experiments show that pretraining our model on diverse
physics datasets achieves state-of-the-art performance while requiring significantly fewer epochs.
Moreover, it generalizes well to unseen initial conditions and remains competitive when fine-tuned
on downstream tasks. The code will be made
publicly available upon publication at https:
//github.com/RudyMorel/DISCO.

To address this limitation, we study the problem of predicting the next states of a PDE-governed dynamical system
from a few successive past state observations, where the
underlying PDE is unknown and can vary across different
trajectories. This task called multi-physics-agnostic prediction has recently gained attention with the effort to build
foundational models for PDEs (McCabe et al., 2024; Herde
et al., 2024). It requires both estimating the underlying
dynamic (inverse problem) and integrating it over time (forward problem), which are typically treated independently
in existing literature (Hsieh et al., 2019; Blanke & Lelarge,
2023). Tackling multi-physics-agnostic prediction requires
facing at least three types of variability in the data:
(1) The PDE class for the dynamics (e.g., Navier-Stokes),
(2) The coefficients of the PDE (e.g., Reynolds number),
(3) The initial conditions of the trajectory.
A natural way to handle these three levels of variability is
to use models that process a context — i.e., a sequence
of preceding states — to infer the underlying dynamics.
Transformers, with their strong sequential learning capabilities (Vaswani et al., 2017), excel at this through In-Context
Learning (Brown et al., 2020), allowing them to adapt to
different dynamics using prior state information. This adaptability has enabled transformers to achieve remarkable performance in natural language processing, where context
plays a crucial role (Dubey et al., 2024). Recent works
(Yang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Yang & Osher, 2024;
McCabe et al., 2024; Serrano et al., 2024) have also shown
that transformers, when trained on diverse PDEs and initial
conditions, can predict future states across different contexts, establishing them as powerful tools for data-driven

1. Introduction
Modeling dynamical systems from data is a highly active
area of research with the potential to significantly reduce
computational costs (Kidger, 2021) and limit the need for
ad-hoc engineering to predict future states (Farlow, 2012).
1

Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute, New
York 2 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, Paris- France. Correspondence to: Rudy Morel <rmorel@flatironinstitute.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

