Mechanisms of Projective Composition of Diffusion Models

Arwen Bradley * 1 Preetum Nakkiran * 1 David Berthelot 1 James Thornton 1 Joshua M. Susskind 1

Abstract
We study the theoretical foundations of composition in diffusion models, with a particular focus
on out-of-distribution extrapolation and lengthgeneralization. Prior work has shown that composing distributions via linear score combination
can achieve promising results, including lengthgeneralization in some cases (Du et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2022). However, our theoretical understanding of how and why such compositions
work remains incomplete. In fact, it is not even
entirely clear what it means for composition to
“work”. This paper starts to address these fundamental gaps. We begin by precisely defining
one possible desired result of composition, which
we call projective composition. Then, we investigate: (1) when linear score combinations provably achieve projective composition, (2) whether
reverse-diffusion sampling can generate the desired composition, and (3) the conditions under
which composition fails. We connect our theoretical analysis to prior empirical observations
where composition has either worked or failed,
for reasons that were unclear at the time. Finally,
we propose a simple heuristic to help predict the
success or failure of new compositions.

Figure 1: Composing diffusion models via score combination. Given two diffusion models, it is sometimes possible to
sample in a way that composes content from one model (e.g.
your dog) with style of another model (e.g. oil paintings).
We aim to theoretically understand this empirical behavior.
Figure generated via score composition with SDXL finetuned on the author’s dog; details in Appendix C.

Figure 2: Length-generalization, another capability of composition enabled by our framework. Diffusion models
trained to generate a single object conditioned on location
(left) can be composed at inference-time to generate images
of multiple objects at specified locations (right). Notably,
such images are strictly out-of-distribution for the individual
models being composed. (Additional samples in Figure 9.)

1. Introduction
The possibility of composing different concepts represented
by pretrained models has been of both theoretical and practical interest for some time (Jacobs et al., 1991; Hinton, 2002;
Du & Kaelbling, 2024), with diverse applications including
image and video synthesis (Du et al., 2023; 2020; Liu et al.,
2022; 2021; Nie et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023a; Wang et al.,
2024), planning (Ajay et al., 2024; Janner et al., 2022), con-

straint satisfaction (Yang et al., 2023c), parameter-efficient
training (Hu et al., 2022; Ilharco et al., 2022), and many
others (Wu et al., 2024; Su et al., 2024; Urain et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2025). One central goal in this field is to build
novel compositions at inference time using only the outputs
of pretrained models (either entirely separate models, or
different conditionings of a single model), to create generations that are potentially more complex than any model
could produce individually. As a concrete example to keep

*

Equal contribution 1 Apple, Cupertino, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Arwen Bradley <arwen bradley@apple.com>, Preetum
Nakkiran <p nakkiran@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

