WeGeFT: Weight-Generative Fine-Tuning for
Multi-Faceted Efficient Adaptation of Large Models

Chinmay Savadikar 1 Xi Song 2 Tianfu Wu 1
Code: https://savadikarc.github.io/wegeft
and challenging research topic. In recent years, large feature
backbones with open weights, such as LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023a;b; AI@Meta, 2024), have become ubiquitous.
Training such models from scratch is infeasible with limited resources, and fine-tuning them entirely can also be
prohibitively costly. This raises two critical questions: (i)
which parts of a pretrained model should be fine-tuned (often treated as a hyperparameter), and (ii) how those parts
should be fine-tuned. In this paper, we focus on the latter question by leveraging module/layer selection strategies
widely adopted in prior art.

Abstract
Fine-tuning large pretrained Transformer models can focus on either introducing a small number of new learnable parameters (parameter efficiency) or editing representations of a small number of tokens using lightweight modules (representation efficiency). While the pioneering method
LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) inherently balances parameter, compute, and memory efficiency,
many subsequent variants trade off compute and
memory efficiency and/or performance to further reduce fine-tuning parameters. To address
this limitation and unify parameter-efficient and
representation-efficient fine-tuning, we propose
Weight-Generative Fine-Tuning (WeGeFT, pronounced wee-gift), a novel approach that learns
to generate fine-tuning weights directly from
the pretrained weights. WeGeFT employs a
simple low-rank formulation consisting of two
linear layers, either shared across multiple layers
of the pretrained model or individually learned
for different layers. This design achieves multifaceted efficiency in parameters, representations,
compute, and memory, while maintaining or exceeding the performance of LoRA and its variants.
Extensive experiments on commonsense reasoning, arithmetic reasoning, instruction following,
code generation, and visual recognition verify the
effectiveness of our proposed WeGeFT.

Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) is a pioneering and widely adopted approach that achieves built-in
efficiency in parameters, compute, and memory. LoRA
learns fine-tuning weight residuals in low-rank forms for
pretrained weights on a layer-specific basis (see the left of
Fig. 1). Thanks to its strong applicability and promising
performance, many follow-up works have emerged, such
as DoRA (Liu et al., 2024) and VeRA (Kopiczko et al.,
2023). However, these variants often sacrifice compute
efficiency (training wall time) and/or GPU memory efficiency to achieve reductions in learnable parameters or performance gains on certain downstream tasks. As we demonstrate in experiments, DoRA, while matching or slightly
surpassing LoRA’s performance, increases training wall
time by more than 5x and consumes around 3GB more GPU
memory. On the other hand, VeRA, though significantly reducing the number of learnable parameters, performs much
worse than LoRA while drastically increasing training wall
time (by more than 20x) and consuming similar additional
GPU memory. These trade-offs motivate us to seek a
formulation that can significantly reduce the number of
learnable parameters, achieve superior or on-par performance compared with LoRA, and retain its efficiency in
compute and memory.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning pretrained deep neural networks (DNNs) as feature backbones for downstream tasks has been an important

Towards these objectives, the recently proposed ReFT (Wu
et al., 2024) introduces a promising framework that focuses
on lightweight representation-editing modules instead of
learning weight residuals, as LoRA does. ReFT is inspired
by causal intervention mechanisms (Geiger et al., 2024) and
operates in a layer-specific manner. While ReFT methods

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA 2 An Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: Chinmay Savadikar
<csavadi@ncsu.edu>, Tianfu Wu <twu19@ncsu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

