IT3 : Idempotent Test-Time Training

Nikita Durasov * 1 Assaf Shocher * 2 Doruk Oner 3 Gal Chechik 2 Alexei A. Efros 4 Pascal Fua 1

Abstract

encountered by systems operating in the real world often
differs substantially from what they were trained on due
to data distribution shifts over time or other changes in the
environment. This inevitably degrades performance, even in
state-of-the-art models (Recht et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al.,
2021; Yao et al., 2022). Machine learning systems used in
production not only need to adapt to distribution shifts but
also must do so on-the-fly using very limited data.

Deep learning models often struggle when deployed in real-world settings due to distribution
shifts between training and test data. While existing approaches like domain adaptation and
test-time training (TTT) offer partial solutions,
they typically require additional data or domainspecific auxiliary tasks. We present Idempotent
Test-Time Training (IT3 ), a novel approach that
enables on-the-fly adaptation to distribution shifts
using only the current test instance, without any
auxiliary task design. Our key insight is that
enforcing idempotence—where repeated applications of a function yield the same result—can
effectively replace domain-specific auxiliary tasks
used in previous TTT methods. We theoretically
connect idempotence to prediction confidence and
demonstrate that minimizing the distance between
successive applications of our model during inference leads to improved out-of-distribution performance. Extensive experiments across diverse
domains (including image classification, aerodynamics prediction, and aerial segmentation) and
architectures (MLPs, CNNs, GNNs) show that
IT3 consistently outperforms existing approaches
while being simpler and more widely applicable.
Our results suggest that idempotence provides a
universal principle for test-time adaptation that
generalizes across domains and architectures.

Thus, in this work, we focus on adapting to distribution
shifts on-the-fly using only the current test instance or batch,
without access to any additional labeled or unlabeled data
during inference. During training, the model only has access
to the base distribution training data, without any knowledge
of the test distribution, which may be different.
Adversarial robustness and domain adaptation address related challenges. However, they typically require additional
data either during training or inference, and sometimes rely
on specific assumptions about the nature of the shift. While
effective when such additional knowledge is available, they
are not designed for immediate, instance-level adaptation
and are not applicable in the scenario we envision. TestTime Training (TTT) (Sun et al., 2020) offers a promising alternative by adapting the model during inference by
performing an auxiliary self-supervised task on each test
sample. This enables the model to handle corrupted and
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) data using only the current test
instance or batch, without access to anything else. However,
TTT requires performing an auxiliary task specific to the
data modality, such as orientation prediction or inpainting
for image data (Gandelsman et al., 2022). And defining an
appropriate auxiliary task is not straightforward in general.

poster / code / video / web

In this paper, we argue that enforcing idempotence can
profitably replace the auxiliary tasks in TTT and yields
an approach we dub IT3 that is a versatile and powerful
while generalizing well across domains and architectures.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning methods, while powerful, typically assume that training and test data come from the same distribution. Unfortunately, this is rarely true in practice. Data

More specifically, let f be a deep network that takes as input
a vector x and a second auxiliary variable that can either
be the ground truth label y corresponding to x or a neutral
uninformative signal 0. In (Durasov et al., 2024b), it was
shown that if such a network is trained so that f (x, 0) =
f (x, y) = y, then at test time the distance ||f (x, f (x, 0))−
f (x, 0)|| correlates strongly with the prediction error. What
if, at test time, we could actively minimize this distance

This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation. * Equal contribution 1 CVLAB, EPFL 2 NVIDIA
3
NeuraVision Lab, Bilkent University 4 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Nikita Durasov <nikita.durasov@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

