Position: The Most Expensive Part of an LLM should be its Training Data

Nikhil Kandpal 1 Colin Raffel 1

Abstract
Training a state-of-the-art Large Language Model
(LLM) is an increasingly expensive endeavor due
to growing computational, hardware, energy, and
engineering demands. Yet, an often-overlooked
(and seldom paid) expense is the human labor
behind these models’ training data. Every LLM is
built on an unfathomable amount of human effort:
trillions of carefully written words sourced from
books, academic papers, codebases, social media,
and more. This position paper aims to assign a
monetary value to this labor and argues that the
most expensive part of producing an LLM should
be the compensation provided to training data
producers for their work. To support this position,
we study 64 LLMs released between 2016 and
2024, estimating what it would cost to pay people
to produce their training datasets from scratch.
Even under highly conservative estimates of wage
rates, the costs of these models’ training datasets
are 10-1000 times larger than the costs to train
the models themselves, representing a significant
financial liability for LLM providers. In the face
of the massive gap between the value of training
data and the lack of compensation for its creation,
we highlight and discuss research directions that
could enable fairer practices in the future.

300x

6000x

GPT-4
DeepSeek-V3

Figure 1. Estimated costs for LLMs’ training datasets surpass the
costs of training by 1-3 orders of magnitude. Above, we plot the
training costs of 64 language models released between 2016 and
2024 along with the estimated cost of their training datasets.

nine months, with recent models like OpenAI’s GPT-4 and
Google’s Gemini Ultra estimated to have cost tens of millions of US dollars (Cottier et al., 2024) and billion-dollar
training runs projected in the near future (Morales, 2024).
Amid these rapidly escalating costs, one major expense remains largely unaccounted for: the large-scale text datasets
used for training. Unlike other resources needed to produce LLMs, like hardware or energy, most training data has
historically been collected for virtually no cost by mining
text from the public Internet (Common Crawl). This webscraped data is foundational to LLMs, particularly in their
pre-training phase, where models require vast amounts of
text to learn general linguistic and world knowledge. Notably, we are not aware of any compensation being given to
the creators of this web text, despite their pivotal role in the
success of modern LLMs.

1. Introduction
Investment into Large Language Models (LLMs) has recently surged, inspired by the widespread impact of AI
systems and their anticipated profitability in coming years.
A major driver of this investment is the reliable performance
gain that comes from scaling up training runs (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022), making each generation of
LLMs more expensive than the last. In fact, the cost of
training a state-of-the-art LLM is currently doubling every
1
University of Toronto & Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
Nikhil Kandpal <nkandpa2@gmail.com>.

In recent years, the practice of training LLMs on web text
has come under scrutiny for both legal and ethical reasons.
Much of the data on the Internet is protected under copyright
law, making its use for training commercial LLMs the subject of multiple ongoing lawsuits (New York Times, 2023;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

