DANCE: Dual Unbiased Expansion with Group-acquired Alignment for
Out-of-distribution Graph Fairness Learning

Yifan Wang 1 * Hourun Li 2 * Ling Yue 3 Zhiping Xiao 4 # Jia Yang 3 Changling Zhou 3 Wei Ju 3 #
Ming Zhang 2 # Xiao Luo 5

Abstract

Sensitive information

Y= 0
Female

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown
strong performance in graph fairness learning,
which aims to ensure that predictions are unbiased with respect to sensitive attributes. However,
existing approaches usually assume that training
and test data share the same distribution, which
rarely holds in the real world. To tackle this
challenge, we propose a novel approach named
Dual Unbiased Expansion with Group-acquired
Alignment (DANCE) for graph fairness learning
under distribution shifts. The core idea of our
DANCE is to synthesize challenging yet unbiased virtual graph data in both graph and hidden
spaces, simulating distribution shifts from a datacentric view. Specifically, we introduce the unbiased Mixup in the hidden space, prioritizing minor groups to address the potential imbalance of
sensitive attributes. Simultaneously, we conduct
fairness-aware adversarial learning in the graph
space to focus on challenging samples and improve model robustness. To further bridge the domain gap, we propose a group-acquired alignment
objective that prioritizes negative pair groups with
identical sensitive labels. Additionally, a representation disentanglement objective is adopted to
decorrelate sensitive attributes and target representations for enhanced fairness. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior effectiveness of
the proposed DANCE.

Y= 0
Male

Y=1

Task-related information

Task-related and sensitive information

Y=1

Female

Male
Train

Y= 0
High
Income

Y= 0
Low
Income

Y=1
High
Income

Y=1
Low
Income

(a)

Train

Test
Fairness Method

(b)

Test

Figure 1. An illustration of sensitive group imbalance (Gender and
Income as sensitive attributes) and inevitably removing task-related
information challenges under distribution shifts.

1. Introduction
Graph-based machine learning methods, especially Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs), have been adopted as the de facto
approach for prediction tasks on graph-structured data (Wu
et al., 2020; Ju et al., 2024). Among these tasks, node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017) is fundamental, which
endeavors to predict the category of each node within a
graph and has been widely applied in various applications,
i.e., community detection (Ren et al., 2025), molecular property prediction (Zhuang et al., 2023) and cross-modal retrieval (Li et al., 2024a). However, graph learning often suffers from fairness issues due to inherent biases in the training
data, with the message-passing mechanism in GNNs further
amplifying these biases (Dong et al., 2023).
To mitigate this issue, significant efforts have been devoted
in recent years to achieving fair graph representation learning. Depending on the stage at which fairness interventions
are applied, these efforts are typically grouped into pre-,
in- and post-processing strategies. Pre-processing strategies
address biases prior to the model training stage by modifying the input graph data, such as by applying node feature
masking (Köse & Shen, 2021; Wang et al., 2024), edge perturbation (Li et al., 2021; Spinelli et al., 2021), mixup (Li
et al., 2024c) or distribution alignment (Dong et al., 2022).
In contrast, in-processing strategies incorporate fairness constraints during the training stage by modifying learning ob-

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Information Technology & Management, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China 2 State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information
Processing, School of Computer Science, PKU-Anker LLM Lab,
Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Peking University, Beijing,
China 4 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 5 Department of
Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
Correspondence to: Zhiping Xiao <patxiao@uw.edu>, Wei Ju
<juwei@pku.edu.cn>, Ming Zhang <mzhang cs@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

