The Lock-in Hypothesis: Stagnation by Algorithm

Tianyi Alex Qiu * 1 Zhonghao He * 2 Tejasveer Chugh 3 Max Kleiman-Weiner 4

Abstract

2024; Peterson, 2024; Jakesch et al., 2023). However there
remains a key gap in prior analyses. First, existing studies
focus primarily on unidirectional AI influence on humans,
neglecting the feedback loop arising from mutual influence.
Second, a mechanistic explanation of the feedback loop has
not yet been established. Finally, much of the evidence
is from laboratory settings, rather than real-world usage
patterns.

The training and deployment of large language
models (LLMs) create a feedback loop with human users: models learn human beliefs from data,
reinforce these beliefs with generated content, reabsorb the reinforced beliefs, and feed them back
to users again and again. This dynamic resembles an echo chamber. We hypothesize that this
feedback loop entrenches the existing values and
beliefs of users, leading to a loss of diversity in
human ideas and potentially the lock-in of false
beliefs. We formalize this hypothesis and test it
empirically with agent-based LLM simulations
and real-world GPT usage data. Analysis reveals
sudden but sustained drops in diversity after the
release of new GPT iterations, consistent with the
hypothesized human-AI feedback loop.

The Lock-in Hypothesis We use lock-in to refer to a state
where a set of ideas, values, or beliefs achieves a dominant
and persistent position. During lock-in, the diversity of
alternative beliefs diminishes until they are marginalized
or vanish entirely (Gabriel & Ghazavi, 2021; Hendrycks &
Mazeika, 2022; Qiu et al., 2024). In domains where objective truth is possible, a population may converge to false
beliefs (e.g., geocentrism); in domains without objective
truth, a population may converge towards harmful beliefs
(e.g., slavery or racism). Group-level diversity loss (Liang
et al., 2024; Padmakumar & He, 2023; Anderson et al.,
2024) combined with the emergence of reinforcing feedback loops (Williams et al., 2024; Taori & Hashimoto, 2023;
Hall et al., 2022; Shumailov et al., 2024) has already been
documented across fields. For instance, bias can become amplified through human-AI interactions (Glickman & Sharot,
2024), while institutional and technological factors may
further accelerate lock-in (Gabriel & Ghazavi, 2021).

Website: thelockinhypothesis.com

1. Introduction
Human-LLM Feedback Loops Frontier AI systems,
such as large language models (LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2023),
are increasingly influencing human beliefs and values
(Fisher et al., 2024; Leib et al., 2021; Costello et al., 2024).
This creates a self-reinforcing feedback loop: AI systems
learn values from human data at pre- and post-training stages
(Conneau & Lample, 2019; Bai et al., 2022; Santurkar et al.,
2023), influence human opinions through their interactions,
and then reabsorb those influenced beliefs, and so on. What
equilibrium will this dynamic process reach?

While “lock-in” in the age of LLMs appears to be a possible
outcome, there has been no known attempt to characterize
its cause and effect on human-AI interaction. In this study,
we make the following contributions:
• Formalizing the Lock-in Hypothesis (§3): We construct
a formal Bayesian model for the lock-in hypothesis. We
show that collective lock-in to a false belief is inevitable
when both feedback loops and a moderate level of mutual
trust are present in a community.

Some argue that this dynamic creates a collective echo chamber (Glickman & Sharot, 2024; Sharma et al., 2024; Anderson et al., 2024). Experimental evidence, including from
randomized controlled trials on AI usage, supports this idea
(Glickman & Sharot, 2024; Sharma et al., 2024; Ren et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 University of Cambridge 3 Independent 4 University of Washington. Correspondence
to: Tianyi Alex Qiu <qiutianyi.qty@gmail.com>, Zhonghao He
<zh378@cam.ac.uk>.

The Lock-in Hypothesis: The feedback loop in humanAI interaction will eventually lead a population to converge on false beliefs. Such beliefs, once formed, are
hard to change with opposing evidence, as feedback loops
indiscriminately amplify confidence in existing individual
and collective beliefs and humans develop trust in AI.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

