Broadband Ground Motion Synthesis by Diffusion Model
with Minimal Condition
Jaeheun Jung * 1 Jaehyuk Lee * 1 Changhae Jung 1 Hanyoung Kim 1 Bosung Jung 1 Donghun Lee 1

Abstract

grew, various improvements in seismological applications
were made by analyzing historically observed seismic waveforms. For example, the accuracy of earthquake analysis
was improved, early warning systems for earthquake-prone
areas were polished, and earthquake-resistant architectural
designs became more robust. Recently deep learning found
successful applications in seismology (Mousavi & Beroza,
2022), such as seismic signal denoising (Zhu et al., 2019),
fault recognition (An et al., 2021), and earthquake event
detection (Mousavi et al., 2020; Saad et al., 2023).

Shock waves caused by earthquakes can be devastating. Generating realistic earthquake-caused
ground motion waveforms help reducing losses
in lives and properties, yet generative models for
the task tend to generate subpar waveforms. We
present High-fidelity Earthquake Groundmotion
Generation System (HEGGS) and demonstrate
its superior performance using earthquakes from
North American, East Asian, and European regions. HEGGS exploits the intrinsic characteristics of earthquake dataset and learns the waveforms using an end-to-end differentiable generator containing conditional latent diffusion model
and hi-fidelity waveform construction model. We
show the learning efficiency of HEGGS by training it on a single GPU machine and validate
its performance using earthquake databases from
North America, East Asia, and Europe, using diverse criteria from waveform generation tasks and
seismology. Once trained, HEGGS can generate
three dimensional E-N-Z seismic waveforms with
accurate P/S phase arrivals, envelope correlation,
signal-to-noise ratio, GMPE analysis, frequency
content analysis, and section plot analysis.

However, the field still faces a shortage of data, particularly for large-scale earthquakes as they are rare (Shi et al.,
2024; Katsanos et al., 2010). Recently, deep-learning based
synthesis of seismic waveforms has emerged as a potential
solution, mostly employing GAN-based generative models
conditioned with various geological and seismological information (Wang et al., 2021; Florez et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2024). However, the synthesized waveforms
from these models often lack seismological realism, such as
phase arrival times and amplitude of ground motions.
We see this problem as a mixed artifact of conditioned generation model architecture and unreliable conditioning information. Hence, we propose adapting diffusion model
architecture (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020),
which have shown superior realism and stability in image
generation, to seismic waveform data in order to present a
novel generation system for seismologically realistic ground
motions with bare minimum set of conditioning information.

1. Introduction
Broadband ground motion caused by seismic waves is crucial in the study of earthquakes and geology since it includes important features related to subsurface structures
of the solid Earth. At the same time, it is a great challenge
from signal processing perspective, as observed ground motion waveform signals cover a wide frequency band and are
caused by rare and unevenly distributed earthquake events.

Our Contribution
• We design a novel seismic waveform generation model,
HEGGS, that requires a bare-minimum set of conditional information on the earthquake and the observation point.

As the size of systematically recorded seismic waveforms
• We demonstrate constructing datasets for HEGGS using openly available seismic datasets, such that observed waveforms are paired with the source earthquake and time-aligned to the earthquake origin time.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Donghun Lee <holy@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We design an end-to-end training method for the model
and demonstrate its effectiveness by learning to gen1

