Improving Value Estimation Critically Enhances Vanilla Policy Gradient

Tao Wang 1 Ruipeng Zhang 1 Sicun Gao 1

Abstract

provement is theoretically guaranteed for sufficiently small
policy updates (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Schulman et al.,
2015a), empirical results suggest otherwise: smaller learning rates for the policy network do not always yield better
performance (Andrychowicz et al., 2021). According to the
trust region theory (Schulman et al., 2015a), there is a gap
between theory and practice because the theory guarantees
improvement of the original policy objective only when the
surrogate objective improves by a margin greater than the
distance between the old and new policies. However, there
is no guarantee that this condition is consistently satisfied
in practical policy training.

Modern policy gradient algorithms, such as TRPO
and PPO, outperform vanilla policy gradient in
many RL tasks. Questioning the common belief
that enforcing approximate trust regions leads to
steady policy improvement in practice, we show
that the more critical factor is the enhanced value
estimation accuracy from more value update steps
in each iteration. To demonstrate, we show that
by simply increasing the number of value update
steps per iteration, vanilla policy gradient itself
can achieve performance comparable to or better than PPO in all the standard continuous control benchmark environments. Importantly, this
simple change to vanilla policy gradient is significantly more robust to hyperparameter choices,
opening up the possibility that RL algorithms may
still become more effective and easier to use.

Moreover, it has been reported that deep policy gradient
methods often suffer from implementation issues such as
brittleness, poor reproducibility, and sensitivity to hyperparameter choices (Henderson et al., 2018; Engstrom et al.,
2020; Andrychowicz et al., 2021). Extensive empirical
analysis has shown that the behavior of deep policy gradient methods does not align with the predictions of their
motivating framework (Ilyas et al., 2020). Recent studies
further highlight that the optimization landscape of many
RL tasks is highly non-smooth and even fractal, raising
questions about the well-posedness of all policy gradient
methods (Wang et al., 2023). Consequently, there is still no
clear answer to the question: while almost all theoretical assumptions are violated in practice, why does PPO perform
better than vanilla policy gradient empirically?

1. Introduction
Deep policy gradient methods have demonstrated their
strength in various domains, including robot learning (Song
et al., 2023), game playing (Vinyals et al., 2019), and large
language model training (Ouyang et al., 2022). Policy gradient methods in its modern versions, such as Trust Region
Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015a), Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017),
have been the popular choice for delivering state-of-theart performance across the broad range of RL tasks. In
comparison, the original policy gradient algorithm, Vanilla
Policy Gradient (VPG) (Sutton et al., 1999), typically performs significantly worse than the modern algorithms. The
common explanation for why TRPO and PPO outperform
VPG is their ability to prevent excessive large policy updates. This is achieved through a surrogate objective that
incorporates importance sampling, constrained by a limit
on policy step size each iteration. While monotonic im-

In this paper, we present a different perspective on deep policy gradient methods within the actor-critic framework: accurate value estimation is more critical than enforcing trust
regions. We first demonstrate that, in practice, trust region
methods do not behave as their theoretical analysis suggests.
Then, we analyze how TRPO and PPO implicitly enhance
value estimation through their implementation designs. Our
theoretical analysis reveals that the true value often grows
significantly faster than the critic’s predictions, leading to
poor value estimation during policy training. Finally, empirical results show that simply increasing the number of value
updates enables the basic VPG algorithm to match PPO’s
performance across multiple continuous control benchmarks
in Gymnasium. This highlights the pivotal role of value estimation in improving policy gradient methods.

1
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA. Correspondence to: Tao Wang <taw003@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 4, we analyze

1

