Maximum Coverage in Turnstile Streams
with Applications to Fingerprinting Measures

Alina Ene 1 Alessandro Epasto 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Hoai-An Nguyen 3 Huy L. Nguyen 4 David P. Woodruff 2 3
Peilin Zhong 2

Abstract

1998). However, its polynomial time and space complexity
make it impractical for large-scale datasets. Our goal therefore is to develop more efficient algorithms for maximum
coverage.

In the maximum coverage problem we are given
d subsets from a universe [n], and the goal is to
output k subsets such that their union covers the
largest possible number of distinct items. We
present the first algorithm for maximum coverage in the turnstile streaming model, where updates which insert or delete an item from a subset
come one-by-one. Notably our algorithm only
uses poly log n update time. We also present turnstile streaming algorithms for targeted and general
fingerprinting for risk management where the goal
is to determine which features pose the greatest
re-identification risk in a dataset. As part of our
work, we give a result of independent interest: an
algorithm to estimate the complement of the pth
frequency moment of a vector for p ≥ 2. Empirical evaluation confirms the practicality of our fingerprinting algorithms demonstrating a speedup
of up to 210x over prior work.

To this end, we present the first one-pass turnstile streaming
algorithm for maximum coverage. In the turnstile streaming model, updates come one-by-one in a stream. Each
update inserts or deletes an item from a subset. The goal is
to process each update efficiently while only maintaining
sublinear space and then output the answer at the end of the
stream. Our algorithm uses sublinear space and notably only
poly log n update time to output a near-tight (1 − 1/e − ε)
approximation to the answer. Our algorithm is one-pass,
meaning it takes only one pass over the stream of updates.
Our algorithm offers efficient time complexity even with
direct access to the full input. The input can be provided
as a sequence of updates, and the total runtime is nearlinear in the number of items across the input subsets. In
addition, allowing arbitrary deletions of items from subsets
is critical for numerous applications, including the following
extension to fingerprinting for dataset risk management.
We also develop turnstile streaming algorithms for targeted
and general fingerprinting. The input consists of n users and
d features, where each user has a value assigned for each
feature. In targeted fingerprinting, the goal is to select k features that minimize the number of users who share identical
values with a given target user u ∈ [n] at these features. In
general fingerprinting, the goal is to select k features that
minimize the number of user pairs with matching values
across those features. Here an update in the stream changes
the value of a user at a feature.

1. Introduction
Maximum coverage is a classic NP-hard problem with applications including information retrieval (Anagnostopoulos
et al., 2015), influence maximization (Kempe et al., 2015),
and sensor placement (Krause & Guestrin, 2007). Given d
subsets of a universe containing n items and a cardinality
constraint k ≥ 0, the goal is to output the k subsets whose
union covers the largest possible number of distinct items.
A simple greedy algorithm using O(knd) time and O(nd)
space achieves a tight 1 − 1/e relative approximation (assuming P ̸= NP) by iterating for k rounds and selecting the
subset that maximizes the marginal gain at each step (Feige,

Our fingerprinting algorithms fit into the broader privacy
attack literature (Seonghun et al., 2023; Chia et al., 2019;
Zhou et al., 2023) and is an extension of Chia et al. (2019)
in privacy auditing and risk measurement. Fingerprinting,
which identifies users based on unique attribute combinations in a dataset, poses a significant privacy risk. Our
algorithms mitigate this risk by identifying the k features
most likely to allow adversaries to successfully fingerprint
users. Previous work, except for Gulyás et al. (2016) (whose

1
Boston University 2 Google Research 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Northeastern University. Correspondence to: HoaiAn Nguyen <hnnguyen@andrew.cmu.edu>, David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

