Decision Mixer: Integrating Long-term and Local Dependencies via Dynamic
Token Selection for Decision-Making

Hongling Zheng 1 Li Shen 2 Yong Luo 1 Deheng Ye 3 Bo Du 1 Jialie Shen 4 Dacheng Tao 5

Abstract

120

The Conditional Sequence Modeling (CSM)
paradigm, benefiting from the transformer’s
powerful distribution modeling capabilities, has
demonstrated considerable promise in offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks. Depending on
the task’s nature, it is crucial to carefully balance
the interplay between inherent local features and
long-term dependencies in Markov decision trajectories to mitigate potential performance degradation and unnecessary computational overhead.
In this paper, we propose Decision Mixer (DM),
which addresses the conflict between features of
different scales in the modeling process from
the perspective of dynamic integration. Drawing inspiration from conditional computation, we
design a plug-and-play dynamic token selection
mechanism to ensure the model can effectively allocate attention to different features based on task
characteristics. Additionally, we employ an auxiliary predictor to alleviate the short-sightedness
issue in the autoregressive sampling process. DM
achieves state-of-the-art performance on various
standard RL benchmarks while requiring significantly fewer computational resources, offering a
viable solution for building efficient and scalable
RL foundation models. Code is available at here.

100

Standard Markov Environment

Decision Transformer
Decision Convformer
Decision Mixer

100
80

80

Non-tandard Markov Environment

Decision Transformer
Decision Convformer
Decision Mixer

60

60
40

40

20

20
0

halfcheetah-medium

hopper-medium

walker2d-medium

0

kitchen-complete

maze2d-umaze antmaze-medium-diverse

Figure 1. The evaluation results for DT, DC, and DM in tasks with
standard Markov properties and non-standard Markov properties.
DM consistently secures the top performance across all tested
environments, showcasing its superiority.

term temporal dependencies, becoming a foundational architecture in fields such as Natural Language Processing
(NLP) (Brown et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023; Xu et al.,
2021) and Computer Vision (CV) (Liu et al., 2021; Si et al.,
2022). Inspired by this success, Decision Transformer
(DT) (Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023) and its variants (Lee
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023) introduce the transformer to
the field of offline Reinforcement Learning (RL), demonstrating its powerful capabilities in Conditional Sequence
Modeling (CSM). Specifically, DT integrates cumulative
rewards, states, and actions into a tuple and trains on offline datasets autoregressively to output appropriate actions.
DT’s limitation lies in overlooking the inherent local associations between adjacent timestep tokens in offline RL
data, which are crucial for the model’s learning of transition
and reward functions. Decision Convformer (DC) (Kim
et al., 2024) employs causal convolution filters instead of
attention modules for data modelling to address this limitation and outperforms DT on specific tasks. However, its
overemphasis on capturing local features leads to suboptimal performance on long-term sequence modeling tasks.
Such tasks typically do not adhere to the standard Markov
property indicated by DC but rather follow a non-standard
Markov process (Ching et al., 2013), where the current state
may depend on multiple previous time steps. Consequently,
a fixed convolution range may fail to adapt to the specific
characteristics of different tasks (Figure 1). Furthermore,
existing works rarely consider the presence of suboptimal
segments within trajectories, and trajectory selection and
concatenation would substantially improve the efficiency of

1. Introduction
Transformer (Vaswani, 2017) is widely regarded for its
capacity to capture complex data distributions and long1
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software and Hubei Key Laboratory of
Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China 2 School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen,
China 3 Tencent Inc., Shenzhen, China 4 Department of Computer
Science, City St George’s, University of London, London, UK
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Li Shen <shenli6@mail.sysu.edu.cn>, Yong Luo
<luoyong@whu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

