MERGE3 : Efficient Evolutionary Merging
on Consumer-grade GPUs

Tommaso Mencattini * 1 Adrian Robert Minut * 2 Donato Crisostomi 2 Andrea Santilli 2 Emanuele Rodolà 2
0.5

Evolutionary model merging enables the creation
of high-performing multi-task models but remains computationally prohibitive for consumer
hardware. We introduce MERGE3 , an efficient framework that makes evolutionary merging of Large Language Models (LLMs) feasible
on a single GPU by reducing fitness computation costs 50× while retaining a large fraction of
the original performance. MERGE3 achieves this
by Extracting a reduced dataset for evaluation,
Estimating model abilities using Item Response
Theory (IRT), and Evolving optimal merges via
IRT-based performance estimators. Our method
enables state-of-the-art multilingual and crosslingual merging, transferring knowledge across
languages with significantly lower computational
overhead. We provide theoretical guarantees
and an open-source library, democratizing highquality model merging.

0.4

Accuracy

Abstract

MERGE3-100
MERGE3-50
MERGE3-20

50x reduction

EvoLLM-JP-7B

0.3
Abel-7B
0.2
24h NVIDIA 4090
0.1

TIES-DARE
Task Arithmetic

0.0

0

1

2
TFLOPs

3

4

×106

Figure 1. Accuracy on Japanese GSM8K over fitness evaluation
FLOPs. MERGE3 is competitive with a model evolved on the
full dataset by only using a consumer-grade GPU and 2% of the
data (point size reflects data amount).

This approach has significantly broadened access to the
field, with ML practitioners producing competitive models
out of existing ones on standard consumer GPUs1 (Ilharco
et al., 2022). However, although computationally inexpensive, most of the existing approaches are quite rudimentary, require ad-hoc choices, and are usually based on ungrounded trial-and-error strategies for selecting the merge
coefficients, which ultimately limits their downstream performance (Yadav et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024). On the other
hand, recent work has shown that evolutionary merging can
produce models of unprecedented quality by automating
the hyperparameter search for merging coefficients (Akiba et al., 2025). While this technique can incorporate
any standard merging method, such models are absent from
public leaderboards likely due to a mismatch between the
high computational demands of evolutionary merging and
single-GPU setups typical of merging practitioners. Indeed
this computational cost is significantly high: computing the
fitness function requires generating and evaluating answers
for each dataset element, for each candidate in every evolutionary step. As shown in Figure 1, the fitness computation alone in the 1,000-trial evolutionary merge from Akiba et al. (2025) requires approximately 4 × 106 TFLOPs,
with the full algorithm demanding largely over a month of

github.com/tommasomncttn/merge3

1. Introduction
Model merging has become a powerful and accessible approach for developing new state-of-the-art models without
the need for cluster-grade computing typically required for
large model training (Yang et al., 2024a). Its key advantage
lies in performing the merging process post-hoc directly
in the parameters of endpoint models—that is, pre-existing
models (either base or fine-tuned) that serve as the components of the merging process—eliminating the need for
training and significantly reducing the demand for expensive computational resources.
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer and Communication
Science, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland 2 Department of Computer Science, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. Correspondence to: Tommaso Mencattini <tommaso.mencattini@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
At the time of writing, around 30% of models on the Hugging
Face Open LLM leaderboard are merged models.

1

