Finding Wasserstein Ball Center: Efficient Algorithm and The Applications in
Fairness
Yuntao Wang * 1 Yuxuan li * 2 Qingyuan Yang 1 Hu Ding 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
To find a representative of several given probability distributions is a natural problem in machine learning. One popular
approach is to compute the geometric center on probability
space with induced distances between probabilities, such as
the seminal Wasserstein distance in the field of optimal transport (Villani, 2021). Given a non-negative weight vector
(ω1 , ω2 , . . . , ωN ) with N ≥ 2, the Wasserstein barycenter
(WB) of N probability measures {µk }N
k=1 under norm p is
defined as the weighted Fréchet Mean mean under Wasserstein distance. Namely, it is the solution of the following
problem
N
X
min
ωt Wpp (µ, µt ),
(1)

Wasserstein Barycenter (WB) is a fundamental
geometric optimization problem in machine learning, whose objective is to find a representative
probability measure that minimizes the sum of
Wasserstein distances to given distributions. WB
has a number of applications in various areas.
However, WB may lead to unfair outcome towards underrepresented groups in some applications (e.g., a “minority” distribution may be far
away from the obtained WB under Wasserstein
distance). To address this issue, we propose an
alternative objective called “Wasserstein Ball Center (WBC)”. Specifically, WBC is a distribution
that encompasses all input distributions within
the minimum Wasserstein distance, which can
be formulated as a “minmax” optimization problem. We show that the WBC problem with fixed
support is equivalent to solving a large-scale linear programming (LP) instance, which is quite
different from the previously studied LP model
for WB. By incorporating some novel observations on the induced normal equation, we propose
an efficient algorithm that accelerates the interior point method by O(min{N 2 m, N m2 , m4 })
times (“N ” is the number of distributions and “m”
is the support size). Finally, we conduct a set
of experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets, demonstrating the computational efficiency of our algorithm, and showing its ability
to provide more fairness for input distributions.

µ∈Pp (Ω)

t=1

where Pp (Ω) is the set of Borel probability measure on Ω
with finite p-th moment, and Wp is the Wasserstein distance
under norm p, which will be formally defined in Section 2.
WB has found various applications in many fields, such
as economics (Carlier & Ekeland, 2010; Chiappori, 2017),
physics (Benamou et al., 2014; Koehl et al., 2019), statistics (Kroshnin et al., 2021; Backhoff-Veraguas et al., 2022;
Goldfeld et al., 2024), medical imaging (Gramfort et al.,
2015; Nadeem et al., 2020), and machine learning (Qin
et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2021; Zhuang et al., 2022).
As the Fréchet mean under Wasserstein distance, WB tends
to assign more measure to the region where the input density
functions “cluster”. In other words, to minimize the average
distance from the barycenter to the input probabilities, if the
support of most distribution is concentrated with high probability in a region, then the WB should also have measure
concentrated in that region. But this property may behave
“unfairly” to “minority”, i.e., the distributions with support
deviated from the majority of others could be too far away
from the WB. Fig. 1 gives an intuitive demonstration for
this issue.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence
to: Hu Ding <huding@ustc.edu.cn>.

The unfairness could cause negative impact in some scenarios (Mehrabi et al., 2021; Caton & Haas, 2024). In medical
applications, datasets usually reflect societal biases or historical inequities in healthcare access. If a deep learning model
is trained on biased data, it can propagate or even amplify
these biases, leading to unequal treatment outcomes. For

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

