Understanding Chain-of-Thought in LLMs through Information Theory

Jean-François Ton * 1 Muhammad Faaiz Taufiq * 1 Yang Liu 2

Abstract

This paper introduces a new formal framework for analyzing
CoT in LLMs. We provide a rigorous method grounded in
information theory, to evaluate the quality of each step in
a model’s reasoning process, thus offering insights beyond
simple accuracy metrics to identify areas for improvement.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance in complex reasoning tasks
through the use of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning, allowing models to break down problems
into manageable sub-tasks. However, existing
CoT evaluation techniques either require annotated CoT data or fall short in accurately assessing intermediate reasoning steps, leading to high
rates of false positives. In this paper, we formalize
CoT reasoning in LLMs through an informationtheoretic lens. Specifically, our framework quantifies the ‘information-gain’ at each reasoning step,
enabling the identification of failure modes in
LLMs without the need for expensive annotated
datasets. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach through extensive experiments on toy arithmetic, GSM8K and PRM800k datasets, where it
significantly outperforms existing outcome-based
methods by providing more accurate insights into
model performance on individual subtasks.

Previous work in this area has proposed “Process Supervision” (Lightman et al., 2023), which requires expensive,
human-annotated step-by-step data. While effective, this approach is often impractical due to the high cost and effort of
creating large-scale annotated datasets. In turn, alternative
methods have recently been proposed, such as outcome reward modelling (Havrilla et al., 2024) or the Math-Shepherd
(Wang et al., 2024b). Both these approaches avoid reliance
on costly annotated step-wise CoT data by instead modelling
the correctness of each step based on the correctness of final
outputs. However, as we show later, these methods can be
unsound for detecting incorrect reasoning steps and can thus
lead to a high false-positive rate in certain scenarios.
To address these shortcomings, we employ an informationtheoretic approach, grounded in the following key insight:
Each correct step in a reasoning process should provide
valuable and relevant information that aids in predicting the
final correct outcome. Building on this insight, we develop
a framework to quantify the “information-gain” after each
sub-task in the reasoning process, without the need for stepby-step annotations. This enables us to detect sub-tasks that
fail to contribute meaningful information toward the correct
solution, signalling potential errors or irrelevant steps in the
model’s reasoning. In addition, we also introduce a practical
algorithm to assess LLM performance across various subtasks within a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning process.
The key contributions of this paper are as follows:

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of tasks, from complex
reasoning to code generation (Chowdhery et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024; Bubeck et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2023). Many
of these advances can be attributed to Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) reasoning (Wei et al., 2024; Nye et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2024), which involves breaking down complex problems
into a series of intermediate steps, mirroring human-like
reasoning processes. The success of CoT reasoning, particularly in domains such as mathematics, logic, and multi-step
decision-making, has led researchers to incorporate CoTlike features directly into model training, i.e. the FLAN
family of models (Chung et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022).

1. We develop a framework for sequential applications
of sub-tasks, e.g. Chain-of-Thought and provide a
rigorous language to identify failure modes in LLMs.
2. Based on this framework, we propose a practical algorithm to assess the task-wise performance of models.
This yields more granular information about a model’s
CoT performance without requiring annotated data for
intermediate reasoning steps.

* denotes equal contribution, where ordering was determined
through a coin flip. 1 ByteDance Seed 2 UC Santa Cruz. Correspondence to: Jean-François Ton <jeanfrancois@bytedance.com>,
Muhammad Faaiz Taufiq <faaiz.taufiq@bytedance.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

3. We validate our methods on extensive toy data, the
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) as well as the PRM800K
1

