TimeBridge: Non-Stationarity Matters for Long-term Time Series Forecasting

Peiyuan Liu 1 * Beiliang Wu 2 * Yifan Hu 1 * Naiqi Li 1 Tao Dai 2 Jigang Bao 1 Shu-tao Xia 1

Abstract

𝑋!

Output

Input

Non-stationarity poses significant challenges for
multivariate time series forecasting due to the
inherent short-term fluctuations and long-term
trends that can lead to spurious regressions or
obscure essential long-term relationships. Most
existing methods either eliminate or retain nonstationarity without adequately addressing its distinct impacts on short-term and long-term modeling. Eliminating non-stationarity is essential
for avoiding spurious regressions and capturing
local dependencies in short-term modeling, while
preserving it is crucial for revealing long-term
cointegration across variates. In this paper, we
propose TimeBridge, a novel framework designed
to bridge the gap between non-stationarity and
dependency modeling in long-term time series
forecasting. By segmenting input series into
smaller patches, TimeBridge applies Integrated
Attention to mitigate short-term non-stationarity
and capture stable dependencies within each
variate, while Cointegrated Attention preserves
non-stationarity to model long-term cointegration
across variates. Extensive experiments show that
TimeBridge consistently achieves state-of-the-art
performance in both short-term and long-term
forecasting. Additionally, TimeBridge demonstrates exceptional performance in financial forecasting on the CSI 500 and S&P 500 indices, further validating its robustness and effectiveness.
Code is available at https://github.com/
Hank0626/TimeBridge.

𝑌!

Predicted 𝑋!
Input

Predicted 𝑌!
Output

Spurious
Regression

Lost
Cointegration

(a) Retain Non-stationarity

(b) Remove Non-stationarity

Figure 1. Visualization of the impact of non-stationarity on shortterm and long-term modeling. The goal is to forecast two cointegrated sequences, Xt and Yt , where Xt exhibits two random
fluctuations. (a) Retaining non-stationarity preserves long-term
cointegration between variates but leads to spurious regressions in
short-term modeling (orange line). (b) Removing non-stationarity
avoids short-term spurious regressions but disrupts long-term similar trends (green line).

which holds significant applications in fields such as financial investment (Sezer et al., 2020), weather forecasting
(Karevan & Suykens, 2020), and traffic flow prediction (Shu
et al., 2021; Miao et al., 2024b). However, the inherent nonstationarity of time series (Kim et al., 2022), characterized
by short-term fluctuations and long-term trends, introduces
challenges such as spurious regressions, making time series
forecasting a particularly complex task.
Recently, many methods have emerged to utilize a
normalization-and-denormalization paradigm to address
non-stationarity in time series (Kim et al., 2022; Fan et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023; 2024b). For instance, RevIN (Kim
et al., 2022) normalizes the input data and subsequently
applies its distributional characteristics to denormalize the
output predictions. Building on this approach, other methods have designed distributional prediction networks (Fan
et al., 2023) and more refined normalization techniques (Liu
et al., 2023) to further mitigate non-stationarity. On the
other hand, some studies (Liu et al., 2022b; Ma et al., 2024;
Fan et al., 2024) argue that over-stabilizing time series may
actually reduce the richness of embedded features, leading
to a decline in model performance. Existing methods for
addressing non-stationarity in time series face a dilemma:

1. Introduction
Multivariate time series forecasting aims to predict future
changes based on historical observations of time series data,
*

Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School 2 Shenzhen University. Correspondence to: Tao Dai
<daitao.edu@gmail.com>, Naiqi Li <linaiqi.thu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

