Explaining, Fast and Slow:
Abstraction and Refinement of Provable Explanations

Shahaf Bassan * 1 Yizhak Yisrael Elboher * 1 Tobias Ladner * 2 Matthias Althoff 2 Guy Katz 1
methods have been proposed to explain neural network
predictions. Classic additive feature attributions such as
LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017),
and integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017) assume
that neural networks exhibit near-linear behavior in a local region around the interpreted instance. Following these
works, methods like Anchors (Ribeiro et al., 2018) and
SIS (Carter et al., 2019) aim to compute a subset of input
features that is (nearly) sufficient to determine the prediction. We refer to this subset of features as an explanation
of the prediction. A common assumption in the literature is
that a smaller explanation provides a better interpretation,
thus, the minimality of the explanation is also a desired
property (Ignatiev et al., 2019; Carter et al., 2019; Darwiche
& Hirth, 2020; Ribeiro et al., 2018; Barceló et al., 2020).

Abstract
Despite significant advancements in post-hoc explainability techniques for neural networks, many
current methods rely on heuristics and do not provide formally provable guarantees over the explanations provided. Recent work has shown that
it is possible to obtain explanations with formal
guarantees by identifying subsets of input features
that are sufficient to determine that predictions remain unchanged using neural network verification
techniques. Despite the appeal of these explanations, their computation faces significant scalability challenges. In this work, we address this
gap by proposing a novel abstraction-refinement
technique for efficiently computing provably sufficient explanations of neural network predictions.
Our method abstracts the original large neural
network by constructing a substantially reduced
network, where a sufficient explanation of the reduced network is also provably sufficient for the
original network, hence significantly speeding up
the verification process. If the explanation is insufficient on the reduced network, we iteratively
refine the network size by gradually increasing it
until convergence. Our experiments demonstrate
that our approach enhances the efficiency of obtaining provably sufficient explanations for neural
network predictions while additionally providing
a fine-grained interpretation of the network’s predictions across different abstraction levels.

Methods like Anchors and SIS rely on probabilistic sampling of the input space and lack formally provable guarantees for the sufficiency of the subsets they identify. In
contrast, recent approaches have demonstrated that incorporating neural network verification tools can produce explanations that are provably certified as sufficient (Wu et al.,
2023; Bassan & Katz, 2023; La Malfa et al., 2021; Izza
et al., 2024). This makes such explanations more suitable
for safety-critical domains where formally certifying the
explanation is vital (Marques-Silva & Ignatiev, 2022).
Although such explanations are compelling, producing
them is computationally expensive for large neural networks (Barceló et al., 2020) as they are obtained by solving
neural network verification queries, which were shown to
be NP-complete (Katz et al., 2017; Sälzer & Lange, 2021).
While there have been rapid advances in the scalability of
neural network verification techniques in recent years (Wang
et al., 2021b; Brix et al., 2023), scalability remains a major
challenge. Furthermore, providing minimal sufficient explanations requires invoking multiple verification queries: for
example, methods suggested by previous research (Bassan
& Katz, 2023; Wu et al., 2023) dispatch a linear number of
queries relative to the input dimension, making these tasks
particularly difficult for high-dimensional input spaces.

1. Introduction
Despite the widespread use of deep neural networks, they
remain uninterpretable black boxes to humans. Various
*
1
Equal contribution
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to: <shahaf.bassan@mail.huji.ac.il>, <yizhak.elboher@mail.huji.ac.il>,
<tobias.ladner@tum.de>.
2

Our Contributions. In this work, we propose a novel
algorithm that significantly enhances the efficiency of generating provably sufficient explanations for neural networks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

