Bayesian Optimization from Human Feedback: Near-Optimal Regret Bounds

Aya Kayal 1 Sattar Vakili 2 Laura Toni 1 Da-shan Shiu 2 Alberto Bernacchia 2

Abstract

et al., 2024), which aims to efficiently identify the best
prompt for black-box Large Language Models (LLMs),
thereby significantly enhancing their performance (Chen
et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; 2023). Obtaining a numeric
score to evaluate each prompt’s performance is often unrealistic, but human users are generally much more reliable at providing preference feedback between pairs of
prompts (Lin et al., 2024). Since human feedback is costly,
it becomes essential to develop efficient methods that can sequentially select favorable pairs of actions while minimizing
the number of feedback instances required.

Bayesian optimization (BO) with preferencebased feedback has recently garnered significant
attention due to its emerging applications. We
refer to this problem as Bayesian Optimization
from Human Feedback (BOHF), which differs
from conventional BO by learning the best actions
from a reduced feedback model, where only the
preference between two actions is revealed to the
learner at each time step. The objective is to identify the best action using a limited number of preference queries, typically obtained through costly
human feedback. Existing work, which adopts
the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) feedback model,
provides regret bounds for the performance of
several algorithms. In this work, within the same
framework we develop tighter performance guarantees.
p Specifically, we derive regret bounds of
Õ( Γ(T )T ), where Γ(T ) represents the maximum information gain—a kernel-specific complexity term—and T is the number of queries.
Our results significantly improve upon existing
bounds. Notably, for common kernels, we show
that the order-optimal sample complexities of
conventional BO—achieved with richer feedback
models—are recovered. In other words, the same
number of preferential samples as scalar-valued
samples is sufficient to find a nearly optimal solution.

The theoretical framework for learning from preferencebased feedback (see, e.g., Pásztor et al., 2024; Xu et al.,
2024) can be modeled as Bayesian Optimization from Human Feedback (BOHF). Similarly to conventional BO (Frazier, 2018; Shahriari et al., 2015; Srinivas et al., 2010),
the learner leverages previously collected samples through
kernel-based regression to learn an unknown black-box function. However, unlike conventional BO methods that rely
on direct evaluations of the target function, this approach
collects pairwise comparisons instead of direct evaluation
feedback, adding further complexities to the problem.
In the BOHF framework, at each time step t = 1, 2, · · · , T ,
the learner selects a pair of actions (xt , x′t ) and receives
binary feedback yt ∈ {0, 1} representing the preference
between the two actions. This binary feedback is modeled as a Bernoulli random variable, where the parameter
is determined by applying a link function (here, sigmoid)
to the difference in the unobserved utilities corresponding
to each action, quantifying the preference between them.
Performance is measured in terms of regret, defined as the
cumulative loss in the selected pairs of actions compared
to the optimal action (details are provided in Section 2).
Kernel-based models employed within the BOHF framework allow for powerful and versatile modeling of preferences among actions, leveraging structures, and handling
continuous domains or very large action spaces.

1. Introduction
Optimizing a black-box function using only preferencebased feedback between pairs of candidate solutions has
recently emerged as an interesting problem. This approach
finds application, for instance, in prompt optimization (Lin
Aya Kayal’s work was part of her research place1
ment at MediaTek Research.
University College London, UK 2 MediaTek Research. Correspondence to: Aya
Kayal <aya.kayal.21@ucl.ac.uk>, Sattar Vakili <sattar.vakili@mtkresearch.com>.

Existing
work establishes a regret bound of

√
2
Õ Γ(T )κ T
for the BOHF problem (Pásztor
et al., 2024), where we use the O and the Õ notations
to hide constants and logarithmic terms respectively, for
simplicity of presentation. In this expression, κ is the
maximum of the derivative of the inverse link function (see

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

