An Effective and Secure Federated Multi-View
Clustering Method with Information-Theoretic Perspective

Xinyue Chen 1 Jinfeng Peng 2 Yuhao Li 1 Xiaorong Pu 1 2 Yang Yang 1 Yazhou Ren 1 2

Abstract

multi-view data, which usually comes from multiple sources
or perspectives (Fang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024; Xu
et al., 2024; Pu et al., 2024). Multi-view clustering aims to
explore and integrate multi-view data in an unsupervised
manner and is applied in practical fields such as recommendation systems (Yu et al., 2018), social network analysis
(Cruickshank, 2020), and bioinformatics (Lin et al., 2024).
Most existing multi-view clustering methods usually assume
that multi-view data are stored centrally in a single entity.
However, due to the presence of data silos and the security
issues associated with data exposure, unifying data from
different sources incurs significant costs and privacy risks.
Consequently, federated multi-view clustering (FedMVC)
is gaining attention for its ability to mine complementary
clustering structures from multiple clients without exposing
private data (Lin et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2023).

Recently, federated multi-view clustering (FedMVC) has gained attention for its ability to mine
complementary clustering structures from multiple clients without exposing private data. Existing
methods mainly focus on addressing the feature
heterogeneity problem brought by views on different clients and mitigating it using shared client information. Although these methods have achieved
performance improvements, the information they
choose to share, such as model parameters or intermediate outputs, inevitably raises privacy concerns. In this paper, we propose an Effective and
Secure Federated Multi-view Clustering method,
ESFMC, to alleviate the dilemma between privacy
protection and performance improvement. This
method leverages the information-theoretic perspective to split the features extracted locally by
clients, retaining sensitive information locally and
only sharing features that are highly relevant to
the task. This can be viewed as a form of privacypreserving information sharing, reducing privacy
risks for clients while ensuring that the server
can mine high-quality global clustering structures.
Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed method more effectively mitigates the trade-off between privacy
protection and performance improvement compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Existing FedMVC methods primarily address the issue of
feature heterogeneity brought by views on different clients.
For instance, federated deep multi-view clustering (Chen
et al., 2023) mitigates the heterogeneity of local data by
constructing global self-supervised information. Building
on resolving heterogeneity issues, some works further explore incomplete data (Ren et al., 2024), communication
variability (Huang et al., 2022), and Non-IID settings (Jiang
et al., 2024). In these explorations, sharing client information is widely used as an effective means to alleviate data
heterogeneity and improve method performance.
Although extensive works indicate that sharing certain information during client training can significantly enhance
the clustering performance of FedMVC methods, it unfortunately raises privacy concerns. For example, researchers can
reconstruct raw data from model parameters or shared gradients (Geiping et al., 2020), while model intermediate outputs
may be vulnerable to model inversion attacks (Mahendran
& Vedaldi, 2015). Techniques such as differential privacy
offer provable security for privacy protection (Abadi et al.,
2016), but the addition of random noise can negatively impact performance. Therefore, maintaining the performance
of proposed methods while further protecting data privacy
remains a critical challenge in the field of FedMVC.

1. Introduction
The advancement of technology and comprehensive attention to various matters have facilitated the emergence of
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Yazhou Ren <yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We revisit the purpose of sharing information and propose
an Effective and Secure Federated Multi-view Clustering
1

