Reconstructing Cell Lineage Trees from Phenotypic Features with Metric
Learning

Da Kuang 1 Guanwen Qiu 1 Junhyong Kim 1 2

Abstract

for uncovering cell lineage relationships. To our
knowledge, this is the first method to cast cell lineage inference explicitly as a metric learning task,
paving the way for future computational models aimed at uncovering the molecular dynamics
of cell lineage. Code and benchmarks are available at: https://kuang-da.github.io/
CellTreeQM-page

How a single fertilized cell gives rise to a complex
array of specialized cell types in development is
a central question in biology. The cells replicate
to generate cell lineages and acquire differentiated characteristics through poorly understood
molecular processes. A key approach to studying developmental processes is to infer the tree
graph of cell lineage histories, which provides
an analytical framework for dissecting individual cells’ molecular decisions during replication
and differentiation (i.e., acquisition of specialized
traits). Although genetically engineered lineagetracing methods have advanced the field, they
are either infeasible or ethically constrained in
many organisms. By contrast, modern single-cell
technologies can measure high-content molecular profiles (e.g., transcriptomes) in a wide range
of biological systems. Here, we introduce CellTreeQM, a novel deep learning method based on
transformer architectures that learns an embedding space with geometric properties optimized
for tree-graph inference. By formulating the lineage reconstruction problem as tree-metric learning, we systematically explore weakly supervised
training settings at different levels of information and present the Cell Lineage Reconstruction Benchmark to facilitate comprehensive evaluation. This benchmark includes (1) synthetic
data modeled via Brownian motion with independent noise and spurious signals; (2) lineageresolved single-cell RNA sequencing datasets. Experimental results show that CellTreeQM recovers lineage structures with minimal supervision
and limited data, offering a scalable framework

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Exploring phenotype-based cell lineage reconstruction. This figure highlights the focus of our study on reconstructing
cell lineage trees using phenotype data, specifically gene expression profiles (right panel), in contrast to traditional methods that
rely on genotype data, such as DNA sequences (left panel).

Understanding how a fertilized egg’s repeated divisions and
differentiation, i.e., the process of different cells acquiring
unique characteristics (e.g., skin cell, muscle cell), gives
rise to a fully formed embryo has been a long-standing goal
in biology (Wolpert et al., 2015; Slack & Dale, 2021). A
key component of this developmental process is the treegraph of cell lineages, which provides a roadmap of how
diverse cell types arise from a single progenitor (Clevers,
2011; Shapiro et al., 2013; Wagner & Klein, 2020). The
cell replication process cannot be directly observed in most
organisms; therefore, inferring or reconstructing the cell
lineage tree from features measured on the individual cells
is an important challenge. Beyond organismal development,

1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA 2 Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to:
Da Kuang <kuangda@seas.upenn.edu>, Junhyong Kim <junhyong@sas.upenn.edu >.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

