Latent Imputation before Prediction:
A New Computational Paradigm for De Novo Peptide Sequencing

Ye Du 1 Chen Yang 1 Nanxi Yu 1 Wanyu Lin 2 Qian Zhao 3 Shujun Wang 1 4 5

De novo peptide sequencing is a fundamental computational technique for ascertaining amino acid
sequences of peptides directly from tandem mass
spectrometry data, eliminating the need for reference databases. Cutting-edge models usually
encode the observed mass spectra into latent representations from which peptides are predicted
autoregressively. However, the issue of missing
fragmentation, attributable to factors such as suboptimal fragmentation efficiency and instrumental constraints, presents a formidable challenge in
practical applications. To tackle this obstacle, we
propose a novel computational paradigm called
Latent Imputation before Prediction (LIPNovo).
LIPNovo is devised to compensate for missing
fragmentation information within observed spectra before executing the final peptide prediction.
Rather than generating raw missing data, LIPNovo performs imputation in the latent space,
guided by the theoretical peak profile of the target peptide sequence. The imputation process is
conceptualized as a set-prediction problem, utilizing a set of learnable peak queries to reason
about the relationships among observed peaks
and directly generate the latent representations of
theoretical peaks through optimal bipartite matching. In this way, LIPNovo manages to supplement missing information during inference and
thus boosts performance. Despite its simplicity,
experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that LIPNovo outperforms state-of-the-art

14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

LIPNovo (Ours)
CasaNovo (Baseline) 0.8
AdaNovo
HelixNovo
0.6

Amino Acid-Level Precision

Frequency of Instances

Abstract

0.4
0.2
0.0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Missing Fragmentation Ratio

Figure 1. Comparison of amino acid-level precision between LIPNovo (ours) and existing methods under varying missing fragmentation ratios. As the missing ratio increases, performance
deteriorates dramatically, highlighting the detrimental impact of
the missing fragmentation issue. The proposed LIPNovo consistently outperforms existing methods across all missing ratios.
Results are based on the test set (i.e., the yeast species) from the
Nine-species dataset (Tran et al., 2017).

methods by large margins. Code is available at
https://github.com/usr922/LIPNovo.

1. Introduction
Peptide sequencing, i.e., determining the amino acid sequences of peptides from observed mass spectra, is the cornerstone of the typical tandem mass spectrometry (MS)
based proteomics workflow (Aebersold & Mann, 2003;
Nesvizhskii et al., 2007; Strauss et al., 2024). This technique plays a pivotal role in understanding protein structure
and function (Lee et al., 2007; Nowinski et al., 2012), holding significant importance in various applications such as
drug discovery (Lin et al., 2020), biomarker discovery (McDonald & Yates Iii, 2002; Wenk et al., 2024), and medical
research (Uzozie & Aebersold, 2018; Macklin et al., 2020).

1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. 2 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University. 3 Department of Applied Biology and
Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
4
Research Institute for Smart Ageing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. 5 Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence of
Things, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Correspondence
to: Shujun Wang <shu-jun.wang@polyu.edu.hk>.

Early approaches (Noor et al., 2021) to solving this task
rely on a database search paradigm, where each spectrum is
scored against a set of candidate peptides, and the highestscoring peptide-spectrum match (PSM) is retrieved as the
prediction. However, this approach is susceptible to certain
limitations, such as limited coverage of the peptide space
in the database and difficulties in identifying new or rare

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

