On Differential Privacy for Adaptively Solving Search Problems via Sketching

Shiyuan Feng 1 Ying Feng 2 George Z. Li 3 Zhao Song 4 David P. Woodruff 3 Lichen Zhang 2

Abstract

data structures: one needs these data structures to be robust
against an adaptive adversary, in which the adversary could
design the input to the data structure based on the prior outputs of the data structure. This is often because these data
structures are incorporated in an iterative process, where the
data structure takes an input formed by the process, returns
a result, and the process utilizes the output to form a new
input. Hence, the input to a data structure may be highly
correlated with the internal randomness of the data structure.
Most traditional randomized data structures, unfortunately,
are not robust enough to handle this type of task, as they
only have probabilistic guarantees against oblivious adversaries1 , in which the input sequence to the data structure is
predetermined, and independent of its internal randomness.

Recently differential privacy has been used for a
number of streaming, data structure, and dynamic
graph problems as a means of hiding the internal
randomness of the data structure, so that multiple possibly adaptive queries can be made without sacrificing the correctness of the responses.
Although these works use differential privacy to
show that for some problems
√ it is possible to tole T ) copies of a data
erate T queries using O(
structure, such results only apply to numerical
estimation problems, and only return the cost of
an optimization problem rather than the solution
itself. In this paper, we investigate the use of differential privacy for adaptive queries to search
problems, which are significantly more challenging since the responses to queries can reveal much
more about the internal randomness than a single
numerical query. We focus on two classical search
problems: nearest neighbor queries and regression
with arbitrary turnstile updates. We identify key
parameters to these problems, such as the number
of c-approximate near neighbors and the matrix
condition number, and use different differential
privacy techniques to design algorithms returning
the solution vector with memory and time depending on these parameters. We give algorithms for
each of these problems that achieve similar tradeoffs.

To address this challenge, various reductions have been
proposed to build an adaptive data structure from oblivious
data structures (Ben-Eliezer et al., 2020; Cherapanamjeri
& Nelson, 2020; 2022; Beimel et al., 2022; Hassidim et al.,
2022; Brand et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023b; Bateni et al.,
2024). These reductions usually proceed as follows: (1)
create k independent copies of the oblivious data structure,
(2) during the query phase sample and query a subset of the
data structures, and (3) aggregate the subsampled answers.
We focus on the following search data structure problem:
we are given n points in Rd represented by a matrix U ∈
Rn×d that is allowed to be preprocessed. Given a sequence
of adaptive queries or updates {v1 , . . . , vT }, we need to
design a data structure that answers queries efficiently and
succeeds with high probability. Throughout the paper we
will consider two key examples of this: (1) the first type of
problem is the approximate near-neighbor problem, where
a query is a c-approximate near-neighbor of vt in U , and
(2) the second type of problem is the regression problem,
where U is in addition augmented by a response vector
b ∈ Rn , it could be the solution to the regression problem
arg minx∈Rd ∥U x − b∥22 where either U or b can also be
updated by vt . Note that one can interpret regression as an
unconstrained search problem over Rd .

1. Introduction
In modern algorithmic design, data structures are playing
a more and more important role, in particular in the recent
breakthroughs in optimization, machine learning and graph
problems. These highly efficient data structures are usually
randomized, with one crucial distinction from traditional
1
Peking University 2 MIT 3 Carnegie Mellon University
University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
Zhao Song <magic.linuxkde@gmail.com>, Lichen Zhang
<lichenz@mit.edu>.

4

For a sequence of T adaptive queries or updates, perhaps
1
In the remainder of the paper, we will refer to data structures that are robust against an adaptive adversary as adaptive data
structures, and data structures that are robust against an oblivious
adversary as oblivious data structures.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

