On the Importance of Embedding Norms in Self-Supervised Learning

Andrew Draganov 1 2 Sharvaree Vadgama 3 Sebastian Damrich 4 Jan Niklas Böhm 4 Lucas Maes 5
Dmitry Kobak∗ 4 Erik Bekkers∗ 3

Abstract

els (Girdhar et al., 2023; Bommasani et al., 2021). Indeed,
prominent methods such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) and Florence (Yuan et al., 2021)
all rely on standard SSL objectives discussed in this paper.

Self-supervised learning (SSL) allows training
data representations without a supervised signal
and has become an important paradigm in machine learning. Most SSL methods employ the
cosine similarity between embedding vectors and
hence effectively embed data on a hypersphere.
While this seemingly implies that embedding
norms cannot play any role in SSL, a few recent
works have suggested that embedding norms have
properties related to network convergence and
confidence. In this paper, we resolve this apparent
contradiction and systematically establish the embedding norm’s role in SSL training. Using theoretical analysis, simulations, and experiments, we
show that embedding norms (i) govern SSL convergence rates and (ii) encode network confidence,
with smaller norms corresponding to unexpected
samples. Additionally, we show that manipulating embedding norms can have large effects on
convergence speed. Our findings demonstrate that
SSL embedding norms are integral to understanding and optimizing network behavior.

These algorithms work by representing similar inputs near
each other and dissimilar inputs far apart in an embedding
space normalized to a hypersphere. This is done by optimizing objective functions based on the cosine similarity between embeddings: popular SSL frameworks like SimCLR
(Chen et al., 2020a) and MoCo (He et al., 2020) optimize the
InfoNCE objective, while SimSiam (Chen & He, 2021) and
BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) optimize the cosine similarity directly. Thus, theoretical studies of SSL representations only
consider the distribution of points on this latent hypersphere
(Wang & Isola, 2020; Zimmermann et al., 2021).
At the same time, there has been some empirical evidence
that the embedding norms prior to normalization contain
meaningful information. For example, Kirchhof et al. (2022)
noted that embedding norms are related to network confidence. No theoretical explanation of this phenomenon was
given. Separately, Zhang et al. (2020) and Wang et al. (2017)
showed that training based on the cosine similarity loss affects the embedding norms and that the embedding norms
affect the gradient magnitudes. However, the implications
of this for SSL methods have not been fully explored. This
implies a clear gap in the literature: several works suggest
interactions between SSL models and the embedding norms
but the extent of this relationship is unknown. Our work
provides the first thorough analysis showing how the embedding norms interact with SSL training dynamics.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a powerful
tool for learning representations from unlabeled data. This
is because, when trained on large unlabeled datasets with
contrastive objectives, SSL models often achieve performance levels comparable to those of supervised methods
and can even induce emergent properties (Chen et al., 2020a;
Caron et al., 2021). SSL has also substantially advanced
multi-modal learning, particularly in vision-language mod-

First, we prove theoretical bounds showing that the embedding norms impose a quadratic slowdown on SSL convergence and verify that this occurs in simulation and in
practice. At the same time, we show that optimizing the
cosine similarity grows these embedding norms across SSL
methods. This leads to a catch-22: small embedding norms
are required to train SSL models but these norms grow during training. Put simply, effectively training SSL models
requires managing the embedding norms. We offer and
evaluate several mechanisms for doing this.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Aarhus
University, Denmark 2 IAS-8, Jülich Forschungszentrum, Germany
3
AMLab, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 4 Hertie Institute for AI in Brain Health, University of Tübingen, Germany
5
Mila, Quebec AI Institute, Canada. Correspondence to: Andrew
Draganov <draganovandrew@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Second, we argue that, because the embeddings grow with
each gradient update, their norms naturally correspond to
1

