Enhancing Foundation Models for Time Series Forecasting
via Wavelet-based Tokenization
Luca Masserano 1 * Abdul Fatir Ansari 2 Boran Han 2 Xiyuan Zhang 2 Christos Faloutsos 3 1 †
Michael W. Mahoney 3 Andrew Gordon Wilson 3 4 † Youngsuk Park 2 Syama Rangapuram 2
Danielle C. Maddix 2 Yuyang Wang 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
How to best develop foundational models for time
series forecasting remains an important open question. Tokenization is a crucial consideration in
this effort: what is an effective discrete vocabulary for a real-valued sequential input? To address
this question, we develop WaveToken, a waveletbased tokenizer that allows models to learn complex representations directly in the space of timelocalized frequencies. Our method first scales
and decomposes the input time series, then thresholds and quantizes the wavelet coefficients, and
finally pre-trains an autoregressive model to forecast coefficients for the forecast horizon. By
decomposing coarse and fine structures in the
inputs, wavelets provide an eloquent and compact language for time series forecasting that
simplifies learning. Empirical results on a comprehensive benchmark, including 42 datasets for
both in-domain and zero-shot settings, show that
WaveToken: i) performs on par or better than
recently proposed foundation models for forecasting while using a much smaller vocabulary
(1024 tokens), and is competitive with modern
deep learning models trained specifically on each
dataset; ii) exhibits superior generalization capabilities, achieving the best average rank across all
datasets for three complementary metrics; and iii)
easily captures complex temporal patterns of practical relevance that are challenging for other recent pre-trained models, including trends, sparse
spikes, and non-stationary time series with varying frequencies evolving over time.

Time series forecasting is integral to decision-making processes in many domains, including finance, healthcare, supply chain optimization, and climate science. Over the last
decade, the field has seen a gradual but steady adoption
of “global” deep learning models in lieu of traditional “local” statistical models (Lara-Benı́tez et al., 2021; Benidis
et al., 2022). Recently, the success of large language models
(LLMs) on natural language and vision applications has
spurred an increasing interest for developing similar “foundation models” in other fields (for example, Subramanian
et al. (2024); Golling et al. (2024); Ansari et al. (2024); Das
et al. (2023)). These efforts aim at building general-purpose
machines able to learn complex representations from vast
amounts of data and to generalize to a wide variety of tasks,
based on the premise that LLMs are general pattern recognizers (Mirchandani et al., 2023). In other words, if a
problem can be reduced to that of modeling an arbitrary
sequence of tokens defined on a discrete vocabulary, then an
autoregressive transformer might be capable of learning nontrivial relationships via next-token prediction, regardless of
the inputs representing text or not. The sequential nature
of time series forecasting aligns seamlessly with this perspective, which is why several recent works have proposed
adapting transformer-based architectures into foundation
models for time series (see Appendix B for a review).
Tokenization is a crucial, albeit still understudied (Dagan
et al., 2024), component of LLMs, as it provides the vocabulary on which token streams are defined and the autoregressive structure is learned. While transformers can, in
principle, learn arbitrary dependencies, it matters in practice whether the architecture can efficiently leverage specific
structures in the inputs. In the context of time series forecasting, it is then important to answer the following question:
what is the most appropriate discrete vocabulary for a continuous (real-valued) sequential input? In other words, what
is the correct “language” for time series forecasting? As the
goal is to develop a unified model with excellent forecasting performance on unseen datasets, an ideal dictionary of
tokens should be as expressive as possible while also being

*

Work done during an internship at Amazon Web Services.
Work done at Amazon. 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon
Web Services 3 Amazon 4 New York University. Correspondence
to: Luca Masserano <lmassera@andrew.cmu.edu>, Abdul Fatir
Ansari <ansarnd@amazon.com>.
†

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

