In-Context Learning and Occam’s Razor

Eric Elmoznino * 1 2 Tom Marty * 1 2 Tejas Kasetty 1 2 Leo Gagnon 1 2 Sarthak Mittal 1 2 Mahan Fathi 3
Dhanya Sridhar * 1 2 Guillaume Lajoie * 1 2

Abstract

poor generalization (Bishop & Nasrabadi, 2006). To enable
better generalization, ML follows the principle of Occam’s
razor—the best explanation is the simplest one that explains
the observations (Rathmanner & Hutter, 2011; Sunehag &
Hutter, 2014; Hutter, 2010). The intuition is that simple
rules that explain the data cannot simply memorize observations, and must instead capture more general patterns. Consequently, learning algorithms usually trade off low training
error and low model complexity with ad hoc approaches
(e.g., via regularization and inductive biases), motivating
the need for notions of complexity that can be tractably
minimized directly.

A central goal of machine learning is generalization. While the No Free Lunch Theorem states
that we cannot obtain theoretical guarantees for
generalization without further assumptions, in
practice we observe that simple models which explain the training data generalize best—a principle
called Occam’s razor. Despite the need for simple models, most current approaches in machine
learning only minimize the training error, and at
best indirectly promote simplicity through regularization or architecture design. Here, we draw a
connection between Occam’s razor and in-context
learning—an emergent ability of certain sequence
models like Transformers to learn at inference
time from past observations in a sequence. In
particular, we show that the next-token prediction
loss used to train in-context learners is directly
equivalent to a data compression technique called
prequential coding, and that minimizing this loss
amounts to jointly minimizing both the training
error and the complexity of the model that was
implicitly learned from context. Our theory and
the empirical experiments we use to support it not
only provide a normative account of in-context
learning, but also elucidate the shortcomings of
current in-context learning methods, suggesting
ways in which they can be improved. We make
our code available at https://github.com/
3rdCore/PrequentialCode.

Although there exist mathematical notions of model complexity such as VC dimension (Vapnik et al., 1998) or Kolmogorov complexity, these quantities cannot be directly
minimized, or even tractably computed for the latter. In
practice, we instead learn predictors that minimize training
error as well as proxies of the model’s complexity, such as
the L1 norm of the parameters, or rely on inductive biases
for low-complexity solutions that are implicit in the model
class and learning algorithm. Defying this trend, however,
pretrained large sequence models (such as large language
models—LLMs) have a surprising ability to rapidly learn
and generalize from small amounts of data presented in their
context (or prompt) without any parameter updates (Radford
et al., 2019). This form of “model fitting at inference” falls
under the category of in-context learning (ICL) which generally refers to the ability of models to learn new tasks from
context. Although ICL refers to a wide range of phenomena
in the literature (Lampinen et al., 2024) such as an LLM
learning a task by following instructions, here, we focus on
ICL as the process where a pretrained sequence model infers
a statistical model from a training dataset passed in-context,
which is also called memory-based meta-learning (e.g., Xie
et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The goal of machine learning (ML) is to learn models that
generalize to unseen data. Longstanding theory shows that
minimizing training error alone can lead to overfitting and

The main contribution of this paper is to provide theoretical
arguments linking ICL to Occam’s razor and a preference
for simple models (Figure 1). Briefly, our theory frames ICL
as a meta-learning algorithm whose next-token prediction
objective is directly equivalent to a powerful compression
method called prequential coding (Blier & Ollivier, 2018).
Given the relationship between compression and Occam’s
razor, we show that the meta-objective in ICL is to find a

*
Equal contribution 1 Mila – Quebec AI Institute 2 Université
de Montréal 3 NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Eric Elmoznino
<eric.elmoznino@mila.quebec>, Guillaume Lajoie <guillaume.lajoie@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

