Diagonal Symmetrization of Neural Network Solvers
for the Many-Electron Schrödinger Equation

Kevin Han Huang 1 Ni Zhan 2 Elif Ertekin 3 Peter Orbanz 1 Ryan P. Adams 2

Abstract

physical phenomena. Ab initio computational methods seek
to solve the non-relativistic electronic Schrödinger equation
from first principles. There, the computation is performed
directly from physical constraints and without relying on
empirical approximations or training data, with the promise
of producing high-accuracy electronic wavefunctions. However, the strict requirement on physical constraints makes it
challenging to incorporate neural networks into these methods. Carleo & Troyer (2017), Hermann et al. (2020) and
FermiNet (Pfau et al., 2020) are some of the first successful
ab initio neural network methods, which learn the ground
state wavefunctions in atoms and molecules via a variational
Monte Carlo (VMC) approach. Many neural network methods have emerged since then (Li et al., 2022; von Glehn
et al., 2023; Cassella et al., 2023), each seeking to improve
how physical constraints are modelled in different systems.
While these approaches have produced state-of-the-arts results on ground state energy and other physical properties,
one notable drawback is their exorbitant training cost compared to classical VMC methods. This issue becomes dire
for modelling large systems, as the Hilbert space of wavefunctions grows exponentially with the number of electrons.

Incorporating group symmetries into neural networks has been a cornerstone of success in many
AI-for-science applications. Diagonal groups of
isometries, which describe the invariance under a
simultaneous movement of multiple objects, arise
naturally in many-body quantum problems. Despite their importance, diagonal groups have received relatively little attention, as they lack a
natural choice of invariant maps except in special
cases. We study different ways of incorporating diagonal invariance in neural network ansätze
trained via variational Monte Carlo methods, and
consider specifically data augmentation, group
averaging and canonicalization. We show that,
contrary to standard ML setups, in-training symmetrization destabilizes training and can lead to
worse performance. Our theoretical and numerical results indicate that this unexpected behavior
may arise from a unique computational-statistical
tradeoff not found in standard ML analyses of
symmetrization. Meanwhile, we demonstrate that
post hoc averaging is less sensitive to such tradeoffs and emerges as a simple, flexible and effective method for improving neural network solvers.

In other AI-for-science approaches, symmetrization has
proved to be successful both for modelling physical constraints and for improving neural network performance
(Batatia et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022; Batzner et al., 2022;
Duval et al., 2023). One VMC example is DeepSolid (Li
et al., 2022), a FermiNet-type wavefunction that employs
translationally invariant features to model periodic solids.
However, recent findings in protein structures (Abramson
et al., 2024), atomic potential (Qu & Krishnapriyan, 2024)
and machine learning theory (Huang et al., 2022; Balestriero
et al., 2022) demonstrate that symmetries may be unnecessary and could sometimes be harmful for performance.
This raises the question how much the previously observed
improvements can be attributed to symmetries versus other
factors such as hyperparameter and architecture choices.

1. Introduction
We study the effect of symmetrizing neural network solutions to the Schrödinger equation. Solving the many-body
Schrödinger equation is of fundamental importance in science, because it provides the key to understanding and predicting the behavior of quantum systems and thereby many
1
Gatsby Unit, University College London, London, UK
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Department of Mechanical Science and
Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Kevin Huang
<han.huang.20@ucl.ac.uk>.
2

Motivated by these questions, we examine the effectiveness
of symmetrizing ab initio neural network solvers under the
natural symmetry groups of a many-body problem, which
are the diagonal groups of isometries. These groups, roughly
speaking, describe the invariance of the system under a

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

