Evaluating Neuron Explanations: A Unified Framework with Sanity Checks

Tuomas Oikarinen 1 Ge Yan 1 Tsui-Wei Weng 2

Abstract

explanations (Bills et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023) for large
language models, as well as explaining features of sparse
autoencoders (Bricken et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024).

Understanding the function of individual units in
a neural network is an important building block
for mechanistic interpretability. This is often done
by generating a simple text explanation of the behavior of individual neurons or units. For these
explanations to be useful, we must understand
how reliable and truthful they are. In this work we
unify many existing explanation evaluation methods under one mathematical framework. This
allows us to compare existing evaluation metrics,
understand the evaluation pipeline with increased
clarity and apply existing statistical methods on
the evaluation. In addition, we propose two simple sanity checks on the evaluation metrics and
show that many commonly used metrics fail these
tests and do not change their score after massive
changes to the concept labels. Based on our experimental and theoretical results, we propose
guidelines that future evaluations should follow
and identify a set of reliable evaluation metrics.

Despite the introduction of various approaches for generating neuron explanations, existing papers often use very
different metrics to evaluate how good their descriptions
are, and it is not clear how they compare to each other. In
addition, many evaluation metrics have problems, as shown
by (Huang et al., 2023). To ensure that unit explanations are
reliable and trustworthy, it is crucial to establish a standardized framework for evaluation.
Motivated by the need for a standardized approach, in this
work we unify many existing evaluation methods under a single mathematical framework: NeuronEval, which provides
much needed conceptual clarity to the topic of explanation
evaluation. This framework allows us to clearly compare
and contrast current evaluation techniques and provides a
more transparent understanding of the evaluation pipeline.
Inspired by this, we introduce two sanity tests to validate
the metrics, revealing that most commonly used evaluation
metrics fail at least one of these basic tests and should not
be relied on alone. In summary, in this paper we:

1. Introduction

• Formalize the task of evaluating individual unit explanations and unify 20 existing methods under the
NeuronEval framework, which lets us apply standard
statistical methods to evaluating neuron explanations.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
on a wide range of tasks, but they are very difficult to understand and often perceived as black-boxes (Rudin et al.,
2022). To address this challenge, the field of mechanistic
interpretability has recently emerged, aiming to provide a
clearer understanding of the internal mechanisms of DNNs.

• Propose two sanity checks for evaluation metrics: Missing Labels Test and Extra Labels Test. We then test different metrics both theoretically and empirically across
hidden layer and final layer neurons, as well as on
linear probes on both vision and language models.

Providing natural language explanations for small components of a neural network is an important part of mechanistic
interpretability. Classic work in this area includes Network
Dissection (Bau et al., 2017) and other works explaining
individual neurons in deep vision models (Mu & Andreas,
2020; Hernandez et al., 2022; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023;
Bai et al., 2025). Other examples include automated neuron
CSE, UC San Diego, CA, USA 2 HDSI, UC San Diego,
CA, USA. Correspondence to: Tuomas Oikarinen <toikarinen@ucsd.edu>, Tsui-Wei Weng <lweng@ucsd.edu>.

• Out of the 18 metrics tested only the following pass
the tests: Correlation(Pearson), Cosine Similarity,
AUPRC, IoU and F1-score. In contrast, many commonly used evaluations fail these sanity tests, such
as: using biased top-and-random sampling, only evaluating on highly activating inputs(Recall), measuring
AUC or mean activation difference MAD, and cannot
be relied on by themselves.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our code and results are publicly available at
https://github.com/Trustworthy-ML-Lab/Neuron Eval.

1

1

