Temporal Difference Flows

Jesse Farebrother 1 2 † Matteo Pirotta 3 Andrea Tirinzoni 3 Rémi Munos 3
Alessandro Lazaric 3 Ahmed Touati 3

Abstract

dictive capability has traditionally been achieved through
world models that capture the transition structure of the environment. These models have enabled significant advances
across numerous domains — from robotics manipulation
employing model-predictive control (Sikchi et al., 2021;
Hafner et al., 2023; Hansen et al., 2022; 2024), to sampleefficient exploration strategies (Schmidhuber, 1991; Stadie
et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017), and sophisticated planning algorithms (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Schrittwieser
et al., 2020). However, while world models have demonstrated impressive results, they face fundamental limitations
when deployed for long-horizon reasoning. The standard
approach of unrolling predictions step-by-step leads to compounding errors, as small inaccuracies in each prediction
accumulate and propagate forward in time (Talvitie, 2014;
Jafferjee et al., 2020; Lambert et al., 2022). This “curse of
horizon” presents a significant challenge for applications
requiring reliable long-range predictions.

Predictive models of the future are fundamental
for an agent’s ability to reason and plan. A common strategy learns a world model and unrolls
it step-by-step at inference, where small errors
can rapidly compound. Geometric Horizon Models (GHMs) offer a compelling alternative by directly making predictions of future states, avoiding cumulative inference errors. While GHMs
can be conveniently learned by a generative analog to temporal difference (TD) learning, existing
methods are negatively affected by bootstrapping
predictions at train time and struggle to generate
high-quality predictions at long horizons. This
paper introduces Temporal Difference Flows (TDFlow), which leverages the structure of a novel
Bellman equation on probability paths alongside
flow-matching techniques to learn accurate GHMs
at over 5× the horizon length of prior methods.
Theoretically, we establish a new convergence result and primarily attribute TD-Flow’s efficacy to
reduced gradient variance during training. We further show that similar arguments can be extended
to diffusion-based methods. Empirically, we validate TD-Flow across a diverse set of domains on
both generative metrics and downstream tasks, including policy evaluation. Moreover, integrating
TD-Flow with recent behavior foundation models
for planning over policies demonstrates substantial performance gains, underscoring its promise
for long-horizon decision-making.

An alternative approach is to learn a generative model of
future states directly, avoiding compounding errors during inference. These models, usually referred to as Geometric Horizon Models (GHM; Thakoor et al., 2022) or
γ-models (Janner et al., 2020), are learned by leveraging
the temporal difference structure of the successor measure
(Blier et al., 2021). However, their reliance on bootstrapped
predictions during training can lead to instability and growing inaccuracy over long horizons. As a result, current
methods struggle to make accurate predictions beyond 2050 steps, also limiting their utility for long-term decisionmaking. In this paper, we show that while state-of-the-art
generative methods like flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023)
and denoising diffusion (Ho et al., 2020) cannot be directly
applied to learn long-horizon GHMs, their iterative nature
can be leveraged to better exploit the temporal difference
structure of the problem. This insight yields a new class of
methods that provably converges to the successor measure
while reducing the variance of their sample-based gradient
estimates, enabling stable long-horizon predictions. Empirically, our approach produces significantly more accurate
GHMs at all horizons, consistently outperforming state-ofthe-art algorithms across domains and metrics, including
prediction accuracy, value function estimation, and generalized policy improvement.

1. Introduction
Predictive modeling lies at the heart of intelligent decisionmaking, enabling agents to reason and plan in complex
environments. In Reinforcement Learning (RL), this pre†

Work done at Meta 1 McGill University 2 Mila - Québec AI
Institute 3 FAIR at Meta. Correspondence to: Jesse Farebrother
<jfarebro@cs.mcgill.ca>, Ahmed Touati <atouati@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

