R2-T2: Re-Routing in Test-Time for Multimodal Mixture-of-Experts

Zhongyang Li 1 Ziyue Li 2 Tianyi Zhou 2

Abstract
In large multimodal models (LMMs), the perception of non-language modalities (e.g., visual representations) is usually not on par with the large
language models (LLMs)’ powerful reasoning capabilities, deterring LMMs’ performance on challenging downstream tasks. This weakness has
been recently mitigated by replacing the vision
encoder with a mixture-of-experts (MoE), which
provides rich, multi-granularity, and diverse representations required by diverse downstream tasks.
The performance of multimodal MoE largely depends on its router, which reweights and mixes
the representations of different experts for each input. However, we find that the end-to-end trained
router does not always produce the optimal routing weights for every test sample. To bridge the
gap, we propose a novel and efficient method “ReRouting in Test-Time (R2-T2)” that locally optimizes the vector of routing weights in test-time
by moving it toward those vectors of the correctly
predicted samples in a neighborhood of the test
sample. We propose three R2-T2 strategies with
different optimization objectives and neighborsearch spaces. R2-T2 consistently and significantly improves state-of-the-art LMMs’ performance on challenging multimodal benchmarks of
diverse tasks, without training any parameters in
the base model. Our code can be accessed here.

1

Figure 1. R2-T2 applied to MoAI-7B compared against 7/8/13B
VLMs on 8 benchmarks. R2-T2 significantly enhances performance of the 7B base MoE model, surpassing a recent 13B VLM.

perts, which provides finer-grained expertise and skills, yet
selecting a constant number of experts for each input (Lepikhin et al., 2020). In MoE, the sparse selection of experts
is achieved through a router, which determines the weight
of each candidate expert based on the input so only experts
with nonzero weights are selected (Fedus et al., 2022). MoE
then aggregates the outputs of the selected experts according
to their weights. Hence, the router and its produced routing
weights play important roles in MoE’s inference cost and
output quality.

Introduction

As the most widely studied LMM, many vision language
models (VLM) adopt an architecture composed of a vision
encoder and an LLM (Zhu et al., 2023), which are both
pre-trained and then aligned by further finetuning so the
LLM can include the vision encoder’s output in its input
as additional tokens. The alignment is usually obtained
through a lightweight projection layer or Q-former (a Transformer model) converting the vision encoder’s output to
LLM tokens. Despite the broad usage of this architecture,
the capability of a vision encoder is usually much more limited than the LLMs (i.e., the “modality imbalance”) (Schrodi
et al., 2024). So the visual features cannot cover all the information required by different reasoning tasks performed
by LLMs. Moreover, the alignment module may lead to

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) have achieved remarkable success in scaling up the size and capacity of large language
and multimodal models (LLMs and LMMs) (Shazeer et al.,
2017) without (significantly) increasing the inference cost.
Specifically, it allows us to increase the total number of ex1
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Tianyi Zhou
<tianyi@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

