Learning Gaussian DAG Models without Condition Number Bounds

Constantinos Daskalakis * 1 Vardis Kandiros * 1 Rui Yao * 1

Abstract

of observations (Duncan, 2014). In particular, this is one of
the fundamental goals of causal inference, where the emphasis is on discovering cause-and-effect relationships between
variables. Perhaps the most popular way of approaching this
problem is through the formalization of Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG) models, or Bayesian Networks, where variables are sampled sequentially, with the order induced by a
DAG G(Lauritzen, 1996; Wainwright et al., 2008). These
models have been widely adopted in the social sciences,
starting from their introduction in the seminal work (Pearl
et al., 2000). They have also found applicability in fields
as diverse as human geography (Malioutov et al., 2006; Ao
& Chang, 2020), the environment (Grace et al., 2007), and
ecology (Byrnes et al., 2011). The problem of determining
G from observations of the variables is referred to in the
literature as causal structure learning.

We study the problem of learning the topology
of a directed Gaussian Graphical Model under
the equal-variance assumption, where the graph
has n nodes and maximum in-degree d. Prior
work has established that O(d log n) samples are
sufficient for this task. However, an important
factor that is often overlooked in these analyses
is the dependence on the condition number of the
covariance matrix of the model. Indeed, all algorithms from prior work require a number of
samples that grows polynomially with this condition number. In many cases this is unsatisfactory,
since the condition number could grow polynomially with n, rendering these prior approaches
impractical in high-dimensional settings. In this
work, we provide an algorithm that recovers the
underlying graph and prove that the number of
samples required is independent of the condition
number. Furthermore, we establish lower bounds
that nearly match the upper bound up to a d-factor,
thus providing an almost tight characterization of
the true sample complexity of the problem. Moreover, under a further assumption that all the variances of the variables are bounded, we design a
polynomial-time algorithm that recovers the underlying graph, at the cost of an additional polynomial dependence of the sample complexity on
d. We complement our theoretical findings with
simulations on synthetic datasets that confirm our
predictions.

In the general case, some popular approaches for solving
this problem include the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2001)
and Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) (Chickering, 2002b).
However, these often require strict assumptions, such as
strong faithfulness (Uhler et al., 2013), or encounter computational issues. Indeed, in general, the problem of recovering
the true Bayesian Network is NP-hard (Chickering, 1996).
The problem becomes more structured using the formalization of Structural Equation Models (SEMs), where each
variable is equal to a function of its parents with some added
independent noise. Identifiability for these models has been
established when the functions are sufficiently non-linear or
when the noise is non-Gaussian (Peters et al., 2014; Shimizu
et al., 2006). For linear Gaussian SEMs, which is the focus of this work, finding the graph in general is impossible. Identifiability was established in (Peters & Bühlmann,
2014), under the additional assumption that all εi have the
same variance (equal variances assumption). A subsequent
flurry of works (Ghoshal & Honorio, 2017b;a; 2018; Chen
et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2020; 2022) established upper and
lower bounds on the number of samples needed (sample
complexity) for inferring the graph in the high dimensional
sparse setting where the maximum in-degree of any node
is bounded by d and the number of nodes n >> d. Often,
the goal in these works is to obtain sample complexity that
scales as O(d log n).

1. Introduction and Background
A common problem that arises in many scientific disciplines
is inferring the underlying dependency structure of a vector
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of EECS, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States.
Correspondence to:
Constantinos Daskalakis
<costis@csail.mit.edu>, Vardis Kandiros <kandiros@mit.edu>,
Rui Yao <rayyao@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, an important factor that is often overlooked in

1

