Enhancing Diversity In Parallel Agents:
A Maximum State Entropy Exploration Story

Vincenzo De Paola 1 Riccardo Zamboni 1 Mirco Mutti 2 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract

comes an objective per se, in order to foster the collection
of maximally informative data.

Parallel data collection has redefined Reinforcement Learning (RL), unlocking unprecedented
efficiency and powering breakthroughs in largescale real-world applications. In this paradigm, N
identical agents operate in N replicas of an environment simulator, accelerating data collection by
a factor of N . A critical question arises: Does specializing the policies of the parallel agents hold
the key to surpass the N factor acceleration? In
this paper, we introduce a novel learning framework that maximizes the entropy of collected
data in a parallel setting. Our approach carefully
balances the entropy of individual agents with
inter-agent diversity, effectively minimizing redundancies. The latter idea is implemented with a
centralized policy gradient method, which shows
promise when evaluated empirically against systems of identical agents, as well as synergy with
batch RL techniques that can exploit data diversity. Finally, we provide an original concentration
analysis that shows faster rates for specialized parallel sampling distributions, which supports our
methodology and may be of independent interest.

A common formulation of the latter pure exploration setting
is state entropy maximization (Hazan et al., 2019), in which
the agent aims to maximize the entropy of the data distribution induced by its policy. The state entropy objective has
been widely studied in the literature, e.g., to provide data collection strategy for offline RL (Yarats et al., 2022; Park et al.,
2023), experimental design (Tarbouriech & Lazaric, 2019),
or transition model estimation (Tarbouriech et al., 2020),
and as a surrogate loss for policy pre-training in reward-free
settings (Mutti & Restelli, 2020). All of the above uphold
the status of state entropy maximization as a flexible tool for
exploration. To this day, however, an important gap remains
in how to deploy state entropy maximization on parallel
simulators.
Let us picture an illustrative example to guide our thoughts:
A robotic arm control task. We may want the robot to be
able to perform a wide range of tasks, such as interacting
with a diverse set of objects. A good strategy is to exploit
a simulator of the robotic arm to learn good manipulation
policies in advance, instead of relying on costly online interactions, in which exploration may be unsafe. Since not
all of the future tasks may be known in advance, one could
opt for state entropy maximization, in order to collect exploration data once and for all. Collecting those data on
complex simulators may be inefficient though, resulting in
long simulation times. However, one crucial advantage of
sampling in simulation rather than the physical system is
that the sampling process does not have to be sequential.

1. Introduction
Exploration, or taking sub-optimal decisions to gather information about the task, lies at the heart of Reinforcement
Learning (RL, Bertsekas, 2019) from its very foundation.
When the task of interest is defined through a reward function, exploration shall be carefully balanced with the exploitation of the current information to maximize the rewards collected over time (Mnih et al., 2013). When a task
is not known at the time of the interaction, exploration be-

In many modern simulators (NVIDIA Isaac Sim; Genesis,
2024; Todorov et al., 2012), the process of learning is accelerated by instantiating vectorized instances of agents and
environments simultaneously. Parallelization was shown
to be a game-changing approach that allowed for unprecedented performance in standard RL (Espeholt et al., 2018),
and the use of a multitude of identical agents operating
on copies of the same environment allowed RL systems
to tackle increasingly complex and large-scale problems.
While the maximum entropy formulation has been widely
adopted in prior works, how to better take advantage of
parallel exploration agents is still to be investigated.

1
AIRLAB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 2 Technion, Israel Intitute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Vincenzo De Paola <vincenzo.depaola@polimi.it>, Riccardo Zamboni <riccardo.zamboni@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

