From Local Details to Global Context:
Advancing Vision-Language Models with Attention-Based Selection

Lincan Cai * 1 Jingxuan Kang * 2 Shuang Li 3 Wenxuan Ma 1 Binhui Xie 1 Zhida Qin 1 Jian Liang 4
𝑇𝑇 = “A photo of a Samoyed”

Abstract
Pretrained vision-language models (VLMs), e.g.,
CLIP, demonstrate impressive zero-shot capabilities on downstream tasks. Prior research highlights the crucial role of visual augmentation techniques, like random cropping, in alignment with
fine-grained class descriptions generated by large
language models (LLMs), significantly enhancing zero-shot performance by incorporating multiview information. However, the inherent randomness of these augmentations can inevitably introduce background artifacts and cause models
to overly focus on local details, compromising
global semantic understanding. To address these
issues, we propose an Attention-Based Selection
(ABS) method from local details to global context,
which applies attention-guided cropping in both
raw images and feature space, supplement global
semantic information through strategic feature selection. Additionally, we introduce a soft matching technique to effectively filter LLM descriptions for better alignment. ABS achieves state-ofthe-art performance on out-of-distribution generalization and zero-shot classification tasks. Notably, ABS is training-free and even rivals fewshot and test-time adaptation methods. Our code
is available at https://github.com/BIT-DA/ABS.

Resolution: 30 × 30
sim
, 𝑇𝑇 = 28.6

sim(

,

) = 63.1

Resolution: 90 × 90
sim

sim

, 𝑇𝑇 = 31.9

sim(

, 𝑇𝑇 = 25.1

,

) = 67.0

Figure 1: Random cropping for visual augmentation may
capture background objects unrelated to the category (red
box), which have lower similarity to the text compared to
semantically meaningful objects (green box). Additionally, the randomness in crop size may result in background
objects having a higher resolution than the main objects,
leading to misjudgments when attempting to filter backgrounds based on image similarity.
(Zhou et al., 2022b;a; Khattak et al., 2023) introduce learnable text or image prompts while keeping VLM’s pre-trained
backbone fixed. Similarly, test-time adaptation (TTA) approaches (Shu et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2023; Karmanov
et al., 2024) also achieve impressive results by finetuning
VLMs online using test data. Although these methods prevent forgetting of pre-trained knowledge in VLMs by freezing the backbone and only finetuning learnable prompts or
adapters, overfitting or a decline in generalization of VLMs
still inevitably occurs (Ma et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023).
To maximize the generalization potential of VLM pretraining, recent studies show that manually designed prompts
can significantly improve VLM performance on downstream
tasks (Zhou et al., 2022b). However, the need for domain
expertise and substantial time investment makes such approaches impractical for real-world applications. To address
this issue, Pratt et al. (2023) uses category information as a
prompt to guide large language models (LLMs) in generating fine-grained descriptions, effectively enriching the text
prompt with detailed nuances. Furthermore, Li et al. (2024)
find that text descriptions are often more precise for local
image details. To improve alignment, they apply a random
cropping operation to enhance image diversity, ensuring
better matching between the image and text modalities.

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) (Radford et al., 2021;
Alayrac et al., 2022; Jia et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2021) garner
significant attention for their remarkable ability to perform
zero-shot generalization across various downstream tasks.
To better adapt VLMs, several prompt-tuning methods
*
1
Equal contribution
Beijing Institute of Technology
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 3 Beihang University
4
Kuaishou Technology. Correspondence to: Shuang Li <shuangliai@buaa.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Despite the benefits of the random cropping, this technique
can inadvertently crop out background objects, leading to
1

