TraceGrad: a Framework Learning Expressive SO(3)-equivariant Non-linear
Representations for Electronic-Structure Hamiltonian Prediction

Shi Yin † 1 Xinyang Pan 2 Fengyan Wang 1 Lixin He † 2 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

“Symmetry dictates interaction” —— C. N. Yang
We propose a framework to combine strong
non-linear expressiveness with strict SO(3)equivariance in prediction of the electronicstructure Hamiltonian, by exploring the mathematical relationships between SO(3)-invariant
and SO(3)-equivariant quantities and their representations. The proposed framework, called
TraceGrad, first constructs theoretical SO(3)invariant trace quantities derived from the
Hamiltonian targets, and use these invariant
quantities as supervisory labels to guide the
learning of high-quality SO(3)-invariant features.
Given that SO(3)-invariance is preserved under
non-linear operations, the learning of invariant
features can extensively utilize non-linear mappings, thereby fully capturing the non-linear patterns inherent in physical systems. Building
on this, we propose a gradient-based mechanism to induce SO(3)-equivariant encodings
of various degrees from the learned SO(3)invariant features. This mechanism can incorporate powerful non-linear expressive capabilities
into SO(3)-equivariant features with correspondence of physical dimensions to the regression
targets, while theoretically preserving equivariant properties, establishing a strong foundation
for predicting electronic-structure Hamiltonian.
Experimental results on eight challenging benchmark databases demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance in Hamiltonian prediction.

Electronic structure calculations provide crucial insights
into the behavior of electrons in condensed matter, forming the foundation for predicting material properties such
as conductivity, magnetism, optical response, and chemical reactivity, playing a key role in applications ranging
from semiconductors to renewable energy and catalysis, ultimately helping to reshape our lives. The core of electronic structure calculations lies in solving the Hamiltonian matrices, from which critical physical quantities such
as orbital energy, band structure and electronic wavefunction are induced. However, traditional Density Functional
Theory (DFT) methods (Hohenberg & Kohn, 1964; Kohn
& Sham, 1965) suffer from the extremely time-consuming
self-consistent field (SCF) algorithms used to obtain the
Hamiltonians. These algorithms involve the exhaustive iterative diagonalization of large matrices, with each diagonalization scaling with a high computational complexity
of O(N 3 ), where N is the number of atoms in the system.
With advantages in computational complexity and generalization capabilities, the deep learning paradigm has significantly advanced physics research (Zhang et al., 2023).
In the task of predicting the Hamiltonians, deep learning
approaches (Unke et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023b; Gong
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024c) bypass the SCF process, dramatically reducing the computational complexity of solving Hamiltonians, opening up new
possibilities for analyzing extremely large atomic systems,
enabling efficient materials simulation and design that was
previously unimaginable. See Appendix B for more details.
To align with fundamental physical laws, deep learning
methods for Hamiltonian prediction must strictly adhere to
equivariance under 3D rotational transformations, i.e., elements from the SO(3) group. However, it remains challenging for deep learning methods to simultaneously ensure strict SO(3)-equivariance and high numerical accuracy
on predicting Hamiltonians. The root cause of this problem lies in the conflict between SO(3)-equivariance and
non-linear expressiveness: specifically, directly applying
non-linear activation functions on SO(3)-equivariant features (with degree l ≥ 1) may lead to the loss of equiv-

1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 2 CAS Key Laboratory of Quantum Information, University of Science and Technology of China. Correspondence to: Shi Yin <shiyin@iai.ustc.edu.cn>, Lixin He
<helx@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

