Robust Multimodal Large Language Models Against Modality Conflict

Zongmeng Zhang 1 Wengang Zhou 2 Jie Zhao 3 Houqiang Li 2

Abstract
Modality Conflict
Despite the impressive capabilities of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) in visionlanguage tasks, they are prone to hallucinations in
real-world scenarios. This paper investigates the
hallucination phenomenon in MLLMs from the
perspective of modality conflict. Unlike existing
works focusing on the conflicts between model
responses and inputs, we study the inherent conflicts in inputs from different modalities that place
MLLMs in a dilemma and directly lead to hallucinations. We formally define the modality conflict and construct a dataset named Multimodal
Modality Conflict (MMMC) to simulate this phenomenon in vision-language tasks. Three methods based on prompt engineering, supervised finetuning, and reinforcement learning are proposed
to alleviate the hallucination caused by modality
conflict. Extensive experiments are conducted on
the MMMC dataset to analyze the merits and demerits of these methods. Our results show that
the reinforcement learning method achieves the
best performance in mitigating the hallucination
under modality conflict, while the supervised finetuning method shows promising and stable performance. Our work sheds light on the unnoticed modality conflict that leads to hallucinations
and provides more insights into the robustness
of MLLMs. The code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/zmzhang2000/
MMMC.

ball
User Question

Human

What color is the ball?

Hallucinated Response
The ball in the image is green.

MLLM
Expected Response

The image does not contain a ball.

MLLM

Figure 1. An example of modality conflict in vision-language tasks.
Given an image describing a dog surfing on the sea, the user
may ask the question “What color is the ball?”. The model may
hallucinate a response “The ball in the image is green”, while there
is no ball in the image. We expect the model to recognize the
conflict between the visual input and the textual input and give a
response like “The image does not contain a ball”.

1. Introduction
The recent success of multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) has advanced the development of artificial intelligence in vision-language tasks (Dai et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023; 2024b; Bai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024). These
models enable the joint reasoning over visual and textual
inputs, and have achieved state-of-the-art performance in
various vision-language tasks that require multimodal reasoning (Fu et al., 2024; Yue et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024c; Lu
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025). The powerful capabilities of
these MLLMs are typically achieved by pretraining separate
language and vision models on large-scale datasets, and then

1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University
of Science and Technology of China 2 Department of Electronic
Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and
Technology of China 3 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.. Correspondence to: Wengang Zhou <zhwg@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

