Understanding Mode Connectivity via Parameter Space Symmetry

Bo Zhao 1 Nima Dehmamy 2 Robin Walters 3 Rose Yu 1

Abstract

(Gotmare et al., 2018). Mode connectivity has also inspired
applications in diverse fields, including model ensembling
(Garipov et al., 2018; Benton et al., 2021; Benzing et al.,
2022), model averaging (Izmailov et al., 2018; Wortsman
et al., 2022), pruning (Frankle et al., 2020), improving adversarial robustness (Zhao et al., 2020), and fine-tuning for
altering prediction mechanism (Lubana et al., 2023).

Neural network minima are often connected by
curves along which train and test loss remain
nearly constant, a phenomenon known as mode
connectivity. While this property has enabled applications such as model merging and fine-tuning,
its theoretical explanation remains unclear. We
propose a new approach to exploring the connectedness of minima using parameter space symmetry. By linking the topology of symmetry groups
to that of the minima, we derive the number of
connected components of the minima of linear
networks and show that skip connections reduce
this number. We then examine when mode connectivity and linear mode connectivity hold or fail,
using parameter symmetries which account for a
significant part of the minimum. Finally, we provide explicit expressions for connecting curves
in the minima induced by symmetry. Using the
curvature of these curves, we derive conditions
under which linear mode connectivity approximately holds. Our findings highlight the role of
continuous symmetries in understanding the neural network loss landscape.

Despite extensive empirical validation, mode connectivity,
especially linear mode connectivity, remains largely a theoretical conjecture (Altintas et al., 2023). The limited theoretical explanation suggests a need for new proof techniques.
In this paper, we focus on parameter symmetries, which encode information about the structure of the parameter space
and the minimum. Our work introduces a new approach
towards understanding the topology of the minimum and
complements existing theories on mode connectivity (Yunis
et al., 2022; Freeman & Bruna, 2017; Nguyen, 2019; 2021;
Kuditipudi et al., 2019; Shevchenko & Mondelli, 2020;
Nguyen et al., 2021).
Discrete symmetry is known to be related to mode connectivity. In particular, the neural network output, and hence the
minimum, is invariant under neuron permutations (HechtNielsen, 1990). Several algorithms have been developed
to find optimal permutations for linear connectivity (Singh
& Jaggi, 2020; Ainsworth et al., 2023), and Entezari et al.
(2022) conjecture that all minima found by SGD are linearly
connected up to permutation. Compared to discrete symmetry, the role of continuous symmetry, such as positive
rescaling in ReLU, in shaping loss landscape remains less
well studied.

1. Introduction
Among recent studies on the loss landscape, a particularly interesting finding is mode connectivity (Draxler et al., 2018;
Garipov et al., 2018)—the observation that distinct minima found by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can be
connected by continuous, low-loss paths through the highdimensional parameter space. Mode connectivity has important implications for other aspects of deep learning theory,
including the lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle et al., 2020)
and the analysis of loss landscapes and training trajectories

We explore the connectedness of minimum through continuous symmetries in the parameter space. Continuous symmetry groups with continuous actions define positive dimensional connected spaces in the minimum (Zhao et al., 2023).
By relating topological properties of symmetry groups to
their orbits and the minimum, we show that both continuous and discrete symmetry are useful in understanding the
origin and failure cases of mode connectivity. Additionally,
continuous symmetry defines curves on the minimum (Zhao
et al., 2024). This enables a principled method for deriving
explicit expressions for paths connecting two minima, a task
that previously relied on empirical approaches.

1

University of California,
San Diego 2 IBM
3
Research
Northeastern
University.
Correspondence to:
Bo Zhao <bozhao@ucsd.edu>,
Nima
Dehmamy <nima.dehmamy@ibm.com>, Robin Walters
<r.walters@northeastern.edu>, Rose Yu <roseyu@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our main contributions are:
1

