ReferSplat: Referring Segmentation in 3D Gaussian Splatting

Shuting He 1 Guangquan Jie 2 Changshuo Wang 3 Yun Zhou 2 Shuming Hu 2 Guanbin Li 4 Henghui Ding 2

Abstract

Training
Multi-view Images

We introduce Referring 3D Gaussian Splatting
Segmentation (R3DGS), a new task that aims to
segment target objects in a 3D Gaussian scene
based on natural language descriptions, which
often contain spatial relationships or object attributes. This task requires the model to identify
newly described objects that may be occluded
or not directly visible in a novel view, posing a
significant challenge for 3D multi-modal understanding. Developing this capability is crucial for
advancing embodied AI. To support research in
this area, we construct the first R3DGS dataset,
Ref-LERF. Our analysis reveals that 3D multimodal understanding and spatial relationship modeling are key challenges for R3DGS. To address
these challenges, we propose ReferSplat, a framework that explicitly models 3D Gaussian points
with natural language expressions in a spatially
aware paradigm. ReferSplat achieves state-ofthe-art performance on both the newly proposed
R3DGS task and 3D open-vocabulary segmentation benchmarks. Dataset and code are available
at https://github.com/heshuting555/ReferSplat.

Text

Testing
Elephant is not directly visible

…
Novel-view
Image
“green object placed between pumpkin and red chair”
“A small cube object with a surface divided into
multiple colored grids”
“yellow object with a float ring ornament”

…

…

Output Mask

Text

“The one standing on the
table has a long nose”

Figure 1. Referring 3D Gaussian Splatting Segmentation (R3DGS)
aims at segmenting the target objects described by a given natural
language descriptions within a 3D Gaussian scene, requiring the
model to identify newly described objects that may be occluded or
not directly visible in a novel view.

more attention, particularly in open-vocabulary 3DGS segmentation (3DOVS) (Qin et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025; Zhou
et al., 2024b), which relies on fixed-pattern linguistic class
names input for segmentation.
However, despite these advancements, free-form natural
language interactions with 3D scenes remain underexplored.
The ability to interpret and localize objects based on arbitrary language descriptions is crucial for various real-world
applications, such as embodied AI (Shorinwa et al., 2024),
autonomous driving (Gu et al., 2024), and VR/AR systems (Jiang et al., 2024). To bridge this gap, we introduce
a new task: Referring 3D Gaussian Splatting Segmentation (R3DGS), aims at segmenting objects in a 3D Gaussian
scene based on natural language expressions that typically
encode spatial relationships and descriptive attributes. As
shown in Fig. 1, R3DGS requires the model to identify
newly described objects, even when occluded or not directly
visible in the novel view, posing a significant challenge for
3D multi-modal understanding. To support future research
in R3DGS, we construct Ref-LERF, a new dataset rich in
complex and spatially grounded language expressions.

1. Introduction
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al., 2023), a recently proposed neural rendering technique, has attracted
significant attention because of its fast training, real-time
rendering capabilities, and explicit point-based representation (Keetha et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Tang et al.,
2024; Zhou et al., 2024a). As 3DGS continues to advance,
text-driven 3D scene understanding has attracted more and
1

MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics, Shanghai University of Finance and
Economics, Shanghai, China 2 Institute of Big Data, College of
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China 3 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Henghui Ding <henghui.ding@gmail.com>.

A straightforward baseline for R3DGS is to adapt existing open-vocabulary 3D scene understanding methods by
replacing short and simple class names with complex natural language expressions. Existing open-vocabulary methods primarily project semantic features onto images for
pixel-level understanding, leveraging semantic knowledge
from pre-trained 2D vision-language models (Radford et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

