Enhancing the Influence of Labels on Unlabeled Nodes in Graph Convolutional
Networks
Jincheng Huang 1 Yujie Mo 1 Xiaoshuang Shi 1 2 Lei Feng 3 Xiaofeng Zhu 1 4

Abstract

Dong et al., 2021). Consequently, the framework of optimizing label utilization in GCNs (LU-GCN) has become an
increasingly prominent research topic (Wang et al., 2021;
Yue et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2022).

The message-passing mechanism of graph convolutional networks (i.e., GCNs) enables label
information to reach more unlabeled neighbors,
thereby increasing the utilization of labels. However, the additional label information does not always contribute positively to the GCN. To address
this issue, we propose a new two-step framework
called ELU-GCN. In the first stage, ELU-GCN
conducts graph learning to learn a new graph
structure (i.e., ELU-graph), which allows the additional label information to positively influence
the predictions of GCN. In the second stage, we
design a new graph contrastive learning on the
GCN framework for representation learning by
exploring the consistency and mutually exclusive
information between the learned ELU graph and
the original graph. Moreover, we theoretically
demonstrate that the proposed method can ensure
the generalization ability of GCNs. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of our method.

Previous LU-GCN can be partitioned into three categories,
i.e., self-training methods, combination methods, and graph
learning methods. self-training methods (Dong et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2023) select unlabeled nodes with the highest classification probability by
GCN as training data with pseudo-labels, thus adding the
number of labels to improve the GCN. Combination methods (Wang et al., 2021; Yue et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2021)
regard the labels as the augmented features so that labels can
be used for both representation learning and classification
tasks. The feature propagation mechanism allows GCNs to
use labels to supervise the representation of both the node
itself (i.e., traditional label utilization) and its unlabeled
neighbors (i.e., neighboring label utilization). However, the
two LU-GCN methods mentioned above primarily focus
on optimizing traditional label utilization, neglecting the
critical importance of neighboring label utilization in semisupervised scenarios. Yet, due to noise in the original graph
structure, GCNs often struggle to utilize the neighboring
labels effectively. To address this issue, recent graph learning methods (Zheng et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2022) are designed to improve the relationship of every node
and its neighbors by updating the graph structure, and thus
may potentially improve the neighboring label utilization.
For example, Bi et al. (2022) adopt the own and neighbors’
label similarity to rewire the graph, which can make features
propagate on the same category nodes as possible.

1. Introduction
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Gasteiger et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2023a; Xu et al.,
2018; Hamilton et al., 2017) have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities, primarily due to their ability to propagate label
information. This capability has driven their widespread
applications in semi-supervised learning. To do this, GCN
propagates the representations of unlabeled neighbors to
labeled nodes by the message passing mechanism, thereby
enabling label information to supervise not only the labeled
nodes but also their unlabeled neighbors (Ji et al., 2023;

Although existing graph learning methods have achieved
promising performance, there are still some limitations that
need to be addressed. First, previous methods have used
heuristic approaches to learn the graph structure, they have
not explored what kind of graph structures can make GCNs
effectively propagate the labeled nodes’ information to unlabeled nodes. As a result, on the learned graph structure,
the label information propagated via message passing may
not always contribute positively to the predictions of GCNs.
Second, existing graph learning methods fail to explore both
the consistency information and the mutually exclusive information between the new graph and the original graph,

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Sichuan Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Yibin, 644000,
China 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China 4 Hainan University, Haikou, China.
Correspondence to: Xiaofeng Zhu <seanzhuxf@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

