Overcoming Non-monotonicity in Transducer-based Streaming Generation

Zhengrui Ma 1 2 Yang Feng 1 2 Min Zhang 3

Abstract

Popular streaming generation methods can be broadly
divided into two categories: Attention-based EncoderDecoder (AED; Bahdanau et al., 2015) and Transducer
(Graves, 2012). Streaming AED models adapt the conventional sequence-to-sequence framework (Bahdanau, 2014)
to support streaming generation. They often rely on an external policy module to determine the READ/WRITE actions
in inference and to direct the scope of cross-attention in
training. Examples include Wait-k policy (Ma et al., 2019)
and monotonic attention-based methods (Raffel et al., 2017;
Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2020d; 2023a). On the
other hand, Transducer models connect the encoder and
predictor through a joiner rather than using cross-attention.
The joiner is designed to synchronize the encoder and predictor by expanding its output vocabulary to include a blank
symbol ϵ, which indicates a READ action. Due to the
decoupling of the predictor state from the encoder state,
READ/WRITE states in Transducer can be represented by
a two-dimensional lattice. This allows for the computation
of total probabilities using the forward-backward algorithm
(Graves, 2012), facilitating end-to-end optimization. Benefited from joint optimization of all potential policies during
training, Transducer often demonstrates better performance
compared to AED models (Xue et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023).

Streaming generation models are utilized across
fields, with the Transducer architecture being popular in industrial applications. However, its inputsynchronous decoding mechanism presents challenges in tasks requiring non-monotonic alignments, such as simultaneous translation. In this research, we address this issue by integrating Transducer’s decoding with the history of input stream
via a learnable monotonic attention. Our approach
leverages the forward-backward algorithm to infer
the posterior probability of alignments between
the predictor states and input timestamps, which
is then used to estimate the monotonic context representations, thereby avoiding the need to enumerate the exponentially large alignment space during
training. Extensive experiments show that our
MonoAttn-Transducer effectively handles nonmonotonic alignments in streaming scenarios, offering a robust solution for complex generation
tasks. Code is available at https://github.
com/ictnlp/MonoAttn-Transducer.

1. Introduction

During the decoding process of Transducer, each target
token is explicitly aligned with a corresponding source token. This input-synchronous decoding property makes the
architecture well-suited for tasks like speech recognition,
where the input and output align monotonically. However,
it poses challenges for non-monotonic alignment tasks such
as simultaneous translation (Chuang et al., 2021; Shao &
Feng, 2022; Ma et al., 2023b;c). Due to the decoupled design, Transducer models have limited ability to attend to
the input stream history during decoding, making it hard to
manage reorderings. To address this issue, recent research
(Liu et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2023) has started to explore
the incorporation of cross-attention mechanism to enhance
the capacity for handling complex non-monotonicity. Despite these efforts, the integration of cross-attention presents
significant challenges. By integrating the predictor states
with source history through attention, the representation of
predictor states becomes relevant not only to the encoder
states but also to the specific READ/WRITE path history

Streaming generation is a widely studied problem in fields
such as speech recognition (Raffel et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2020; Seide et al., 2024), simultaneous translation (Cho &
Esipova, 2016; Gu et al., 2017; Seamless Communication
et al., 2023), and speech synthesis (Ma et al., 2020a; Zhang
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). Unlike modern turn-based
large language models, streaming models need to start generating the output before the input is completely read. This
necessitates a careful balance between generation quality
and latency.
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 School of
Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University. Correspondence to: Zhengrui Ma <mazhengrui21b@ict.ac.cn>, Yang Feng
(Corresponding Author) <fengyang@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

