Position: We Need Responsible, Application-Driven (RAD) AI Research

Sarah Hartman 1 Cheng Soon Ong 1 2 Julia Powles 3 4 Petra Kuhnert 1

Abstract

sectors, the widespread uptake of AI elevates the need for
applied AI research to be responsive to contextual needs and
societal values (Nissenbaum, 2009), ethical and legal considerations, and public concerns. Further, AI researchers have
responsibilities to inform and educate the public regarding
actual capabilities and limitations of AI, as an instrumental component of building trust in human-AI collaboration
(McGrath et al., 2024).

This position paper argues that achieving meaningful scientific and societal advances with artificial intelligence (AI) requires a responsible,
application-driven approach (RAD) to AI research. As AI is increasingly integrated into society, AI researchers must engage with the specific
contexts where AI is being applied. This includes
being responsive to ethical and legal considerations, technical and societal constraints, and public discourse. We present the case for RAD-AI to
drive research through a three-staged approach:
(1) building transdisciplinary teams and peoplecentred studies; (2) addressing context-specific
methods, ethical commitments, assumptions, and
metrics; and (3) testing and sustaining efficacy
through staged testbeds and a community of
practice. We present a vision for the future of
application-driven AI research to unlock new
value through technically feasible methods that
are adaptive to the contextual needs and values of
the communities they ultimately serve.

In recent years, the concept of Responsible AI (RAI) has
gained significant traction in industry, government, and academic settings (Adams et al., 2024; Maslej et al., 2024;
UNESCO, 2024). The concept of RAI (Confalonieri et al.,
2021; Lu et al., 2023) has become more pronounced, as
the failures, flaws, and harms of AI have been made visible
(Cressie, 2023) due to the embedding of AI into everyday
technologies. Responsible AI draws on prior technical work
undertaken in the areas of fairness, transparency, and explainability, as means of responding to AI’s deficiencies
(Confalonieri et al., 2021). Yet, two of the major weaknesses of RAI are that it lacks stable definition and that it
fails, at core, to specify who is responsible, for what, to
whom (Powles, 2023). Instead, RAI casts responsibility diffusely. Adams et al. (2024, p. 9), for example, define RAI
as “the design, development, deployment and governance
of AI in a way that respects and protects all human rights
and upholds the principles of AI ethics through every stage
of the AI lifecycle and value chain. It requires all actors
involved in the national AI ecosystem to take responsibility
for the human, social and environmental impacts of their
decisions”.

1. Introduction
The artificial intelligence (AI) landscape is evolving rapidly,
requiring researchers to engage with many aspects of AI integration into society. Innovations span diverse fields, from
specific examples in medicine - where AI is helping with
early detection of atrial fibrillation and providing real-time
health insights in clinical settings (Briganti & Le Moine,
2020), to agriculture - where it promises to better predict
crop yield (Elbasi et al., 2022), optimise fertiliser use (Elbasi et al., 2022), and analyse long-term agricultural trends
(Hartman et al., 2022). Across both the public and private

RAI gestures to earlier frameworks designed to ensure science and innovation are responsive to societal needs, including work on ethical, legal, and social implications, value
sensitive design and, most significantly, Responsible Innovation (RI) or Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI).
The classic formulation of RI advocates for a deliberative
approach to research, centred on four dimensions: anticipation; reflexivity; inclusion; and responsiveness (Owen et al.,
2013; Stilgoe et al., 2020). This model has been extensively
applied and refined since the early 2010s, and adds considerable sophistication to RAI discourse, particularly around
integrating affected communities into the research process
(McCrea et al., 2024).

1
CSIRO’s Data61, Australia 2 College of Systems and Society, Australian National University, Australia 3 Tech & Policy Lab, Law School, University of Western Australia, Australia 4 Centre for Business Research, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Sarah Hartman
<sarah.hartman@data61.csiro.au>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

