FlowDrag: 3D-aware Drag-based Image Editing
with Mesh-guided Deformation Vector Flow Fields

Gwanhyeong Koo 1 Sunjae Yoon 1 Younghwan Lee 1 Ji Woo Hong 1 Chang D. Yoo 1

Abstract
Drag-based editing allows precise object manipulation through point-based control, offering user
convenience. However, current methods often
suffer from a geometric inconsistency problem
by focusing exclusively on matching user-defined
points, neglecting the broader geometry and leading to artifacts or unstable edits. We propose
FlowDrag, which leverages geometric information for more accurate and coherent transformations. Our approach constructs a 3D mesh from
the image, using an energy function to guide mesh
deformation based on user-defined drag points.
The resulting mesh displacements are projected
into 2D and incorporated into a UNet denoising
process, enabling precise handle-to-target point
alignment while preserving structural integrity.
Additionally, existing drag-editing benchmarks
provide no ground truth, making it difficult to assess how accurately the edits match the intended
transformations. To address this, we present VFD
(VidFrameDrag) benchmark dataset, which provides ground-truth frames using consecutive shots
in a video dataset. FlowDrag outperforms existing
drag-based editing methods on both VFD Bench
and DragBench.

(a) User Edit

(b) DiffEditor

(c) GoodDrag

(d) FlowDrag (ours)

Figure 1. Results of drag-based image editing. While other methods only optimize around user-specified points, failing to preserve
the Statue of Liberty’s structure (first row), FlowDrag maintains
overall integrity. In the second row, FlowDrag stably rotates the
woman’s face from her nose without distorting her hat or hand,
whereas other methods fail to maintain geometric consistency.

Tumanyan et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023; Koo et al., 2024a),
which uses user-provided prompts, has shown promising
results but often struggles with precise and fine-grained edits. Even slight variations in text can lead to vastly different
results, making it difficult for users to achieve consistent
and detailed modifications, thereby highlighting the challenges of achieving precision in text-to-image editing. To
address this, DragGAN (Pan et al., 2023) introduced a pointdragging method, enhancing user convenience for more
precise editing. However, due to the constraints of GANs,
struggled with general image performance. This limitation
led to interest in exploring drag-based image editing using diffusion models, which can be categorized into two
main approaches: motion-based (Shi et al., 2024; Ling et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) and gradientguidance-based (Mou et al., 2023; 2024) methods. The
motion-based approach in drag-based image editing consists
of two processes: motion supervision and point tracking.
Motion supervision measures the difference between the
handle and target points in the UNet decoder’s feature map
and applies it to optimize the latent, gradually shifting the
handle point toward the target. Subsequently, point tracking updates the handle point’s position in the feature map,
ensuring alignment with the progressively edited result. In
contrast, gradient-based methods derive inspiration from
score-based (Song et al., 2020b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021)

1. Introduction
The advancements in text-to-image (T2I) generation diffusion models (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022;
Nichol et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023) have significantly enhanced image generation capabilities. Leveraging pretrained
T2I diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022) trained on large
scale dataset, the image editing field has also seen substantial progress. Text-based image editing (Hertz et al., 2022;
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST).
Correspondence to: Chang D. Yoo <cdyoo@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

