Orthogonal Subspace Decomposition for Generalizable AI-Generated Image
Detection
Zhiyuan Yan * 1 2 Jiangming Wang * 2 Peng Jin 1 Ke-Yue Zhang 2 Chengchun Liu 1 Shen Chen 2 Taiping Yao 2
Shouhong Ding 2 Baoyuan Wu 3 Li Yuan 1

Abstract

Quick Shortcut to Fake
Fake Loss

1.00

Real Loss

Test AUC

Best AUC
0.80

AUC

Loss (Cross-entropy)

Detecting AI-generated images (AIGIs), such as
natural images or face images, has become increasingly important yet challenging. In this paper, we start from a new perspective to excavate the reason behind the failure generalization
in AIGI detection, named the asymmetry phenomenon, where a naively trained detector tends
to favor overfitting to the limited and monotonous
fake patterns, causing the feature space to become highly constrained and low-ranked, which
is proved seriously limiting the expressivity and
generalization. One potential remedy is incorporating the pre-trained knowledge within the vision
foundation models (higher-ranked) to expand the
feature space, alleviating the model’s overfitting
to fake. To this end, we employ Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) to decompose the original
feature space into two orthogonal subspaces. By
freezing the principal components and adapting
only the remained components, we preserve the
pre-trained knowledge while learning fake patterns. Compared to existing full-parameters and
LoRA-based tuning methods, we explicitly ensure orthogonality, enabling the higher rank of
the whole feature space, effectively minimizing
overfitting and enhancing generalization. We finally identify a crucial insight: our method implicitly learns a vital prior that fakes are actually
derived from the real, indicating a hierarchical
relationship rather than independence. Modeling
this prior, we believe, is essential for achieving
superior generalization. Our codes are publicly
available at GitHub.

0.60
0.40
0.20

~100× Larger
0.00
0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Iterations

Figure 1. Illustration of the asymmetry phenomenon in AIgenerated image detection. We show that the baseline detector
(i.e., Xception) tends to quickly overfit to the fake patterns in
the training set (Rossler et al., 2019), causing the limited generalization when facing previously unseen fakes (Li et al., 2020b).

1. Introduction
The rapid development of AI generative technologies has
significantly lowered the barrier for creating highly realistic fake images. As deep generative models advance and
mature (Goodfellow et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022b; Yan et al., 2025), the proliferation of AIgenerated images (AIGIs1 ) has drawn considerable attention,
driven by their ability to produce high-quality content with
relative ease. However, these advancements also introduce
significant risks, if misused for malicious purposes such as
deepfakes (mainly including face-swapping (Korshunov &
Marcel, 2018) and face-reenactment (Thies et al., 2016)),
which may violate personal privacy, spread misinformation,
and erode trust in digital media. Consequently, there is an
urgent need to develop a reliable and robust framework for
detecting AIGIs.

*
Equal contribution 1 Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School 2 Tencent Youtu Lab 3 The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Taiping Yao <taipingyao@tencent.cn>, Li Yuan <yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn>.

Most existing studies in AIGI detection (Wang et al., 2020b;
Rossler et al., 2019) typically approach the real/fake classification problem as a symmetric binary classification task,
akin to the “cat versus dog” problem. A standard binary

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
In the context of this research, AIGI primarily refers to deepfakes (face-swapping) and synthetic images (e.g., nature or arts).

1

