Towards an Explainable Comparison and Alignment of Feature Embeddings

Mohammad Jalali 1 Bahar Dibaei Nia 2 Farzan Farnia 1

Abstract

Alayrac et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Oquab et al., 2024). The
application of pre-trained embeddings has enabled scalable
solutions for many downstream tasks, particularly in scenarios where the available sample size and compute resources
are significantly limited. In such cases, the embedded data
can be used to train simple models, such as linear or knearest neighbors (KNN) classifiers, to achieve satisfactory
results. Additionally, features extracted by standard embedding models are widely employed for the automated
evaluation of generative models (Heusel et al., 2017; Hessel
et al., 2021; Stein et al., 2023; Ospanov et al., 2025), providing accurate rankings of generative modeling architectures
without requiring time-intensive human assessments.

While several feature embedding models have
been developed in the literature, comparisons of
these embeddings have largely focused on their
numerical performance in classification-related
downstream applications. However, an interpretable comparison of different embeddings requires identifying and analyzing mismatches between sample groups clustered within the embedding spaces. In this work, we propose the Spectral
Pairwise Embedding Comparison (SPEC) framework to compare embeddings and identify their
differences in clustering a reference dataset. Our
approach examines the kernel matrices derived
from two embeddings and leverages the eigendecomposition of the kernel difference matrix to detect sample clusters that are captured differently
by the two embeddings. We present a scalable
implementation of this kernel-based approach,
with computational complexity that grows linearly
with the sample size. Furthermore, we introduce
an optimization problem using this framework
to align two embeddings, ensuring that clusters
identified in one embedding are also captured in
the other model. We provide numerical results
demonstrating the SPEC’s application to compare
and align embeddings on large-scale datasets such
as ImageNet and MS-COCO. The project page is
available at https://mjalali.github.io/SPEC/.

While recent advancements in the machine learning community have introduced various embedding models that achieve
remarkable results on standard image, text, and video domains, comparisons of these embeddings have primarily
focused on evaluating their performance in standard downstream tasks, such as classification accuracy on benchmark
datasets (e.g. ImageNet). However, such comparisons often
lack interpretability and do not reveal how differently the
embeddings behave in recognizing various sample types.
A more fine-grained comparison is necessary to disclose
explainable differences between embedding models, particularly in identifying which samples are clustered differently
according to the models. Understanding these differences
can aid in interpreting and debugging embeddings and can
also be leveraged to align multiple embeddings. Furthermore, interpreting the discrepancies of embeddings can be
used to select representation models for downstream tasks.
In this work, we propose a spectral approach called Spectral Pairwise Embedding Comparison (SPEC) for the finegrained comparison of two embeddings. The SPEC framework detects differences in sample clusters assigned by two
embeddings, identifying major data groups that are clustered differently by one embedding compared to the other.
To achieve this, we extend the well-established kernel principal component analysis (Kernel-PCA) approach (Schölkopf
et al., 1998), that leverages the eigendecomposition of the
kernel similarity matrix, and propose analyzing the principal eigenvectors of the difference of embeddings’ kernel
matrices to interpret the differences in cluster assignments.
Our analysis suggests that the SPEC framework could effectively detect cluster differences between two embeddings,

1. Introduction
Several mainstream frameworks in computer vision and natural language processing rely on embedding models to map
raw image and text inputs into spaces with semantically
meaningful features (Radford et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023;
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Sharif University of Technology.
Correspondence to:
Mohammad Jalali <mjalali24@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Bahar Dibaei
Nia <bahar.dibaeinia@sharif.edu>, Farzan Farnia <farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

