HealthGPT: A Medical Large Vision-Language Model for Unifying
Comprehension and Generation via Heterogeneous Knowledge Adaptation

Tianwei Lin 1 2 Wenqiao Zhang 1 Sijing Li 1 Yuqian Yuan 1 2 Binhe Yu 3 Haoyuan Li 2 Wanggui He 2
Hao Jiang 2 Mengze Li 4 Xiaohui Song 1 Siliang Tang 1 Jun Xiao 1 Hui Lin 1 Yueting Zhuang 1
Beng Chin Ooi 5

7 Medical Multi-Modal Comprehension Tasks
1. X-Ray
Comprehension

List all anatomical locations showing
pulmonary edema, hazy opacity, or
mediastinal displacement.

4. Microsopy Comprehension

Which abdominal organ shows any
indication of a lesion or abnormality
in the CT image?
No abdominal organs show
any clear indications of lesions
or abnormalities.

3. MRI
Comprehension

Could you explain what this mass
in the MRI means for my health?
Is it very serious?
Certainly, the MRI shows a
defined mass in your left nasal
cavity. There is no sign of the ...

1. CT2MRI
Generation

2. MRI2CT
Generation

What is the purpose of comparing
the OCT structure image and OCTA
image with H&E histology?

5. OCT Comprehension

To confirm the histological position
of the obtained OCT brain images.
6. Fundus
Comprehension

What specific findings or pathological
changes can be observed in this
fundus image?
The fundus image appears normal with
no noticeable signs of pathology…

7. Ultrasound
What type of imaging technique
Comprehension
is used in this image?
The image is a sagittal grayscale ultrasonographic…
5. Report-to-CXR
The X-ray shows no
pleural effusion or
pneumothorax. Gen.

I need a version of this CT representation
in MRI.
The image has
been transformed
into MRI.

Comp. Perf.

The purpose of the different
membrane treatments used…

Left hilar structures, left lung,
right hilar structures, right lung.
2. CT
Comprehension

What is the purpose of the different
membrane treatments used in this
study?

Performance

3. Image Reconstruction

4. Super Resolution

Here is the
chest X-ray
image for
you.

Gen. Perf.

Could you improve the quality
of this MRI image?

Reconstruct the following
medical images.

Transform the MRI display into a
CT image.
Here is the CT
version of the
MRI image.

Here is the reconstructed
medical image you need.

Here is the image with
improved resolution.

5 Medical Multi-Modal Generation Tasks
Figure 1: HealthGPT enables medical multimodal comprehension and generation, outperforming both state-of-the-art
unified visual models and medical-specific models across various tasks. This highlights its superior capability in tackling
complex tasks in healthcare applications. Comp.Perf. and Gen.Perf. denote the results of comprehension and generation.

Abstract

integrates medical visual comprehension and generation capabilities within a unified autoregressive paradigm. Our bootstrapping philosophy
is to progressively adapt heterogeneous comprehension and generation knowledge to pretrained Large Language Models (LLMs). This
is achieved through a novel heterogeneous lowrank adaptation (H-LoRA) technique, which is
complemented by a tailored hierarchical visual
perception (HVP) approach and a three-stage
learning strategy (TLS). To effectively learn the
HealthGPT, we devise a comprehensive medical

We present HealthGPT, a powerful Medical
Large Vision-Language Model (Med-LVLM) that
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Alibaba Group,
Hangzhou, China 3 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China 4 The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, HongKong, China 5 National University
of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Wenqiao Zhang
<wenqiaozhang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

