One-Pass Feature Evolvable Learning with Theoretical Guarantees

Cun-Yuan Xing * 1 Meng-Zhang Qian * 1 Wu-Yang Chen 1 Wei Gao 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract

we need to deploy new sensors since old sensors will wear
out, i.e., features corresponding to old sensors vanish but
features corresponding to new sensors emerge.

Feature evolvable learning studies the scenario
where old features will vanish and new features
will emerge when learning with data streams, and
various methods have been developed by utilizing
some useful relationships from old features to new
features, rather than re-training from scratch. In
this work, we focus on two fundamental problems:
How to characterize the relationships between two
different feature spaces, and how to exploit those
relationships for feature evolvable learning. We
introduce the Kernel Ortho-Mapping (KOM) discrepancy to characterize relationships between
two different feature spaces via kernel functions,
and correlate with the optimal classifiers learned
from different feature spaces. Based on this discrepancy, we develop the one-pass algorithm for
feature evolvable learning, which requires going
through all instances only once without storing
the entire or partial training data. Our basic idea
is to take online kernel learning with the random
Fourier features and incorporate some feature and
label relationships via the KOM discrepancy for
feature evolvable learning. We finally validate
the effectiveness of our proposed method both
theoretically and empirically.

Feature evolvable learning has been proposed to study the
scenarios, where old features will vanish and new features
will emerge when learning with streaming data. Recent
years have witnessed increasing attention on this direction
(Zhang et al., 2016; Hou et al., 2019; Beyazit et al., 2019;
Gu et al., 2022; Hou et al., 2023; Schreckenberger et al.,
2023; Chen & Liu, 2024). For feature evolvable learning, it
is crucial to update model adaptively to accommodate new
feature space but retain information of old feature space.
Various methods have been developed for feature evolvable
learning by utilizing useful relationships from old features
to new features, rather than re-training from scratch (Hou
& Zhou, 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2022; Hou
et al., 2022; Lian et al., 2023; Sajedi & Razzazi, 2024). This
is helpful to prevent unnecessary wastes of computational
resources and useful information from previous models over
old features, and sometimes we may not collect sufficient
training data to learn a stable model over new feature space.
Despite successes on the designs of practical algorithms,
there are still some fundamental problems unsolved for
feature evolvable learning. For example, how to present a
formalization on the relationship characterization between
different feature spaces, as well as correlations with model
performance. Another problem is how to utilize useful
relationships and information to improve the performance
for feature evolvable learning from a theoretical view.

1. Introduction
Conventional machine learning generally works with the
assumption that the data comes from a fixed feature space
(Valiant, 1984; Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2016; Mohri et al., 2018; Alpaydin, 2021). In
some real-world applications, however, we may face more
open scenarios; for example, we deploy sensors to collect
data in an environmental monitoring task, and each sensor
corresponds to a feature. Due to finite lifespan of sensors,

This work focuses on the one-pass algorithm for feature
evolvable learning with theoretical guarantees, and the main
contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce the Kernel Ortho-Mapping (KOM) discrepancy to characterize the relationships between two
different feature spaces via kernel functions, which
essentially reflects kernels’ gap under the rotational
invariance. We compare our KOM discrepancy with
prior characterizations such as kernel alignment and `2
distance (Cristianini et al., 2001; Romero et al., 2015).

*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China; School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Wei
Gao <gaow@nju.edu.cn>.

• Based on the KOM discrepancy, we develop the onepass algorithm for feature evolvable data streams,
which requires going through all instances only once

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

