Prior Knowledge Guided Neural Architecture Generation

Jingrong Xie 1 Han Ji 1 Yanan Sun

1

Abstract
Automated architecture design methods, especially neural architecture search, have attracted
increasing attention. However, these methods naturally need to evaluate numerous candidate architectures during the search process, thus computationally extensive and time-consuming. In
this paper, we propose a prior knowledge guided
neural architecture generation method to generate high-performance architectures without any
search and evaluation process. Specifically, in order to identify valuable prior knowledge for architecture generation, we first quantify the contribution of each component within an architecture to
its overall performance. Subsequently, a diffusion
model guided by prior knowledge is presented,
which can easily generate high-performance architectures for different computation tasks. Extensive experiments on new search spaces demonstrate that our method achieves superior accuracy
over state-of-the-art methods. For example, we
only need 0.004 GPU Days to generate architecture with 76.1% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet and
97.56% on CIFAR-10. Furthermore, we can find
competitive architecture for more unseen search
spaces, such as TransNAS-Bench-101 and NATSBench, which demonstrates the broad applicability of the proposed method.

3*1$* RXUV

%HWWHU
,6'$576 +HHWDO

$QJOH/RVV <DQJHWDO
6:'1$6 ;XHHWDO

%D/H1$67) =KDQJHWDO

7(1$6 &KHQHWDO
(*1$6 &DLHWDO
3,$177 /XHWDO

)DLU1$6 &KXHWDO

3&'$576 ;XHWDO

(RL1$6 =KRXHWDO

Figure 1. Search cost and performance comparison of our proposed
PG-NAG method against the state-of-the-art NAS methods on
ImageNet.

ation assessing each architecture to find the optimal one.
However, the exhaustive search for an optimal architecture
is computationally demanding due to the vast search space,
which often contains over 1010 possible architectures (Cai
et al., 2019). Furthermore, evaluating each candidate architecture requires training from scratch on a dataset to obtain
accuracy, leading to significant time and resource costs.
To alleviate these costs, several methods have been introduced to accelerate architecture evaluation, such as performance predictors (Ji et al., 2024) and zero-shot methods (Peng et al., 2024). These methods aim to predict the
performance of architectures without training from scratch.
However, even with faster evaluations, current NAS methods still need to evaluate architectures individually, which
remains time-intensive, especially with a large number of
candidates. Therefore, minimizing computational costs remains a central challenge in NAS research.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an effective approach
to automatically designing neural architectures and has seen
success in diverse tasks. NAS generally involves three main
components (Elsken et al., 2019): search space defining possible architectures, search strategy exploring this vast space
to identify promising candidates, and performance evalu1

This leads to growing interest in the Neural Architecture
Generation (NAG) paradigm, which reduces costs by avoiding the exhaustive search approach and instead focuses on
directly generating high-performance architectures. For instance, AutoBuild (Mills et al., 2024) trains a predictor to
rank the performance of the modules in architecture, thus

Department of Computer Science Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
Correspondence to: Yanan Sun
<ysun@scu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

