Fast Estimation of Partial Dependence Functions using Trees

Jinyang Liu 1 Tessa Steensgaard 1 Marvin Wright 2 3 4 Niklas Pfister 1 5 Munir Hiabu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
As machine learning models become increasingly complex
and widely deployed in mission-critical applications, interpretability has become essential for ensuring fairness
and transparency (Adadi & Berrada, 2018). One popular
model explanation method is Shapley additive explanations
(SHAP) (Lundberg et al., 2020) – a post-hoc explanation
method that has gained traction for its game-theoretic approach of attributing feature importance based on Shapley
values. A value function must be specified for the Shapley
value. In this paper we refer to SHAP as the Shapley values
that use the partial dependence (PD) functions as the value
function. Others (Chen et al., 2020; Taufiq et al., 2023) have
termed it interventional Shapley values.

Many existing interpretation methods are based
on Partial Dependence (PD) functions that, for a
pre-trained machine learning model, capture how
a subset of the features affects the predictions by
averaging over the remaining features. Notable
methods include Shapley additive explanations
(SHAP) which computes feature contributions
based on a game theoretical interpretation and
PD plots (i.e., 1-dim PD functions) that capture
average marginal main effects. Recent work has
connected these approaches using a functional
decomposition and argues that SHAP values can
be misleading since they merge main and interaction effects into a single local effect. However,
a major advantage of SHAP compared to other
PD-based interpretations has been the availability
of fast estimation techniques, such as TreeSHAP.
In this paper, we propose a new tree-based estimator, FastPD* , which efficiently estimates arbitrary PD functions. We show that FastPD consistently estimates the desired population quantity – in contrast to path-dependent TreeSHAP
which is inconsistent when features are correlated.
For moderately deep trees, FastPD improves the
complexity of existing methods from quadratic
to linear in the number of observations. By estimating PD functions for arbitrary feature subsets,
FastPD can be used to extract PD-based interpretations such as SHAP, PD plots and higher-order
interaction effects.

PD plots, i.e. one-dimensional PD functions (Friedman,
2001; Hastie et al., 2009; Molnar et al., 2023) quantify the
effect of individual features by averaging predictions while
holding a target feature at fixed values. However, as noted by
Hiabu et al. (2023), both PD plots and SHAP do not provide
a complete model interpretation. SHAP merges main effects
and interactions while PD plots ignore interactions thereby
limiting insight into feature contributions.
Alternatively, a functional decomposition allows for greater
insight by clearly separating main effects and higher-order
interactions. This idea has previously been investigated
in Stone (1994); Hooker (2007); Chastaing et al. (2012);
Lengerich et al. (2020); Herren & Hahn (2022) under the
functional ANOVA identification constraint and more generally in Bordt & von Luxburg (2023); Fumagalli et al. (2025).
In this paper, we consider an identification constraint based
on PD functions for which we develop a fast algorithm.
Computational efficiency improvements for SHAP have
been proposed in several contexts: model-agnostic methods
such as FastSHAP (Jethani et al., 2022); deep-network adaptations (Ancona et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022); and treebased approaches via TreeSHAP (Lundberg et al., 2020).
The popular path-dependent variant of TreeSHAP—used in
XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) and LightGBM (Ke et al.,
2017)—is derived from approximating PD functions (Friedman, 2001). Recent work has further optimized these algorithms (Yang, 2022; Yu et al., 2022) and extended them to
efficient SHAP interaction computations (Muschalik et al.,
2024).

1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science,
Universität Bremen, Germany 3 Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology – BIPS, Germnay 4 Department of Public
Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 5 Lakera, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Jinyang Liu <jl@math.ku.dk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
* The implementation is available as an R-package on GitHub:
https://github.com/PlantedML/glex

1

