Analyze Feature Flow to Enhance Interpretation and Steering in Language
Models
Daniil Laptev 1 2 Nikita Balagansky 1 2 Yaroslav Aksenov 1 Daniil Gavrilov 1

Abstract

cosine similarity, that aligns SAE features across multiple
modules (MLP, attention, and residual) at each layer, capturing how features originate, propagate, or vanish throughout
the model in a form of “flow graphs”.

We introduce a new approach to systematically
map features discovered by sparse autoencoder
across consecutive layers of large language models, extending earlier work that examined interlayer feature links. By using a data-free cosine
similarity technique, we trace how specific features persist, transform, or first appear at each
stage. This method yields granular flow graphs
of feature evolution, enabling fine-grained interpretability and mechanistic insights into model
computations. Crucially, we demonstrate how
these cross-layer feature maps facilitate direct
steering of model behavior by amplifying or suppressing chosen features, achieving targeted thematic control in text generation. Together, our
findings highlight the utility of a causal, crosslayer interpretability framework that not only clarifies how features develop through forward passes
but also provides new means for transparent manipulation of large language models.

1. Cross-Layer Feature Evolution. Using the pretrained
SAEs that can isolate interpretable monosemantic directions, we utilize information obtained from cosine
similarity between their decoder weights to track how
these directions evolve or appear across layers. This
reveals distinct patterns of feature birth and refinement
not seen in single-layer analyses.
2. Mechanistic Properties of Flow Graph. By building
a flow graph, we uncover an evolutionary pathway,
which is also an internal circuit-like computational
pathway, where MLP and attention modules introduce
new features to already existing ones or change them.
3. Multi-Layer Model Steering. We show that flow
graphs can improve the quality of model steering by
targeting multiple SAE features at once, and also offer
a better understanding of the steering outcome. This
framework provides the first demonstration of such
multi-layer steering via SAE features.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) excel at generating coherent text but remain largely opaque in how they store and
transform semantic information. Previous research has revealed that neural networks often encode concepts as linear
directions within hidden representations (Mikolov et al.,
2013), and that sparse autoencoders (SAEs) can disentangle
these directions into monosemantic features in the case of
LLMs (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023). Yet,
most methods analyze a single layer or focus solely on the
residual stream, leaving the multi-layer nature of feature
emergence and transformation underexplored (Balagansky
et al., 2024; Balcells et al., 2024).

Our method helps to discover the lifespan of SAE features,
understand their evolution across layers, and shed light on
how they might form computational circuits, thereby enabling more precise control over model behavior.

2. Preliminaries
2.1. Linear representation hypothesis
To understand how models encode and process the information they learn, one can examine the geometric structure of their hidden representations and weights. Research
has shown (Mikolov et al., 2013; Marks & Tegmark, 2024;
Gurnee & Tegmark, 2024; Engels et al., 2025) that linear
directions carry semantically meaningful information and
may be used by models to represent learned concepts. Observations of this kind led to the development of the linear
representation hypothesis, which can be stated as follows.

In this paper, we propose a data-free approach, based on
1
T-Tech 2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology. Correspondence to: Nikita Balagansky <n.n.balaganskiy@tbank.ru>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

