TimePoint: Accelerated Time Series Alignment via
Self-Supervised Keypoint and Descriptor Learning

Ron Shapira Weber 1 2 Shahar Ben Ishay 1 2 Andrey Lavrinenko 1 2 Shahaf E. Finder 1 2 Oren Freifeld 1 2 3

Abstract
Fast and scalable alignment of time series is a
fundamental challenge in many domains. The
standard solution, Dynamic Time Warping (DTW),
struggles with poor scalability and sensitivity to
noise. We introduce TimePoint, a self-supervised
method that dramatically accelerates DTW-based
alignment while typically improving alignment
accuracy by learning keypoints and descriptors
from synthetic data. Inspired by 2D keypoint
detection but carefully adapted to the unique challenges of 1D signals, TimePoint leverages efficient 1D diffeomorphisms—which effectively
model nonlinear time warping—to generate realistic training data. This approach, along with fully
convolutional and wavelet convolutional architectures, enables the extraction of informative keypoints and descriptors. Applying DTW to these
sparse representations yields major speedups and
typically higher alignment accuracy than standard DTW applied to the full signals. TimePoint
demonstrates strong generalization to real-world
time series when trained solely on synthetic data,
and further improves with fine-tuning on real data.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that TimePoint consistently achieves faster and more accurate alignments than standard DTW, making it
a scalable solution for time-series analysis. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
BGU-CS-VIL/TimePoint.

Figure 1. TimePoint (TP): Keypoint Detection and Descriptors on
real-world, unseen, ECG data of length 2500 (TP was trained on
synthetic data of length 512). Each panel depicts (top-to-bottom)
the original signal and predicted keypoints, keypoint probability
map, and PCA of the learned descriptors (D = 256, using 5
principal components for visualization purposes).

ordered sequences of observations collected over time and
are instrumental in revealing temporal patterns, trends, and
anomalies. A key challenge arises when these sequences
grow in length or vary in sampling rates: not only do computational costs escalate with sequence size, but subtle misalignments can arise due to variable speeds or temporal
distortions in the data. Consequently, developing robust
and efficient approaches for comparing and aligning time
series has become essential for tasks such as classification,
clustering, and anomaly detection.

1. Introduction
Time series data are ubiquitous across finance, healthcare,
environmental monitoring, and engineering. They consist of

Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is one of the most widely
used algorithms for time series alignment due to its ability
to accommodate elastic shifts in the temporal axis (Sakoe,
1971; Sakoe & Chiba, 1978). It has found broad application
in speech recognition, gesture analysis, and signature verification. Despite its flexibility, DTW suffers from several
practical limitations. First, its computational cost is O(L2 )
with respect to the sequence lengths L, which becomes
prohibitive for large-scale or high-throughput applications.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, BenGurion University of the Negev (BGU). 2 Data Science Research
Center, BGU. 3 School of Brain sciences and Cognition, BGU. Correspondence to: Ron Shapira Weber <ronsha@post.bgu.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

