Optimal Transport-based Conformal Prediction

Gauthier Thurin 1 Kimia Nadjahi 1 Claire Boyer 2

Abstract

ical priority. Conformal Prediction (CP, Vovk et al., 2005)
has emerged as a compelling framework to address this
need, by generating prediction sets with coverage guarantees (ensuring they contain the true outcome with a specified
confidence level) regardless of the model or data distribution.
Most CP methods are thus model-agnostic and distributionfree while being easy to implement, which explains their
growing popularity in recent years.

Conformal Prediction (CP) is a principled framework for quantifying uncertainty in black-box
learning models, by constructing prediction sets
with finite-sample coverage guarantees. Traditional approaches rely on scalar nonconformity
scores, which fail to fully exploit the geometric
structure of multivariate outputs, such as in multioutput regression or multiclass classification. Recent methods addressing this limitation impose
predefined convex shapes for the prediction sets,
potentially misaligning with the intrinsic data geometry. We introduce a novel CP procedure handling multivariate score functions through the lens
of optimal transport. Specifically, we leverage
Monge-Kantorovich vector ranks and quantiles to
construct prediction region with flexible, potentially non-convex shapes, better suited to the complex uncertainty patterns encountered in multivariate learning tasks. We prove that our approach
ensures finite-sample, distribution-free coverage
properties, similar to typical CP methods. We
then adapt our method for multi-output regression
and multiclass classification, and also propose
simple adjustments to generate adaptive prediction regions with asymptotic conditional coverage
guarantees. Finally, we evaluate our method on
practical regression and classification problems,
illustrating its advantages in terms of (conditional)
coverage and efficiency.

The main idea of CP is to convert a set of non-conformity
scores into reliable uncertainty sets using quantiles. Nonconformity scores are empirical measurements of how unusual a prediction is. For example, in regression, the score
can be defined as |ŷ − y|, where ŷ ∈ R is the model’s prediction and y ∈ R the true response (Lei et al., 2018). These
scores are central to the CP framework as they encapsulate
the uncertainty stemming from both the model and the data,
directly influencing the size and shape of the resulting prediction sets. Therefore, the quality of the prediction sets
hinges on the relevance of the chosen non-conformity score:
while a poorly designed score may still achieve the required
coverage guarantee, it often leads to overly conservative or
inefficient prediction sets, failing to capture the complex
patterns of the underlying data distribution (Angelopoulos
& Bates, 2023).
Most CP approaches rely on scalar non-conformity scores
(e.g., Angelopoulos & Bates, 2023; Romano et al., 2020b;
Cauchois et al., 2021; Sesia & Romano, 2021; Lei
et al., 2018). Although conceptually simple, such onedimensional representations can be too restrictive or poorly
suited in applications that require multivariate prediction
sets. To circumvent this, recently-proposed CP methods
seek to incorporate correlations despite the use of scalar
scores, by leveraging techniques such as copulas (Messoudi
et al., 2021) or ellipsoids (Johnstone & Cox, 2021; Messoudi et al., 2022; Henderson et al., 2024). Nevertheless,
these approaches either lack finite-sample coverage guarantees or impose restrictive modeling assumptions that prescribe the shape of the prediction region. Feldman et al.
(2023) recently proposed a CP method able to construct
more adaptive prediction regions with non-convex shapes,
establishing a connection with multivariate quantiles. However, their method (as conformalized quantile regression,
Romano et al., 2019) requires intervening in the way the
predictor is trained and, therefore, cannot be directly applied

1. Introduction
In various domains, including high-stakes applications,
state-of-the-art performances are often achieved by blackbox machine learning models. As a result, accurately quantifying the uncertainty of their predictions has become a crit1
CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France 2 Laboratoire
de Mathématiques d’Orsay (LMO), Université Paris Saclay,
France, and Institut universitaire de France. Correspondence to:
Gauthier Thurin <gthurin@mail.di.ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

