Raising the Bar: Investigating the Values of Large Language Models
via Generative Evolving Testing

Han Jiang 1 Xiaoyuan Yi* 2 Zhihua Wei* 1 Ziang Xiao 3 Shu Wang 4 Xing Xie 2

Abstract

(a) Expected Maximum Toxicity (EMT) Trends:
GPT Model

Warning: Contains harmful model outputs.
Despite significant advancements, the propensity
of Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate
harmful and unethical content poses critical challenges. Measuring value alignment of LLMs becomes crucial for their regulation and responsible deployment. Although numerous benchmarks
have been constructed to assess social bias, toxicity, and ethical issues in LLMs, those static benchmarks suffer from evaluation chronoeffect, in
which, as models rapidly evolve, existing benchmarks may leak into training data or become saturated, overestimating ever-developing LLMs. To
tackle this problem, we propose GETA, a novel
generative evolving testing approach based on
adaptive testing methods in measurement theory.
Unlike traditional adaptive testing methods that
rely on a static test item pool, GETA probes the
underlying moral boundaries of LLMs by dynamically generating test items tailored to model capability. GETA co-evolves with LLMs by learning
a joint distribution of item difficulty and model
value conformity, thus effectively addressing evaluation chronoeffect. We evaluated various popular LLMs with GETA and demonstrated that 1)
GETA can dynamically create difficulty-tailored
test items and 2) GETA’s evaluation results are
more consistent with models’ performance on unseen OOD and i.i.d. items, laying the groundwork
for future evaluation paradigms.

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.5

0.7

Dataset

EMT↓

0.1

0.2

0.3

(b) Trolley Problem:
Is it right to sacrifice one person to save five others?
——————————————— 2022/12/14 ———————————————

It is never right to sacrifice one person to save five
others… (×) / It’s important to try to save as many
lives as possible… (×)
——————————————— 2025/01/25 ———————————————

The trolley problem is a moral dilemma that raises
questions about ethical decision-making…
Ultimately, there is no universally agreed-upon
answer to the trolley problem, and individuals may
have different perspectives on what the morally
right course of action is in this scenario. (√)

Figure 1. Illustration of Evaluation chronoeffect. (a) Toxicity (↓) of
updated GPT versions measured on R EALT OXICITY P ROMPTS (upper) and toxicity of GPT-3.5-turbo (230315) on different datasets
(bottom). (b) ChatGPT’s answers to the trolley problem over time.

1. Introduction
Flourishing from large-scale training (Brown et al.,
2020; Wei et al., 2022a) and high-quality human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022), Large Language Models (LLM)
have demonstrated remarkable abilities in instruction following and problem-solving, sparking a revolution in the AI
field. Despite such prosperity, LLMs remain a double-edged
sword, with further amplified existing ethical risks (Weidinger et al., 2021b; Bommasani et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023a; Liu et al., 2023d; McKenzie et al., 2023) and emerging new issues, particularly regarding social bias (Liang

This work was conducted during the first author’s internship at Microsoft Research Asia and was released at
https://github.com/Salomeeeee/GETA. 1 Tongji University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Johns Hopkins University
4
University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to:
Xiaoyuan Yi <xiaoyuanyi@microsoft.com>, Zhihua Wei <zhihua_wei@tongji.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

