SDE Matching: Scalable and Simulation-Free Training
of Latent Stochastic Differential Equations

Grigory Bartosh 1 Dmitry Vetrov 2 Christian A. Naesseth 1

Abstract

Table 1. Asymptotic complexity comparison. L and R are number of sequential and parallel evaluations of drift/diffusion terms,
respectively, and D is the number of parameters/states.

The Latent Stochastic Differential Equation
(SDE) is a powerful tool for time series and sequence modeling. However, training Latent SDEs
typically relies on adjoint sensitivity methods,
which depend on simulation and backpropagation through approximate SDE solutions, which
limit scalability. In this work, we propose SDE
Matching, a new simulation-free method for training Latent SDEs. Inspired by modern Score- and
Flow Matching algorithms for learning generative
dynamics, we extend these ideas to the domain of
stochastic dynamics for time series and sequence
modeling, eliminating the need for costly numerical simulations. Our results demonstrate that
SDE Matching achieves performance comparable
to adjoint sensitivity methods while drastically
reducing computational complexity.

Method

Memory

Time

Forward Pathwise
(Yang & Kushner, 1991)
(Gobet & Munos, 2005)

O(1)

O(LD)

Backprop through Solver
(Giles & Glasserman, 2006)

O(L)

O(L)

Stochastic Adjoint
(Li et al., 2020)

O(1)

O(L log L)

Amortized Reparameterization
(Course & Nair, 2023)

O(R)

O(R)

SDE Matching
(this paper)

O(1)

O(1)

Differential Equations (SDEs) (Movellan et al., 2002; Ha
et al., 2018; Tzen & Raginsky, 2019; Peluchetti & Favaro,
2020; Hodgkinson et al., 2020). Latent SDEs have been
shown to be more robust to data shifts (Oh et al., 2024), and
applications are numerous, from neuroscience (ElGazzar &
van Gerven, 2024) to video prediction (Daems et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Differential equations are a natural choice for modeling
continuous-time dynamical systems and have recently received significant interest in machine learning. Since Chen
et al. (2018) introduced the adjoint sensitivity method
for learning Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) in a
memory-efficient manner, ODE-based approaches became
popular in deep learning for density estimation (Grathwohl
et al., 2019) and to model irregularly observed time series
(Yildiz et al., 2019; Rubanova et al., 2019).

To enable more memory-efficient learning, Li et al. (2020)
extended the adjoint sensitivity method from ODEs to SDEs.
Despite these advancements, training of ODE and SDE
models is simulation-based, it relies on costly numerical
integration of differential equations and backpropagation
through the solutions. With training algorithms that are
difficult to parallelize on modern hardware, Latent SDEs
have till now resisted truly scaling.

However, ODEs describe deterministic systems and encode
all uncertainty into their initial conditions. This limits the
applicability of ODE-based approaches when modeling
stochastic and chaotic processes. To address these limitations, several works study Neural (or Latent) Stochastic

In parallel, Score Matching (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021b) and Flow Matching methods (Lipman et al., 2023;
Albergo et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) have demonstrated
that continuous-time dynamics for generative modeling can
be learned efficiently in a simulation-free manner—without
requiring numerical integration. These techniques have
proven computationally efficient and scalable for highdimensional problems. Inspired by these developments,
we develop a simulation-free approach for learning SDEs.

1
University of Amsterdam 2 Constructor University, Bremen. Correspondence to: Grigory Bartosh <g.bartosh@uva.nl>,
Dmitry Vetrov <dvetrov@constructor.university>, Christian A.
Naesseth <c.a.naesseth@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

