Securing Equal Share: A Principled Approach for Learning Multiplayer
Symmetric Games

Jiawei Ge * 1 Yuanhao Wang * 2 Wenzhe Li 3 Chi Jin 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, AI systems have achieved remarkable success in multi-agent decision-making problems, particularly
in a wide range of strategic games. These include, but
are not limited to, Go (Silver et al., 2016), Mahjong (Li
et al., 2020), Poker (Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018; 2019), Starcraft 2 (Vinyals et al., 2019), DOTA
2 (Berner et al., 2019), League of Legends (Ye et al., 2020),
and Diplomacy (Gray et al., 2020; Bakhtin et al., 2022;
, FAIR). Many of these games are two-player zero-sum
games1 , where Nash equilibria (NEs) always exist and can
be computed in polynomial time. NEs in two-player zerosum games are also non-exploitable—an agent employing
a NE strategy will not lose even when facing an adversarial
opponent who seeks to exploit the agent’s weaknesses. Although such equilibrium strategies do not necessarily capitalize on opponents’ weaknesses or guarantee large-margin
victories, human players often adopt suboptimal strategies
that deviate significantly from equilibria in complex games
with large state spaces. Consequently, AI agents who adopt
equilibrium strategies often outperform humans in practice
for two-player zero-sum games.

This paper examines multiplayer symmetric
constant-sum games with more than two players in a competitive setting, such as Mahjong,
Poker, and various board and video games. In
contrast to two-player zero-sum games, equilibria in multiplayer games are neither unique
nor non-exploitable, failing to provide meaningful guarantees when competing against opponents who play different equilibria or nonequilibrium strategies. This gives rise to a series
of long-lasting fundamental questions in multiplayer games regarding suitable objectives, solution concepts, and principled algorithms. This
paper takes an initial step towards addressing
these challenges by focusing on the natural objective of equal share—securing an expected
payoff of C/n in an n-player symmetric game
with a total payoff of C. We rigorously identify
the theoretical conditions under which achieving an equal share is tractable and design a series of efficient algorithms, inspired by no-regret
learning, that provably attain approximate equal
share across various settings. Furthermore, we
provide complementary lower bounds that justify
the sharpness of our theoretical results. Our experimental results highlight worst-case scenarios
where meta-algorithms from prior state-of-theart systems for multiplayer games fail to secure
an equal share, while our algorithm succeeds,
demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.

In contrast, multiplayer games—defined here as those
with more than two players—exhibit fundamentally different game structures compared to two-player zero-sum
games. This distinction introduces several unique challenges. Firstly, NEs are believed to be no longer computable in polynomial time (Daskalakis et al., 2009; Chen
& Deng, 2005). Moreover, there may exist multiple NEs
with distinct values. Such non-uniqueness in equilibria
raises a critical concern about the adoption of equilibrium
strategies in multiplayer settings: if a learning agent adopts
an equilibrium that is different from other players, collectively, they are not playing any single equilibrium, which
undermines the equilibrium property that dissuades the
agent from changing its strategy as long as others maintain
theirs. Finally, in multiplayer games, equilibrium strategies are no longer non-exploitable and fail to provide meaningful guarantees when competing against opponents who

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering, Princeton University 2 Department of
Computer Science, Princeton University 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Jiawei Ge <jg5300@princeton.edu>, Chi Jin
<chij@princeton.edu>.

1
Games such as DOTA and League of Legends, despite involving two teams, can be mostly considered similar to two-player
zero-sum games in terms of their game structures and solutions.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

