Enhancing Spectral GNNs: From Topology and Perturbation Perspectives

Taoyang Qin 1 Ke-Jia CHEN 1 2 Zheng Liu 1

Abstract
Spectral Graph Neural Networks process graph
signals using the spectral properties of the normalized graph Laplacian matrix. However, the
frequent occurrence of repeated eigenvalues limits the expressiveness of spectral GNNs. To
address this, we propose a higher-dimensional
sheaf Laplacian matrix, which not only encodes
the graph’s topological information but also increases the upper bound on the number of distinct eigenvalues. The sheaf Laplacian matrix is
derived from carefully designed perturbations of
the block form of the normalized graph Laplacian, yielding a perturbed sheaf Laplacian (PSL)
matrix with more distinct eigenvalues. We provide a theoretical analysis of the expressiveness
of spectral GNNs equipped with the PSL and establish perturbation bounds for the eigenvalues.
Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets
for node classification demonstrate that incorporating the perturbed sheaf Laplacian enhances the
performance of spectral GNNs.

Figure 1. The perturbed sheaf Laplacian LF can be viewed as a
special perturbation of Lblock (L is the normalized graph Laplacian, ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product, I is the d × d identity
matrix, and all restriction maps are orthogonal). Specifically, for
each (v, z) ∈ E, if Qvz slightly deviates from the identity I while
satisfying the sheaf Laplacian constraints, the resulting matrix is
both a valid normalized sheaf Laplacian and a perturbed version
of Lblock .

Wang and Zhang (Wang & Zhang, 2022) highlight the issue
of repeated eigenvalues and propose an orthogonal Jacobi
basis approach in which each prediction dimension has a
flexible filter design. However, the individual filter design
does not fully resolve the performance degeneracy caused
by different eigenvectors sharing the same eigenvalue. Lu
et al. (Lu et al., 2024) tackle the issue by adding a diagonal
matrix of uniformly sampled eigenvalues to the normalized
Laplacian matrix. The polynomial filters integrated with
the corrected eigenvalues yield improved node classification results. Although this method helps mitigate repeated
eigenvalues, it also compromises the original topological
information encoded in the normalized Laplacian matrix by
reducing the operator’s spectral gap, which reflects graph’s
connectivity and information flow (see Appendix F.2).

1. Introduction
Both spatial and spectral Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have shown outstanding performance in various graph tasks
(Kipf & Welling, 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Huang et al.,
2023; Jin et al., 2024). Unlike spatial GNNs, spectral
GNNs conduct frequency-domain convolution on normalized Laplacian matrices of graphs. However, in most graph
datasets, the multiplicity of eigenvalues of the normalized
graph Laplacian matrices is not small. The repeated eigenvalues limit the expressive power of spectral GNNs, resulting in a deteriorated performance (Wang & Zhang, 2022;
Lu et al., 2024).

Besides the above issues, both works focus only on linear
settings, leaving the impact of nonlinear activation function
unexplored.
We focus on the challenge of repeated eigenvalues in a nonlinear context. We propose to utilize a higher dimensional
sheaf Laplacian matrix, which guarantees a higher upper
bound on the number of distinct eigenvalues (Hansen &
Ghrist, 2018; Hansen, 2020). Specifically, we normalize
the sheaf Laplacian matrix by applying perturbation on the
block form of the normalized graph Laplacian matrix. The
designed perturbation of the identity matrix serves as the
restriction map, which increases the diversity of eigenvalue

1

School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Nanjing, China 2 Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Big Data Security & Intelligent Processing, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Ke-Jia CHEN <chenkj@njupt.edu.cn>, Zheng
Liu <zliu@njupt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

