Objective drives the consistency of representational similarity across datasets

Laure Ciernik 1 2 3 Lorenz Linhardt * 1 4 Marco Morik * 1 4 Jonas Dippel 1 4 5 Simon Kornblith 6
Lukas Muttenthaler 1 4 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Representation learning has seen remarkable progress in
recent years, with state-of-the-art models achieving or even
surpassing human-level performance in a wide range of
computer vision tasks (Radford et al., 2021; Dehghani et al.,
2023; Oquab et al., 2024; Zhai et al., 2023; Muttenthaler
et al., 2024). With this progress in task performance, model
representation spaces tend to approach each other irrespective of the models’ training data or architecture (Huh et al.,
2024). Even between models trained on different modalities,
better task performances result in more similar representations. Two questions naturally arise from this phenomenon:
Do pairwise similarities of model representations transfer
from one dataset to another, and are they generally linked
to the models’ downstream behavior?

The Platonic Representation Hypothesis claims
that recent foundation models are converging to
a shared representation space as a function of
their downstream task performance, irrespective
of the objectives and data modalities used to train
these models (Huh et al., 2024). Representational similarity is generally measured for individual datasets and is not necessarily consistent
across datasets. Thus, one may wonder whether
this convergence of model representations is confounded by the datasets commonly used in machine learning. Here, we propose a systematic
way to measure how representational similarity
between models varies with the set of stimuli used
to construct the representations. We find that the
objective function is a crucial factor in determining the consistency of representational similarities
across datasets. Specifically, self-supervised vision models learn representations whose relative
pairwise similarities generalize better from one
dataset to another compared to those of image
classification or image-text models. Moreover,
the correspondence between representational similarities and the models’ task behavior is datasetdependent, being most strongly pronounced for
single-domain datasets. Our work provides a
framework for analyzing similarities of model
representations across datasets and linking those
similarities to differences in task behavior.

Investigating the correspondence between representation
and behavior has a long history in representation learning
and adjacent fields (e.g. Hermann & Lampinen, 2020; Sucholutsky et al., 2023). Two models can have different
intermediate layer representations even though they show
the same task behavior (Muttenthaler et al., 2023; Lampinen
et al., 2024). However, if two models show different behavior, one can be certain that the output layer representations
are different, since identical output representations map to
the same behavior. What remains unclear is how behavior
(e.g., downstream task accuracy) is affected by the convergence of model representations (i.e., the similarity of
representations). Does this relationship depend on the similarity measure at hand, or may it be due to the nature of a
dataset?
The field lacks consensus on how to define (pairwise) representational similarity (cf. Kriegeskorte et al., 2008; Kornblith et al., 2019a; Williams et al., 2021; Duong et al., 2023;
Sucholutsky et al., 2023) and how to systematically measure
its relationship to behavior (cf. Geirhos et al., 2021; Muttenthaler et al., 2023; Sucholutsky et al., 2023; Lampinen
et al., 2024). Here, we use similarity measures that are
widely used and have been empirically proven to be useful
for measuring representational similarity of neural networks,
such as Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA; Kornblith et al.,
2019a; Raghu et al., 2021), and Representational Similarity
Analysis (RSA; Kriegeskorte et al., 2008).

*

1
Equal contribution
Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany 2 Hector Fellow
Academy, Karlsruhe, Germany 3 European Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems (ELLIS), Tübingen, Germany
4
BIFOLD—Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and
Data, Berlin, Germany 5 Aignostics, Berlin, Germany 6 Anthropic,
California, United States of America. Correspondence to:
Laure Ciernik <ciernik@tu-berlin.de>, Lukas Muttenthaler
<lukas.muttenthaler@tu-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

