A Multi-Region Brain Model to Elucidate the Role of
Hippocampus in Spatially Embedded Decision-Making

Yi Xie 1 2 Jaedong Hwang 1 Carlos Brody 2 3 David Tank 2 Ila Fiete 1

Abstract

mann et al., 2022) and deeper architectures (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021; He et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2023), frequently
emphasizing scale over the efficiency driven by biologically inspired models (Banino et al., 2018). To bridge this
gap, insights from neuroscience can inform more efficient
architectures by studying how biological systems process information to make robust and adaptive decisions in dynamic
and uncertain environments. The brain contains specialized
circuits including the hippocampal circuit (HPC), a key set
of brain areas critical for spatial, contextual, and associative learning and memory (O’Keefe, 1978; Dostrovsky &
O’Keefe, 1971; Squire, 1992; Scoville & Milner, 1957).
Meanwhile, cortical and subcortical regions play a central
role in evidence accumulation and decision-making (Pinto
et al., 2019; IBL et al., 2023).

Brains excel at robust decision-making and dataefficient learning. Understanding the architectures
and dynamics underlying these capabilities can
inform inductive biases for deep learning. We
present a multi-region brain model that explores
the normative role of structured memory circuits
in a spatially embedded binary decision-making
task from neuroscience. We counterfactually compare the learning performance and neural representations of reinforcement learning (RL) agents
with brain models of different interaction architectures between grid and place cells in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, coupled with
an action-selection cortical recurrent neural network. We demonstrate that a specific architecture–
where grid cells receive and jointly encode selfmovement velocity signals and decision evidence
increments–optimizes learning efficiency while
best reproducing experimental observations relative to alternative architectures. Our findings thus
suggest brain-inspired structured architectures for
efficient RL. Importantly, the models make novel,
testable predictions about organization and information flow within the entorhinal-hippocampalneocortical circuit: we predict that grid cells must
conjunctively encode position and evidence for
effective spatial decision-making, directly motivating new neurophysiological experiments.∗

Brain-scale neural recordings at cellular resolution, which
are only recently possible, open a window into how brain
regions interact with each other to perform complex tasks.
Here we focus on the accumulating tower task, a widely
adopted, interpretable benchmark in neuroscience for probing multi-region brain interactions underlying spatially embedded evidence accumulation and decision-making (Pinto
et al., 2019; 2022; Nieh et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2024).
In the task, mice navigate an immersive virtual reality corridor, where they are stochastically presented with visual
towers on both sides. At the end of the corridor, they must
turn left or right depending on which side has more towers
(see Figure 1D). This task requires integrating evidence:
computing the difference in the total number of towers on
each side (“accumulated evidence”). Task standardization
enables reproducible experiments, and these in turn inform
theoretical models (Lee et al., 2024; Karniol-Tambour et al.,
2024) that generate testable predictions about behavior and
neural dynamics. We focus on this task to build a multisystem brain model spanning memory, integration, spatial
navigation, and decision circuits.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has advanced through the adoption of larger
datasets (Lin et al., 2014; Russakovsky et al., 2015; Schuh*
See project page at https://minzsiure.github.io/
multiregion-brain-model/. 1 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, USA. Correspondence to: Yi Xie <evayixie@princeton.edu>, Ila Fiete <fiete@mit.edu>.

During the task, the dorsal CA1 region of the hippocampus
encodes conjunctive cognitive maps of both the animal’s
location and accumulated evidence. Place fields in this
region are tuned not only to spatial position but also to
task-relevant accumulated evidence, meaning that individual
neurons fire selectively based on both variables (Nieh et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

