Flopping for FLOPs: Leveraging Equivariance for Computational Efficiency

Georg Bökman 1 David Nordström 1 Fredrik Kahl 1

Abstract
Incorporating geometric invariance into neural
networks enhances parameter efficiency but typically increases computational costs. This paper
introduces new equivariant neural networks that
preserve symmetry while maintaining a comparable number of floating-point operations (FLOPs)
per parameter to standard non-equivariant networks. We focus on horizontal mirroring (flopping) invariance, common in many computer vision tasks. The main idea is to parametrize the
feature spaces in terms of mirror-symmetric and
mirror-antisymmetric features, i.e., irreps of the
flopping group. This decomposes the linear layers
to be block-diagonal, requiring half the number of
FLOPs. Our approach reduces both FLOPs and
wall-clock time, providing a practical solution for
efficient, scalable symmetry-aware architectures.

Figure 1: Common image classification tasks are invariant to
flopping (horizontal mirroring). In our implementation, this
invariance is enforced through equivariant network layers,
halving the required floating-point operations (FLOPs).
enable more efficient computations. In a nutshell, our case
is that equivariant neural networks can be simple models
that scale well.

1. Introduction

Many vision problems are invariant (or more generally
equivariant) to horizontal mirroring, also known as flopping1 , and partially invariant to other geometric transformations such as rotations. For instance, both images in Figure 1
show a butterfly of the same species. Enforcing geometric
invariance in a neural network architecture can be done by
hard-coding the symmetry in each network layer, by enforcing specific weight sharing (Wood & Shawe-Taylor, 1996;
Cohen & Welling, 2016). It has been shown in the literature
that such architectural symmetry constraints typically improve the parameter efficiency of neural networks (Cohen &
Welling, 2016; Bekkers et al., 2018; Weiler & Cesa, 2019).
However, this comes at the cost of requiring more compute
per parameter. For instance, Klee et al. (2023) found that
rotation invariant ResNets typically outperformed ordinary
ResNets on ImageNet-1K in the equal-parameter setting,
but that the training time of the invariant ResNets far exceeded that of the ordinary ResNets. This is because the
symmetry-induced weight sharing means that each trainable
parameter is used in more computations.

One of the main drivers of progress in deep learning is the
scaling of compute. This idea is perhaps best summarized
in Sutton’s Bitter Lesson (Sutton, 2019). As Sutton states:
Seeking an improvement that makes a difference
in the shorter term, researchers seek to leverage
their human knowledge of the domain, but the
only thing that matters in the long run is the leveraging of computation.
It follows from the Bitter Lesson that a guiding principle
for designing deep learning models should be to find simple
models that scale well. In computer vision, this has proven
fruitful and led to models such as the Vision Transformer
(ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). However, a straightforward critique of Sutton’s argument is that leveraging domain
knowledge can yield algorithms that better utilize computation. This paper explores common image symmetries that
1
Chalmers University of Technology. Correspondence to:
Georg Bökman <bokman@chalmers.se>.

In this paper, we show that invariant neural networks can
achieve a comparable number of floating-point operations
(FLOPs) per parameter to ordinary neural networks. Imple-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

See Wikipedia article or Oxford definition.

