Causality Inspired Federated Learning for OOD Generalization

Jiayuan Zhang 1 Xuefeng Liu 1 2 Jianwei Niu 1 2 Shaojie Tang 3 Haotian Yang 1 Xinghao Wu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a privacypreserving framework for collaborative learning across distributed clients. A practical problem, how to enable the
FL model to robustly generalize to target clients with unknown distributions, referred to as the out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization problem, has recently attracted significant research attention. Unfortunately, deep learning
models are prone to relying on non-causal relationships
(i.e., shortcuts) for prediction (Geirhos et al., 2020), leading
to significant performance degradation when the test distributions fall outside the training scope. For instance, in
Fig. 1, ‘dogs’ and ‘grass’ exhibit high statistical dependence
in the training dataset of Client A, which can easily mislead the model into making predictions based on the grass
background (non-causal features) rather than the shape of
dogs (causal features). Recent works in centralized learning
scenarios have proposed addressing the OOD generalization
problem through the lens of causality, focusing on learning
causal features that maintain an invariant causal relationship
to the output label across various data distributions. It is
widely recognized that causal features are far more robust
to distribution shifts compared to non-causal ones.

The out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
problem in federated learning (FL) has recently
attracted significant research interest. A common
approach, derived from centralized learning, is
to extract causal features which exhibit causal relationships with the label. However, in FL, the
global feature extractor typically captures only
invariant causal features shared across clients and
thus discards many other causal features that are
potentially useful for OOD generalization. To
address this problem, we propose FedUni, a simple yet effective architecture trained to extract all
possible causal features from any input. FedUni
consists of a comprehensive feature extractor, designed to identify a union of all causal feature
types in the input, followed by a feature compressor, which discards potential inactive causal features. With this architecture, FedUni can benefit
from collaborative training in FL while avoiding
the cost of model aggregation (i.e., extracting only
invariant features). In addition, to further enhance
the feature extractor’s ability to capture causal features, FedUni add a causal intervention module
on the client side, which employs a counterfactual generator to generate counterfactual examples that simulate distributions shifts. Extensive
experiments and theoretical analysis demonstrate
that our method significantly improves OOD generalization performance.

However, in FL, the global feature extractor is typically
trained to extract causal features that remain invariant across
all clients (Zhang et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022; Tang
et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023b; Liao et al., 2024). Although
these invariant features are generally robust and reliable,
many valuable causal features that are potentially useful
for OOD generalization are inevitably discarded. This limitation becomes more pronounced in the presence of data
heterogeneity, where only a small subset of invariant causal
features are shared across clients. As an illustrative example,
consider the task of learning a global model for dog classification in FL, as shown in Fig. 1. In this setup, Client A has
real-world photos of dogs, while Client B’s dataset consists
of dog sketches. The global feature extractor, trained to
capture invariance across clients, preserves only invariant
causal features like shape while discarding client-specific
ones such as details of the dog’s mouth and tail. When
the test data distribution matches that of Client A’s training
data, discarding these detailed causal features can lead to
suboptimal generalization. In contrast, preserving all causal
features enables clients to flexibly select those most relevant

1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China 3 Department
of Management Science and Systems, School of Management,
Center for AI Business Innovation, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Jianwei Niu <niujianwei@buaa.edu.cn>, Xuefeng Liu <liu xuefeng@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

