Measuring Variable Importance in Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
with Confidence
Joseph Paillard 1 2 Angel Reyero Lobo 2 3 Vitaliy Kolodyazhniy 1 Bertrand Thirion 2 Denis A. Engemann 1

Abstract

and development (Frank & Hargreaves, 2003; Hartl et al.,
2021). Machine Learning (ML) promises to improve the
prediction of biomedical and clinical outcomes from highdimensional, high-throughput data in various biomedical
applications due to its ability to learn complex functions
and representations from heterogeneous and correlated data,
such as those encountered in e.g. imaging, genomics or
transcriptomics data (Le Goallec et al., 2022; Parrish et al.,
2024; DeGroat et al., 2023). Regardless, their notorious lack
of interpretability hinders the applicability of ML models
for generating scientific and clinical insights, motivating
efforts for new methods for estimating variable importance
within the field of interpretable ML (Molnar, 2020; Biecek
& Burzykowski, 2021). Most studies so far have focused
on classical ML models like random forests (Strobl et al.,
2008), which are well-suited for tabular data with few variables (Grinsztajn et al., 2022). A more recent line of work,
exposed to complex life-science data, has therefore emphasised the importance of high-capacity ML algorithms
and proposed methods combining high-capacity ML algorithms with inference algorithms backed by statistical guarantees (Mi et al., 2021; Williamson et al., 2023; Lei et al.,
2018; Chamma et al., 2024).

Causal machine learning holds promise for estimating individual treatment effects from complex
data. For successful real-world applications of
machine learning methods, it is of paramount importance to obtain reliable insights into which
variables drive heterogeneity in the response to
treatment. We propose PermuCATE, an algorithm based on the Conditional Permutation Importance (CPI) method, for statistically rigorous
global variable importance assessment in the estimation of the Conditional Average Treatment
Effect (CATE). Theoretical analysis of the finite
sample regime and empirical studies show that
PermuCATE has lower variance than the LeaveOne-Covariate-Out (LOCO) reference method
and provides a reliable measure of variable importance. This property increases statistical
power, which is crucial for causal inference in
the limited-data regime common to biomedical
applications. We empirically demonstrate the benefits of PermuCATE in simulated and real-world
health datasets, including settings with up to hundreds of correlated variables.

Despite significant efforts and advances on methods for interpretability, the utility of ML models remains limited as
biomedical data are often of interventional nature. Therefore, such datasets are typically analyzed using biostatistical
methods appropriate for causal inference and accepted by
regulatory agencies. Over the past decade, findings from the
causal inference and potential outcomes literature (Imbens
& Rubin, 2015) have been adapted to propose the estimand
framework (Akacha et al., 2017; Ratitch et al., 2020), a
flexible statistical-modelling framework useful for causal
analysis of clinical data. It provides formal concepts and
draws a conceptual distinction between the quantity of interest and the estimation method. This enables a formal
language that can bridge the gap between classical biostatistics and ML, hence, pave the way for causal ML in biomedical applications (Feuerriegel et al., 2024; Sanchez et al.,
2022; Doutreligne & Varoquaux, 2025). When studying
heterogeneity of treatment effects using ML, explainability
with statistical guarantees is crucial for uncovering useful
predictive biomarkers as ad-hoc methodology may increase

1. Introduction
The ever growing volume of high-dimensional biomedical data holds promise to facilitate the discovery of novel
biomarkers that can predict individual treatment success or
risk of adverse events (Pang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2020;
Kong et al., 2022). Transforming complex biological signals into actionable variables, therefore, plays a crucial
role for increasing the efficiency of biomedical research
1
Roche Pharma Research & Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland; 2 Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau, France;
3
Institut de Mathematiques de Toulouse, UMR5219 Université de Toulouse, France. Correspondence to: Joseph Paillard
<joseph.paillard@roche.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

