Rethinking Time Encoding via Learnable Transformation Functions

Xi Chen 1 Yateng Tang 2 Jiarong Xu 3 Jiawei Zhang 4 Siwei Zhang 1 Sijia Peng 1 Xuehao Zheng 2 Yun Xiong 1

Abstract

vations in weather forecasting (Murat et al., 2018; Neumann
et al., 2024). Adopting time series models and dynamic
graph models to handle time-related data are two common
approaches (Wu et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023). In both cases,
effectively incorporating time information is crucial for making accurate predictions. To achieve this, existing research
works typically employ time encoding methods to capture
and represent time information, with the resulting time embedding being treated as an independent feature in time
series forecasting and dynamic graph representation learning models.

Effectively modeling time information and incorporating it into applications or models involving
chronologically occurring events is crucial. Realworld scenarios often involve diverse and complex
time patterns, which pose significant challenges
for time encoding methods. While previous methods focus on capturing time patterns, many rely
on specific inductive biases, such as using trigonometric functions to model periodicity. This narrow focus on single-pattern modeling makes them
less effective in handling the diversity and complexities of real-world time patterns. In this paper, we investigate to improve the existing commonly used time encoding methods and introduce
Learnable Transformation-based Generalized
Time Encoding (LeTE). We propose using deep
function learning techniques to parameterize nonlinear transformations in time encoding, making
them learnable and capable of modeling generalized time patterns, including diverse and complex
temporal dynamics. By enabling learnable transformations, LeTE encompasses previous methods
as specific cases and allows seamless integration
into a wide range of tasks. Through extensive
experiments across diverse domains, we demonstrate the versatility and effectiveness of LeTE.

Early studies represent time by using hand-crafted temporal
features designed specifically for downstream tasks (Choi
et al., 2016; Baytas et al., 2017; Kwon et al., 2018). A
prominent example is the time encoding method illustrated
in Figure 1 (a), which is widely used in existing time series processing work (Wang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023).
Such methods typically involve manually splitting timestamps into components (e.g., month, day, etc.), assigning
a embedding to each component, and adding these embeddings to form the final time embedding. However, these
methods are resource-intensive and often rely on domain
expertise, which may limit their abilities to capture only
specific pre-defined time patterns (Kazemi et al., 2019).
With the rapid development of attention mechanisms, which
offer advantages such as better handling of long-range dependencies and adaptive weighting of time-related information, subsequent research on time series and dynamic
graphs has increasingly leveraged these mechanisms (Xu
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). To better
model time and ensure compatibility between time encoding methods and self-attention, Functional Time Encoding (FTE) methods were proposed, with two representative
works: Functional Time Representation (Xu et al., 2019)
and Time2Vec (Kazemi et al., 2019), as illustrated in Figure
1 (b). Nearly all subsequent dynamic graph representation
learning research employs these methods to encode time
(Yu et al., 2023). These techniques transform time input
into multi-dimensional time embeddings by applying multiple linear transformations followed by pre-defined nonlinear transformation functions. Due to their reliance on predefined non-linear transformations—such as trigonometric
functions to capture periodic patterns—these methods are
inherently limited to capturing fixed, specific time patterns.

1. Introduction
Time-related data are commonly observed in real-world applications, such as user transaction data in financial institutions (Kazemi et al., 2020; Lezmi & Xu, 2023), purchase behavior sequences in e-commerce (Kang & McAuley, 2018;
Rossi et al., 2020; Skarding et al., 2021), and climate obser1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 2 Tencent Weixin Group, Shenzhen, China 3 School of
Management, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 4 IFM Lab, University of California, Davis, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yun
Xiong <yunx@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

