Competitively Consistent Clustering

Niv Buchbinder* 1 Roie Levin* 2 Yue Yang* 2

Abstract

dataset in a metric space, the task is to output a set of cluster
centers that minimize an objective which is a function of
the distances between data points and their nearest center.
In this work we study three such clustering formulations:
(i) k-center, in which we can open at most k centers and
we seek to minimize the maximum distance of any point to
its nearest open center, (ii) facility location, in which there
is cost to open each center, and we wish to minimize the
sum of opening costs plus the sum of distances between
each data points and its nearest open center, and (iii) kmedian, in which we can open at most k centers, and we
wish to minimize the sum of distances between each data
point and its nearest open center. These classical objectives
have been studied extensively for the last few decades, and
though they are NP-hard, their approximability is almost
completely understood (Byrka et al., 2017; Byrka & Aardal,
2010; Jain et al., 2002; Hochbaum & Shmoys, 1986; Guha
& Khuller, 1999).

In fully-dynamic consistent clustering, we are
given a finite metric space (M, d), and a set
F ⊆ M of possible locations for opening centers.
Data points arrive and depart, and the goal is to
maintain an approximately optimal clustering solution at all times while minimizing the recourse,
the total number of additions/deletions of centers
over time. Specifically, we study fully dynamic
versions of the classical k-center, facility location,
and k-median problems. We design algorithms
that, given a parameter β ≥ 1, maintain an O(β)approximate solution at all times, and whose total
recourse is bounded by O(log |F | log ∆)·O PTβR EC .
Here O PTβR EC is the minimal recourse of an offline
algorithm that maintains a β-approximate solution
at all times, and ∆ is the metric aspect ratio. Finally, while we compare the performance of our
algorithms to an optimal solution that maintains k
centers, our algorithms are allowed to use slightly
more than k centers. We obtain our results via a
reduction to the recently proposed Positive Body
Chasing framework of [Bhattacharya, Buchbinder,
Levin, Saranurak, FOCS 2023], which we show
gives fractional solutions to our clustering problems online. Our contribution is to round these
fractional solutions while preserving the approximation and recourse guarantees. We complement
our positive results with logarithmic lower bounds
which show that our bounds are nearly tight.

In practice however, we are often faced with situations
where the data is not static but evolving over time. As
the data change, it may be important to maintain a set of
cluster centers that not only minimizes the objective at hand,
but also does not change drastically between time steps.
For example, suppose we are clustering as a preprocessing
step to split data among servers; shuffling data between
servers with every update could be prohibitively costly. This
harder task, known as consistent clustering, is less well
understood than its offline counterpart and has drawn significant attention in recent years from both academic and
industry researchers (Lattanzi & Vassilvitskii, 2017; CohenAddad et al., 2022; 2019; Chan et al., 2024; Bhattacharya
et al., 2022a; Fichtenberger et al., 2021; Ł ˛
acki et al., 2024;
Guo et al., 2021; 2020; Moseley et al., 2023; Bhattacharya
et al., 2024b; Forster & Skarlatos, 2025; Bhattacharya et al.,
2024a).

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental optimization primitive and one
of the most widely used tools in data analysis. Given a

To the best of our knowledge, all state-of-the-art fullydynamic consistent clustering results aim for absolute recourse bounds. These are guarantees of the form “After T
data point insertions or deletions, the algorithm incurs at
most c · T recourse.” Consider, for example, the recent work
of Ł ˛
acki at el. (Ł ˛
acki et al., 2024) which gives an algorithm
for fully-dynamic k-center that maintains a constant approximation with O(T ) recourse. This highly non-trivial bound
is a significant improvement over previous results (Lattanzi

*

Authors ordered alphabetically. 1 Department of Statistics
and Operations Research, School of Mathematical Sciences,
Tel Aviv University, Israel. 2 Department of Computer Science,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854. Correspondence
to: Niv Buchbinder <niv.buchbinder@gmail.com>, Roie Levin
<roie.levin@rutgers.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

