Gridded Transformer Neural Processes for Spatio-Temporal Data

Matthew Ashman * 1 Cristiana Diaconu * 1 Eric Langezaal * 1 2 Adrian Weller 1 3 Richard E. Turner 1 3

Abstract

building such models is non-trivial: the data are typically
heterogeneous, irregular in space and time, and multi-modal,
with each modality potentially sampled at different spatiotemporal locations. A field that has greatly benefitted from
these recent advancements, and will serve as the motivating
real-world use case throughout this work, is medium-range
weather and environmental forecasting. Here, a new generation of models have improved performance and reduced
computational costs (Bodnar et al., 2025; Lam et al., 2023;
Price et al., 2025; Bi et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2023b;a). These models operate on environmental
variables that are regularly structured in space and time,
allowing them to leverage architectures from the vision
and language community, such as the Vision Transformer
(ViT; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), Swin Transformer (Liu et al.,
2021), and Perceiver (Jaegle et al., 2021). They are trained
and deployed on data from computationally intensive scientific simulation and analysis techniques, which integrate
observational data (e.g. from weather stations, ships, buoys,
etc.) with simulation data to provide the best estimate of
the atmosphere’s state. They are currently not trained on
observational measurements directly.

Effective modelling of large-scale spatio-temporal
datasets is essential for many domains, yet existing approaches often impose rigid constraints on
the input data, such as requiring them to lie on
fixed-resolution grids. With the rise of foundation models, the ability to process diverse, heterogeneous data structures is becoming increasingly important. Neural processes (NPs), particularly transformer neural processes (TNPs), offer a
promising framework for such tasks, but struggle
to scale to large spatio-temporal datasets due to
the lack of an efficient attention mechanism. To
address this, we introduce gridded pseudo-token
TNPs which employ specialised encoders and decoders to handle unstructured data and utilise a
processor comprising gridded pseudo-tokens with
efficient attention mechanisms. Furthermore, we
develop equivariant gridded TNPs for applications
where exact or approximate translation equivariance is a useful inductive bias, improving accuracy and training efficiency. Our method consistently outperforms a range of strong baselines in
various synthetic and real-world regression tasks
involving large-scale data, while maintaining competitive computational efficiency. Experiments
with weather data highlight the potential of gridded TNPs and serve as just one example of a
domain where they can have a significant impact.

We are now on the cusp of a second generation of such
models that will integrate unstructured observational data
alongside or instead of analysis data altogether, improving accuracy and reducing computational costs. Achieving
this is challenging, as such models need to be able to 1)
handle data at arbitrary input locations, and 2) effectively
combine modalities that are not necessarily recorded at the
same locations. Only a few works have attempted this more
ambitious problem (Allen et al., 2025; McNally et al., 2024;
Xu et al., 2025; Xiao et al., 2024), and the optimal architectures remain unclear. This presents fertile ground for
impactful research, with findings easily transferable to other
spatio-temporal domains. For instance, the same techniques
could be used to model real-life systems governed by partial
differential equations (PDEs), by pre-training on synthetic
PDE simulations, followed by fine-tuning on real-world unstructured observations such as wind tunnel measurements.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of data from in situ sensors, remote observations, and scientific computing models is transforming
spatio-temporal modelling. This has led to a surge of interest from the machine learning community to develop
new tools and models to support these efforts. However,
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge 2 University
of Amsterdam 3 Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to:
Matthew Ashman <mca39@cam.ac.uk>, Cristiana Diaconu
<cdd43@cam.ac.uk>.

What framework is most suitable for spatio-temporal tasks
containing both structured and unstructured data? Here we
advocate for neural processes (NPs; Garnelo et al. 2018a;b)
a family of meta-learning models that map from datasets
of arbitrary size and structure to predictions over outputs at

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

