ML2 -GCL: Manifold Learning Inspired Lightweight Graph Contrastive
Learning

Jianqing Liang 1 Zhiqiang Li 1 Xinkai Wei 1 Yuan Liu 1 Zhiqiang Wang 1

Abstract

data to facilitate various downstream tasks (Cai et al., 2018),
has shown wide applications in social network analysis (Pal
et al., 2020), molecular property prediction (Liang et al.,
2024) and point clouds (Du et al., 2024). Unlike traditional
Euclidean data, unstructured features and complex relations
in graphs pose unique challenges to representation learning.
While a tremendous number of works have been developed
(Kipf & Welling, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018), the requirement of task-dependent labels limits their applicability in
practical scenarios. Inspired by the success of contrastive
learning in the visual domain, graph contrastive learning
(GCL) has demonstrated great potential and yielded promising performance (Velickovic et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2020;
Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; Zhu et al., 2020).

Graph contrastive learning has attracted great
interest as a dominant and promising selfsupervised representation learning approach in
recent years. While existing works follow the basic principle of pulling positive pairs closer and
pushing negative pairs far away, they still suffer
from several critical problems, such as the underlying semantic disturbance brought by augmentation strategies, the failure of GCN in capturing
long-range dependence, rigidness and inefficiency
of node sampling techniques. To address these
issues, we propose Manifold Learning Inspired
Lightweight Graph Contrastive Learning (ML2 GCL), which inherits the merits of both manifold
learning and GCN. ML2 -GCL avoids the potential risks of semantic disturbance with only one
single view. It achieves global nonlinear structure recovery from locally linear fits, which can
make up for the defects of GCN. The most amazing advantage is about the lightweight due to its
closed-form solution of positive pairs weights and
removal of pairwise distances calculation. Theoretical analysis proves the existence of the optimal closed-form solution. Extensive empirical
results on various benchmarks and evaluation protocols demonstrate effectiveness and lightweight
of ML2 -GCL. We release the code at https:
//github.com/a-hou/ML2-GCL.

GCL pulls positive pairs closer and pushes negative pairs
far away without labels to learn node embeddings for downstream tasks. Despite comparable performance to supervised learning methods, some critical challenges of augmentation strategies and node sampling approaches still remain
to be solved. The commonly used random augmentation
strategies such as node dropping (You et al., 2020) and edge
perturbation (Qiu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023), may destroy the structural integrity and semantic consistency of
graphs. Current node sampling approaches mainly rely on
the similarity of structure relations and node embeddings
(Lee et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2025),
or probability models, especially clustering algorithms or
mixed models, to estimate the probability of positive pairs
and negative pairs (Li et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024; Sun
et al., 2024). Such a simple and straightforward strategy
may lead to high computational cost, and thus is not applicable to large-scale applications. Moreover, they also ignore
the importance of different nodes, among which there exist
significant differences in social networks. We are highly
motivated to develop an efficient and effective GCL method
significantly differs from existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Graph representation learning, which aims to learn appropriate low-dimensional representations for graph structured
*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi
University, Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, China. Correspondence to:
Jianqing Liang <liangjq@sxu.edu.cn>.

Manifold learning, which can capture both the local structure and global topology through modeling the geometric
characteristics of data in low dimensional manifold space,
provides a new perspective for graph contrastive learning.
However, existing GCL methods have not fully exploited
the potential of manifold learning yet, especially the lack

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

