ELITE: Enhanced Language-Image Toxicity Evaluation for Safety

Wonjun Lee * 1 2 Doehyeon Lee * 3 4 Eugene Choi 3 5 Sangyoon Yu 3 Ashkan Yousefpour 3 4 Haon Park 3
Bumsub Ham 1 Suhyun Kim 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Vision Language Models (VLMs), which are composed of
pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) and visual encoders, have been introduced to tackle complex multimodal
tasks. Despite advancements in their capabilities and performance, VLMs remain vulnerable to malicious inputs,
raising significant safety concerns and posing substantial
challenges to their large-scale deployment in real-world applications (Zong et al., 2024; Carlini et al., 2023; Gong et al.,
2023; Bommasani et al., 2021).

Current Vision Language Models (VLMs) remain vulnerable to malicious prompts that induce
harmful outputs. Existing safety benchmarks for
VLMs primarily rely on automated evaluation
methods, but these methods struggle to detect
implicit harmful content or produce inaccurate
evaluations. Therefore, we found that existing
benchmarks have low levels of harmfulness, ambiguous data, and limited diversity in image-text
pair combinations. To address these issues, we
propose the ELITE benchmark, a high-quality
safety evaluation benchmark for VLMs, underpinned by our enhanced evaluation method, the
ELITE evaluator. The ELITE evaluator explicitly
incorporates a toxicity score to accurately assess
harmfulness in multimodal contexts, where VLMs
often provide specific, convincing, but unharmful descriptions of images. We filter out ambiguous and low-quality image-text pairs from existing benchmarks using the ELITE evaluator and
generate diverse combinations of safe and unsafe
image-text pairs. Our experiments demonstrate
that the ELITE evaluator achieves superior alignment with human evaluations compared to prior
automated methods, and the ELITE benchmark
offers enhanced benchmark quality and diversity.
By introducing ELITE, we pave the way for safer,
more robust VLMs, contributing essential tools
for evaluating and mitigating safety risks in realworld applications.
Warning: This paper includes examples of harmful language and images that may be sensitive or
uncomfortable. Reader discretion is advised.

Concerns about the safety of VLMs, such as malicious
users inducing harmful outputs, have been raised and several safety evaluation benchmarks have appeared to assess
the safety of VLMs (Zong et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025; Gu
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Gong
et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024). These benchmarks are typically constructed by collecting image-text pairs that can
trigger harmful responses, with safety evaluations conducted
through automated methods using language models rather
than humans (Zong et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024; Liu et al.,
2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). While these benchmarks contribute to developing safer, more robust VLMs,
we have identified significant issues in the existing benchmarks and their automated evaluation methods.
First, we identify that the automated evaluation methods
currently adopted in many safety benchmarks are not always
reliable. As shown in Fig. 1(c), in the upper example, the
model’s response is largely vague or simply descriptive of
the image, yet it is still deemed a successful jailbreak. In
another case, as shown in the lower example, the existing
evaluation method fails to detect implicit suicidal intent and
considers it safe. We identify these problems in the safety
evaluation methods and propose the Enhanced LanguageImage Toxicity Evaluation (ELITE) evaluator, a method
designed to accurately evaluate the safety of VLMs.
Second, we identify quality issues in existing safety benchmarks. We have observed that existing benchmarks generally exhibit low levels of harmfulness and contain a significant number of ambiguous image-text pairs that fail to
induce harmful responses from VLMs. To address this, we
introduce the ELITE benchmark, which filters out ambiguous image-text pairs from existing benchmarks using the

*
Equal contribution 1 Yonsei University 2 Korea Institute of Science and Technology 3 AIM Intelligence 4 Seoul National University 5 Sookmyung Women’s University 6 Kyung Hee University.
Correspondence to: Suhyun Kim <dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

