The Brain’s Bitter Lesson:
Scaling Speech Decoding With Self-Supervised Learning

Dulhan Jayalath 1 Gilad Landau 1 Brendan Shillingford 2 Mark Woolrich3 Oiwi Parker Jones 1

Abstract
The past few years have seen remarkable progress
in the decoding of speech from brain activity,
primarily driven by large single-subject datasets.
However, due to individual variation, such as
anatomy, and differences in task design and scanning hardware, leveraging data across subjects
and datasets remains challenging. In turn, the
field has not benefited from the growing number
of open neural data repositories to exploit largescale deep learning. To address this, we develop
neuroscience-informed self-supervised objectives,
together with an architecture, for learning from
heterogeneous brain recordings. Scaling to nearly
400 hours of MEG data and 900 subjects, our approach shows generalisation across participants,
datasets, tasks, and even to novel subjects. It
achieves improvements of 15-27% over state-ofthe-art models and matches surgical decoding
performance with non-invasive data. These advances unlock the potential for scaling speech
decoding models beyond the current frontier.

Unlabelled MEG
(abundant)

Labelled
MEG
(scarce)

Figure 1: Leveraging unlabelled data using pretext tasks
for speech decoding. We pre-train a neural network using
tasks that generate implicit labels from abundant unlabelled
MEG neuroimaging data, permitting learning from large
heterogeneous datasets. The tasks apply a randomly selected
neuroscientifically relevant transformation T to the data and
the network predicts the transformation. We then train a
linear probe on top of the pre-trained model, which remains
frozen, with labelled data, achieving superior generalisation
owing to the strength of the representation.

1. Introduction

Recent work towards brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have
tried to scale up labelled datasets for individual subjects,
using either invasive (Moses et al., 2021; Willett et al., 2023)
or non-invasive brain recordings (Tang et al., 2023), mapping these to transcripts of attempted or imagined speech.
Yet, a number of obstacles to scale remain, especially in
magnetoencephalography (MEG) data. Current speech decoding models rarely train on multiple subjects, combine
datasets, or utilise data from diverse tasks. Thus the size
of training data has been limited to how much can be acquired for a single subject, and data from other subjects,
or from the growing number of public data repositories,
has not been leveraged. There are many reasons for these
limitations; individual brains and data from different neuroimaging scanners differ, for example. But overcoming
these limitations holds the promise of training models on
collective, internet-scale data.

In his Bitter Lesson, Richard Sutton argues that a major
conclusion of 70 years of AI research is that general methods
exploiting large-scale computation will outperform modelbased approaches as the availability of compute increases
(Sutton, 2019). The ability of deep learning to learn from
ever-larger datasets has enabled seemingly arbitrary scaling
with computation, leading to astounding advances across
a diverse set of domains (Jumper et al., 2021; Caron et al.,
2021; OpenAI, 2023; Radford et al., 2023).
In the domain of brain data, and of tasks like speech decoding, the bitter lesson has not yet been fully assimilated.
1
PNPL / 3 OHBA, University of Oxford 2 Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to: <{dulhan, oiwi}@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

https://pnpl.robots.ox.ac.uk/bbl

1

