Taming Diffusion for Dataset Distillation with High Representativeness

Lin Zhao 1 Yushu Wu 1 Xinru Jiang 1 Jianyang Gu 2 Yanzhi Wang 1 Xiaolin Xu 1 Pu Zhao 1 Xue Lin 1

Abstract

storage efficiency, dataset distillation generates a small distilled dataset to replace the full dataset for training (Wang
et al., 2018; Loo et al.; Lee & Chung, 2024), while targeting comparable performance as the full dataset. In contrast
to dataset pruning methods (selecting a subset from the
full dataset) (Zhang et al., 2024; Sorscher et al., 2022; Tan
et al., 2024), dataset distillation treats the distilled dataset as
continuous parameters that are optimized to integrate information from the full dataset. This approach achieves better
performance, especially with relatively high compression
rates. (Du et al., 2024b; Sun et al., 2024; Yin et al., 2023).

Recent deep learning models demand larger
datasets, driving the need for dataset distillation
to create compact, cost-efficient datasets while
maintaining performance. Due to the powerful
image generation capability of diffusion, it has
been introduced to this field for generating distilled images. In this paper, we systematically investigate issues present in current diffusion-based
dataset distillation methods, including inaccurate
distribution matching, distribution deviation with
random noise, and separate sampling. Building
on this, we propose D3 HR, a novel diffusionbased framework to generate distilled datasets
with high representativeness. Specifically, we
adopt DDIM inversion to map the latents of the
full dataset from a low-normality latent domain
to a high-normality Gaussian domain, preserving information and ensuring structural consistency to generate representative latents for the
distilled dataset. Furthermore, we propose an
efficient sampling scheme to better align the representative latents with the high-normality Gaussian distribution. Our comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that D3 HR can achieve higher accuracy across different model architectures compared with state-of-the-art baselines in dataset
distillation. Source code: https://github.
com/lin-zhao-resoLve/D3HR.

Recent data distillation methods primarily focus on improving the efficiency of the distillation algorithm (Yin et al.,
2023; Sun et al., 2024; Su et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024).
Among them, the diffusion-based methods achieve strong
performance due to their remarkable generative capabilities.
They capture the most informative features of the full dataset
by extracting representative latents from the pre-trained Variational Autoencoder (VAE) latent space (Su et al., 2024; Gu
et al., 2024). Thus, the architectural dependency during
distillation is eliminated, enabling a one-time generation
cost for training various model architectures. This strategy enhances the efficiency of distillation and significantly
improves cross-architecture generalization.
However, the above diffusion-based methods may struggle
to guarantee the representativeness of the distilled dataset.
(i) Inaccurate distribution matching. This challenge
arises from leveraging diffusion models to generate distilled
datasets, relying on accurately modeling the VAE feature
distributions for proper decoding. However, as shown in
Figure 1a, the low-degree of normality1 for the distribution in VAE latent space results in difficulties in effectively
matching the distribution. (ii) Distribution deviation with
random noise. Besides, these methods generate distilled
images from the initial noise, which inject unpredictable randomness to latents, potentially violating the structural and
representative information gathered in the VAE space with
potential distribution deviation. (iii) Separate sampling.
Moreover, the distilled data are individually matched to
parts of the entire VAE distribution without considering the

1. Introduction
Driven by the scaling law, recent deep learning models
have expanded in scale, demanding exponentially larger
datasets for optimal training performance, which makes
dataset maintenance costly and labor-intensive (Deng et al.,
2009; Alexey, 2020). To achieve both computational and
1

Northeastern University 2 The Ohio State University. Correspondence to: Pu Zhao <p.zhao@northeastern.edu>, Xue Lin
<xue.lin@northeastern.edu>.

1

Normality refers to the degree of the latent space data conforms to a normal distribution. A higher degree of normality
indicates closer conformity.

st

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

