TAB F LEX: Scaling Tabular Learning to Millions with Linear Attention

Yuchen Zeng * 1 2 Tuan Dinh * 3 Wonjun Kang 4 5 Andreas C. Müeller 6

Abstract

2023), from vision (Bai et al., 2023b), audio (Chu et al.,
2023; 2024) to bio-signals (Wan et al., 2023) and protein
sequences (Rives et al., 2019; Hayes et al., 2024). Tabular data, as one of the most fundamental and critical data
types in real-world applications – including recommendation systems (Zhang et al., 2019), finance (Arun et al., 2016),
and medicine (Johnson et al., 2016) has attracted a great
deal of attention and attempts to explore the potential of
Transformer-based models, particularly for tabular classification (Arik & Pfister, 2021; Hollmann et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2020; Dinh et al., 2022; Gorishniy et al., 2021). For
example, the FT transformer (Gorishniy et al., 2021) converts each sample into a sequence of embeddings to use the
transformer to make predictions. TabTransformer (Huang
et al., 2020) learns embeddings for categorical features, concatenating them with continuous features. On the other
hand, LIFT (Dinh et al., 2022) converts tabular data combined with feature names and task descriptions into textual
sentences as input to LLMs. In particular, compared to traditional methods for tabular data such as gradient-boosted
trees (Friedman, 2001), these transformer-based methods
often suffer from high latency overhead for training and
inference, primarily due to their larger model sizes.

Leveraging the in-context learning (ICL) capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) for tabular classification has gained significant attention
for its training-free adaptability across diverse
datasets. Recent advances, such as TAB PFN, excel in tabular small-scale datasets but struggle
to scale for large and complex datasets. Our
work enhances the efficiency and scalability of
TAB PFN for larger datasets by incorporating
linear attention mechanisms as a scalable alternative to complexity-quadratic self-attention.
Our model, TAB F LEX, efficiently handles tabular datasets with thousands of features and hundreds of classes, seamlessly scaling to millions of
samples. For instance, TAB F LEX processes the
poker-hand dataset with more than a million
samples in just 5 seconds. Our extensive evaluations demonstrate that TAB F LEX can achieve over
a 2× speedup compared to TAB PFN and a 1.5×
speedup over XGBoost, outperforming 25 tested
baselines in terms of efficiency across a diverse
range of datasets. Furthermore, TAB F LEX remains highly effective in large-scale datasets, delivering strong performance with significantly reduced computational costs, especially when combined with data-efficient techniques such as dimensionality reduction and data sampling.

The recent TAB PFN (Hollmann et al., 2023) addresses the
latency limitations of Transformer-based methods by utilizing the in-context learning (ICL) capability (Brown et al.,
2020) of LLMs for directly learning a new task from examples without parameter updates, attaining superior efficiency and performance on small-scale datasets. In particular, TAB PFN incorporates all training and testing samples
into a single prompt and classifies the testing samples in
one forward pass, making it highly efficient and effective
on simple and small tabular datasets. However, TAB PFN
faces challenges with complex datasets that require large
sample sizes for effective learning, primarily due to the scalability limitations imposed by the quadratic complexity of
the attention mechanism, introducing difficulties for both
the scalable pretraining and inference processes.

1. Introduction
Enhancing the applicability of the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) for diverse data modalities beyond textual data and non-language tasks (Achiam et al.,
2023; Brown et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2023a; Dubey et al.,
2024) has achieved remarkable success (Gemini Team et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Work done during an internship at the
Gray Systems Lab, Microsoft 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison
3
University of California San Francisco 4 Furiosa AI 5 Seoul National University 6 Gray System Lab, Microsoft. Correspondence
to: Andreas C. Müeller <amueller@microsoft.com>.

In this work, we address the limitations of the scalability
of TAB PFN and improve the effectiveness of Transformerbased methods for tabular classification. We first systematically analyze scalable alternatives to attention mechanisms,
focusing on state-space models (SSMs) within the Mamba
model (Gu & Dao, 2024) and linear attention (Katharopou-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

