CRANE: Reasoning with constrained LLM generation

Debangshu Banerjee 1 * Tarun Suresh 1 * Shubham Ugare 1 Sasa Misailovic 1 Gagandeep Singh 1

Abstract

Jiang et al., 2024), logical solvers (Pan et al., 2023; Olausson et al., 2023), and theorem provers (Wu et al., 2022;
Yang et al., 2023). These tools impose specific syntactic
and semantic constraints on their inputs, requiring LLMs
to produce outputs in the correct format. For instance, if
an LLM provides output to a specific logical solver (Han
et al., 2024), the output must be parsable by that solver.
Similarly, Wolfram Alpha (wolfram, 2024) translates user
queries about mathematical problems into a domain-specific
language (DSL) to utilize symbolic solvers. However, as
highlighted in recent studies (Ugare et al., 2024b; Lundberg
et al., 2023; Poesia et al., 2022), pre-trained LLM outputs
do not always comply with downstream tools’ input requirements. Constrained decoding algorithms (Ugare et al.,
2024b; Poesia et al., 2022) address this issue by projecting the LLM output onto user-specified formal constraints
(e.g., syntactic rules defined by a context-free grammar G),
thereby ensuring that the input requirements of downstream
tasks are satisfied.

Code generation, symbolic math reasoning, and
other tasks require LLMs to produce outputs that
are both syntactically and semantically correct.
Constrained LLM generation is a promising direction to enforce adherence to formal grammar, but
prior works have empirically observed that strict
enforcement of formal constraints often diminishes the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. In this
work, we first provide a theoretical explanation for
why constraining LLM outputs to very restrictive
grammars that only allow syntactically valid final
answers reduces the reasoning capabilities of the
model. Second, we demonstrate that by augmenting the output grammar with carefully designed
additional rules, it is always possible to preserve
the reasoning capabilities of the LLM while ensuring syntactic and semantic correctness in its
outputs. Building on these theoretical insights,
we propose a reasoning-augmented constrained
decoding algorithm, CRANE, which effectively
balances the correctness of constrained generation
with the flexibility of unconstrained generation.
Experiments on multiple open-source LLMs and
benchmarks show that CRANE significantly outperforms both state-of-the-art constrained decoding strategies and standard unconstrained decoding, showing up to 10% points accuracy improvement over baselines on challenging symbolic reasoning benchmarks GSM-symbolic and FOLIO.

As illustrated in Fig. 1, constrained decoding improves the
syntactic correctness of LLM outputs (e.g., generating a
well-formed mathematical expression). However, it does
not guarantee functional correctness (e.g., ensuring the expression correctly answers the user’s query). Recent works
such as Tam et al. (2024) have empirically observed that
imposing constraints on LLM outputs can, in some cases,
reduce functional correctness for specific tasks. Tam et al.
(2024) attributes this reduction in functional accuracy to
a decline in the LLM’s reasoning capabilities under constrained decoding. This observation raises the following
open questions:
• RQ1: Do LLMs truly lose reasoning capabilities under
constrained decoding?
• RQ2: How can we leverage the benefits of constrained
decoding in reducing syntax errors while preserving the
unconstrained reasoning capabilities of LLMs?

1. Introduction
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) are
widely used in AI systems that interact with traditional software tools like Python interpreters (OpenAI, 2024; Chen
et al., 2023) for code generation (Suresh et al., 2024a;b;

Key Challenges: First, we need to formally identify the
root cause of the reduction in functional accuracy of endto-end systems when a pre-trained LLM operates under
constrained generation. Unlike the empirical observations
in (Tam et al., 2024), we seek a formal justification for
this reduction that is not limited to specific LLMs used
in experiments but extends to any LLM, including more

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to:
Debangshu Banerjee <db21@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

