Elucidating the Design Space of Multimodal Protein Language Models

Cheng-Yen Hsieh * ‡ ♡ Xinyou Wang * ♢ ♡ Daiheng Zhang † 2 ♡ Dongyu Xue ♡ Fei Ye ♡ Shujian Huang ♢
Zaixiang Zheng ‡ ♡ Quanquan Gu ♡

Abstract

Jumper et al., 2021)) that fail to capture the interplay between them. This limitation hinders the ability to jointly
model, understand, and generate proteins in a unified framework, which is essential for tasks like protein design, folding,
and functional annotation (Lee et al., 2022b; Senior et al.,
2020; Lees et al., 2011).
Recent efforts in multimodal protein language models such
as ESM3 (Hayes et al., 2024) and DPLM-2 (Wang et al.,
2024a) have demonstrated the potential of integrating sequence and structure within a single language model as
a unified generative framework. In particular, DPLM-2
is a mulitmodal extension of diffusion protein language
model (DPLM, Wang et al., 2024b) with discrete diffusion
framework (Austin et al., 2021), which naturally aligns with
the discrete nature of protein sequences, enabling it to benefit from large-scale pre-training on sequence databases—a
crucial factor for accurate structure prediction (Lin et al.,
2022). Beyond sequence modeling, DPLM-2 extends its
capabilities by tokenizing 3D coordinates into discrete tokens, thereby enabling direct language modeling of both
modalities, hence comprehension and generation of them.
Despite the success, the structure tokenization process introduces structural information loss—obscuring fine-grained
geometric relationships critical for accurate protein modeling. Consequently, even such state-of-the-art multimodal
PLMs struggle to generate biologically plausible structures
for complex tasks like structure folding (Lin et al., 2022)
or motif scaffolding (Watson et al., 2023; Yim et al., 2024),
where precise structural correlations are crucial. The loss
of nuanced variations due to tokenization also degrades the
structure diversity in unconditional generation.
In this paper, we systematically explore the key pitfalls
and the design space of token-based multimodal protein
language models to bridge their limitations on structural
modeling. In addition to the structural information loss
from tokenization, we identify the primary challenges as
the inaccuracies in language model’s capability in structure
(tokens) prediction, which could not be simply resolved
by improving the reconstruction accuracy. We find that
index-based structure tokens as supervised labels ignore
correlations between semantically similar structure tokens,
making the learning process particularly challenging.
In response, we build upon DPLM-2 to advance the design

Multimodal protein language models (PLMs) integrate sequence and token-based structural information, serving as a powerful foundation for
protein modeling, generation, and design. However, the reliance on tokenizing 3D structures into
discrete tokens causes substantial loss of fidelity
about fine-grained structural details and correlations. In this paper, we systematically elucidate the design space of multimodal PLMs to
overcome their limitations. We identify tokenization loss and inaccurate structure token predictions by the PLMs as major bottlenecks. To address these, our proposed design space covers
improved generative modeling, structure-aware
architectures and representation learning, and data
exploration. Our advancements approach finergrained supervision, demonstrating that tokenbased multimodal PLMs can achieve robust structural modeling. The effective design methods
dramatically improve the structure generation diversity, and notably, folding abilities of our 650M
model by reducing the RMSD from 5.52 to 2.36
on PDB testset, even outperforming 3B baselines
and on par with the specialized folding models.
Project page and code: bytedance.github.
io/dplm/dplm-2.1.

1

Introduction

Proteins are the molecular machinery of life, encoded
by amino acid sequences that fold into intricate threedimensional structures to perform their biological functions.
Existing approaches often treat sequence and structure as
separate modalities, relying on disjoint models (e.g., ESM
for sequences and AlphaFold for structures (Lin et al., 2023;
Equal contribution † Core Contributor ‡ Project Lead ♢ School
of Computer Science, Nanjing University 2 Dept. of ECE, Rutgers
University ♡ ByteDance Seed (this work was done during Xinyou
Wang and Daiheng Zhang’s internship at ByteDance Seed). Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <quanquan.gu@bytedance.com>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

