Incremental Gradient Descent with Small Epoch Counts
is Surprisingly Slow on Ill-Conditioned Problems

Yujun Kim * 1 Jaeyoung Cha * 1 Chulhee Yun 1

Abstract

where the objective F (x) is the average of a finite number
of component functions fi (x). In modern deep learning applications, the number of components n is often extremely
large, making full gradient optimization methods computationally expensive. To address this, stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and its variants have gained attention for
their computational efficiency and scalability (Lan, 2020).

Recent theoretical results demonstrate that the
convergence rates of permutation-based SGD
(e.g., random reshuffling SGD) are faster than
uniform-sampling SGD; however, these studies
focus mainly on the large epoch regime, where
the number of epochs K exceeds the condition
number κ. In contrast, little is known when K is
smaller than κ, and it is still a challenging open
question whether permutation-based SGD can
converge faster in this small epoch regime (Safran
& Shamir, 2021). As a step toward understanding
this gap, we study the naive deterministic variant,
Incremental Gradient Descent (IGD), on smooth
and strongly convex functions. Our lower bounds
reveal that for the small epoch regime, IGD can
exhibit surprisingly slow convergence even when
all component functions are strongly convex. Furthermore, when some component functions are allowed to be nonconvex, we prove that the optimality gap of IGD can be significantly worse throughout the small epoch regime. Our analyses reveal
that the convergence properties of permutationbased SGD in the small epoch regime may vary
drastically depending on the assumptions on component functions. Lastly, we supplement the paper
with tight upper and lower bounds for IGD in the
large epoch regime.

SGD methods can be categorized based on the strategy used
to select the component index i(t) at iteration t: (1) withreplacement SGD, and (2) permutation-based SGD. In withreplacement SGD, also known as uniform-sampling SGD,
each index is drawn independently from a uniform distribution over {1, 2, . . . , n}. This approach has been the primary
focus of theoretical studies, as it guarantees the stochastic
gradient at each step to be an unbiased estimator of the
gradient of the overall objective F (Bubeck et al., 2015).
In contrast, permutation-based SGD—where indices are
sampled in a shuffled order, also referred to as withoutreplacement SGD or shuffling gradient methods—is more
commonly used in practice. Its popularity arises from strong
empirical performance and simplicity of implementation,
making it the standard choice for real-world machine learning applications. However, despite its widespread use, the
theoretical understanding of permutation-based SGD had
remained underdeveloped until recently, due to challenges
arising from the lack of independence between iterates.
Nevertheless, recent advances have successfully addressed
the theoretical challenges of permutation-based SGD
(Haochen & Sra, 2019; Nagaraj et al., 2019). For example, Random Reshuffling (RR), one of the most common
permutation-based methods, randomly shuffles the indices at
the start of each epoch. It has been theoretically shown that
RR achieves a convergence rate of O(1/nK 2 ) for smooth
and strongly convex objectives, which is faster than the rate
O(1/nK) of with-replacement SGD, where K is the number of epochs (Ahn et al., 2020; Mishchenko et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Many machine learning and deep learning tasks can be
formulated as finite-sum minimization problems:
n

min F (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

*

Equal contribution 1 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. Correspondence
to: Chulhee Yun <chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr>.

While these results suggest that RR is theoretically superior
to with-replacement methods, the story is far from complete.
Existing analyses of permutation-based SGD are mostly
restricted to the large epoch regime, where K is sufficiently
large relative to the problem’s condition number κ (defined

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

