Nearly Optimal Algorithms for Contextual Dueling Bandits from Adversarial
Feedback
Qiwei Di 1 Jiafan He 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

ial feedback. Experimental results demonstrate
its superiority over the state-of-the-art dueling
bandit algorithms in the presence of adversarial
feedback.

Learning from human feedback plays an important role in aligning generative models, such as
large language models (LLM). However, the effectiveness of this approach can be influenced by
adversaries, who may intentionally provide misleading preferences to manipulate the output in an
undesirable or harmful direction. To tackle this
challenge, we study a specific model within this
problem domain–contextual dueling bandits with
adversarial feedback, where the true preference
label can be flipped by an adversary. We propose
an algorithm namely robust contextual dueling
bandits (RCDB), which is based on uncertaintyweighted maximum likelihood
√ estimation. Our
e
algorithm achieves an O(d
T /κ + dC/κ) regret bound, where T is the number of rounds, d
is the dimension of the context, κ is the lower
bound of the derivative of the link function, and
0 ≤ C ≤ T is the total number of adversarial
feedback. We also prove a lower bound to show
that our regret bound is nearly optimal, both in
scenarios with and without (C = 0) adversarial
feedback. Our work is the first to achieve nearly
minimax optimal regret for dueling bandits in
the presence of adversarial preference feedback.
Additionally, for the sigmoid link function, we
develop a novel algorithm that takes into account
the effect of local derivatives into maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) analysis through a refined
method for estimating the link function’s derivative. This method helps us to eliminate the κ
dependence in the leading term with respect to T ,
which reduces the exponential dependence on the
parameter radius B to a polynomial dependence.
We conduct experiments to evaluate our proposed
algorithm RCDB against various types of adversar-

1

Introduction

Acquiring an appropriate reward proves challenging in numerous real-world applications, often necessitating intricate
instrumentation (Zhu et al., 2020) and time-consuming calibration (Yu et al., 2020) to achieve satisfactory levels of
sample efficiency. For instance, in training large language
models (LLM) using reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF), the diverse values and perspectives of
humans can lead to uncalibrated and noisy rewards (Ouyang
et al., 2022). In contrast, preference-based data, which
involves comparing or ranking various actions, is a more
straightforward method for capturing human judgments and
decisions. In this context, the dueling bandit model (Yue
et al., 2012) provides a problem framework that focuses
on optimal decision-making through pairwise comparisons,
rather than relying on the absolute reward for each action.
However, human feedback may not always be reliable. In
real-world applications, human feedback is particularly vulnerable to manipulation through preference label flip. Adversarial feedback can significantly increase the risk of misleading a large language model (LLM) into erroneously
prioritizing harmful content, under the false belief that it
reflects human preference. Despite the significant influence
of adversarial feedback, there is limited existing research
on the impact of adversarial feedback specifically within
the context of dueling bandits. A notable exception is Agarwal et al. (2021), which studies dueling bandits when an
adversary can flip some of the preference labels received
by the learner. They proposed an algorithm that is agnostic
to the amount of adversarial feedback introduced by the
adversary. However, their setting has the following two
limitations. First, their study was confined to a finite-armed
setting, which renders their results less applicable to modern
applications such as RLHF. Second, their adversarial feedback is defined on the whole comparison matrix. In each
round, the adversary observes the outcomes of all pairwise
comparisons and then decides to corrupt some of the pairs
before the agent selects the actions. This assumption does

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

