Fraud-Proof Revenue Division on Subscription Platforms
Abheek Ghosh 1 * Tzeh Yuan Neoh 2 * Nicholas Teh 1 * Giannis Tyrovolas 1 *

Abstract

Subscription platforms have seen significant growth in recent years, driven by the rise of internet streaming services
such as Spotify, Apple Music, Netflix, etc. For instance,
the annual revenue of the music streaming industry reached
US$27.6 billion in 2023, with significant increases over
the last ten years (International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, 2024). Under this business model, users
pay a fixed subscription fee to enjoy unlimited access to
all content on the platform, typically by content creators.
The platform then takes a fixed revenue cut and distributes
the rest to the creators based on engagement metrics (e.g.,
play counts or views) and/or specific agreements between
creators and platforms.

We study a model of subscription-based platforms
where users pay a fixed fee for unlimited access
to content, and creators receive a share of the
revenue. Existing approaches to detecting fraud
predominantly rely on machine learning methods,
engaging in an ongoing arms race with bad actors. We explore revenue division mechanisms
that inherently disincentivize manipulation. We
formalize three types of manipulation-resistance
axioms and examine which existing rules satisfy
these. We show that a mechanism widely used
by streaming platforms, not only fails to prevent
fraud, but also makes detecting manipulation computationally intractable. We also introduce a novel
rule, S CALED U SER P ROP, that satisfies all three
manipulation-resistance axioms. Finally, experiments with both real-world and synthetic streaming data support S CALED U SER P ROP as a fairer
alternative compared to existing rules.

Despite efforts to curb manipulation, bad actors persist, using bots and click-farms to inflate user engagement (Drott,
2020; Snickars & Mähler, 2018). This issue is so significant
that major music streaming platforms like Amazon Music
and Spotify have established an industry advocacy group
(Music Fights Fraud Alliance, 2025) to combat such fraud,
which is estimated to cost the industry US$300 million annually (Burton, 2021). Additionally, the rise of AI-generated
content introduces new challenges— platforms are increasingly flooded with synthetic tracks, videos, and live streams
designed to exploit engagement-driven algorithms. This
AI-generated content often amplifies fraudulent listening
activities, making manipulation harder to detect.

1. Introduction
In September 2024, the FBI criminally charged a musician,
Michael Smith, for orchestrating a scheme to fraudulently inflate his music streams on platforms such as Amazon Music,
Apple Music, Spotify, and YouTube Music—and according
to court documents, walked away with over US$10 million
in royalty payments (United States Attorney’s Office, 2024).
To successfully execute his scheme, he utilized hundreds of
thousands of songs created using AI, and built a complicated
network of over a thousand bot accounts that artificially
boost streams across these platforms billions of times. Although each stream originated from a bona fide, fee-paying
account, the way the platform(s) distributed subscription
revenue allowed each bot to generate more in royalties than
it cost to maintain its subscription.

Current machine learning (ML) approaches to this problem
predominantly focus on detecting fraudulent activity—using
sophisticated algorithms ranging from anomaly detection
(Esmaeilzadeh et al., 2022) to unsupervised learning (Mollaoğlu et al., 2021) and graph neural networks (Li et al.,
2021). For instance, music streaming platforms such as Spotify have proprietary models that identify whether a stream
is legitimate (using meta-data such as IP location, listening
patterns, and other information) and issue fines if they deem
too many streams to be fraudulent (Spotify, 2025).
However, as AI continues to evolve, so do the methods used
by fraudsters, leading to a continuous arms race. These bad
actors increasingly leverage advanced automation tools to
make fraudulent activities more sophisticated and harder
to detect, challenging the robustness of existing detection
frameworks and driving the need for innovative, adaptive
solutions (United States Attorney’s Office, 2024).

*

1
Alphabetical ordering
University of Oxford, UK
2
Harvard University, USA. Correspondence to:
Tzeh
Yuan Neoh <tzehyuan neoh@harvard.edu>, Nicholas Teh
<nicholas.teh@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

