Spherical-Nested Diffusion Model for Panoramic Image Outpainting

Xiancheng Sun 1 Senmao Ma 1 Shengxi Li 1 2 Mai Xu 1 Jingyuan Xia 3 Lai Jiang 1 2 Xin Deng 1 2 Jiali Wang 4

Abstract
Panoramic image outpainting acts as a pivotal
role in immersive content generation, allowing for
seamless restoration and completion of panoramic
content. Given the fact that the majority of generative outpainting solutions operates on planar
images, existing methods for panoramic images
address the sphere nature by soft regularisation
during the end-to-end learning, which still fails to
fully exploit the spherical content. In this paper,
we set out the first attempt to impose the sphere
nature in the design of diffusion model, such that
the panoramic format is intrinsically ensured during the learning procedure, named as sphericalnested diffusion (SpND) model. This is achieved
by employing spherical noise in the diffusion process to address the structural prior, together with
a newly proposed spherical deformable convolution (SDC) module to intrinsically learn the
panoramic knowledge. Upon this, the proposed
method is effectively integrated into a pre-trained
diffusion model, outperforming existing state-ofthe-art methods for panoramic image outpainting. In particular, our SpND method reduces
the FID values by more than 50% against the
state-of-the-art PanoDiffusion method. Codes are
publicly available at https://github.com/
chronos123/SpND.

Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed and existing methods for panoramic image outpainting. (a) Existing methods learn
panoramic content by soft regularisations, in a macro way, thus outpainting irregular 3D arrangement and artefacts. (b) The proposed
method incorporates the sphere nature within the design, thus in
a micro way, which is able to outpaint realistic and high-quality
panoramic images. Note that E denotes for the encoder and D
denotes for the decoder.

2019; Zhang & Kou, 2022), augmented reality (AR) (Lee
& Tsai, 2015; Eiris et al., 2018), and autonomous driving
(Huang et al., 2018; Yurtsever et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2022).
Although existing methods (Rombach et al., 2022) are capable of generating high-quality content, they are designed
for planar images and fail to generalise well to panoramic
images, due to the spherical distortion introduced by the
equirectangular projection (ERP). Consequently, the generation of panoramic images has emerged as a pivotal area of
research, drawing extensive research interest seeking to produce high-quality panoramic content. We also notice several
text-to-panorama generation methods, including PanFusion
(Zhang et al., 2024) and MVDiffusion (Tang et al., 2023)
by incorporating attention mechanism to partially address
panoramic cues. They still fail to address spatial continuity
and contextual coherence for panoramic image outpainting.

1. Introduction
Most recently, panoramic images have received increasing
research efforts due to their critical roles in applications such
as virtual reality (VR) (Wan Abd Arif et al., 2009; Wang,
1

Department of Electronic Information Engineering, Beihang
University, Beijing, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Electronic Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, Location, Country 4 Cainiao Technology, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Shengxi Li <LiShengxi@buaa.edu.cn>.

As one of the main-stream tasks of panoramic image generation, panoramic image outpainting has been pioneered by
works (Akimoto et al., 2019; Sumantri & Park, 2020), which
are able to complete scenes with the 360◦ × 180◦ field-ofview (FOV). To ensure spherical continuity of the generated
edges, one of the core characteristics of panoramic images,
existing solutions include the usage of circular padding technique (Hara et al., 2021; Akimoto et al., 2022) and rotation

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

