On the Impact of Performative Risk Minimization for Binary Random Variables

Nikita Tsoy 1 Ivan Kirev 1 Negin Rahimi 1 Nikola Konstantinov 1

Abstract

a deployed model θ induces a data distribution D(θ), which
gives rise to a new learning objective, the performative risk
Ez∼D(θ) (ℓ(θ, z)), with ℓ being a loss function and z being a sample from the model-induced distribution. Much
progress has been achieved in performative risk minimization (PRM), i.e., finding performatively-optimal points (see
Hardt & Mendler-Dünner, 2023, for a recent survey).

Performativity, the phenomenon where outcomes
are influenced by predictions, is particularly prevalent in social contexts where individuals strategically respond to a deployed model. In order to
preserve the high accuracy of machine learning
models under distribution shifts caused by performativity, Perdomo et al. (2020) introduced the
concept of performative risk minimization (PRM).
While this framework ensures model accuracy,
it overlooks the impact of the PRM on the underlying distributions and the predictions of the
model. In this paper, we initiate the analysis of
the impact of PRM, by studying performativity
for a sequential performative risk minimization
problem with binary random variables and linear
performative shifts. We formulate two natural
measures of impact. In the case of full information, where the distribution dynamics are known,
we derive explicit formulas for the PRM solution
and our impact measures. In the case of partial
information, we provide performative-aware statistical estimators, as well as simulations. Our
analysis contrasts PRM to alternatives that do not
model data shift and indicates that PRM can have
amplified side effects compared to such methods.

While PRM is preferable to standard risk minimization (RM)
for the sake of test-time accuracy, the broader impact of
PRM remain elusive. In particular, using PRM instead of
RM leads to different predictions deployed by the learner
and also changes the evolution of the data distribution, and
these effects are compounded when deploying multiple models over time. This limited understanding of the impact of
PRM on the predictions and distribution may be partially
due to the mathematical challenges arizing from analyzing
the long-term dynamics of the learned models, in the presense of intricate dependencies of the data distribution on
all previous models.
Contributions In this work, we initiate the analysis of
the broader impact of PRM, by studying a sequential performative mean estimation problem for binary variables,
in the presence of linear performative distribution shifts.
The simplicity of the learning setup enables us to derive
the long-term dynamics of PRM, despite the complicated
downstream impact of each deployed prediction on the future data distributions. This in turn allows us to quantify the
evolution of the predictions and the data distribution.

1. Introduction
Predictions can significantly influence everyday life (Rodamar, 2018), an effect known as performativity. For instance, traffic predictions can alter people’s daily routes,
crime predictions can affect police resource allocation, and
stock price predictions can steer traders’ decisions. These
changes can lead to shifts in the underlying data distribution,
making the original predictions less accurate.

Within this model, we formulate two measures of impact.
The first measure concerns the model predictions and corresponds to the usual statistical notion of a bias of an estimator.
The second measure quantifies the shift in the mean of the binary random variable, relative to the mean in the case of lack
of performative effects, and thus allows us to understand the
evolution of the data distribution under PRM.

To capture these effects, Perdomo et al. (2020) introduced
the concept of performative prediction. In this framework,

We analyze PRM and the two measures in a one-period (single model deployment) and an infinite horizon (sequential
model deployment) setting. In each case, we first study a
full information setting, where all problem parameters (e.g.
strength of performativity and initial distribution) are known
to the model provider, in order to isolate the effects of performativity from exploration. We then analyze performativity

1
INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”. Correspondence to: Nikita Tsoy <nikita.tsoy@insait.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

