Free Process Rewards without Process Labels
Lifan Yuan * 1 Wendi Li * 2 3 Huayu Chen 2 Ganqu Cui 4 Ning Ding 2 Kaiyan Zhang 2 Bowen Zhou 2
Zhiyuan Liu 2 Hao Peng 1

Abstract
38.6×

Different from its counterpart outcome reward
models (ORMs), which evaluate the entire
responses, a process reward model (PRM) scores
a reasoning trajectory step by step, providing
denser and more fine-grained rewards. However,
training a PRM requires labels annotated at
every intermediate step, presenting significant
challenges for both manual and automatic data
collection. This paper aims to address this
challenge. Both theoretically and empirically,
we show that an Implicit PRM can be obtained
at no additional cost, by simply training an
ORM on the cheaper response-level labels. The
only assumption is to parameterize the outcome
reward as the log-likelihood ratios of the policy
π (y)
and reference models rϕ (y) = β log πrefϕ (y) ,
which can be optimized regardless of the specific
choice of loss objectives. In experiments, we train
our Implicit PRMs with various objectives and
evaluate their performance on MATH. Implicit
PRMs outperform strong MCTS-based baselines
á la Math-Shepherd (Wang et al., 2023) using
less than 1/38 of the training data. We further
find that scaling up instructions and responses
benefits our Implicit PRMs, and the latter brings
a larger gain. Particularly, Implicit PRMs with
the cross-entropy (CE) loss is more data-efficient,
and yields meaningful improvements even trained
with only one response per instruction, a setup
that suffers from extreme data scarcity and
imbalance. We hope that our work will encourage
a rethinking of PRM training approaches and contribute to making training PRMs more accessible.

10.6×

+2.9%

Figure 1: The x-axis indicates the FLOPs required to collect
the data and train the model, and y axis the accuracies of
best-of-64 performance. The accuracy is averaged over
the best-of-64 accuracies of Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang
et al., 2023), Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, and Llama-3.1-70BInstruct (Meta, 2024) on MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021).
Different dots on the same line indicates models trained with
the same approach but on different scales of data. The topleft zone is desirable in this figure, as it suggests a model can
achieve higher performance with less development overhead.
Our implicit PRM is much cheaper to train while presenting
the best performance under the same budget.

1. Introduction
Training on high-quality supervised data has driven the advances in LLMs development (Meta, 2024; Ding et al., 2023;
Luo et al., 2024b; Yue et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2024b). Building upon this progress, reward models push the boundaries even further, especially in tasks
requiring complex reasoning (Lightman et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023; Snell et al., 2024). Outcome Reward Models
(ORMs), designed to evaluate full responses, have been primarily explored, which can be used in both reinforcement
learning (RL) and inference. However, due to the sparsity
of outcome rewards, ORMs often yield suboptimal performance when reranking responses at inference (Lightman
et al., 2023) and struggle with stability and efficiency during
RL training (Cao et al., 2024; Chan et al., 2024). This highlights the growing demand for denser and more fine-grained
rewards. Process Reward Models (PRMs), evaluating intermediate steps to provide fine-grained guidance, naturally
meet this need. Existing work has shown consistent results

*
1
Equal contribution
University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign 2 Tsinghua University 3 Huazhong University of
Science and Technology 4 Shanghai AI Lab.
Correspondence to: Lifan Yuan <lifan4@illinois.edu>, Wendi Li
<wendili@hust.edu.cn>, Ganqu Cui <cuiganqu@pjlab.org.cn>,
Ning Ding <dn97@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

