AutoCATE: End-to-End, Automated Treatment Effect Estimation

Toon Vanderschueren 1 2 Tim Verdonck 2 Mihaela van der Schaar 3 Wouter Verbeke 1

Abstract

marketers, these challenges may outweigh potential benefits,
hindering the practical use of these techniques. To address
this, we advocate for automated, end-to-end solutions for
learning ML pipelines for CATE estimation.

Estimating causal effects is crucial in domains like
healthcare, economics, and education. Despite
advances in machine learning (ML) for estimating conditional average treatment effects (CATE),
the practical adoption of these methods remains
limited, due to the complexities of implementing, tuning, and validating them. To address these
challenges, we formalize the search for an optimal
ML pipeline for CATE estimation as a counterfactual Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter (CASH) optimization. We introduce AutoCATE, the first end-to-end, automated
solution for CATE estimation. Unlike prior approaches that address only parts of this problem,
AutoCATE integrates evaluation, estimation, and
ensembling in a unified framework. AutoCATE
enables comprehensive comparisons of different
protocols, yielding novel insights into CATE estimation and a final configuration that outperforms commonly used strategies. To facilitate
broad adoption and further research, we release
AutoCATE as an open-source software package.

The challenge of automated CATE estimation. Despite
significant progress in automated ML (AutoML) (see He
et al., 2021), existing solutions do not address the unique
challenges of CATE estimation. A key problem is the lack
of ground truth: the treatment effect is the difference in outcomes with and without treatment, but only one outcome is
observed per instance. Which outcome is observed depends
on confounding variables (e.g., older patients more often
receive treatment), leading to covariate shift (Shalit et al.,
2017). Finally, CATE estimation pipelines are highly complex: metalearners combine multiple baselearners, and often
include both classification and regression models. Risk
measures require predictions themselves and, thus, tuning
ML pipelines. These challenges complicate training and
validation of ML pipelines for CATE estimation.
Contributions. To address these challenges, we propose
AutoCATE, the first automated, end-to-end framework for
constructing and validating an ML pipeline for CATE estimation. In doing so, we make the following contributions:
• C OUNTERFACTUAL CASH—We formalize the search
for an ML pipeline for CATE estimation as a counterfactual Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter
(CASH) optimization. Our solution, AutoCATE, automatically searches across preprocessors, metalearners, evaluators, baselearners, and their hyperparameters. The process
is organized into three stages–evaluation, estimation, and
ensembling–each including several design choices.
• E ND -T O -E ND AUTOMATION—We develop automated
protocols that perform well across data sets and applications. Our end-to-end approach includes often-overlooked
aspects of CATE estimation, such as preprocessing, feature selection, and ensembling. Our perspective uncovers
novel insights (see Figure 14), questions (e.g., the trade-off
to use data for training or validation) and solutions (e.g.,
multi-objective optimization across evaluation criteria).
• S OFTWARE PACKAGE—We release AutoCATE as an
open-source tool to support future research on all aspects
of CATE estimation. For practitioners unfamiliar with ML,
AutoCATE makes automated CATE estimation with advanced ML techniques accessible in a few lines of code.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating causal effects is crucial in domains
like healthcare, education, and economics. Despite advances
in machine learning (ML) for estimating the conditional average treatment effect (CATE), real-world adoption remains
limited due to the complexity of developing ML pipelines for
CATE estimation. Methods often involve numerous hyperparameters, and their performance varies significantly across
data sets and applications. Moreover, validating counterfactual predictions and tuning pipelines is highly challenging,
and the performance of evaluation criteria also varies with
the data generating process (Curth & van der Schaar, 2023).
For practitioners unfamiliar with ML, such as clinicians or
1

KU Leuven 2 University of Antwerp 3 University of
Cambridge.
Correspondence to: Toon Vanderschueren
<toon.vanderschueren@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

