Integration-free Kernels for Equivariant Gaussian Process Modelling

Tim Steinert 1 David Ginsbourger 1 August Lykke-Møller 2 Ove Christiansen 2 Henry Moss 3 4

Abstract
We study the incorporation of equivariances into
vector-valued GPs and more general classes of
random field models. While kernels guaranteeing equivariances have been investigated previously, their evaluation is often computationally
prohibitive due to required integrations over the
involved groups. In this work, we provide a kernel characterization of stochastic equivariance for
centred second-order vector-valued random fields
and we construct integration-free equivariant kernels based on the notion of fundamental regions
of group actions. We establish data-efficient and
computationally lightweight GP models for velocity fields and molecular electric dipole moments
and demonstrate that proposed integration-free
kernels may also be leveraged to extract equivariant components from data.

Figure 1. Rotational equivariance of electric dipole moments (red
arrow) of acetylacetone molecules.

ensuring positive definiteness in matrix-valued covariance
kernels. However, attracted by GP’s explicit posterior distributions that facilitate uncertainty quantification and active
learning, especially in scientific applications Moss et al.
(2020); Griffiths et al. (2022); Ranković et al. (2024), there
has been a significant recent effort to encode invariances
and equivariances through tailored kernels Ginsbourger et al.
(2012); Scheuerer & Schlather (2012); Ginsbourger et al.
(2016); van der Wilk et al. (2018); Holderrieth et al. (2021);
Henderson (2023).

1. Introduction

Unfortunately, building equivariant kernels comes with significant computational effort, and choices are typically made
that alleviate costs at the price of reducing expressiveness.
Such computational challenges have been addressed in specific contexts, e.g., for accurate modelling of interatomic
force fields Glielmo et al. (2017), by transforming a scalar
argument-wise invariant kernel into an equivariant matrixvalued kernel with a single group integration.

The incorporation of structural knowledge such as physical
laws into machine learning models has gained significant
attention for improving predictive accuracy and realism.
For example, equivariances are ubiquitous across molecular
chemistry, where applying simultaneous rigid motions on
underlying atoms typically results in equivalent motions to
their vectorial properties (as demonstrated in Figure 1). The
incorporation of such equivariances is well-established in
deep learning Cohen & Welling (2016), allowing neural
networks to exploit knowing the responses across entire
orbits of a group action from a single data point.

Our work proposes a novel class of equivariant kernels that
simultaneously overcome the previously high computational
cost and limited flexibility of existing equivariant kernels.
We exploit the group-theoretic notion of projecting onto fundamental regions of group actions, substantially extending
the approach of Ginsbourger et al. (2012) as proposed for
scalar-valued invariance. Our main contributions are:

In contrast, progress incorporating such knowledge into
Gaussian process (GP) models has been more moderate,
potentially due to the intricate mathematical constraint of
1

IMSV, University of Bern, Switzerland 2 Department of Chemistry, University of Aarhus, Denmark 3 School of Mathematical
Sciences, Lancaster University, UK 4 Department of Applied Maths
and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: <tim.steinert@unibe.ch>.

1. a theoretical framework for stochastically equivariant
random fields,
2. a class of integration-free equivariant kernels that are
computationally efficient, flexible, and stable,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

3. empirical results on equivariant fluid flows and dipole
predictions from quantum chemistry.
1

