Best Subset Selection: Optimal Pursuit for Feature Selection and Elimination

Zhihan Zhu 1 Yanhao Zhang 1 Yong Xia 1
coefficient vector β ∈ Rp×1 is expressed as follows:

Abstract
This paper introduces two novel criteria: one for
feature selection and another for feature elimination in the context of best subset selection, which
is a benchmark problem in statistics and machine
learning. From the perspective of optimization,
we revisit the classical selection and elimination
criteria in traditional best subset selection algorithms, revealing that these classical criteria capture only partial variations of the objective function after the entry or exit of features. By formulating and solving optimization subproblems for
feature entry and exit exactly, new selection and
elimination criteria are proposed, proved as the
optimal decisions for the current entry-and-exit
process compared to classical criteria. Replacing the classical selection and elimination criteria
with the proposed ones generates a series of enhanced best subset selection algorithms. These
generated algorithms not only preserve the theoretical properties of the original algorithms but
also achieve significant meta-gains without increasing computational cost across various scenarios and evaluation metrics on multiple tasks
such as compressed sensing and sparse regression.

y = Xβ + ϵ,

(1)

where y ∈ Rn×1 represents the response vector, X ∈ Rn×p
is the design matrix, and ϵ ∈ Rn×1 denotes the measurement noise. In subset selection, simpler models with fewer
predictors are often favored. The goal is to select a subset
of features by identifying nonzero coefficients (i.e., Active
/ Support Set S) in β that achieves a balance between accuracy and model simplicity. This leads to the best-subset
selection problem, which can be formulated as follows:
min Ln (β) ≜

β∈Rp

1
∥y − Xβ∥22
2n

s. t. ∥β∥0 ≤ K,

(2)

where K is maximum allowed sparsity level. Since problem
(2) is NP-hard (Davis et al., 1997), significant efforts have
been directed toward developing polynomial-time approximation algorithms (Dy & Brodley, 2000; Qian et al., 2015;
Wei et al., 2015; Qian et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2020).
Relaxation-based methods have been proposed to approximately solve (2) by replacing ℓ0 penalty with smooth approximations. Examples include Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) (Tibshirani, 1996),
Adaptive LASSO (Zou, 2006), Smoothly Clipped Absolute Deviation (SCAD) (Fan & Li, 2001), Minimax Concave Penalty (MCP) (Zhang, 2010), etc. However, these
methods could be computational burdensome (Hazimeh &
Mazumder, 2020; Needell & Tropp, 2009) and are also
difficult to control the number of selected features.

1. Introduction
Subset selection is a classic topic in statistics and machine
learning, with significant applications in feature selection
(Kohavi & John, 1997; Das & Kempe, 2011), sparse regression (Miller, 2002; Das & Kempe, 2018), compressed sensing (Chen et al., 2001), maximum coverage (Feige, 1998)
etc. Even in the era of large models, subset selection can
effectively reduce training costs and enhance the instructionfollowing ability of large language models (LLMs) by selecting high-quality features (Wang et al., 2024).

Another widely used class of methods is greedy algorithms,
known for their high computational efficiency and simplicity. These methods perform subset selection directly by
selecting and eliminating basis based on feature importance.
Notably, the criteria for feature selection and elimination in
this category are generally consistent, differing only in the
underlying combination strategies.
Correlation-based Selection. Greedy algorithms typically
select features based on their correlation with residuals,
calculated as follows:

The fundamental multivariate linear regression model with
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Beihang University, Beijing,
China (Email: {zhihanzhu, yanhaozhang, yxia}@buaa.edu.cn).
Correspondence to: Yong Xia <yxia@buaa.edu.cn>.

T

rk = y − Xβ k−1 , j ∗ = argmax
j∈S c

|rk Xj |
,
∥Xj ∥2

(3)

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

where Xj is the j-th column of X, S c is the complement of
support S, β k−1 denotes the updated coefficient on S, and
1

