Geometric Algebra Planes:
Convex Implicit Neural Volumes

Irmak Sivgin * 1 Sara Fridovich-Keil * 1 2 Gordon Wetzstein 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract

ies. In recent years tremendous progress has been made
in modeling these volumes using measurements and computation (Tewari et al., 2022), to make them accessible for
downstream tasks in applications including manufacturing
(Intwala & Magikar, 2016; Šlapak et al., 2024), robotic
navigation (Ming et al., 2024; Wijayathunga et al., 2023),
entertainment and culture (Liu et al., 2024; Croce et al.,
2023), and medicine (Udupa & Herman, 1999; Masero et al.,
2002; Richter et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024). All methods that
seek to model a volume face a three-way tradeoff between
model size, which determines hardware memory requirements, expressiveness, which determines how faithfully the
model can represent the underlying volume, and optimizability, which captures how quickly and reliably the model
can learn the volume from measurements. Certain applications place stricter requirements on model size (e.g. for
deployment on mobile or edge devices), expressiveness (e.g.
resolution required for medical diagnosis or safe robotic
navigation), or optimizability (e.g. for interactive applications), but all stand to benefit from improvements to this
three-way pareto frontier.

Volume parameterizations abound in recent literature, encompassing methods from classic voxel
grids to implicit neural representations. While
implicit representations offer impressive capacity and improved memory efficiency compared
to voxel grids, they traditionally require training
through nonconvex optimization, which can be
slow and sensitive to initialization and hyperparameters. We introduce GA-Planes, a novel family of implicit neural volume representations inspired by Geometric Algebra that can be trained
using convex optimization, addressing the limitations of nonconvex methods. GA-Planes models generalize many existing representations including any combination of features stored in
tensor basis elements followed by a neural feature decoder, and can be adapted to convex or
nonconvex training as needed for various inverse
problems. In the 2D setting, we prove GAPlanes models are equivalent to a low-rank plus
low-resolution matrix factorization that outperforms the classic low-rank plus sparse decomposition for fitting a natural image. In 3D, GAPlanes models exhibit competitive expressiveness,
model size, and optimizability across tasks such
as radiance field reconstruction, 3D segmentation, and video segmentation. Code is available
at https://github.com/sivginirmak/
Geometric-Algebra-Planes.

Many existing strategies have been successfully applied at
different points along this pareto frontier; some representative examples from computer vision are summarized in
Appendix A.1. Our goal is to maintain or surpass the existing pareto frontier of model size and expressiveness while
improving optimization stability through convexity.
Our approach introduces convex and semiconvex reformulations of the volume modeling optimization process that
apply to a broad class of volume models we call Geometric
Algebra Planes, or GA-Planes for short. We adopt the term
semiconvex for Burer-Monteiro (BM) factorizations of a
convex objective, as introduced in (Sahiner et al., 2024),
within the context of convex neural networks. BM factorized problems have the property that every local minimum
is globally optimal (Sahiner et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Volumes are everywhere—from the world we live in to the
videos we watch to the organs and tissues inside our bod*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University, CA, USA 2 School of Electrical & Computer
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Mert Pilanci <pilanci@stanford.edu>.

GA-Planes is a mixture-of-primitives model that generalizes
several existing volume models including voxels and tensor
factorizations. Most importantly, most models in this family
can be formulated for optimization by a convex program, as
long as the objective function (to fit measurements of the
volume) is convex. At the same time, any GA-Planes model

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

