DCTdiff: Intriguing Properties of Image Generative Modeling in the DCT Space

Mang Ning 1 Mingxiao Li * 2 Jianlin Su * 3 Jia Haozhe 4 Lanmiao Liu 5 1 Martin Benes 6 Wenshuo Chen 4
Albert Ali Salah 1 Itir Onal Ertugrul 1

Abstract
This paper explores image modeling from the frequency space and introduces DCTdiff, an endto-end diffusion generative paradigm that efficiently models images in the discrete cosine transform (DCT) space. We investigate the design
space of DCTdiff and reveal the key design factors. Experiments on different frameworks (UViT,
DiT), generation tasks, and various diffusion samplers demonstrate that DCTdiff outperforms pixelbased diffusion models regarding generative quality and training efficiency. Remarkably, DCTdiff can seamlessly scale up to 512×512 resolution without using the latent diffusion paradigm
and beats latent diffusion (using SD-VAE) with
only 1/4 training cost. Finally, we illustrate several intriguing properties of DCT image modeling. For example, we provide a theoretical proof
of why ‘image diffusion can be seen as spectral
autoregression’, bridging the gap between diffusion and autoregressive models. The effectiveness of DCTdiff and the introduced properties
suggest a promising direction for image modeling in the frequency space. The code is https:
//github.com/forever208/DCTdiff.

Figure 1. Image samples generated by DCTdiff trained on the
dataset AFHQ 512×512 without using any VAE.

tion (DCT) and PNG applies DEFLATE (Deutsch, 1996)
for compression in a lossy and lossless manner, respectively. In this paper, we explore image modeling in the DCT
space with a focus on generative tasks, as they require a
complete understanding of the entire image (Goodfellow,
2016). Recently, diffusion models (Song & Ermon, 2019;
Ho et al., 2020) have demonstrated remarkable generative
performance and been adapted in various tasks, including
text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022; Esser et al.,
2024), video generation (Blattmann et al., 2023; Polyak
et al., 2024), and 3D synthesis (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al.,
2023). However, diffusion-based generative modeling in
the pixel space is expensive and difficult to scale directly
to high-resolution generation. Researchers have explored
alternatives such as latent space modeling (Rombach et al.,
2022) and neural network-based upsampling (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021) to address these challenges.

1. Introduction
Image discriminative and generative modeling in the RGB
space has been the mainstream approach in deep learning
for a long time due to the success of Convolutional Neural
Networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016) and
Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). In contrast,
images are often stored in a compressed form. For example,
JPEG (Wallace, 1991) uses Discrete Cosine Transforma*

Equal contribution 1 Utrecht University, the Netherlands 2 KU
Leuven, Belgium 3 Moonshot AI, China 4 Shandong University,
China 5 Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, the Netherlands
6
University of Innsbruck, Austria. Correspondence to: Mang Ning
<m.ning@uu.nl>.

We argue that image diffusion modeling in the pixel space
is unnecessary due to its inherent redundancy. Instead, we
advocate using a (near) lossless compression that provides
a compact space for efficient diffusion modeling. JPEG
achieves significant image compression by converting pixels

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

