An Efficient Private GPT Never Autoregressively Decodes

Zhengyi Li 1 2 Yue Guan 1 Kang Yang 3 Yu Feng 1 Ning Liu 1 Yu Yu 1 2 Jingwen Leng 1 2 Minyi Guo 1 2

Abstract

comes a major concern. Recent works (Hao et al., 2022;
Lu et al., 2025; Hou et al., 2023; Pang et al., 2024)leverage secure two-party computation (2PC) to enable privacypreserving GPT inference. These studies allow the client
and server to jointly execute inference on encrypted inputs
and models utilizing cryptographic techniques such as homomorphic encryption (HE) (Gentry, 2009) and multi-party
computation (MPC) (Yao, 1986). Consequently, the client
only learns the inference results without access to model
weights, and the server knows nothing.

The wide deployment of the generative pretrained transformer (GPT) has raised privacy concerns for both clients and servers. While cryptographic primitives can be employed for secure
GPT inference to protect the privacy of both
parties, they introduce considerable performance
overhead. To accelerate secure inference, this
study proposes a public decoding and secure verification approach that utilizes public GPT models,
motivated by the observation that securely decoding one and multiple tokens takes a similar latency.
The client uses the public model to generate a set
of tokens, which are then securely verified by the
private model for acceptance. The efficiency of
our approach depends on the acceptance ratio of
tokens proposed by the public model, which we
improve from two aspects: (1) a private sampling
protocol optimized for cryptographic primitives
and (2) model alignment using knowledge distillation. Our approach improves the efficiency
of secure decoding while maintaining the same
level of privacy and generation quality as standard secure decoding. Experiments demonstrate a
2.1× ∼ 6.0× speedup compared to standard decoding across three pairs of public-private models
and different network conditions.

However, privacy protection incurs significant computational and communication costs for both the linear and
nonlinear layers. Linear layers involving matrix multiplication are usually computed through HE, which requires
substantial computation. Complex nonlinear layers, such
as GELU and softmax, require numerous rounds of communication and data transmission. To accelerate secure GPT
inference, prior works focus on optimizing cryptographic
protocols (Hao et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024;
Kim et al., 2024) or modifying GPT architectures to tailor
the cryptographic primitives (Li et al., 2022; Zeng et al.,
2023; Zimerman et al., 2024; Ran et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2024a). Despite these efforts, achieving efficient secure
inference remains a major challenge.
This study explores an orthogonal approach by utilizing public GPTs to accelerate secure GPT inference, mainly during
the decoding phase. We notice the availability of powerful public GPT models within the GPT community (Wolf
et al., 2019). These models share some linguistic and logical
knowledge with private models (Chen & Gao, 2022; Zhao
et al., 2023). Since this shared knowledge is inherently nonsensitive and publicly disclosed, a more efficient approach
is to only securely compute the exclusive parts of the private
model instead of all. However, few works have explored
this direction due to the lack of interpretability of the GPT
models (Friedman et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2024), making it
challenging to separate shared knowledge.

1. Introduction
The generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) (Vaswani
et al., 2017) has brought significant advancements in various
machine learning tasks, such as coding (GitHub, 2025) and
chatbots (Leiter et al., 2023). To deploy a GPT application,
either the client needs to upload private data or the model
owner needs to send its private model to the client. As GPT
increasingly handles sensitive data and tasks, privacy be1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Qizhi Institute 3 State
Key Laboratory of Cryptology. Correspondence to: Jingwen Leng
<leng-jw@sjtu.edu.cn>, Kang Yang <yangk@sklc.org>, Yu Yu
<yyuu@sjtu.edu.cn>.

This work introduces an observation of the performance
characteristics of secure decoding to utilize public models
for acceleration without comprising privacy. Standard secure decoding forwards only one token per decoding step.
We observe that securely forwarding single and multiple
tokens takes similar latency. This motivates us to treat the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

