LBI-FL: Low-Bit Integerized Federated Learning
with Temporally Dynamic Bit-Width Allocation

Li Ding * 1 Hao Zhang * 1 Wenrui Dai 2 Chenglin Li 1 Weijia Lu 3
Zhifei Yang 3 Xiaodong Zhang 3 Xiaofeng Ma 3 Junni Zou 2 Hongkai Xiong 1

Abstract
Top-1 Accuracy(%)

FP32

Federated learning (FL) is greatly challenged by
the communication bottleneck and computation
limitation on clients. Existing methods based on
quantization for FL cannot simultaneously reduce
the uplink and downlink communication cost and
mitigate the computation burden on clients. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose the
first low-bit integerized federated learning (LBIFL) framework that quantizes the weights, activations, and gradients to lower than INT8 precision to evidently reduce the communication and
computational costs. Specifically, we achieve dynamical temporal bit-width allocation for weights,
activations, and gradients along the training trajectory via reinforcement learning. An agent is
trained to determine bit-width allocation by comprehensively considering the states like current
bit-width, training stage, and quantization loss as
the state. The agent efficiently trained on smallscale datasets can be well generalized to train
varying network architectures on non-independent
and identically distributed datasets. Furthermore,
we demonstrated in theory that federated learning
with gradient quantization achieves an equivalent
convergence rate to FedAvg. The proposed LBIFL can reduce the communication costs by 8 times
compared to full-precision FL. Extensive experiments show that the proposed LBI-FL achieves a
reduction of more than 50% BitOPs per client on
average for FL with less than 2% accuracy loss
compared to low-bit training with INT8 precision.

FP32

Ours

FP32

Ours

75

84.4

84

-87.5%

-87.5%

-87.5%
81

84

UI8
Top-1 Accuracy(%)

Communication cost

Ours

Ours

71

Computation cost

84

UI8

Ours

84.4

UI8

Ours

73

-51.4%

-51.5%
-54.1%

81

84

LeNet

ResNet-18

71

ViT-S

Figure 1: Image classification results on CIFAR-10 with the
low-bit integerized federated learning framework (LBI-FL).
The proposed method can simultaneously reduce both the
communication cost and computational cost. The areas of
bubbles are positively correlated with the communication
cost or the BitOPs for training the model.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
framework designed to enable model training without the
local data exchange. In FL, multiple clients independently
train a model on their local data and periodically send the
updated model parameters (or model updates) to a central
server for aggregation. This paradigm can address the data
privacy and security concerns while effectively leveraging
the computational resources distributed over local clients.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electronic Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 2 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 3 United Automotive Electronic Systems, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Wenrui Dai <daiwenrui@sjtu.edu.cn>, Chenglin Li <lcl1985@sjtu.edu.cn>.

However, a significant challenge in FL is the communication overhead, as it necessitates a frequent transmission
of models or updates between local clients and the central
server. To address this, a substantial body of literature has focused on compressing the model updates through techniques
such as quantization and sparsification. Compression-based
federated algorithms such as QSGD (Alistarh et al., 2017)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

