Learning Adaptive Lighting via Channel-Aware Guidance

Qirui Yang * 1 2 Peng-Tao Jiang * 2 Hao Zhang 2 Jinwei Chen 2 Bo Li 2 Huanjing Yue 1 Jingyu Yang 1

Abstract

Exposure Correction in SCIE
#1 FECNet
#2 FECNet+ERL
#3 CoTF
#4 RetinexMamba
#5 Retinexformer

Learning lighting adaptation is a crucial step in
achieving good visual perception and supporting
downstream vision tasks. Current research often addresses individual light-related challenges,
such as high dynamic range imaging and exposure correction, in isolation. However, we identify shared fundamental properties across these
tasks: i) different color channels have different
light properties, and ii) the channel differences
reflected in the spatial and frequency domains
are different. Leveraging these insights, we introduce the channel-aware Learning Adaptive Lighting Network (LALNet), a multi-task framework
designed to handle multiple light-related tasks
efficiently. Specifically, LALNet incorporates
color-separated features that highlight the unique
light properties of each color channel, integrated
with traditional color-mixed features by Light
Guided Attention (LGA). The LGA utilizes colorseparated features to guide color-mixed features
focusing on channel differences and ensuring visual consistency across all channels. Additionally,
LALNet employs dual domain channel modulation for generating color-separated features and a
mixed channel modulation and light state space
module for producing color-mixed features. Extensive experiments on four representative lightrelated tasks demonstrate that LALNet significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
benchmark tests and requires fewer computational
resources. We provide an online demo at LALNet.

0.86 dB

Low-Light Enhancement in LOL
#1 CoTF
#2 LANet
#3 Restormer
#4 DiffIR
#5 RetinexMamba

1.23 dB

Image Retouching in HDR+
#1 CoTF
#2 sLUT
#3 Retinexformer
#4 LLFLUT
#5 MambaIR

2.15 dB

Tone Mapping in HDRI Haven
#1 SepLUT
#2 CoTF
#3 Restormer
#4 Retinexformer
#5 RetinexMamba

3.86 dB

Figure 1. Our LALNet significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on four representative benchmark tests of light-related
image enhancement, including image retouching, tone mapping,
low-light enhancement, and exposure correction.

images taken under poor lighting conditions often exhibit
degraded quality, which not only affects visual presentation
but also poses challenges for tasks such as object detection
and tracking. Consequently, learning adaptive lighting has
emerged as a pivotal step in achieving robust visual perception and supporting downstream vision tasks. This process
is analogous to the perception of the human visual system,
that is, light adaptation, which enables us to maintain stable
visual perception across diverse lighting environments.
Many tasks in computer vision aim to achieve light adaptation, including exposure correction (Li et al., 2024a; Huang
et al., 2023), image retouching (He et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2024), low-light enhancement (Cai et al., 2023; Yi et al.,
2023), and tone mapping (Cao et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2022). The common goal of these light-related tasks is to
adjust the light level of the scene to the perceptually optimal
level, thereby revealing more visual details. However, due
to the different characteristics of these light-related tasks,
most of the current methods (Zeng et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2024a) are designed to deal with the above tasks individually and are difficult to apply to other light-related tasks. For

1. Introduction
Photography is the art of light. The quality of an image
is crucial for effective visual presentation and robust performance in subsequent computer vision tasks. However,
*
Equal contribution 1 Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. 2 vivo
Mobile Communication Co., Ltd, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Peng-Tao Jiang <pt.jiang@vivo.com>, Jingyu Yang
<yjy@tju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

