No Free Lunch From Random Feature Ensembles:
Scaling Laws and Near-Optimality Conditions

Benjamin S. Ruben 1 William L. Tong 2 3 4 Hamza Tahir Chaudhry 2 3 Cengiz Pehlevan 2 3 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Ensembling methods are a well-established tool in machine
learning for reducing the variance of learned predictors.
While traditional ensemble approaches like random forests
(Breiman, 2001) and XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016)
combine many weak predictors, the advent of deep neural
networks has shifted the state of the art toward training a
single large predictor (LeCun et al., 2015). However, deep
neural networks still suffer from various sources of variance,
such as finite datasets and random initialization (Atanasov
et al., 2022; Adlam & Pennington, 2020; Lin & Dobriban,
2021; Atanasov et al., 2024). As a result, deep ensembles—ensembles of deep neural networks—remain a popular method for variance reduction (Ganaie et al., 2022; Fort
et al., 2020), and uncertainty estimation (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017).

Given a fixed budget for total model size, one
must choose between training a single large model
or combining the predictions of multiple smaller
models. We investigate this trade-off for ensembles of random-feature ridge regression models in
both the overparameterized and underparameterized regimes. Using deterministic equivalent risk
estimates, we prove that when a fixed number of
parameters is distributed among K independently
trained models, the ridge-optimized test risk increases with K. Consequently, a single large
model achieves optimal performance. We then ask
when ensembles can achieve near-optimal performance. In the overparameterized regime, we
show that, to leading order, the test error depends
on ensemble size and model size only through
the total feature count, so that overparameterized
ensembles consistently achieve near-optimal performance. To understand underparameterized ensembles, we derive scaling laws for the test risk as
a function of total parameter count when the ensemble size and parameters per ensemble member
are jointly scaled according to a “growth exponent” ℓ. While the optimal error scaling is always
achieved by increasing model size with a fixed
ensemble size, our analysis identifies conditions
on the kernel and task eigenstructure under which
near-optimal scaling laws can be obtained by joint
scaling of ensemble size and model size.

A critical consideration in practice is the computational cost
associated with ensemble methods. While increasing the
number of predictors in an ensemble improves its accuracy
(provided each ensemble member is “competent” (Theisen
et al., 2023)), each additional model incurs significant computational overhead. Supposing a fixed memory capacity
for learned parameters, a more pragmatic comparison is
between an ensemble of neural networks and a single large
network with the same total parameter count. Indeed, recent
studies have called into question the utility of deep ensembles relative to a single network of comparable total size
(Abe et al., 2022; Vyas et al., 2023). However, because
ensemble learning allows fully parallelized training and inference, it will likely remain an attractive option in practice.
A robust understanding of when an ensemble of small neural
networks might approach the performance of a single large
neural network is therefore needed.

1

Biophysics PhD Program, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA 2 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
3
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138, USA 4 Kempner Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin S. Ruben <benruben@g.harvard.edu>.

Originally introduced as a fast approximation to Kernel
Ridge Regression, random-feature ridge regression (RFRR)
(Rahimi & Recht, 2007) has emerged as a rich “toy model”
for deep learning, capturing non-trivial effects of dataset
size and network width (Canatar et al., 2021; Atanasov
et al., 2023; Mei & Montanari, 2022). In particular, the
generalization error of deep networks and RFRR can vary
non-monotonically with dataset size and feature count due
to over-fitting effects known as “double-descent” (D’Ascoli

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

