Multi-Stage Manipulation with Demonstration-Augmented
Reward, Policy, and World Model Learning

Adrià López Escoriza 1 2 Nicklas Hansen 1 Stone Tao 1 3 Tongzhou Mu 1 Hao Su 1 3

Abstract

Schmidhuber, 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Kidambi et al.,
2020; Hafner et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020; Hansen et al.,
2022; 2024; Sferrazza et al., 2024). However, designing
accurate reward functions is challenging. Poorly designed
rewards can lead agents to become trapped in local minima or exploit unintended shortcuts, resulting in undesirable
behaviors (Clark & Amodei, 2016). More critically, scaling reward design to complex tasks is highly impractical:
the larger the state space and the longer the horizon, the
more intricate the reward must be. While recent approaches
leveraging Large Language Models (Kwon et al., 2023;
Ma et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024) and Vision-Language
Models (Rocamonde et al., 2024; Baumli et al., 2024) for
reward generation show promise, they still struggle with
high-precision requirements, particularly in manipulation
problems. In contrast, sparse rewards, such as binary signals
indicating task or subtask completion, are much easier to
obtain. However, traditional RL methods still struggle to
learn effectively from sparse rewards.

Long-horizon tasks in robotic manipulation
present significant challenges in reinforcement
learning (RL) due to the difficulty of designing
dense reward functions and effectively exploring the expansive state-action space. However,
despite a lack of dense rewards, these tasks often have a multi-stage structure, which can be
leveraged to decompose the overall objective into
manageable subgoals. In this work, we propose
Demonstration-Augmented Reward, Policy, and
World Model Learning (DEMO3 ), a framework
that exploits this structure for efficient learning
from visual inputs. Specifically, our approach
incorporates multi-stage dense reward learning,
a bi-phasic training scheme, and world model
learning into a carefully designed demonstrationaugmented RL framework that strongly mitigates
the challenge of exploration in long-horizon tasks.
Our evaluations demonstrate that our method improves data-efficiency by an average of 40% and
by 70% on particularly difficult tasks compared
to state-of-the-art approaches. We validate this
across 16 sparse-reward tasks spanning four domains, including challenging humanoid visual
control tasks using as few as five demonstrations.
Website with code and visualizations can be found
at https://adrialopezescoriza.github.io/demo3.

Fortunately, long-horizon tasks do offer opportunities to
simplify the problem. Typically, such tasks exhibit a natural
multi-stage structure. For example, a pick-and-place task
can be broken down into subtasks such as grasping, lifting,
and placing. Each of these can be associated with stage
indicators or rewards that can easily be queried from the
environment. This multi-stage structure allows these tasks
to be decomposed into more manageable subgoals, enabling
the agent to collect rewards more frequently (Smith et al.,
2020; Di Palo & Johns, 2021). However, subgoal sparse
rewards can still be insufficient if the distance between subgoals is too great, leading back to the exploration problem.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) with dense rewards has enabled significant progress in high-dimensional control tasks.
Many such tasks are now solvable when the reward function is carefully designed for the specific goal. In particular, model-based RL (MBRL) has demonstrated strong
performance in these high-dimensional problems (Ha &

Prior work shows that Learning from Demonstrations (LfD)
can help mitigate exploration issues in sparse reward settings. Algorithms such as CoDER (Zhan et al., 2022) and
MoDem (Hansen et al., 2023; Lancaster et al., 2024) leverage demonstrations to populate the replay buffer of an offpolicy RL algorithm (Sutton & Barto, 2018), but they often
scale poorly with task complexity as they need demonstrations that sufficiently cover the behavior space. Inverse RL
methods (Trott et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2021; Memarian et al.,
2021; Escontrela et al., 2022) train RL on a reward function
that is learned from demonstrations, but inverse RL alone

1

University of California San Diego 2 ETH Zürich, Switzerland 3 Hillbot. Correspondence to: Adrià López Escoriza
<alopez@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

