Rethinking Benign Overfitting in Two-Layer Neural Networks

Ruichen Xu 1

Kexin Chen 2

Abstract

over-parameterized neural networks, models can perfectly
fit the training data while still exhibiting improved generalization as model complexity increases. When and why this
benign overfitting phenomenon happens garnered significant interest within the learning theory community. Recent
works, e.g., Frei et al. (2022); Cao et al. (2022); Kou et al.
(2023), showed a sharp phase transition between benign
and harmful overfitting in two-layer neural networks with
a feature-noise data model (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020), which
assumes data is composed of a feature vector as its mean
and a random Gaussian vector as its data-specific noise.
Specifically, when the magnitude of the noise exceeds a
threshold, neural networks memorize the data noise, leading to harmful overfitting. Nevertheless, such harmful
overfitting is rarely observed in modern over-parameterized
neural networks.

Recent theoretical studies (Kou et al., 2023; Cao
et al., 2022) revealed a sharp phase transition
from benign to harmful overfitting when the
noise-to-feature ratio exceeds a threshold—a situation common in long-tailed data distributions
where atypical data is prevalent. However, such
harmful overfitting rarely happens in overparameterized neural networks. Further experimental results suggested that memorization is necessary for achieving near-optimal generalization
error in long-tailed data distributions (Feldman &
Zhang, 2020). We argue that this discrepancy between theoretical predictions and empirical observations arises because previous feature-noise
data models overlook the heterogeneous nature
of noise across different data classes. In this paper, we refine the feature-noise data model by incorporating class-dependent heterogeneous noise
and re-examine the overfitting phenomenon in
neural networks. Through a comprehensive analysis of the training dynamics, we establish test
loss bounds for the refined model. Our findings
reveal that neural networks can leverage "data
noise" to learn implicit features that improve the
classification accuracy for long-tailed data. Our
analysis also provides a training-free metric for
evaluating data influence on test performance.
Experimental validation on both synthetic and
real-world datasets supports our theoretical results.

Empirical evidence (Feldman & Zhang, 2020; Hartley &
Tsaftaris, 2022; Wang et al., 2024; Garg & Roy, 2023) indicates that memorization can, in fact, enhance generalization, especially in long-tailed data distributions characterized by substantial data-specific noise. These findings contradict current theories of the phase transition to harmful
overfitting. Consequently, the following problem remains
open:
How can we theoretically explain benign overfitting in
overparameterized neural networks?
Inspired by the heterogeneous intra-class distributions in
real-world datasets (as shown in Figure 1), we refine the
feature-noise data model by incorporating class-dependent
noise and re-examine the benign overfitting phenomenon
in two-layer ReLU convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
In this paper, we make the following contributions:

1. Introduction

• We establish an enhanced feature-noise model by considering heterogeneous noise across classes. Our results with this model theoretically explain how memorization of long-tailed data boosts model performance, which cannot be predicted by existing theoretical frameworks for neural networks.

Overfitting, also known as memorization, had long been
considered detrimental to model generalization performance (Hastie et al., 2009). However, with the advent of
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 2 School of Science and
Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
China. Correspondence to: Ruichen Xu <rcxu642@gmail.com>.

• We derive general theoretical phase transition results
between benign and harmful overfitting by analyzing
the test error bounds of the refined model. Our results
demonstrate that although the trained neural networks

nd

Proceedings of the 42
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

