Defending LVLMs Against Vision Attacks Through Partial-Perception
Supervision

Qi Zhou 1 Dongxia Wang 1 2 Tianlin Li 3 Yun Lin 4 Yang Liu 3 Jin Song Dong 5 Qing Guo 6

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) represent a significant advancement in AI, enabling more intuitive interactions between humans and machines by bridging the gap
between visual perception and language understanding. For
instance, LLava (Liu et al., 2024b) and GPT-4 (Achiam et al.,
2023) have demonstrated outstanding performance across
a wide range of visual tasks. LVLMs are being applied
in various fields: Tian et al. (2024) integrate LVLMs into
autonomous driving systems to make decisions in driving
scenarios, while Med-PaLM, proposed by Tu et al. (2024),
offers new capabilities for intelligent medical consultations.
The applications continue to grow.

Recent studies have raised significant concerns
regarding the vulnerability of Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) to maliciously injected
or perturbed input images, which can mislead
their responses. Existing defense methods
show that such vision attacks are sensitive to
image modifications especially cropping, using
majority voting across responses of modified
images as corrected responses. However, these
modifications often result in partial images and
distort the semantics, which reduces response
quality on clean images after voting. Instead of
directly using responses from partial images for
voting, we investigate using them to supervise
(guide) the LVLM’s responses to the original
images at inference time. We propose a blackbox, training-free method called DPS (Defense
through Partial-Perception Supervision). In
this approach, the model is prompted using the responses generated by a model that perceives only
a partial image. With DPS, the model can adjust
its response based on partial image understanding
when under attack, while confidently maintaining
its original response for clean input. Empirical
experiments show our method outperforms the
baseline, cutting the average attack success
rate by 76.3% across six datasets on three
popular models. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/tools-only/DPS

However, as LVLMs are increasingly applied, researchers
have recently discovered that carefully crafted manipulations of image inputs can easily mislead these models. For
example, Zhang et al. (2024b) show that LVLMs’ generation is easily misled by adversarial noise. Moreover, Liu
et al. (2024d) manipulate images to induce harmful outputs,
achieving safety-critical attacks. To defend against such
attacks, Sun et al. (2024) and Zhang et al. (2024a) reveal
that attacked images demonstrate sensitivity to modifications, especially cropping, which is highly concise with
nearly no deployment cost, effectively eliminates various
attacks. Building on this insight, Sun et al. (2024) propose
SmoothVLM, which employs majority voting to integrate
responses from randomly modified input images, effectively
countering these attacks, as illustrated in Figure 1. For normal queries, however, these modifications often result in
partial images and significantly distort the image semantics,
resulting in compromised voting outcomes. This largely
reduces the practical effectiveness of these methods.

1

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China 2 Huzhou Institute of Industrial Control Technology,
China 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 4 School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 5 School of Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 6 IHPC and CFAR,
Agency for Science, Technology, and Research, Singapore. Correspondence to: Dongxia Wang <dxwang@zju.edu.cn>, Tianlin Li
<tianlin001@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

Facing the dilemma that using a partial image can prevent
attacks, but may also severely distort the semantics, we
explore how to collaborate the models’ responses to both the
partial and full images, avoiding attacks while preserving
image semantics for clean inputs. This collaboration is
particularly challenging, as responses from both partial and
full images can be unreliable when facing attacks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we are inspired by recent work (Burns et al.,
2023; Khan et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024) that highlights
1

