Learning Invariant Causal Mechanism from Vision-Language Models

Zeen Song * 1 2 Siyu Zhao * 2 Xingyu Zhang * 1 2 Jiangmeng Li 1 Changwen Zheng 1 Wenwen Qiang 1

Abstract

tasks by measuring semantic similarity between images and
textual category descriptions (Radford et al., 2021). Notably,
CLIP performs well in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios,
effectively adapting to domain variations and recognizing
previously unseen categories.

Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)
has achieved remarkable success, but its performance can degrade when fine-tuned in out-ofdistribution (OOD) scenarios. We model the prediction process using a Structural Causal Model
(SCM) and show that the causal mechanism involving both invariant and variant factors in training environments differs from that in test environments. In contrast, the causal mechanism
with solely invariant factors remains consistent
across environments. We theoretically prove the
existence of a linear mapping from CLIP embeddings to invariant factors, which can be estimated using interventional data. Additionally,
we provide a condition to guarantee low OOD
risk of the invariant predictor. Based on these
insights, we propose the Invariant Causal Mechanism of CLIP (CLIP-ICM) framework. CLIPICM involves collecting interventional data, estimating a linear projection matrix, and making
predictions within the invariant subspace. Experiments on several OOD datasets show that CLIPICM significantly improves the performance of
CLIP. Our method offers a simple but powerful
enhancement, boosting the reliability of CLIP in
real-world applications. The source code is available at https://github.com/ZeenSong/CLIP-ICM.

However, this ability of CLIP is task-independent. In many
real-world applications, CLIP requires fine-tuning to adapt
to specific tasks (Gao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022a; Shu
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b). When fine-tuning CLIP
for downstream tasks, a critical question arises: Can CLIP
maintain its strong capabilities when faced with test data
that differs from the training distribution? More importantly,
can it still perform well when encountering new classes
not seen during training? To address this, we conduct an
experiment on the Terra Incognita dataset (Beery et al.,
2018), which contains species data collected from diverse
real-world environments. The results in Table 1 show that
fine-tuning CLIP in the training domain does not necessarily
lead to good performance in the test domain. Furthermore,
when encountering new classes not observed in the training
domain, fine-tuning on the training domain can harm the
zero-shot ability of CLIP.
To address the above problem, we find that inconsistent prediction issues can be well explained from a causal perspective. Inspired by (Pearl, 2009; Pearl & Bareinboim, 2014;
Schölkopf et al., 2021), we first propose a Structural Causal
Model (SCM) to capture the causal processes underlying
OOD predictions of CLIP. In this causal model, predictions
rely on two types of latent factors, which are assumed to
generate the image data: (1) environment-invariant factors
that remain unchanged across different environments and
(2) environment-variant factors that vary with the environment. By analyzing the causal mechanisms in the SCM, we
observe that if predictions rely on both invariant and variant
factors, the causal mechanism in the training environment
differs from that in the test environment. However, when
based solely on invariant factors, the prediction mechanism
remains consistent across environments. This raises an intriguing question: could we design a predictor that relies
only on the invariant factors?

1. Introduction
As one of the most successful large-scale pre-trained visionlanguage models, Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining
(CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) has garnered significant attention. Trained on 400 million diverse image-text pairs, CLIP
achieves robust cross-modal alignment without task-specific
supervision. This enables direct generalization to unseen
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Software Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences. Correspondence to: Wenwen Qiang <qiangwenwen@iscas.ac.cn>.

A key challenge in obtaining such an invariant predictor is
that it is unclear which parts of the extracted representations
of CLIP correspond to the invariant factors (Hyvärinen &

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

