Learning-Augmented Algorithms for MTS with Bandit Access to Multiple
Predictors
Matei Gabriel Coşa 1 Marek Eliáš 1

Abstract

or configurations of some complex system. At each time
step t = 1, . . . , T , we receive a cost function ct : M →
R+ ∪ {0, +∞}. Seeing ct , we can decide to stay in our previous state st−1 and pay its cost ct (st−1 ), or move to some
(possibly cheaper) state st and pay ct (st ) + d(st−1 , st ),
where the distance function d represents the transition cost
between two states. Our objective is to minimize the total
cost paid over time.

We consider the following problem: we are given
ℓ heuristics for Metrical Task Systems (MTS),
where each might be tailored to a different type
of input instances. While processing an input instance received online, we are allowed to query
the action of only one of the heuristics at each
time step. Our goal is to achieve performance
comparable to the best of the given heuristics.
The main difficulty of our setting comes from
the fact that the cost paid by a heuristic at time
t cannot be estimated unless the same heuristic
was also queried at time t − 1. This is related
to Bandit Learning against memory bounded adversaries (Arora et al., 2012). We show how to
achieve regret of O(OPT2/3 ) and prove a tight
lower bound based on the construction of Dekel
et al. (2013).

MTS is very hard in the worst case. This is due to its
online nature (st has to be chosen without knowledge of
ct+1 , . . . , cT ) and also due to its generality. The performance of algorithms is evaluated using the competitive ratio which is, roughly speaking, the ratio between the algorithm’s cost and the cost of the optimal solution computed
offline. Denoting n the number of points in the metric space
M , the best competitive ratio achievable for MTS is 2n − 1
and Θ(log2 n) in the case of deterministic and randomized
algorithms, respectively (Borodin et al., 1992; Bartal et al.,
2006; Bubeck et al., 2022a; 2019). Note that n is usually
very large or even infinite (e.g., M = Rd ).

1. Introduction

This worst-case hardness motivates the study of MTS and
its special cases in the context of Learning-Augmented Algorithms (Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021). Here, the algorithm
can use predictions produced by an ML model in order to
exploit specific properties of input instances. By augmenting the algorithm with the ML model, we obtain a heuristic
with an outstanding performance, well beyond the classical worst-case lower bounds, on all inputs where the ML
model performs well. One of the key techniques used in this
context is Combining Heuristics which is used to achieve
robustness (Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021; Wei, 2020; Antoniadis et al., 2023a), adjust hyperparameters (Antoniadis
et al., 2021), and recognize the most suitable heuristic for
the current input instance (Emek et al., 2021; Anand et al.,
2022; Antoniadis et al., 2023b).

Metrical Task Systems (MTS) (Borodin et al., 1992) are a
very broad class of online problems capable of modeling
problems arising in computing, production systems, power
management, and routing service vehicles. In fact, many
fundamental problems in the field of Online Algorithms
including Caching, k-server, Ski-rental, and Convex Body
Chasing are special cases of MTS. Metrical Task Systems
are also related to Online Learning from Expert Advice,
see (Blum & Burch, 2000) for the comparison of the two
problems.
In MTS, we are given a description of a metric space (M, d)
and a starting point s0 ∈ M beforehand. The points in
M are traditionally called states and, depending on the
setting, they can represent actions, investment strategies,

Combining heuristics. In this basic theoretical problem,
we are given ℓ heuristics H1 , . . . , Hℓ which can be simulated on the input instance received online. We want to
combine them into a single algorithm which achieves a cost
comparable to the best of the heuristics on each individual
instance. The difficulty of the combination problem is given
by the online setting: because we receive the input online,

1
Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Matei Gabriel
Coşa <mateigabriel.cosa@studbocconi.it>,
Marek Eliáš
<marek.elias@unibocconi.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

