Understanding Sharpness Dynamics in NN Training with a Minimalist Example:
The Effects of Dataset Difficulty, Depth, Stochasticity, and More

Geonhui Yoo 1 Minhak Song 2 Chulhee Yun 1

Abstract

ing mechanisms to explain its behavior (Ahn et al., 2022;
2023; Arora et al., 2022; Damian et al., 2023; Song & Yun,
2023; Wang et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023). Notably, Damian
et al. (2023) introduce the self-stabilization mechanism, attributing the edge of stability to a negative feedback loop
formed by the third-order term in the Taylor expansion of
the loss. However, their analysis relies on the assumption
that progressive sharpening occurs, i.e., that the sharpness
tends to increase along the negative gradient direction.

When training deep neural networks with gradient descent, sharpness often increases—a phenomenon known as progressive sharpening—
before saturating at the edge of stability. Although
commonly observed in practice, the underlying
mechanisms behind progressive sharpening remain poorly understood. In this work, we study
this phenomenon using a minimalist model: a
deep linear network with a single neuron per layer.
We show that this simple model effectively captures the sharpness dynamics observed in recent
empirical studies, offering a simple testbed to better understand neural network training. Moreover,
we theoretically analyze how dataset properties,
network depth, stochasticity of optimizers, and
step size affect the degree of progressive sharpening in the minimalist model. We then empirically
demonstrate how these theoretical insights extend
to practical scenarios. This study offers a deeper
understanding of sharpness dynamics in neural
network training, highlighting the interplay between depth, training data, and optimizers.

Although commonly observed in practice, the underlying
mechanisms behind progressive sharpening remain poorly
understood. Analyzing this phenomenon is particularly challenging due to its dependence on various factors, including
network architecture, training data, and optimizers. Cohen
et al. (2021) conduct systematic experiments to investigate
how these factors influence the degree of progressive sharpening, and we summarize their observations in Section 2.
In this work, we study progressive sharpening using a minimalist model: a deep linear network with a single neuron
per layer. We show that this simple model effectively captures the sharpness dynamics observed in recent empirical
studies. Furthermore, we empirically demonstrate that our
theoretical findings from the minimalist model extend to
practical scenarios. Our main contributions are summarized
below:

1. Introduction
• In Section 2, we identify key factors influencing progressive sharpening (dataset size, network depth, batch size,
and learning rate) based on Cohen et al. (2021), and summarize them in Phenomenon 1.

Understanding the learning dynamics of neural network
training is challenging due to the non-convex nature of its
loss landscape. Recent empirical studies have highlighted
that when training deep neural networks using gradient descent with step size η, sharpness often increases—a phenomenon known as progressive sharpening—and eventually
hovers near 2/η, a regime known as the edge of stability (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2019; 2020; Cohen et al., 2021).

• In Section 3, we propose a minimalist model that successfully replicates sharpness dynamics in deep learning,
including the effects of key factors on progressive sharpening (Phenomenon 1) and behavior at the edge of stability.

The sharpness dynamics in deep learning have garnered significant interest in recent years, with several studies propos-

• In Section 4 and Section 5, we provide a rigorous theoretical analysis of the minimalist model. We introduce
the concept of dataset difficulty and derive bounds on the
sharpness using this quantity. Furthermore, we show that
the predicted sharpness from these bounds aligns well with
empirical observations, even beyond our theoretical setup.

1

KAIST AI 2 KAIST Math. Correspondence to: Chulhee Yun
<chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

