Dynamic Similarity Graph Construction
with Kernel Density Estimation

Steinar Laenen 1 Peter Macgregor 2 He Sun 1
data points in ε−2 · n0.25+o(1) time for the Gaussian kernel1 .
In particular, our algorithm maintains (1 ± ε)-approximate
estimates of the kernel densities for every query point q ∈ Q
throughout the sequence of data point insertions; see Theorem 3.1 for the formal statement. Although it is known
that KDE estimators can be maintained dynamically (Liang
et al., 2022), to the best of our knowledge, this represents the
first dynamic algorithm for the KDE problem that efficiently
maintains query estimates under data point insertions.

Abstract
In the kernel density estimation (KDE) problem,
we are given a set X of data points in Rd , a kernel
function k : Rd × Rd → R, and a query point
q ∈ Rd , andPthe objective is to quickly output an
estimate of x∈X k(q, x). In this paper, we consider KDE in the dynamic setting, and introduce
a data structure that efficiently maintains the estimates for a set of query points as data points are
added to X over time. Based on this, we design
a dynamic data structure that maintains a sparse
approximation of the fully connected similarity
graph on X, and develop a fast dynamic spectral
clustering algorithm. We further evaluate the effectiveness of our algorithms on both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

Among its many applications, an efficient algorithm for
the KDE problem on X = Q ⊂ Rd can be used to speed
up the construction of a similarity graph for X, which is
a key component used in many graph-based clustering algorithms (e.g., spectral clustering). These clustering algorithms usually have superior performance over traditional
geometric clustering techniques (e.g., k-means) (Ng et al.,
2001; von Luxburg, 2007), but in general lack a dynamic
implementation. Our second contribution addresses this
challenge, and designs a dynamic algorithm that maintains a
similarity graph for the dataset X with expected amortised
update time n0.25+o(1) when new data points are added; see
Theorem 4.1 for the formal statement. Our algorithm guarantees that, when the set Xt of data points at any time t has
a cluster structure, our dynamically maintained graph will
have the same cluster structure as the fully connected graph
on Xt ; hence a downstream graph clustering algorithm will
perform well.

1. Introduction
Given a set X = {x1 , . . . , xn } of data points, a set
Q = {q1 , . . . , qm } of query points, and a kernel function k : Rd × Rd →
PR⩾0 , the KDE problem is to quickly
approximate µq ≜ xi ∈X k(q, xi ) for every q ∈ Q. As a
basic question in computer science, this problem has been
actively studied since the 1990s (Greengard & Strain, 1991)
and has comprehensive applications in machine learning
and statistics (Bakshi et al., 2023; Genovese et al., 2014;
Scholkopf & Smola, 2018; Schubert et al., 2014).

Our algorithms are experimentally compared against several
baseline algorithms on 8 datasets, and these experiments
confirm the sub-linear update time proven in theory. These
experiments further demonstrate that

In this paper we first study the KDE problem in the dynamic
setting, where both the sets of data and query points change
over time. The objective is to dynamically update all the
KDE estimates µq for every q ∈ Q as data points are added
to X. Building on the framework for static KDE developed
by Charikar et al. (2020), our algorithm processes: (i) insertions and deletions of query points, and (ii) insertions of

• our dynamic KDE algorithm scales better to large
datasets than several baselines, including the fast static
KDE algorithm in (Charikar et al., 2020), and
• our dynamic similarity graph construction algorithm
runs faster than the fully-connected and k-nearest
neighbour similarity graph baselines, and produces
comparable clustering results when applying spectral
clustering.

1

University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom 2 University of
St Andrews, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: He Sun
<h.sun@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Our algorithm generalises to arbitrary kernel functions, with
different powers of n in the update time.

1

