Not all solutions are created equal: An analytical dissociation of
functional and representational similarity in deep linear neural networks

Lukas Braun 1 Erin Grant 2 Andrew M. Saxe 2
A

Abstract
A foundational principle of connectionism is that
perception, action, and cognition emerge from parallel computations among simple, interconnected
units that generate and rely on neural representations. Accordingly, researchers employ multivariate pattern analysis to decode and compare the
neural codes of artificial and biological networks,
aiming to uncover their functions. However, there
is limited analytical understanding of how a network’s representation and function relate, despite
this being essential to any quantitative notion of
underlying function or functional similarity. We
address this question using analysable two-layer
linear networks and numerical simulations in nonlinear networks. We find that function and representation are dissociated, allowing representational similarity without functional similarity and
vice versa. Further, we show that neither robustness to input noise nor the level of generalization
error constrain representations to the task. In contrast, networks robust to parameter noise have limited representational flexibility and must employ
task-specific representations. Our findings suggest that representational alignment reflects computational advantages beyond functional alignment alone, with significant implications for interpreting and comparing the representations of
connectionist systems.

B

C

D

Figure 1: Random walk. (A) A random walk on the solution
manifold of a two-layer linear network reveals that input and readout weights can change continuously, inducing changes in the
(B) network parametrisation and thus the (C) hidden-layer representations, while preserving the (D) network output.

1
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Gatsby Unit & Sainsbury Wellcome Centre,
University College London, London, UK. Correspondence to:
Lukas Braun <lukas.braun@psy.ox.ac.uk>.

pute with distributed representations (Rumelhart et al. 1986).
Accordingly, one might aim to identify function from networks observables such as connectivity weights and neural activity patterns; however, this is often complicated by
the inherent complexity and partial observability of these
systems. In particular, the structure of artificial and biological networks is often non-identifiable in the sense that
networks can be structurally distinct, yet implement the
same input-output mapping. For example, biophysical
neuron models can exhibit nearly identical functions at both
the neuron (Goldman et al. 2001) and network levels (Prinz
et al. 2004) despite considerable variation in their architecture (reviewed in Marder and Goaillard 2006; Albantakis
et al. 2024). Similarly, artificial neural networks (ANNs) are
almost always non-identifiable due to simple symmetries,
such as permutation-invariance of neurons (Sussmann 1992;
Albertini and Sontag 1993), scale-invariance of activation
functions (Neyshabur et al. 2015a), alongside more complex
symmetries arising from feature composition across layers
and from finite training data (Refinetti et al. 2021; Arous
et al. 2022). As modern networks are deep and heavily overparametrised (Zhang et al. 2021), they are inherently nonidentifiable, with many parametrisations yielding the same
input-output behaviour. Determining when parametrisations
become identifiable and understanding the consequences
of non-identifiability remain open problems (Roeder et al.
2021; Entezari et al. 2022; Vlačić and Bölcskei 2022; Ghosh
et al. 2022; Wang and Jordan 2021; Godfrey et al. 2022;
Martinelli et al. 2023; Bona-Pellissier et al. 2023; Lampinen
et al. 2024; Kori et al. 2024; Marconato et al. 2024).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Even deep linear networks exhibit both trivial and non-trivial
symmetries, making their parametrisation non-identifiable.
While any deep linear network can be re-parametrised as

1. Introduction
The parallel distributed processing hypothesis posits that
function in artificial and biological networks emerges from
interactions among simple interconnected units that com-

1

