Reinforcement Learning with Random Time Horizons

Enric Ribera Borrell * 1 2 Lorenz Richter * 1 3 Christof Schütte 1 2

Abstract

are random even in deterministic environments. In all those
cases the termination depends on previous (random) choices
and is therefore random itself. However, the common literature has so far largely ignored the fact that runtimes can
be random. In particular, policy gradient theorems typically
assume that they are either deterministic or infinite (Sutton
& Barto, 2018). Nonetheless, it is intuitively evident that
considering random times should have an effect on optimization formulas since the runtimes mostly depend on the
current policy such that in principle one should be careful
with taking gradients (cf. Nota & Thomas (2020)).

We extend the standard reinforcement learning
framework to random time horizons. While the
classical setting typically assumes finite and deterministic or infinite runtimes of trajectories, we argue that multiple real-world applications naturally
exhibit random (potentially trajectory-dependent)
stopping times. Since those stopping times typically depend on the policy, their randomness has
an effect on policy gradient formulas, which we
(mostly for the first time) derive rigorously in this
work both for stochastic and deterministic policies. We present two complementary perspectives,
trajectory or state-space based, and establish connections to optimal control theory. Our numerical
experiments demonstrate that using the proposed
formulas can significantly improve optimization
convergence compared to traditional approaches.

In this work, we close this theoretical gap and systematically investigate the effect of random time horizons in reinforcement learning problems. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:
• We extend the typical reinforcement learning framework to random time horizons, including (deterministic) finite and infinite runtimes as special cases.

1. Introduction

• We state corresponding (random time) policy gradient
theorems both for deterministic and stochastic policies.

The goal in reinforcement learning is to identify policies π
that maximize the expected return
"N
#
X
J(π) = Eπ
rn (Sn , An ) ,
(1)

• This allows us for the first time to rigorously derive
a trajectory-based gradient estimator for random time
horizons (for stochastic as well as deterministic policies) in discrete time.

n=0

• For deterministic policies we derive a novel modelbased policy gradient formula, which does not rely
on learning the Q-value function as in actor-critic approaches.

where the states Sn and the actions An run until a time N .
While the classical framework considers the case where N
is either finite and deterministic or infinite, runtimes can as
well be random. To name two examples, one could consider
robots that aim to reach a target in a noisy environment or
one could play a game whose terminating state depends on
reaching a certain level. Furthermore, considering stochastic
policies (as commonly done in practice in order to balance
exploration and exploitation) leads to the fact that runtimes

• In multiple numerical experiments, we systematically
investigate the effect of incorporating the randomness
of the time horizon in the gradient computation. For
most cases we can see significant performance improvements of our gradient formulas compared to the
standard ones, in particular in terms of convergence
speed.

*

Equal contribution 1 Zuse Institute Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany 2 Institute of Mathematics, Free University Berlin, 14195
Berlin, Germany 3 dida Datenschmiede GmbH, 10827 Berlin,
Germany. Correspondence to: Enric Ribera Borrell <ribera.borrell@zib.de>, Lorenz Richter <richter@zib.de>.

1.1. Related work

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Gradient based on-policy optimization in reinforcement
learning has been pioneered by Sutton et al. (1999), where
a policy gradient theorem for infinite time horizons and
1

