Understanding the Forgetting of (Replay-based) Continual Learning via Feature
Learning: Angle Matters

Hongyi Wan * 1 Shiyuan Ren * 1 Wei Huang 2 Miao Zhang 1 Xiang Deng 1 Yixin Bao 1 Liqiang Nie 1

Abstract

challenge in CL is the catastrophic forgetting phenomenon
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), where learning from new
distributions often causes a significant decline in the model’s
ability to retain knowledge from previous tasks.

Continual learning (CL) is crucial for advancing human-level intelligence, but its theoretical
understanding, especially regarding factors influencing forgetting, is still relatively limited. This
work aims to build a unified theoretical framework for understanding CL using feature learning
theory. Different from most existing studies that
analyze forgetting under linear regression model
or lazy training, we focus on a more practical twolayer convolutional neural network (CNN) with
polynomial ReLU activation for sequential tasks
within a signal-noise data model. Specifically, we
theoretically reveal how the angle between task
signal vectors influences forgetting that: acute
or small obtuse angles lead to benign forgetting,
whereas larger obtuse angles result in harmful
forgetting. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
replay method alleviates forgetting by expanding the range of angles corresponding to benign
forgetting. Our theoretical results suggest that
mid-angle sampling, which selects examples with
moderate angles to the prototype, can enhance
the replay method’s ability to mitigate forgetting.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
confirm our theoretical results and highlight the
effectiveness of our mid-angle sampling strategy.

Catastrophic forgetting in CL has prompted various empirical methods, which can be broadly categorized into three
types: regularization-based methods, replay-based methods, and architecture-based methods. Regularization-based
methods (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018a;
Benzing, 2022) selectively regularize parameter changes to
balance the learning of new and old tasks. Replay-based
methods (Rebuffi et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017;
Chaudhry et al., 2018b; Rolnick et al., 2019; Buzzega et al.,
2020; Boschini et al., 2022) approximate and restore old
data distributions by storing training samples or gradient information from previous tasks. Architecture-based methods
(Mallya et al., 2018; Ostapenko et al., 2019; Qin et al., 2021;
Kumar et al., 2021) allocate specific network parameters to
each task to counteract forgetting.
Despite the success of experimental studies in addressing
forgetting, theoretical understanding of forgetting in CL
remains limited. Most of the recent works concentrate on
linear models (Evron et al., 2022; 2023; Lin et al., 2023;
Ding et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024). Analyses beyond linear
models are primarily confined to the teacher-student setup
(Lee et al., 2021) and the neural tangent kernel (Bennani
et al., 2020; Doan et al., 2021). However, these theories
often rely on strong assumptions, such as infinitely wide networks or linearizing assumptions in the weight space, which
may not fully capture the generalization and forgetting dynamics in CL. As a result, a unified theoretical framework
for CL with practical neural networks remains absent.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) involves learning a series of tasks
in sequence (Wang et al., 2024), where the model adapts as
if all tasks are learned simultaneously. Unlike traditional
machine learning models which deal with static data, CL
focuses on dynamic and evolving distributions. A major

In this paper, we fill the theoretical gap in CL with neural
networks through the application of feature learning theory
(Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020; Cao et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023),
establishing a unified theoretical framework to analyze the
convergence, generalization and forgetting in CL. We provide a precise characterization to how the angle between task
signal vectors influences forgetting in polynomial ReLU
neural networks during continual learning. Moreover, we
reveal the mechanisms by which replay-based methods help
alleviate forgetting. Our theoretical findings inspire mid-

*
Equal contribution 1 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China 2 Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: Miao Zhang <zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn>, Wei Huang
<weihuang.uts@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

