Decision Making under the Exponential Family:
Distributionally Robust Optimisation with Bayesian Ambiguity Sets

Charita Dellaporta * 1 2 Patrick O’Hara * 3 Theodoros Damoulas 2 3 4

Abstract
14

Decision making under uncertainty is challenging as the data-generating process (DGP) is often
unknown. Bayesian inference proceeds by estimating the DGP through posterior beliefs on the
model’s parameters. However, minimising the
expected risk under these beliefs can lead to suboptimal decisions due to model uncertainty or
limited, noisy observations. To address this, we
introduce Distributionally Robust Optimisation
with Bayesian Ambiguity Sets (DRO-BAS) which
hedges against model uncertainty by optimising
the worst-case risk over a posterior-informed ambiguity set. We provide two such sets, based on
the posterior expectation (DRO-BASPE ) or the
posterior predictive (DRO-BASPP ) and prove that
both admit, under conditions, strong dual formulations leading to efficient single-stage stochastic
programs which are solved with a sample average approximation. For DRO-BASPE , this covers
all conjugate exponential family members while
for DRO-BASPP this is shown under conditions
on the predictive’s moment generating function.
Our DRO-BAS formulations outperform existing
Bayesian DRO on the Newsvendor problem and
achieve faster solve times with comparable robustness on the Portfolio problem.

BASP E
BASP P
BDRO

 = 0.2

µ, σ 2 ∼ Π
DGP

12

σ

10

8

6
15.0

17.5

20.0

22.5

25.0

27.5

30.0

32.5

µ

Figure 1. Visualisation of our BASPE and BASPP ambiguity sets
versus BDRO (Shapiro et al., 2023) for Normal likelihood with
Normal-Gamma posterior. BASPE contains distributions with expected (under the posterior Π) KL divergence from the model of at
most ϵ. BASPP contains distributions with KL divergence at most
ϵ from the posterior predictive distribution. BDRO minimises the
expected worst-case risk between each KL-based ambiguity set
based on posterior samples µ, σ 2 ∼ Π (orange crosses).

from the data-generating process (DGP). Given the observations, parametric model-based inference estimates the DGP
with a distribution Pθ indexed by parameters θ ∈ Θ in parameter space Θ ⊆ Rk . In a Bayesian framework, the data
is combined with a prior to obtain posterior beliefs about θ
and the decision maker can now minimise the risk under the
Bayesian estimator.
However, the estimator is likely different from the true DGP
due to model and data uncertainty: the number of observations may be small; the data may be noisy; and the prior
or model may be misspecified. Minimising the risk under
the Bayesian model inherits any estimation error, and leads
to overly optimistic decisions on out-of-sample scenarios
even if the estimator is unbiased: this phenomenon is called
the optimiser’s curse (Kuhn et al., 2019). For example, if
the number of observations is small and the prior is overly
concentrated, the decision will likely be overly optimistic.

1. Introduction
Decision-makers regularly attempt to optimise an objective
under uncertainty with only finite sampling access – via independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations –
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University College London, UK 2 Department of Statistics, University of Warwick,
Coventry, UK 3 Department of Computer Science, University of
Warwick, Coventry, UK 4 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Charita Dellaporta <h.dellaporta@ucl.ac.uk>,
Patrick O’Hara <Patrick.H.O-Hara@warwick.ac.uk>.

To hedge against the uncertainty of the estimated distribution, the field of Distributionally Robust Optimisation
(DRO) minimises the expected objective function under
the worst-case distribution that lies in an ambiguity set.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

