Risk-Sensitive Theory of Mind: Coordinating with Agents
of Unknown Bias using Cumulative Prospect Theory

Mason O. Smith 1 Wenlong Zhang 1

Abstract
Humans are often modeled as rational actors by
interactive agents when they are in fact frequently
observed to make biased decisions. This erroneous assumption may cause an agent’s model
of the human to fail, especially when interaction
occurs in bias-inducing settings that prompt risky
decisions. To address this, this paper formulates
a risk-sensitive multi-agent coordination problem
and presents the novel Risk-Sensitive Theory of
Mind (RS-ToM) framework that allows an autonomous agent to reason about and adapt to a
partner of unknown risk-sensitivity. In simulated
studies, we show that an agent with an RS-ToM is
able to better coordinate with such a partner when
compared to an agent that assumes their partner
is rational. Thus, we observe significant improvements to team performance, coordination fluency,
compliance with partner risk-preferences, and predictability. The presented results suggest that an
RS-ToM will be able to model and plan with partners that exhibit these risk-sensitive biases in the
real world.

Figure 1. Illustration of a (robot) agent reasoning about how its
(human) partner may hold irrationally optimistic or pessimistic
perceptions about entering a puddle, where they risk slipping and
losing their held item, and the best way to align its strategy to
improve team coordination in the Risky Overcooked task.

risk-averse) about their prospects when faced with a risky
decision (Kahneman & Tversky, 2013). For example, consider the task in Fig. 1 which demonstrates two strategies.
An optimistic human would likely prefer the purple strategy
that risks traversing puddle states since optimism discounts
the negative consequence of slipping. Conversely, a pessimistic human would likely prefer the orange strategy and
take an unnecessarily long detour to avoid any risk at all. An
autonomous agent that can reason about these preferences
can then deploy strategies that is best aligned with (biased)
human values to improve coordination.

1. Introduction
Autonomous agents have traditionally modeled their human partners as noisy-rational actors (Baker & Tenenbaum,
2014) and think in approximately the same way that machines do. While convenient, this can be an erroneous assumption as humans often display behavior that systemically
deviates from rational strategies. This is referred to as biased decision-making (Kahneman & Tversky, 1974). Most
relevant to the proposed work, humans tend to be either
irrationally optimistic (i.e., risk-seeking) or pessimistic (i.e.,
1

Humans are said to have risk-sensitive preferences that violate axioms of rational decision-making (Briggs, 2023) that
noisy-rationality relies upon. When violated, this leads to
the inability for an agent to understand human preferences
and accurately predict their actions. Thus, team performance can suffer when inadequate consideration of human

School of Manufacturing Systems and Networks, Arizona
State University, Mesa, Arizona USA. Correspondence to: Mason
O. Smith <mosmith3@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

