Feature out! Let Raw Image as Your Condition for Blind Face Restoration

Xinmin Qiu * 1 Gege Chen * 1 Bonan Li 1 Congying Han 1 Tiande Guo 1 Zicheng Zhang 1

Abstract

of extensive prior information during the restoration process. In recent years, generative models (Ho et al., 2020;
Rombach et al., 2022; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Liu et al.,
2022; Karras et al., 2022; Li et al., 2025) based on diffusion processes have demonstrated promising results in BFR.
These models have evolved from focusing on the transport
between Gaussian noise and real data distributions to facilitating transport between arbitrary real data distributions. In
contrast, bridge-based methods address the transport paths
between arbitrary distributions. An increasing number of
image processing tasks in the visual domain, including image inpainting, and image segmentation, are capitalizing on
this capability. Diffusion-based generative approaches offer
robust data priors and a comprehensive solution framework.
Particularly in image restoration tasks, which require transforming low-quality (LQ) images into high-quality (HQ)
counterparts with clear details and consistent content.

Blind face restoration (BFR), which involves converting low-quality (LQ) images into high-quality
(HQ) images, remains challenging due to complex and unknown degradations. While previous
diffusion-based methods utilize feature extractors
from LQ images as guidance, using raw LQ images directly as the starting point for the reverse
diffusion process offers a theoretically optimal solution. In this work, we propose Pseudo-Hashing
Image-to-image Schrödinger Bridge (P-I2SB), a
novel framework inspired by optimal mass transport problems, which enhances the restoration
potential of Schrödinger Bridge (SB) by correcting data distributions and effectively learning the
optimal transport path between any two data distributions. Notably, we theoretically explore and
identify that existing methods are limited by the
optimality and reversibility of solutions in SB,
leading to suboptimal performance. Our approach
involves preprocessing HQ images during training
by hashing them into pseudo-samples according
to a rule related to LQ images, ensuring structural
similarity in distribution. This guarantees optimal
and reversible solutions in SB, enabling the inference process to learn effectively and allowing
P-I2SB to achieve state-of-the-art results in BFR,
with more natural textures and retained inference
speed compared to previous methods.

Recent strategies to address these issues can be categorized
into two primary approaches. The first approach involves
utilizing non-diffusion-based methods for preliminary processing, followed by refinement through diffusion-based
techniques. Examples include DifFace (Yue & Loy, 2022)
and DR2 (Yue & Loy, 2022), which employ CNN-based
models like SwiIR (Liang et al., 2021) for initial restoration,
enhancing texture clarity using diffusion-based methods.
The second approach involves designing sophisticated feature extraction and fusion techniques to refine condition
guidance. Methods such as DiffBIR (Lin et al., 2023) and
PGDiff (Yang et al., 2024) incorporate external modules
to improve the integration of LQ images as condition guidance, which indirectly controls the inverse process. However, these approaches introduce additional complexities.
The preliminary models are constrained by their lightweight
nature, potentially leading to the loss of critical information. Meanwhile, the latter requires meticulously designed
modules to effectively guide the path, which can weaken
the inherent transport capabilities of diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Blind face restoration (BFR) (Yang et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2021a) presents a significant challenge in
the field of image restoration due to the complexity of degradation and the unknown causes of such degradation, along
with high demands for the quality of restoration results. As
a blind inverse problem, BFR necessitates the incorporation
*

Both these methods share a focus on learning generative
models for HQ images by using feature extractors and fusion
to derive and embed content features from LQ images into
the model as guidance conditions. However, the forward
and reverse processes of diffusion models are not inherently
linked to LQ images, limiting restoration performance due to
the constraints of LQ feature extraction. Thus, robust feature

1

Equal contribution School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. Correspondence to:
Congying Han <hancy@ucas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

