Nonparametric Modern Hopfield Models

Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 Bo-Yu Chen * 2 Dennis Wu 1 Feng Ruan 3 Han Liu 1 3

Abstract

Ramsauer et al., 2020) — a class of transformer-compatible
associative memories. In short, we present a nonparametric
framework1 , and then debuting efficient modern Hopfield
models with sub-quadratic complexity and appealing theoretical properties. Such a construction is of practical importance. As in many Hopfield-centric methods (Hu et al.,
2024a; Wu et al., 2024a; Xu et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024b;
Schimunek et al., 2023; Fürst et al., 2022; Paischer et al.,
2022; Seidl et al., 2022; Widrich et al., 2020), modern Hopfield models (and their derived deep learning layers) serve
as powerful alternatives to the attention mechanism with
additional functionalities, but lack efficient implementation
for gigantic deep models (Hu et al., 2023, Section C.2).

We present a nonparametric interpretation for
deep learning compatible modern Hopfield models and utilize this new perspective to debut efficient variants. Our key contribution stems from
interpreting the memory storage and retrieval processes in modern Hopfield models as a nonparametric regression problem subject to a set of
query-memory pairs. Interestingly, our framework not only recovers the known results from
the original dense modern Hopfield model but
also fills the void in the literature regarding efficient modern Hopfield models, by introducing
sparse-structured modern Hopfield models with
sub-quadratic complexity. We establish that this
sparse model inherits the appealing theoretical
properties of its dense analogue — connection
with transformer attention, fixed point convergence and exponential memory capacity. Additionally, we showcase the versatility of our framework by constructing a family of modern Hopfield
models as extensions, including linear, random
masked, top-K and positive random feature modern Hopfield models. Empirically, we validate our
framework in both synthetic and realistic settings
for memory retrieval and learning tasks. Code is
available at GitHub; future updates are on arXiv.

1

This issue becomes more prominent in this era of Large
Foundation Models (Bommasani et al., 2021). Foundation
models are huge transformer-based models pretrained on
massive datasets, and play a central role not only in machine
learning but also in a wide range of scientific domains, such
as ChatGPT (Brown et al., 2020; Floridi & Chiriatti, 2020)
for natural language, BloombergGPT (Wu et al., 2023) for
finance, DNABERT (Zhou et al., 2024a;b; Ji et al., 2021)
for genomics, and many others. To push toward Hopfieldbased large foundation models, this work provides a timely
efficient solution, back-boned by a solid theoretical ground.
Modern Hopfield models (Ramsauer et al., 2020), motivated
by the dense associative memory models (Demircigil et al.,
2017; Krotov & Hopfield, 2016), are (auto-)associative
memory models that (i) have exponential memory capacity,
(ii) retrieve stored patterns based on input queries with only
one retrieval step, and (iii) are compatible with deep learning architectures. They achieve (i) by adopting highly nonlinear energy functions, (ii) by adopting a memory-retrieval
dynamics ensuring monotonic minimization of the energy
function, and (iii) by the connection between their memory
retrieval dynamics and attention mechanism. Deepening (ii)
and (iii), Hu et al. (2023) and Wu et al. (2024b) propose a
theoretical framework for deriving modern Hopfield models

Introduction

We tackle the challenges in computational efficiency of
modern Hopfield models (Wu et al., 2024b; Hu et al., 2023;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Department of
Physics and Computer Science, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence
to:
Jerry Yao-Cheih Hu <jhu@u.northwestern.edu>,
Bo-Yu
Chen
<b12202023@ntu.edu.tw>,
Dennis
Wu
<hibb@u.northwestern.edu>,
Feng
Ruan
<fengruan@northwestern.edu>,
Han
Liu
<hanliu@northwestern.edu>.

1

After completing the draft, the authors became aware of the
independent study by Nguyen et al. (2024) on a nonparametric
(primal-dual) formulation for Transformer attention. To our knowledge, Nguyen et al. (2024) were the first to cast attention as an
ϵ-SVR solution (Awad et al., 2015; Vapnik, 2013; Kar & Karnick,
2012; Schölkopf & Smola, 2002). Our study presents a similar
framework but focuses on Hopfield-style associative memory.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

