MissScore: High-Order Score Estimation in the Presence of Missing Data

Wenqin Liu 1 Haoze Hou 2 Erdun Gao 3 Biwei Huang 4 Qiuhong Ke 5 Howard Bondell 1 Mingming Gong 1 6

Abstract

medical imaging (Song et al., 2021; Chung & Ye, 2022). Denoising Score Matching (DSM) (Vincent, 2011), an efficient
method for estimating the score of the data density from
samples, has become widely used in training score-based
generative models (Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2020).
Beyond the first-order score, high-order derivatives of the
data density, which we refer to as high-order scores, offer
more refined local approximations of the data distribution,
such as its curvature, and enable new model capabilities.
For instance, they can improve the mixing speed of sampling methods and provide insights into quantifying the
uncertainty in denoising problem (Dalalyan & Karagulyan,
2019; Sabanis & Zhang, 2019; Meng et al., 2021). Additionally, Lu et al. (2022) empirically demonstrated that incorporating high-order score matching improves the likelihood
of score-based diffusion ordinary differential equations on
both synthetic and real data, while maintaining high-quality
generation. Furthermore, high-order scores have been utilized in recovering causal structures (Rolland et al., 2022;
Sanchez et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024).

Score-based generative models are essential
in various machine learning applications, with
strong capabilities in generation quality. In particular, high-order derivatives (scores) of data density offer deep insights into data distributions,
building on the proven effectiveness of first-order
scores for modeling and generating synthetic data,
unlocking new possibilities for applications. However, learning them typically requires complete
data, which is often unavailable in domains such
as healthcare and finance due to data corruption,
acquisition constraints, or incomplete records. To
tackle this challenge, we introduce MissScore, a
novel framework for estimating high-order scores
in the presence of missing data. We derive objective functions for estimating high-order scores
under different missing data mechanisms and propose a new algorithm specifically designed to handle missing data effectively. Our empirical results demonstrate that MissScore accurately and
efficiently learns the high-order scores from incomplete data and generates high-quality samples,
resulting in strong performance across a range of
downstream tasks.

Despite their promise, learning high-order scores usually
requires training the model on complete data (Meng et al.,
2021; Lu et al., 2022). However, in many real-world scenarios, such as healthcare, finance, and social networks,
data often contain missing values due to privacy constraints
or high sampling costs (Rubin, 1976; Shpitser, 2016). A
straightforward approach to handling missing data is to impute the missing values and train the model on the imputed
dataset. However, imputation methods often compromise
data quality, and potentially leading to biased results and significantly degrading the performance of downstream tasks
(Ouyang et al., 2023). Furthermore, these methods fail to
capture the inherent uncertainty associated with missing
data, producing a distribution of imputed values that poorly
represents the true underlying data distribution (Van Buuren
& Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011; Gondara & Wang, 2018;
Wang et al., 2021). Some alternative approaches, such
as using generative adversarial networks (GANs) or variational auto-encoders (VAEs) to directly approximate the
data generation model from incomplete data (Li et al., 2019;
Gain & Shpitser, 2018), require training additional networks,
which can be computationally expensive and may also result in model inconsistency. To address this issue, some
works propose to explicitly constrain the learning objective

1. Introduction
The first-order derivative of the log data density, also known
as (Stein) score (Liu et al., 2016), plays an important role
in various machine learning applications, including data
synthesis (Song & Ermon, 2019; 2020; Kim et al., 2022),
super-resolution (Li et al., 2022), and inverse problems in
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Australia 2 Institute of Statistics and Big Data, Renmin University of China, China 3 Australian Institute for Machine Learning,
The University of Adelaide, Australia 4 Halıcıoğlu Data Science
Institute, UC San Diego, United States 5 Faculty of Information
Technology, Monash University, Australia 6 Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates. Correspondence to: Mingming
Gong <mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

