Design Considerations in Offline Preference-based RL

Alekh Agarwal 1 Christoph Dann 1 Teodor V. Marinov 1

Abstract

good policy from the preference dataset, with Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024b) being the
pioneering approach in this line of work. These approaches
are referred to as offline or direct alignment, since they do
not draw any fresh samples from the learned policy during
training, and only use the responses observed in the preference dataset. This paper focuses on this latter family of
algorithms, and studies how the properties of the data and
the learning objective affect the quality of the learned policy.

Offline algorithms for Reinforcement Learning
from Human Preferences (RLHF), which use only
a fixed dataset of sampled responses given an
input, and preference feedback among these responses, have gained increasing prominence in
the literature on aligning language models. In this
paper, we study how the different design choices
made in methods such as DPO, IPO, SLiC and
many variants influence the quality of the learned
policy, from a theoretical perspective. Our treatment yields insights into the choices of loss function, the policy which is used to normalize loglikelihoods, and also the role of the data sampling
policy. Notably, our results do not rely on the
standard reparameterization-style arguments used
to motivate some of the algorithms in this family,
which allows us to give a unified treatment to a
broad class of methods. We also conduct a small
empirical study to verify some of the theoretical
findings on a standard summarization benchmark.

Offline methods for RLHF such as DPO (Rafailov et al.,
2024b), IPO (Azar et al., 2024), SLiC (Zhao et al., 2022;
2023) and KTO (Ethayarajh et al., 2024), along with a growing number of variants have received a significant attention
in the academic literature owing to a number of attractive
properties. First, the removal of an explicit reward learning
step simplifies the number of modeling choices and steps
required for the RLHF pipeline, along with reducing the
demand on computational resources. Furthermore, the requirement to only evaluate a policy’s likelihood on a fixed
set of responses in the preference dataset, as opposed to generating responses from the learned policy as in online RL,
adds further resource efficiency. However, the growth of
this literature has also spurred an equally large body of work
now detailing the various deficiencies of these techniques,
such as the tendency of the algorithms to shift the probability mass outside the support of the observed responses
in the preference dataset, significant preference hacking behaviors and notorious collapses in the learning dynamics
with continued training (Pal et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024;
Rafailov et al., 2024a; Fisch et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
The now substantial literature on Reinforcement Learning
with Human Preferences (RLHF) can be broadly categorized into two families of methods. Given a dataset of
human preferences, the first class of online algorithms are
based on learning a reward function that assigns numerical
scores to a response y given some input x, such that the
high-scoring responses are preferred over the low-scoring
ones in our preference dataset. These methods subsequently
maximize this reward function using an online RL algorithm like PPO (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022) or Reinforce (Ahmadian et al.,
2024). A different approach forgoes the reward learning
step and uses a reparameterization trick to directly learn a

While some of the issues raised above have received theoretical treatment for specific approaches, the literature still
lacks a comprehensive theoretical foundation underlying
these offline RLHF techniques. Most of these techniques
have been motivated by some variant of the original reparameterization argument in the DPO paper, but the argument
hinges on unformalized assumptions regarding the coverage
of the data with respect to the learned policy, and does not
capture all the algorithmic variants which have subsequently
been developed in the literature.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research. Correspondence
to: Alekh Agarwal <alekhagarwal@google.com>, Christoph
Dann <chrisdann@google.com>, Teodor V. Marinov <tvmarinov@google.com>.

In this paper, we instead adopt the perspective of offline
RLHF as just solving a loss minimization problem on a
preference dataset, and study when the optimal solution

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

