Unified Breakdown Analysis for Byzantine Robust Gossip

Renaud Gaucher 1 2 Aymeric Dieuleveut 1 Hadrien Hendrikx 2

Abstract

even controlled by a hostile party. Such issues are modeled
as Byzantine node failures (Lamport et al., 1982), defined
as omniscient adversaries able to collude with each other.
Standard distributed learning methods are known to be vulnerable to these Byzantine attacks (Blanchard et al., 2017).
This has led to significant efforts in the development of robust distributed learning algorithms. From the first works
on Byzantine-robust SGD (Blanchard et al., 2017; Yin et al.,
2018; Alistarh et al., 2018; El-Mhamdi et al., 2020), methods have been developed to tackle stochastic noise using
Polyak momentum (Karimireddy et al., 2021; Farhadkhani
et al., 2022) and mixing strategies to handle heterogeneous
loss functions (Karimireddy et al., 2023; Allouah et al.,
2023). In parallel to these robust algorithms, efficient attacks have been developed to challenge Byzantine-robust
algorithms (Baruch et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020). Recently,
(Allouah et al., 2025) have used pre-aggregation adaptive
clipping to improve the robustness. To bridge the gap between algorithm performance and achievable accuracy in
the Byzantine setting, tight lower bounds have been constructed for the heterogeneous setting (Karimireddy et al.,
2023; Allouah et al., 2024). Yet, all these works rely on a
trusted central server to coordinate the training.

In decentralized machine learning, different devices communicate in a peer-to-peer manner to
collaboratively learn from each other’s data. Such
approaches are vulnerable to misbehaving (or
Byzantine) devices. We introduce F–RG, a general framework for building robust decentralized
algorithms with guarantees arising from robustsum-like aggregation rules F. We then investigate
the notion of breakdown point, and show an upper
bound on the number of adversaries that decentralized algorithms can tolerate. We introduce
a practical robust aggregation rule, coined CS+ ,
such that CS+ –RG has a near-optimal breakdown.
Other choices of aggregation rules lead to existing
algorithms such as ClippedGossip or NNA. We
give experimental evidence to validate the effectiveness of CS+ –RG and highlight the gap with
NNA, in particular against a novel attack tailored
to decentralized communications.

1. Introduction

In contrast, the decentralized case has been less explored.
Especially when the communication network, abstracted
as a graph where vertices represent computing units that
communicate through edges, is not fully connected (a.k.a.
sparse). For instance, understanding how many Byzantine
nodes can be tolerated over an arbitrary network before
a communication protocol fails is an open question (that
we address in this paper). Indeed, the network is often
assumed to be fully connected (El-Mhamdi et al., 2021;
Farhadkhani et al., 2023). If the work of (Fang et al., 2022)
addresses the case of sparse networks, they only consider
homogeneous losses. Closer to our setting, He et al. (2023);
Wu et al. (2023) tackle Byzantine optimization on sparse
networks with heterogeneous losses, however, they only
achieve suboptimal robustness, as their guarantees vanish
with either the number of nodes or the connectivity of the
network. Moreover, the communication scheme proposed in
He et al. (2023) relies on inaccessible information. Similarly,
there is a lack of attacks designed to challenge decentralized
optimization. Up to our knowledge, only He et al. (2023)
propose one, named Dissensus. Still, a few previous works

Distributed machine learning, in which the training process is performed on multiple computing units (or nodes),
responds to the increasingly distributed nature of data, its
sensitivity, and the rising computational cost of optimizing models. We investigate the decentralized paradigm
of distributed learning, in which nodes communicate in a
peer-to-peer manner within a communication network, in
opposition to distributed architectures relying on a central
server that coordinates all units.
Distributing the training over a large number of devices
introduces new security issues: software may be faulty, local data may be corrupted, and nodes can be hacked or
1

Centre de mathématiques appliquées, École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau France 2 Centre
Inria de l’Univ.
Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, LJK, Grenoble, France.
Correspondence to: Renaud Gaucher <renaud.gaucher@polytechnique.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

