CostFilter-AD: Enhancing Anomaly Detection through Matching Cost Filtering

Zhe Zhang 1 Mingxiu Cai 1 Hanxiao Wang 2 Gaochang Wu† 1 Tianyou Chai 1 Xiatian Zhu† 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) plays a critical role
in industrial quality inspection (Wu et al., 2024) by identifying anomalies at both image- and pixel-level using models
trained solely on normal samples (Zhao, 2023; Chen et al.,
2025). Being able to handle the scarcity and diversity of
anomalies, as well as address the long-tail distribution of
rare anomaly types through anomaly synthesis (Zhao, 2022)
have been favored in particular. Existing approaches predominantly follow a “single model per category” paradigm
(Liu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022),
while effective, they often result in higher training costs and
reduced scalability as anomaly categories expand. Thus,
multi-class UAD with a unified model has emerged as a
more scalable approach (Lu et al., 2023; He et al., 2024b;
Yao et al., 2024). However, the inherent challenges of this
task persist due to the diverse characteristics of anomalies
across categories, particularly for subtle anomalies around
small areas, with low contrast, or proximity to normals,
making the unified detection extremely challenging.

Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) seeks
to localize the anomaly mask of an input image
with respect to normal samples. Either by reconstructing normal counterparts (reconstructionbased) or by learning an image feature embedding
space (embedding-based), existing approaches
fundamentally rely on image-level or featurelevel matching to derive anomaly scores. Often, such a matching process is inaccurate yet
overlooked, leading to sub-optimal detection. To
address this issue, we introduce the concept of
cost filtering, borrowed from classical matching tasks, such as depth and flow estimation,
into the UAD problem. We call this approach
CostFilter-AD. Specifically, we first construct a
matching cost volume between the input and normal samples, comprising two spatial dimensions
and one matching dimension that encodes potential matches. To refine this, we propose a cost
volume filtering network, guided by the input
observation as an attention query across multiple feature layers, which effectively suppresses
matching noise while preserving edge structures
and capturing subtle anomalies. Designed as a
generic post-processing plug-in, CostFilter-AD
can be integrated with either reconstruction-based
or embedding-based methods. Extensive experiments on MVTec-AD and VisA benchmarks validate the generic benefits of CostFilter-AD for
both single- and multi-class UAD tasks. Code and
models will be released at https://github.
com/ZHE-SAPI/CostFilter-AD.

Existing UAD methods can be broadly divided into two categories in terms of model design. Reconstruction-based methods detect anomalies by comparing residuals or similarities
between inputs and their reconstructions. These methods
focus on designing networks, such as UNet (Zhao, 2023),
Transformer (Lu et al., 2023), and Diffusion (Yao et al.,
2024), to address challenges like the “identical shortcut” issue and limited reconstruction capability (You et al., 2022).
Such challenges often lead to reconstructions that either retain anomalies in a normal-like style or suffer from undesirable spatial misalignments. On the other hand, embeddingbased methods (Roth et al., 2022; Damm et al., 2025) operate on the assumption that models trained on normal samples
cannot effectively extract features deviating from the normal
distribution. This enables these methods to separate anomalous features from normal clusters derived from pre-trained
models. Both approaches typically incorporate synthetic
anomalies (Zhao, 2022; Zhang et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
2025) to simulate real-world anomalies during training, enabling unsupervised learning. In essence, deriving the final
anomaly score map in both methods is about matching the
input sample with templates (reconstructed or normal training samples) at the image- or feature-level, with anomaly
regions exhibiting relatively higher matching costs.

1

State Key Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for Process
Industries, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China. 2 Meta,
London, U.K. 3 Surrey Institute for People-Centred Artificial
Intelligence, and Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K. Correspondence
to: Gaochang Wu <wugc@mail.neu.edu.cn>, Xiatian Zhu
<Eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

