Disentangled Graph Spectral Domain Adaptation

Liang Yang 1 Xin Chen 1 Jiaming Zhuo 1 Di Jin 2 Chuan Wang 3 Xiaochun Cao 4 Zhen Wang 5
Yuanfang Guo 6

The distribution shifts and the scarcity of labels prevent graph learning methods, especially
graph neural networks (GNNs), from generalizing across domains. Compared to Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) with embedding alignment, Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation
(UGDA) becomes more challenging in light of
the attribute and topology entanglement in the
representation. Beyond embedding alignment,
UGDA turns to topology alignment but is limited
by the ability of the employed topology model
and the estimation of pseudo labels. To alleviate this issue, this paper proposed a Disentangled
Graph Spectral Domain adaptation (DGSDA) by
disentangling attribute and topology alignments
and directly aligning flexible graph spectral filters
beyond topology. Specifically, Bernstein polynomial approximation, which mimics the behavior
of the function to be approximated to a remarkable degree, is employed to capture complicated
topology characteristics and avoid the expensive
eigenvalue decomposition. Theoretical analysis
reveals the tight GDA bound of DGSDA and the
rationality of polynomial coefficient regularization. Quantitative and qualitative experiments
justify the superiority of the proposed DGSDA.

Target

Model
(Topology)
Alignment

Attribute
Alignment

Source

Attribute and Topology Decomposition

Abstract

aligned
attributes

Source
Domain
(Supervised)
aligned model

Spectral
Alignment
Target
Domain
(Unsupervised)

disentanglement

Figure 1. The proposed Disentangled Graph Spectral Domain
Adaptation (DGSDA). The disentanglement is between attribute
and model/topology alignments.

1. Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous as a language for modeling complex
relational data in diverse fields, ranging from social networks to traffic to the sciences (Hu et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2022). Research on graphs has been conducted in many disciplines, including graph theory in mathematics (Bondy &
Murty, 2008), network science in physics (Barabási, 2013),
and graph representation learning in artificial intelligence
(Cui et al., 2019; Guan et al., 2024; Zhuo et al., 2023;
Fang et al., 2022). Unfortunately, their essential complexity makes labeling graphs more difficult and requires more
domain knowledge than labeling images, text, and speech.
Although the quest for the foundation model has come a
long way in many fields (Bommasani et al., 2021), e.g., LM
in NLP and CV (Zhao et al., 2023), the distribution shifts
and scarcity of labels prevent graph learning methods, especially graph neural networks (GNNs), from generalizing
across domains, and impede the design of graph foundation
models (Li et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b).

1

Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Calculation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology,
Tianjin, China 2 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, China 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing JiaoTong University, Beijing, China 4 School of
Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yatsen University, Shenzhen, China 5 School of Artificial Intelligence,
OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China 6 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Di Jin <jindi@tju.edu.cn>.

Unsupervised graph learning methods have demonstrated
the potential to learn transferable representations without
relying on labeled data (Yang et al., 2025; Zhuo et al.,
2024). However, these methods often assume a singledomain setting, overlooking cross-domain distribution shifts.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) transfers knowledge from label-rich domains to unlabeled target domains
with distribution discrepancies. Embedding alignment is

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

