V ECTOR G RIMOIRE: Codebook-based Shape Generation
under Raster Image Supervision

Marco Cipriano * 1 Moritz Feuerpfeil * 1 Gerard de Melo 1

Im2Vec Ours

Abstract
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) is a popular format on the web and in the design industry. However, despite the great strides made in generative modeling, SVG has remained underexplored
due to the discrete and complex nature of such
data. We introduce G RIMOIRE, a text-guided
SVG generative model that is comprised of two
modules: A Visual Shape Quantizer (VSQ) learns
to map raster images onto a discrete codebook
by reconstructing them as vector shapes, and an
Auto-Regressive Transformer (ART) models the
joint probability distribution over shape tokens,
positions, and textual descriptions, allowing us to
generate vector graphics from natural language.
Unlike existing models that require direct supervision from SVG data, G RIMOIRE learns shape
image patches using only raster image supervision which opens up vector generative modeling
to significantly more data. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method by fitting G RIMOIRE
for closed filled shapes on MNIST and Emoji, and
for outline strokes on icon and font data, surpassing previous image-supervised methods in generative quality and the vector-supervised approach
in flexibility.

Figure 1. Generative results for fonts and icons from G RIMOIRE
and Im2Vec. Since Im2Vec does not accept any conditioning, we
sample after training Im2Vec only on icons of stars or the letter A,
respectively. For G RIMOIRE we use the models trained on the full
dataset conditioned on the respective class.

Isola et al., 2017; Saharia et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021),
SVG generation remains a less explored task. Prior work
aimed at training a deep neural network for this goal has
primarily adopted large language models (LLMs) to address
the problem (Wu et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024). In general,
existing approaches share two key limitations: they necessitate SVG data for direct supervision, which inherently
limits the available data and increases the burden of data
pre-processing, and they are not easily extendable when it
comes to visual attributes such as color or stroke properties.
The extensive pre-processing is required due to the diverse
nature of an SVG file that can express shapes as a series of
different basic primitives such as circles, lines, and squares
– each having different properties – that can overlap and
occlude each other.

1. Introduction

An ideal generative model for SVG should however benefit
from visual guidance for supervision, which is not possible
when merely training to reproduce tokenized SVG primitives, as there is no differentiable mapping to the generated
raster imagery. In this paper, we present G RIMOIRE, a novel
pipeline explicitly designed to generate SVG files with only
raster image supervision. Our approach incorporates a differentiable rasterizer, DiffVG (Li et al., 2020), to bridge
the vector graphics primitives and the raster image domain.
We adopt a VQ-VAE recipe (Van Den Oord et al., 2017),
which pairs a codebook-based discrete auto-encoder with
an auto-regressive Transformer that models the image space
implicitly by learning the distribution of codes that resemble them. We find this approach particularly promising for

In the domain of computer graphics, Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) has emerged as a versatile format, enabling the
representation of 2D graphics with precision and scalability. SVG is an XML-based vector graphics format that
describes a series of parametrized shape primitives rather
than a limited-resolution raster of pixel values. While modern generative models have made significant advancements
in producing high-quality raster images (Ho et al., 2020;
*
Equal contribution 1 Hasso Plattner Institute. Correspondence
to: Marco Cipriano <marco.cipriano@hpi.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

