Preference learning made easy:
Everything should be understood through win rate

Lily H. Zhang 1 Rajesh Ranganath 1 2

Abstract

ment learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano
et al., 2017) on state-of-the-art and high-profile language
models such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024). The goal of learning
from preference data is to finetune powerful base language
models to output generations more in line with human preferences (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022), motivated by the fact that pretraining on internet-scale data has
enabled large language models to exhibit fluent generations
of text (Minaee et al., 2024) but not necessarily responses
aligned with what humans prefer to see.

Preference learning, or the task of aligning generative models to preference comparison data, has yet
to reach the conceptual maturity of classification,
density estimation, etc. To close this gap, this
work presents a framework to understand preference learning starting from the sampling distribution of pairwise preference data. First, we prove
that the only evaluation of a generative model that
respects both preferences and prevalences in the
data distribution is a form of win rate, justifying
win rate as the focal point to understand preference learning. We then analyze preference learning methods as win rate optimization (WRO) or
non-WRO. We present novel instances of WRO
beyond existing examples (RLHF, NLHF) and
identify two key theoretical benefits of all such
methods. We prove that common non-WRO methods like DPO and SFT on preferred samples lack
these properties and suggest ways to mitigate such
theoretical limitations. We also show that WRO
underperforms in practice due optimization difficulties and that optimization success predicts
performance better than choices which affect the
objective’s solution. Our analysis highlights best
practices for existing methods and provides recommendations for future research, guided by the
principle that one should either align non-WRO
methods more closely with WRO or improve the
optimization of WRO objectives.

In recent years, the landscape of algorithms and evaluations
for preference learning has grown significantly (Kaufmann
et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024), resulting in a complex and
often fragmented field that can pose challenges for practitioners and researchers deciding where to focus their efforts.
Whereas well-established machine learning tasks such as
classification are grounded in principles such as maximum
likelihood, preference learning lacks such a unifying conceptual foundation. To advance the field, we thus first ask:
what underlying principles underpin preference learning?
We address this question by developing a framework starting from the sampling distribution implied by pairwise preference data. We first tackle the question of evaluating a
model under the preference learning paradigm. We show
that the only evaluation of a generative model rooted in
the preference data sampling distribution itself is a form
of win rate we call h-win rate; any other notions of good
either do not evaluate the model or respect the preference
data, or are based on assumptions outside of either (Section 3). From this insight, we introduce a win rate-centric
framework for understanding the landscape of preference
learning methods. Given h-win rate is the only relevant
evaluation without additional assumptions, we relate common preference learning algorithms to directly optimizing
for win rate, dividing the preference learning space into
win rate optimization (WRO) and non-WRO objectives. In
Section 4, we generalize the space of WRO beyond existing methods in the literature and identify two theoretical
benefits of such methods: (1) win rate-correspondence, i.e.,
optimizing the objective corresponds to optimizing for hwin rate; and (2) win rate-consistency, i.e., the solution can
achieve the maximum win rate possible over a competitor

1. Introduction
Learning from preference data, often referred to as human
feedback, has emerged as a key step in training large language models, particularly given the success of reinforce1

Center for Data Science, New York University, New York,
USA 2 Courant Institute, New York University, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Lily H. Zhang <lily.h.zhang@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

