CogReact: A Reinforced Framework to Model Human Cognitive Reaction
Modulated by Dynamic Intervention

Songlin Xu 1 Xinyu Zhang 1

Abstract

Battleday et al., 2021; Peterson et al., 2021) predominantly
concentrates on modeling human cognition under standard
and ideal conditions, often neglecting the nuanced impact
of environmental stimuli (Do et al., 2021). Alternatively,
some studies treat environmental stimuli as a constant factor
throughout the cognitive process (Bourgin et al., 2019).

Using deep neural networks as computational
models to simulate cognitive processes can provide key insights into human behavioral dynamics.
Challenges arise when environments are highly
dynamic, obscuring stimulus-behavior relationships. However, the majority of current research
focuses on simulating human cognitive behaviors
under ideal conditions, neglecting the influence of
environmental disturbances. We propose CogReact, which integrates drift-diffusion with deep
reinforcement learning to simulate granular effects of dynamic environmental stimuli on the human cognitive process. Quantitatively, it improves
cognition modeling by considering the temporal
effect of environmental stimuli on the cognitive
process and captures both subject-specific and
stimuli-specific behavioral differences. Qualitatively, it captures general trends in the human
cognitive process under stimuli. We examine our
approach under diverse environmental influences
across various cognitive tasks. Overall, it demonstrates a powerful, data-driven methodology to
simulate, align with, and understand the vagaries
of human cognitive response in dynamic contexts.

We propose that a more nuanced modeling approach is imperative, particularly when dealing with dynamic stimuli
that can fluctuate over time, contingent upon user performance. This nuanced approach involves stimuli variation at
fine-grained timescales, exerting a continuous influence on
human cognitive behaviors. To illustrate, consider an animated visual stimulus conveying time pressure (Slobounov
et al., 2000). Such stimuli inform users of the passage of
time, evoking sensations of pressure. Representing these
stimuli as a binary existence indicator would oversimplify
their nuanced effects. Therefore, this paper raises a fundamental question: How to simulate the impact of dynamic
environmental stimuli on the regulation of human cognitive behaviors with precision at a fine-grained level?
We address this question starting by examining how dynamic time pressure stimuli (Zur & Breznitz, 1981) influence cognitive performance, particularly within the context
of a math arithmetic task, a widely utilized benchmark for
evaluating human cognition and logical reasoning (Lin et al.,
2011; Judd & Klingberg, 2021; Daitch et al., 2016). The
dynamism inherent in time pressure feedback encompasses
two primary facets. Firstly, the presentation of time pressure can be dynamic, involving the delivery of progressively
changing visual frames over time (Fig. 5(a)), thereby instilling a sense of urgency. Secondly, the presence of time
pressure may vary dynamically across different trials. Since
time pressure stimuli represent a well-established feedback
modality to modulate human cognitive performance (Cheng,
2017; Slobounov et al., 2000; Moore & Tenney, 2012; Edland & Svenson, 1993; Whittaker et al., 2016), modeling
such a modulation effect holds the promise to offer valuable insights in understanding human cognition (Jaffe et al.,
2023) and facilitating adaptive intervention design for regulating user performance (Costa et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Modeling human cognition is a fundamental challenge in
understanding human behaviors (Jaffe et al., 2023). In particular, modeling the effects of environmental dynamics (e.g.,
stress (Cheng, 2017) and feedback (Costa et al., 2019)) on
cognitive performance could elucidate behavioral responses
to tasks (Cheng, 2017) and inform the design of feedback
mechanisms to augment cognition (Costa et al., 2019). However, prior research (Jaffe et al., 2023; Peterson et al., 2018;
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Correspondence to: Songlin Xu <soxu@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we introduce a systematic hybrid framework
(CogReact) depicted in Fig. 1. This framework integrates
1

