Efficient Network Automatic Relevance Determination
Hongwei Zhang 1 2 3 Ziqi Ye 4 3 Xinyuan Wang 5 3 Xin Guo 3 Zenglin Xu 1 3 Yuan Cheng 1 3 Zixin Hu 1 3
Yuan Qi 1 6 3

Abstract

1. INTRODUCTION
Multiple-input Multiple-output Regression is a powerful
modeling framework widely applied in quantitative disciplines such as finance and genomics (Zellner, 1962; Breiman
& Friedman, 1997; Hastie et al., 2009; Wang, 2010; He
et al., 2016). In biological research, this approach is often used to explore how molecular-level features (microphenotypes) influence broader phenotypic traits (macrophenotypes) (Stephens, 2013; Akbani et al., 2014). A typical
example involves examining how gene expression levels or
protein concentrations, influence disease states or developmental outcomes. However, biological data often involve
ultra-high-dimensional features, with thousands of genes or
proteins contributing to a limited number of observable samples (Moon et al., 2019). Such high-dimensional settings
present significant computational challenges.

We propose Network Automatic Relevance Determination (NARD), an extension of ARD for
linearly probabilistic models, to simultaneously
model sparse relationships between inputs X ∈
Rd×N and outputs Y ∈ Rm×N , while capturing
the correlation structure among the Y . NARD
employs a matrix normal prior which contains a
sparsity-inducing parameter to identify and discard irrelevant features, thereby promoting sparsity in the model. Algorithmically, it iteratively
updates both the precision matrix and the relationship between Y and the refined inputs. To
mitigate the computational inefficiencies of the
O(m3 + d3 ) cost per iteration, we introduce Sequential NARD, which evaluates features sequentially, and a Surrogate Function Method, leveraging an efficient approximation of the marginal
likelihood and simplifying the calculation of determinant and inverse of an intermediate matrix.
Combining the Sequential update with the Surrogate Function method further reduces computational costs. The computational complexity per
iteration for these three methods is reduced to
O(m3 + p3 ), O(m3 + d2 ), O(m3 + p2 ), respectively, where p ≪ d is the final number of features
in the model. Our methods demonstrate significant improvements in computational efficiency
with comparable performance on both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

Empirical studies suggest that only a subset of specific
molecular features significantly impacts the observed phenotypes. This highlights the need for sparse regression
models that focus on the most relevant features, reducing
over-fitting and enhancing interpretability. Furthermore,
macro-phenotypes often exhibit sparse network structures,
where only a few phenotypes are connected via interaction
relationship. This sparse structure highlights the need for
approaches that capture not only the individual effects of inputs but also the inter-dependencies among multiple outputs.
Emerging methodologies for multi-omics integration and
cross-modal network information processing capitalize on
this principle, reflecting the fact that biological mechanisms
arise from the complex interplay of numerous molecular
events and their interactions (Cohen et al., 2022; Kristensen
et al., 2014).

1

Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 2 School of Data Science, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China 3 Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science, Shanghai, China 4 Department of Applied
Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom 5 Eberly College of Science, Pennsylvania State University, PA, United State 6 Zhongshan Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Zixin Hu
<huzixin@fudan.edu.cn>, Yuan Qi <qiyuan@fudan.edu.cn>.

Another related example is the study of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL). Some genetic variants can affect
the expression of multiple genes, acting as potential confounders in gene networks. Gene expression data alone are
unable to fully capture the gene activities. Ignoring these
effects can result in spurious associations, leading to false
positives or false negatives. Incorporating covariates such as
genetic variants from eQTL studies improves the estimation
of relationships among genes at the transcriptional level.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we focus on linearly probabilistic models
1

