MixBridge: Heterogeneous Image-to-Image Backdoor Attack through
Mixture of Schrödinger Bridges

Shixi Qin 1 Zhiyong Yang 1 Shilong Bao 1 Shi Wang 2 Qianqian Xu 2 Qingming Huang 1 3 2

Abstract

the efficacy of MixBridge. The code is available at: https://github.com/qsx830/
MixBridge.

This paper focuses on implanting multiple heterogeneous backdoor triggers in bridge-based diffusion models designed for complex and arbitrary
input distributions. Existing backdoor formulations mainly address single-attack scenarios and
are limited to Gaussian noise input models. To
fill this gap, we propose MixBridge, a novel
diffusion Schrödinger bridge (DSB) framework
to cater to arbitrary input distributions (taking
I2I tasks as special cases). Beyond this trait, we
demonstrate that backdoor triggers can be injected
into MixBridge by directly training with poisoned image pairs. This eliminates the need for
the cumbersome modifications to stochastic differential equations required in previous studies,
providing a flexible tool to study backdoor behavior for bridge models. However, a key question arises: can a single DSB model train multiple backdoor triggers? Unfortunately, our theory shows that when attempting this, the model
ends up following the geometric mean of benign
and backdoored distributions, leading to performance conflict across backdoor tasks. To overcome this, we propose a Divide-and-Merge strategy to mix different bridges, where models are
independently pre-trained for each specific objective (Divide) and then integrated into a unified model (Merge). In addition, a Weight Reallocation Scheme (WRS) is also designed to enhance the stealthiness of MixBridge. Empirical
studies across diverse generation tasks speak to

Warning: This paper contains model outputs that may
be offensive in nature.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable performance across various domains, including image (Ho et al.,
2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans), text (Lou
et al.), audio (Kong et al.), speech generation (Huang et al.,
2022), and others (Wen et al., 2022). Alongside the success
of diffusion models, potential risks have emerged, such as
vulnerability to backdoor attacks. In a backdoor attack scenario, the attacker secretly implants triggers into a victim
model. Once unsuspecting users deploy the victim model in
their applications, these triggers can be activated to produce
harmful content (e.g., Not-Suitable-For-Work images).
So far, various backdoor attack methods have been developed to reveal the mechanism of backdoor attacks in diffusion models. Existing research primarily focuses on two specific formulations: unconditional diffusion models (Chou
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a; Chou et al., 2024) and conditional Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models (Zhai et al.,
2023; Struppek et al., 2023; Shan et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2025). However, we argue that two crucial scenarios remain
unexplored in the current literature. First, existing backdoor
formulations are designed for diffusion-based models that
exclusively take Gaussian noise as input. Unfortunately,
real-world tasks often require models to handle more arbitrary and complex input distributions, rather than pure
noise. For example, tasks like super-resolution and image
inpainting use images as input in an Image-to-Image (I2I)
generation context. Second, most studies merely focus on
the single backdoor attack. Yet in practice, malicious attackers may consider heterogeneous backdoor attacks, such as
injecting multiple backdoors with different triggers simultaneously, to enhance stealthiness and maximize the impact
of their attack.

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China 2 Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of
Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100190, China 3 Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management (BDKM), University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 101408, China. Correspondence to: Zhiyong Yang <yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang
<qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address these issues, our goal in this paper is two-fold:
1

