ConText: Driving In-context Learning for Text Removal and Segmentation

Fei Zhang 1 2 * Pei Zhang 3 Baosong Yang 3 Fei Huang 3 Yanfeng Wang 1 Ya Zhang 1 †

Abstract
This paper presents the first study on adapting the
visual in-context learning (V-ICL) paradigm to
optical character recognition tasks, specifically
focusing on text removal and segmentation. Most
existing V-ICL generalists employ a reasoningas-reconstruction approach: they turn to using
a straightforward image-label compositor as
the prompt and query input, and then masking the
query label to generate the desired output. This
direct prompt confines the model to a challenging
single-step reasoning process. To address this,
we propose a task-chaining compositor in the
form of image-removal-segmentation,
providing an enhanced prompt that elicits reasoning with enriched intermediates. Additionally, we
introduce context-aware aggregation, integrating
the chained prompt pattern into the latent query
representation, thereby strengthening the model’s
in-context reasoning. We also consider the issue of visual heterogeneity, which complicates
the selection of homogeneous demonstrations in
text recognition. Accordingly, this is effectively
addressed through a simple self-prompting strategy, preventing the model’s in-context learnability from devolving into specialist-like, contextfree inference. Collectively, these insights culminate in our ConText model, which achieves new
state-of-the-art across both in- and out-of-domain
benchmarks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Ferenas/ConText.

Figure 1. Comparison with previous V-ICL paradigm and our proposed OCR-adapted in-context system. Instead of relying simply
on task-specific tuning, our ConText focuses on chaining together
related visual tasks to leverage their mutual benefits, thereby embracing a more powerful in-context understanding and reasoning.

powerful reasoning capabilities. Notably, in-context learning (ICL) (Rubin et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2022; Wies et al.,
2023), a method deserving of particular attention, empowers
models with training-free learning ability by using merely a
few input-output examples (demonstrations) as the context.
This efficient LLM-inspired paradigm has sparked interest
among computer vision researchers, leading to the exploration of visual in-context learning (V-ICL) paradigm (Bar
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b;d; Bai et al., 2024), and
paving the way for developing vision-centric contexts.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant advances due to
the emergence of large language models (LLMs) (Brown
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023), enabling models with

Similar to ICL defined in natural language processing,
current works have regulated V-ICL as a reasoning-fromdemonstration process, where an in-context prompt is defined as an image-label pair, guiding any query image
input to generate its target output. To instantiate this, mainstream approaches (Bar et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b;d;
Fang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024) proposed to composite
two image-label pairs into a single visually grid-like input, with one pair serving as the query by masking the label
regions, and then perform mask-wise reconstruction based
on MAE (He et al., 2022). This in-painting-based baseline

*Work was done during the internship at Tongyi Lab
<ferenas@sjtu.edu.cn>. 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University (Yanfeng Wang and Ya Zhang are with School of Artificial Intelligence)
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Ya Zhang <ya zhang@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

