From Black Boxes to Transparent Minds: Evaluating and Enhancing
the Theory of Mind in Multimodal Large Language Models

Xinyang Li * 1 Siqi Liu * 1 Bochao Zou † 1 Jiansheng Chen 1 Huimin Ma † 1

Abstract

they, like the robot TARS in Interstellar, accurately comprehend and execute both explicit and implicit tasks assigned
by humans (Figure 1) ? It leds to the question that whether
large models have ToM. Evaluating the ToM capabilities
of large models is crucial for understanding their potential
to meaningfully engage with human communication and
reasoning. Some works utilized the classical Sally-Anne to
test the ToM capabilities of machines (Nematzadeh et al.,
2018; Grant et al., 2017; Ullman, 2023; Lore et al., 2024;
Kosinski, 2024). While these evaluation methods offer preliminary insights into the ToM capabilities of large models,
they remain limited in scope.

As large language models evolve, there is growing anticipation that they will emulate humanlike Theory of Mind (ToM) to assist with routine
tasks. However, existing methods for evaluating machine ToM focus primarily on unimodal
models and largely treat these models as black
boxes, lacking an interpretative exploration of
their internal mechanisms. In response, this study
adopts an approach based on internal mechanisms
to provide an interpretability-driven assessment
of ToM in multimodal large language models
(MLLMs). Specifically, we first construct a multimodal ToM test dataset, GridToM, which incorporates diverse belief testing tasks and perceptual
information from multiple perspectives. Next,
our analysis shows that attention heads in multimodal large models can distinguish cognitive information across perspectives, providing evidence
of ToM capabilities. Furthermore, we present a
lightweight, training-free approach that significantly enhances the model’s exhibited ToM by
adjusting in the direction of the attention head. 1

Most existing studies adopt unimodal approaches, focusing
on either text or videos, and lack comprehensive agent-level
information (Gandhi et al., 2021; Nematzadeh et al., 2018;
Grant et al., 2017; Le et al., 2019; Amirizaniani et al., 2024).
In contrast, human social interactions rely on reasoning
about others’ mental states by integrating multimodal inputs, such as visual and linguistic data. Although some
studies (Jin et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2025) have attempted to
extend ToM evaluations of large models to multimodal environments using video-based datasets, their datasets often
incorporate excessive high-level information, such as spatial relationships, agents’ tasks, and action trajectories (Ma
et al., 2023). Moreover, in real-world datasets, an agent’s
perception of environmental events cannot be accurately
captured. For example, in the MMToM-QA dataset (Jin
et al., 2024), it is impossible to determine from the video
modality alone whether the protagonist truly “saw” the plate.
Consequently, the accuracy of ToM evaluations may depend
on the quality of perceptual information, which could lead
to correct or incorrect performance for reasons unrelated
to genuine ToM capabilities. Unlike these prior works, we
construct a dataset that is based on 2d grid world, enabling
large models to perceive the full context of the physical
world through the video modality while supplementing cognitive perspective information for each agent through the
text modality.

1. Introduction
Theory of Mind (ToM) is a psychological term referring
to infer mental states to self and others. This capability is
fundamental to human social cognition and emotional understanding. In recent years, the rapid development of large
models raised researchers’ consideration: can they interact
with us in a manner similar to humans? For example, could
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Bochao
Zou <zoubochao@ustb.edu.cn>, Huimin Ma <mhmpub@ustb.edu.cn>.

Furthermore, the majority of assessments of ToM capabilities in large models take a black-box approach, relying
heavily on question-answering tasks to infer conclusions
(Xu et al., 2024), as demonstrated in Figure 1, while lacking

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Project Page: https://annaisavailable.github.
io/GridToM

1

