C HAMELEON: A Flexible Data-mixing Framework
for Language Model Pretraining and Finetuning
Wanyun Xie 1 Francesco Tonin 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

significantly influences the generalization capabilities and
downstream performance of LLMs.

Training data mixtures greatly impact the generalization performance of large language models. Existing domain reweighting methods often
rely on costly weight computations and require
retraining when new data is introduced. To this
end, we introduce a flexible and efficient data
mixing framework, C HAMELEON, that employs
leverage scores to quantify domain importance
within a learned embedding space. We first construct a domain affinity matrix over domain embeddings. The induced leverage scores determine
a mixture that upweights domains sharing common representations in embedding space. This
formulation allows direct transfer to new data by
computing the new domain embeddings. In experiments, we demonstrate improvements over
three key scenarios: (i) our computed weights improve performance on pretraining domains with
a fraction of the compute of existing methods;
(ii) C HAMELEON can adapt to data changes without proxy retraining, boosting few-shot reasoning accuracies when transferred to new data; (iii)
our method enables efficient domain reweighting in finetuning, consistently improving test perplexity on all finetuning domains over uniform
mixture. Our code is available at https://
github.com/LIONS-EPFL/Chameleon.

Domain reweighting, which involves adjusting the relative
contributions of different domains in the training dataset,
has emerged as a critical aspect of LLM training (Gao et al.,
2020; Du et al., 2022). However, obtaining optimal domain
weights is a challenging problem due to factors such as data
quality, diversity, inter-domain overlap, and task-specific
complexities (Shen et al., 2023; Longpre et al., 2024).
Early domain reweighting methods relied on manual selection, often favoring high-quality sources like Wikipedia and
academic texts (Brown et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020). While
intuitive, these approaches are neither optimal nor scalable.
Recent work explores computational strategies for optimizing domain mixtures, such as DoReMi (Xie et al., 2023) and
DoGE (Fan et al., 2024b), which use a small proxy model
to derive domain weights for training a larger base model.
Though effective, these methods are computationally expensive and have limited practical applicability.
We contend that an ideal data-mixing method should (i)
improve universal generalization, the fundamental goal of
domain reweighting; (ii) adapt to domain modifications –
data naturally evolves between preparation and LLM training, making frequent recalibration impractical; (iii) handle
different training stages such as pertaining and fine-tuning.
Most existing methods are limited to pretraining scenarios
and do not consider either domain changes or the fine-tuning
stage where domain specificity often plays a larger role.
In this work, we introduce C HAMELEON, a novel and efficient framework for data mixing that addresses these challenges. Our method computes domain weights directly
from learned embeddings using kernel ridge leverage scores
(KRLS), which quantify the importance of each domain
based on its contribution to the overall embedding space.

1. Introduction
Pretraining large language models (LLMs) relies heavily
on vast and diverse datasets, encompassing sources such as
academic papers, books, and code repositories (Brown et al.,
2020; Dubey et al., 2024). The composition of these datasets

Unlike existing approaches, C HAMELEON reduces the datamixing compute and eliminates the need for frequent retraining of proxy models when domains change. Instead, it
constructs a domain affinity matrix to capture relationships
between domains and computes leverage scores that guide
domain reweighting. Our data-centric approach enables

1

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. Correspondence to: Wanyun Xie <wanyun.xie@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

