Heterogeneous Treatment Effect in Time-to-Event Outcomes: Harnessing
Censored Data with Recursively Imputed Trees

Tomer Meir 1 Uri Shalit 1 2 Malka Gorfine 2

Abstract
Tailoring treatments to individual needs is a central goal in fields such as medicine. A key step toward this goal is estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects (HTE)—the way treatments impact
different subgroups. While crucial, HTE estimation is challenging with survival data, where time
until an event (e.g., death) is key. Existing methods often assume complete observation, an assumption violated in survival data due to rightcensoring, leading to bias and inefficiency. Cui
et al. (2023) proposed a doubly-robust method
for HTE estimation in survival data under no hidden confounders, combining a causal survival forest with an augmented inverse-censoring weighting estimator. However, we find it struggles under heavy censoring, which is common in rareoutcome problems such as Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS). Moreover, most current methods cannot handle instrumental variables, which
are a crucial tool in the causal inference arsenal.
We introduce Multiple Imputation for Survival
Treatment Response (MISTR), a novel, general,
and non-parametric method for estimating HTE
in survival data. MISTR uses recursively imputed
survival trees to handle censoring without directly
modeling the censoring mechanism. Through extensive simulations and analysis of two real-world
datasets—the AIDS Clinical Trials Group Protocol 175 and the Illinois unemployment dataset we
show that MISTR outperforms prior methods under heavy censoring in the no-hidden-confounders
setting, and extends to the instrumental variable
setting. To our knowledge, MISTR is the first nonparametric approach for HTE estimation with unobserved confounders via instrumental variables.

Figure 1. Our goal is to estimate the heterogeneous treatment effect, defined as the expected difference in survival times (or their
transformation, see Eq. (1)) with and without treatment, conditional on a set of covariates. We propose a multiple-imputationbased estimator that effectively leverages censored observations,
outperforms existing methods, and is applicable in settings with
instrumental variable adjustment for unobserved confounders.

1. Introduction
In the field of causal inference, the Heterogeneous Treatment Effect (HTE) characterizes the way individuals or
subgroups respond to an intervention. For example when
assigning treatments to patients, estimating the HTE allows
us to take into account relations between patient characteristics and treatment responses and thus optimizing clinical
outcomes (Kent et al., 2018; Collins & Varmus, 2015). Due
to its wide applicability, HTE estimation is an area of active
research within the machine learning community (Athey &
Imbens, 2016; Shalit et al., 2017; Wager & Athey, 2018;
Athey et al., 2019; Künzel et al., 2019; Nie & Wager, 2021;
Curth & van der Schaar, 2021; Curth & Van Der Schaar,
2023; Curth et al., 2024). This work focuses on HTE in
survival analysis, where the outcome of interest is time to
event. This is a common use case in medicine, when, for
example, selecting a cancer treatment that leads to longer
survival. Survival outcomes are also of interest in commercial applications, for instance, when enacting interventions
to reduce user churn. A major challenge associated with
survival outcomes is censoring, as we explain below.

1
Department of Data and Decisions Sciences, Technion, Haifa,
Israel 2 Department of Statistics and Operations Research, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Malka Gorfine
<gorfinem@tauex.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

