Code-Generated Graph Representations Using Multiple LLM Agents for
Material Properties Prediction

Jiao Huang 1 2 Qianli Xing 1 3 Jinglong Ji 1 2 Bo Yang 1 3

Abstract

material data (Damewood et al., 2023). Recently, graph neural networks (GNN) have shown remarkable performance
in predicting material properties and become the dominant
technology (Chen et al., 2024b; Fang & Yan, 2024).

Graph neural networks have recently demonstrated remarkable performance in predicting material properties. Crystalline material data is manually encoded into graph representations. Existing methods incorporate different attributes into
constructing representations to satisfy the constraints arising from symmetries of material structure. However, existing methods for obtaining
graph representations are specific to certain constraints, which are ineffective when facing new
constraints. In this work, we propose a code generation framework with multiple large language
model agents to obtain representations named
Rep-CodeGen with three iterative stages simulating an evolutionary algorithm. To the best of
our knowledge, Rep-CodeGen is the first framework for automatically generating code to obtain
representations that can be used when facing new
constraints. Furthermore, a type of representation
from generated codes by our framework satisfies
six constraints, with codes satisfying three constraints as bases. Extensive experiments on two
real-world material datasets show that a property
prediction method based on such a graph representation achieves state-of-the-art performance in
material property prediction tasks.

For most GNN-based material properties predicting methods, a crystalline material data instance is represented by
an attributed graph, where nodes represent the atoms and
the edges define the interatomic reactions of neighboring
atoms (Xie & Grossman, 2018). The attributes of the graph
commonly contain elemental properties as node features and
interatomic distances as edge features. With the manually
designed codes, the attributed graph can be translated into
a numerical form, called a graph representation, which can
be processed by GNN. As many important material properties are highly sensitive to the structure of materials, a
fundamental challenge for these methods is to obtain the
representation that can capture the structure of crystalline
material(Choudhary & DeCost, 2021).
A widely adopted solution by researchers is to incorporate different attributes into the process of constructing
the graph and the representation. CGCNN (Xie & Grossman, 2018), Matformer (Yan et al., 2022), and PotNet(Lin
et al., 2023) mainly focus on the distance of atoms, while
ALIGNN(Choudhary & DeCost, 2021), PerCNet(Huang
et al., 2025), and ComFormer(Yan et al., 2024) further incorperates angle attributes. With the different attributes,
representations satisfy different constraints arising from
symmetries of material structure. Ideally, representations
capture structures better when satisfying more constraints.
However, existing methods for obtaining graph representations are specific to certain constraints, which is ineffective
when facing new constraints. Moreover, the above research
strategy requires expert knowledge in both material and
computer science, which costs researchers years to learn.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, machine learning methods have been
widely used in material science. These methods normally
employ hand-crafted descriptors as the representation of
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge
Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin, 130012, China 2 College of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin, 130012, China 3 College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin,
130012, China. Correspondence to: Qianli Xing <qianlixing@jlu.edu.cn>, Bo Yang <ybo@jlu.edu.cn>.

Inspired by the achievements of large language models
(LLM) in code generation and material science, we propose
a code generation framework with multiple LLM agents
to obtain representations named Rep-CodeGen. The codes
generated by large language models are always of low quality when the task is difficult. Specificly, the main difficulty
is to guide LLM agents to generate codes to obtain representation satisfying constraints, which requires LLM agents

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

