HashAttention: Semantic Sparsity for Faster Inference

Aditya Desai 1 Shuo Yang 1 Alejandro Cuadron 2 Matei Zaharia 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1 Ion Stoica 1

Abstract
Leveraging long contexts is crucial for advanced
AI systems, but attention computation poses a
scalability challenge. While scaled dot-product
attention (SDPA) exhibits token sparsity, i.e. only
a few pivotal tokens significantly contribute to
output, exploiting this sparsity remains challenging. Existing methods either suffer from quality degradation or require substantial additional
resources. We show that identifying pivotal tokens is a Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS)
problem. However, existing MIPS solutions are
not well-suited for SDPA, as they are not GPUfriendly and often underperform due to the separated query and key distributions. This paper introduces HashAttention, framing pivotal token identification as a recommendation problem. Given a
query, HashAttention encodes keys and queries
in Hamming space, capturing the required semantic similarity, using learned mapping functions.
HashAttention efficiently identifies pivotal tokens
for a given query using bitwise operations and
computes attention using only these tokens, improving the overall attention efficiency. Trained
on generic data, HashAttention reduces tokens
used by up to 16× with minimal quality loss,
requiring only 32 bits of auxiliary memory per
token. Sparsity can be further improved to 32×
through task-specific fine-tuning. On A100 GPU,
at 32× sparsity, incorporating HashAttention reduces attention latency by up to 4.3× in GPTFAST and 2.54× in FlashDecode, and achieves
up to 3.12× higher throughput for GPT-FAST.

Figure 1. Quality vs. Throughput (on A100 GPU) vs. Auxiliary
memory at different sparsity rates for Double Sparsity (16 channels,
2bit and 4 bit quantization) and HashAttention implemented in
GPT-FAST (batch=1) framework on RULER@32K using Llama3.1-8B-Instruct. The impact of auxiliary memory is excluded
from throughput computation due to the relatively small scale of
the problem (batch=1 and 32K context length). Also, throughput is overestimated for Double sparsity by excluding quantization/dequantization in throughput computation.

to engaging in extended conversations (Touvron et al., 2023;
Achiam et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b). It is commonplace
for LLM models to preprocess and store huge amounts
of text in the form of KV Cache, which is later used to
process various prompts. However, the Scaled Dot Product
Attention (SDPA), which is fundamental to the transformer
architecture that has driven the Generative AI revolution
(Vaswani, 2017; Brown et al., 2020), does not scale well
with context length. Generating a single token requires
SDPA to access the entire context KV Cache, which can be
hundreds of GB. For instance, a KV Cache of 512K tokens
is 64GB (0.125 MB per token) for the LLama3.1-8B model.

1. Introduction

Luckily, sparsity naturally arises in SDPA. Due to the softmax kernel, only a few pivotal tokens significantly contribute to the final attention computation(Bricken & Pehlevan, 2021; Deng et al., 2024). Efficiently identifying these
pivotal tokens provides a pathway to achieving efficient attention. Various approaches to identifying pivotal tokens
have been explored in the literature. Heuristic-based methods, such as fixed sparsity patterns(Xiao et al., 2023), ignore
the dynamic nature of contextual sparsity in attention, resulting in suboptimal attention quality. KV cache discard strate-

The ability to refer to long contexts efficiently is crucial for
modern AI applications, from processing lengthy documents
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
UC Berkeley 2 Department of Computer Sciences, ETH Zurich.
Correspondence to: Aditya Desai <apdesai@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

