On the Interplay between Graph Structure and Learning Algorithms in Graph
Neural Networks
Junwei Su 1 Chuan Wu 1

Abstract

algorithm design and selection in practice.

This paper studies the interplay between learning
algorithms and graph structure for graph neural
networks (GNNs). Existing theoretical studies on
the learning dynamics of GNNs primarily focus
on the convergence rates of learning algorithms
under the interpolation regime (noise-free) and offer only a crude connection between these dynamics and the actual graph structure (e.g., maximum
degree). This paper aims to bridge this gap by investigating the excessive risk (generalization performance) of learning algorithms in GNNs within
the generalization regime (with noise). Specifically, we extend the conventional settings from
the learning theory literature to the context of
GNNs and examine how graph structure influences the performance of learning algorithms such
as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and Ridge
regression. Our study makes several key contributions toward understanding the interplay between
graph structure and learning in GNNs. First, we
derive the excess risk profiles of SGD and Ridge
regression in GNNs and connect these profiles
to the graph structure through spectral graph theory. With this established framework, we further
explore how different graph structures (regular
vs. power-law) impact the performance of these
algorithms through comparative analysis. Additionally, we extend our analysis to multi-layer linear GNNs, revealing an increasing non-isotropic
effect on the excess risk profile, thereby offering new insights into the over-smoothing issue in
GNNs from the perspective of learning algorithms.
Our empirical results align with our theoretical
predictions, collectively showcasing a coupling
relation among graph structure, GNNs and learning algorithms, and providing insights on GNN

1. Introduction
Graph structure data is ubiquitous in the real world and
many important learning problems are naturally modelled
as a graph. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged
as a dominant class of machine learning models specifically
designed for learning problems in graph-structured data.
They have demonstrated considerable success in addressing
a wide range of graph-related problems in various domains
such as chemistry (Gilmer et al., 2017; Reiser et al., 2022),
biology (Tsubaki et al., 2019; Réau et al., 2023), social
networking (Chen et al., 2017; Sheng et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2017; Su et al., 2024), and computer vision (Zhu et al., 2022;
Yang et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2017; Zellers
et al., 2018). A defining characteristic of GNNs is their
use of a spatial approach through message passing on the
graph structure for feature aggregation. This enables GNNs
to preserve structural information and dependencies from
the underlying graph structure, allowing them to be highly
effective in tasks such as node regression.
Because of their central role in numerous important applications, there is a growing body of literature on theoretical research on GNNs (see Sec. 2 for a more detailed discussion).
Existing theoretical studies on GNNs primarily concentrate
on two aspects: their expressive power (Xu et al., 2018)
and generalization capabilities under different measures.
The expressive power of GNNs refers to their ability to distinguish between different graph structures and effectively
capture node relationships and graph topology. Generalization capabilities are often explored through complexity
measures, such as VC-dimension (Scarselli et al., 2018) and
Rademacher complexity (Lv, 2021), or through informationtheoretic measures, like mutual information and entropy.
These results provide interesting insight into how powerful
GNNs are as a neural model.

1

School of Computing and Data Science, University
of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Junwei Su <junweisu@connect.hku.hk>, Chuan Wu <cwu@cs.hku.hk>.

Existing Gap. Nevertheless, there is a notable gap in
understanding the interplay between learning algorithms
(e.g., stochastic gradient descent (SGD)) and graph structure, especially when concerning their generalization performance (excessive risk) in the presence of noise (inter-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

