Prompt-based Depth Pruning of Large Language Models

Juyun Wee * 1 Minjae Park * 1 Jaeho Lee 1

Abstract
Depth pruning aims to reduce the inference cost
of a large language model without any hardwarespecific complications, by simply removing several less important transformer blocks. However,
our empirical findings suggest that the importance of a transformer block may be highly taskdependent—a block that is crucial for a task can
be removed without degrading the accuracy on another task. Based on this observation, we develop
a dynamic depth pruning algorithm, coined PuDDing (Prompt-routed Dynamic Depth Pruning),
which determines which blocks to omit from the
model based on the input prompt. PuDDing operates by training a lightweight router to predict
the best omission set among a set of options,
where this option set has also been constructed in
a data-driven manner. Empirical results on commonsense reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that
PuDDing effectively accelerates the inference language models, and achieves better on-task performance than static depth pruning baselines.
Project Page:
Code:

Figure 1. The general framework of prompt-based depth pruning.
Given some query from the user, the goal is to identify which
layers from an LLM can be omitted, so that one can make accurate
prediction on low-memory consumer devices.

that is particularly effective for on-device scenarios (Song
et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024). Such methods simply remove
several transformer blocks (which we call “omission set”)
from the pretrained model, based on some measures of block
importance computed using a small amount of calibration
samples. As everything is identical except for the number
of blocks, the pruned model is suitable to be deployed on
any hardware without tailored supports on low-precision
(e.g., integer cores) or fine-grained sparsity (e.g., 2:4 sparsity). Furthermore, as there is no extensive training involved,
depth pruning can be easily done in a device-by-device manner for deployment on various devices.

jwee01.github.io/PuDDing
github.com/tada0347/PuDDing

1. Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have
achieved remarkable success in a wide range of natural language processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al.,
2023; Dubey et al., 2024). However, significant computational requirements of LLMs pose challenges in resourceconstrained environments, limiting their practicality. For example, LLaMA-3.3-70B needs 140GB of RAM to be loaded
in bf16, which is often too big for memory-constrained local
devices. Thus, reducing the model size is essential to make
LLMs feasible for on-device applications.

*
Equal contribution 1 POSTECH. Correspondence to: Jaeho
Lee <jaeho.lee@postech.ac.kr>.

A key limitation of typical depth pruning algorithms is that
their pruning decision is static, i.e., the same omission set is
removed regardless of the query given to the model. While
this choice allows one to save storage (e.g., flash drives)
by discarding the pruned parameters at the local device, it
sacrifices the ability to adapt to various downstream tasks.
Indeed, our empirical observations show that pruning some
transformer blocks in an LLM may incur significant accuracy degradation on certain tasks, while being highly
unnecessary for other tasks (see Section 3).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Can we make dynamic depth pruning decisions to improve
the performance on various tasks? This question has not
been well studied yet, especially in the context of on-device

Depth pruning is a versatile model compression technique

1

