Zero-Shot Offline Imitation Learning via Optimal Transport

Thomas Rupf 1 2 Marco Bagatella 2 3 Nico Gürtler 1 2 Jonas Frey 2 3 Georg Martius 1 2

Abstract

which however rely on large amounts of expert data, usually
involving costly human participation, e.g. teleoperation. A
potential solution to this issue can be found in reinforcement learning approaches, which enable learning from
suboptimal data sources (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Existing
methods within this framework ease the burden of learning
general policies by limiting the task class to additive
rewards (Laskin et al., 2021; Sancaktar et al., 2022; Frans
et al., 2024) or single goals (Bagatella & Martius, 2023).

Zero-shot imitation learning algorithms hold the
promise of reproducing unseen behavior from
as little as a single demonstration at test time.
Existing practical approaches view the expert
demonstration as a sequence of goals, enabling
imitation with a high-level goal selector, and a
low-level goal-conditioned policy. However, this
framework can suffer from myopic behavior: the
agent’s immediate actions towards achieving individual goals may undermine long-term objectives.
We introduce a novel method that mitigates this
issue by directly optimizing the occupancy matching objective that is intrinsic to imitation learning.
We propose to lift a goal-conditioned value function to a distance between occupancies, which are
in turn approximated via a learned world model.
The resulting method can learn from offline, suboptimal data, and is capable of non-myopic, zeroshot imitation, as we demonstrate in complex,
continuous benchmarks. The code is available
at https://github.com/martius-lab/
zilot.

This work lifts the restrictions of previous approaches,
and proposes a method that can reproduce rich behaviors
from offline, suboptimal data sources. We allow arbitrary
tasks to be specified through a single demonstration devoid
of actions at inference time, conforming to a zero-shot
Imitation Learning (IL) setting (Pathak et al., 2018; Pirotta
et al., 2024). Furthermore, we consider a relaxation of this
setting (Pathak et al., 2018), where the expert demonstration
may be rough, consisting of an ordered sequence of states
without precise time-step information, and partial, meaning
each state contains only partial information about the full
state. These two relaxations are desirable from a practical
standpoint, as they allow a user to avoid specifying information that is either inconsequential to the task or costly
to attain (e.g. only through teleoperation). For example,
when tasking a robot arm with moving an object along a
path, it is sufficient to provide the object’s position for a
few “checkpoints” without specifying the exact arm pose.

1. Introduction
The emergence of zero/few-shot capabilities in language
modeling (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022; Kojima
et al., 2022) has renewed interest in generalist agents across
all fields in machine learning. Typically, such agents are
pretrained with minimal human supervision. At inference,
they are capable of generalization across diverse tasks, without further training, i.e. zero-shot. Such capabilities have
also been a long-standing goal in learning-based control
(Duan et al., 2017). Promising results have been achieved
by leveraging the scaling and generalization properties of
supervised learning (Jang et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022;
O’Neill et al., 2023; Ghosh et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024),

In principle, a specified goal sequence can be decomposed
into multiple single-goal tasks that can be accomplished by
goal-conditioned policies, as proposed by recent zero-shot
IL approaches (Pathak et al., 2018; Hao et al., 2023).
However, we show that this decomposition is prone to
myopic behavior when expert demonstrations are partial.
Continuing the robotic manipulation example from above,
let us consider a task described by two sequential goals,
each specifying a certain position that the object should
reach. In this case an optimal goal-conditioned policy
would attempt to reach the first goal as fast as possible,
possibly by throwing the object towards it. The agent would
then relinquish control of the object, leaving it in a suboptimal—or even unrecoverable—state. In this case, the agent
would be unable to move the object towards the second
goal. This myopic behavior is a fundamental issue arising
from goal abstraction, as we formally argue in Section

1

Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 2 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 ETH, Zürich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Thomas Rupf <thrupf@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

