Quadratic Upper Bound for Boosting Robustness

Euijin You 1 Hyang-Won Lee 1

Abstract

gradient-based iterative method that updates perturbations
in the direction that maximizes the loss to explore stronger
attacks. There are several other approaches that generate
adversarial examples by introducing more sophisticated loss
functions (Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). While
these approaches can effectively enhance the robustness,
they often require time-consuming and computationally expensive training due mainly to the need for generating highquality examples and performing iterative optimization.

Fast adversarial training (FAT) aims to enhance
the robustness of models against adversarial attacks with reduced training time, however, FAT
often suffers from compromised robustness due
to insufficient exploration of adversarial space. In
this paper, we develop a loss function to improve
robustness in FAT without requiring stronger inner
maximization. Specifically, we derive a quadratic
upper bound (QUB) on the adversarial training
(AT) loss function and propose to utilize the
bound with existing FAT methods. Our experimental results show that applying QUB loss to the
existing methods yields significant improvement
of robustness. Furthermore, using various metrics,
we demonstrate that this improvement is likely to
result from the smoothened loss landscape of the
resulting models.

To address this issue, the concept of fast adversarial training (FAT) has emerged (Shafahi et al., 2019). FAT utilizes
single-step attacks instead of multi-step attacks, enabling
faster and more cost-efficient training, and hence, allows for
only a coarse-grained exploration of the adversarial space.
As a result, FAT often suffers from catastrophic overfitting
(Wong et al., 2020), where the model becomes excessively
robust to the adversarial examples encountered during training while compromising robustness against unseen attacks.
Various FAT methods have since been proposed to overcome catastrophic overfitting and improve performance (Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2020; Kim et al., 2021; Sriramanan et al., 2020; 2021; Jia et al., 2022a). By analyzing
the causes of the problem and approaching it from new
perspectives, these methods have demonstrated improved
robustness, even with reduced training time.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown remarkable performance
in various tasks like image classification and speech recognition, bringing innovation in real-world applications. However, these models have been found to be vulnerable to
adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2015). These attacks
involve adding small perturbations to the data to mislead the
model into making incorrect predictions, severely compromising its reliability.

In this paper, we propose a simple loss function designed to
enhance robustness without significantly affecting the short
training time of FAT. We derive a quadratic upper bound
(QUB) on the AT loss function by relying on the fact that the
cross-entropy loss function is convex with respect to logits.
The bound can indeed be viewed as a combination of the
terms for accounting for robust accuracy as well as standard
accuracy. We propose to utilize the bound for adversarial
training instead of the original AT loss function. Experimental results show that our QUB can further enhance the
robustness of existing AT methods without significantly increasing training time. We also analyze various metrics and
demonstrate that employing QUB has the effect of smoothing the loss landscape with respect to perturbations, which
contributes to enhanced robustness.

Adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al., 2018) is the most
common defense method to address this issue. It generates
adversarial examples by perturbing the input data during the
training process and trains the model with these examples
to improve robustness. Accordingly, the robustness of the
model obtained by AT depends heavily on the quality of
generated adversarial examples. A well-known approach,
projected gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018), is a
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Konkuk
University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Hyang-Won
Lee <leehw@konkuk.ac.kr>.

The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

