Counterfactual Voting Adjustment for Quality Assessment and Fairer Voting
in Online Platforms with Helpfulness Evaluation

Chang Liu 1 Yixin Wang 2 Moontae Lee 1 3

Abstract

answers in Q&A communities help build large-scale knowledge repositories through the wisdom of crowds (Wang et al.,
2013). For instance, StackOverflow — the largest iconic
community within the StackExchange expert Q&A forums
— alone recorded over 24 million questions and 36 million
answers (sta). This paper identifies these customer reviews
and user answers as key examples of user-generated responses provided for various products and questions.

Efficient access to high-quality information is vital for online platforms. To promote more useful
information, users not only create new content
but also evaluate existing content, often through
helpfulness voting. Although aggregated votes
help service providers rank their user content,
these votes are often biased by disparate accessibility per position and the cascaded influence of
prior votes. For a fairer assessment of information quality, we propose the Counterfactual Voting
Adjustment (CVA), a causal framework that accounts for the context in which individual votes
are cast. Through preliminary and semi-synthetic
experiments, we show that CVA effectively models the position and herding biases, accurately
recovering the predefined content quality. In a
real experiment, we demonstrate that reranking
content based on the learned quality by CVA exhibits stronger alignment with both user sentiment
and quality evaluation assessed by GPT-4o, outperforming system rankings based on aggregated
votes and model-based rerankings without causal
inference. Beyond the individual quality inference, our embeddings offer comparative insights
into the behavioral dynamics of expert user groups
across 120 major StackExchange communities.

Volume does not always indicate quality. Although usergenerated responses are abundant, their sheer size and diversity make it difficult to identify genuinely helpful information. To address this challenge, many service providers
frequently implement binary voting systems, allowing users
to rate individual responses as helpful or not. However,
even when aggregated, these helpfulness votes may fail to
accurately capture the true quality of the responses. Due
to the limited perception of human users (Joachims et al.,
2007), more accessible responses displayed at the top tend
to attract more votes, leading to position bias. Furthermore,
users often conform to majority opinion: the visible count
of prior votes can significantly steer subsequent evaluations
(Lee et al., 2016), amplifying herding bias. Over time,
these biases mutually reinforce a cascading effect: favoring content that gains early popularity and overshadowing
potentially superior yet less accessible future content.
To fairly assess information quality while mitigating position and herding biases, we should be capable of addressing
two counterfactual questions: What if the content were displayed in a different position, and what if the content had an
equal number of positive and negative votes? In interactive
systems, however, it is infeasible to create parallel universes
where the same content is evenly distributed across all positions with a balanced number of votes. To overcome this
challenge, we introduce the Counterfactual Voting Adjustment (CVA), a causal framework that systematically
accounts for the contextual factors influencing individual
votes. Unlike existing models that rely solely on static data,
CVA leverages voting trajectories to simultaneously adjust
position and herding biases, offering a principled approach
to inferring the causal effect of helpfulness voting on content quality. This framework facilitates fairer rankings that
reduce the undue influence of early accessibility and social

1. Introduction
User-generated content is influential information for decision-making and knowledge discovery. Customer reviews
on merchant products and services are essential elements of
electronic Word-Of-Mouth (eWOM) (Babić Rosario et al.,
2016), where 97% of customers rely on online reviews
for their daily shopping decisions (Murphy, 2017). User
1
Department of Information and Decision Sciences, University
of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, United States 2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States 3 LG AI Research, Seoul, Korea.
Correspondence to: Moontae Lee <moontae@uic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

