When Model Knowledge meets Diffusion Model: Diffusion-assisted Data-free
Image Synthesis with Alignment of Domain and Class

Yujin Kim * 1 2 Hyunsoo Kim * 1 2 Hyunwoo J. Kim 3 Suhyun Kim 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

The widespread availability of open-source pre-trained models have significantly advanced the field of deep learning
(Ridnik et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2023; Goldblum et al.,
2024). Recently, platforms such as Hugging Face (Wolf,
2019) have further enhanced accessibility of the pre-trained
model, enabling researchers to easily apply these models to
various tasks like knowledge distillation and model pruning
(Tran et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Yin et al., 2020). However, a common requirement for utilizing these models in
such applications is access to their training data, either in
full or in part, for training student networks or fine-tuning
pruned models. Unfortunately, these training datasets are
often inaccessible due to various reasons, including data
privacy and copyright issues. Consequently, the lack of
access to training data presents a challenge in leveraging the
potential of pre-trained models across various applications.

Open-source pre-trained models hold great potential for diverse applications, but their utility
declines when their training data is unavailable.
Data-Free Image Synthesis (DFIS) aims to generate images that approximate the learned data distribution of a pre-trained model without accessing
the original data. However, existing DFIS methods produce samples that deviate from the training
data distribution due to the lack of prior knowledge about natural images. To overcome this
limitation, we propose DDIS, the first Diffusionassisted Data-free Image Synthesis method that
leverages a text-to-image diffusion model as a
powerful image prior, improving synthetic image quality. DDIS extracts knowledge about the
learned distribution from the given model and
uses it to guide the diffusion model, enabling the
generation of images that accurately align with
the training data distribution. To achieve this, we
introduce Domain Alignment Guidance (DAG)
that aligns the synthetic data domain with the
training data domain during the diffusion sampling process. Furthermore, we optimize a single
Class Alignment Token (CAT) embedding to effectively capture class-specific attributes in the
training dataset. Experiments on PACS and ImageNet demonstrate that DDIS outperforms prior
DFIS methods by generating samples that better
reflect the training data distribution, achieving
SOTA performance in data-free applications.

To address the above issue, Data-Free Image Synthesis
(DFIS) has been proposed as a solution. DFIS aims to
synthesize images that approximate the training data distribution by extracting the model’s internal understanding
of its training data. This enables the application of these
models to tasks like data-free knowledge distillation or pruning, enhancing their utility (Yin et al., 2020; Mordvintsev
et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2022; Ghiasi et al., 2022). However, since existing DFIS methods generate images without
prior knowledge of natural images, the image search space
becomes huge. Consequently, they produce images with
unnatural or artificial patterns that deviate from the training
data distribution, ultimately limiting the model’s utility.
In this paper, we introduce a novel DFIS paradigm that
leverages the inherent natural image understanding of an
off-the-shelf Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion model. Recent
breakthroughs in T2I diffusion models trained on large-scale
open-world datasets (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022) provide powerful image priors capable of significantly
narrowing the search space on DFIS. However, naively replacing the original training data with images generated
by the T2I diffusion model is insufficient. Due to the inaccessibility of information regarding the training dataset,
encompassing its domain, class-specific attributes, the input
prompts of the T2I diffusion model are necessarily impre-

*
Equal contribution 1 Korea University 2 Korea Institute of Science and Technology 3 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology 4 Kyung Hee University. Correspondence to: Suhyun
Kim <dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

