Curse of High Dimensionality Issue in Transformer for Long-context Modeling

Shuhai Zhang * 1 2 Zeng You * 1 3 Yaofo Chen 1 Zhiquan Wen 1 Qianyue Wang 1 Zhijie Qiu 1
Yuanqing Li 1 2 Mingkui Tan 1 4

Abstract

hibiting emergent abilities like few-shot learning and complex reasoning (Schaeffer et al., 2023). These capabilities
stem primarily from their ability to model long-range dependencies through self-attention (Vaswani, 2017; Schaeffer
et al., 2023). However, a key challenge in long-context
modeling is the redundancy in attention computation: while
attention weights are often sparse, meaning many tokens
contribute minimally to predictions, all tokens still consume
equal computational resources. This substantial inefficiency
raises the question: how can we reduce redundant computations without sacrificing model performance?

Transformer-based large language models (LLMs)
excel in natural language processing tasks by
capturing long-range dependencies through selfattention mechanisms. However, long-context
modeling faces significant computational inefficiencies due to redundant attention computations:
while attention weights are often sparse, all tokens consume equal computational resources. In
this paper, we reformulate traditional probabilistic sequence modeling as a supervised learning
task, enabling the separation of relevant and irrelevant tokens and providing a clearer understanding
of redundancy. Based on this reformulation, we
theoretically analyze attention sparsity, revealing
that only a few tokens significantly contribute
to predictions. Building on this, we formulate
attention optimization as a linear coding problem and propose a group coding strategy, theoretically showing its ability to improve robustness against random noise and enhance learning efficiency. Motivated by this, we propose
Dynamic Group Attention (DGA), which leverages the group coding to explicitly reduce redundancy by aggregating less important tokens during attention computation. Empirical results show
that our DGA significantly reduces computational
costs while maintaining competitive performance.
Code is available at https://github.com/
bolixinyu/DynamicGroupAttention.

Existing approaches (Xiao et al., 2024; Han et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024) often tackle this issue by discarding some
tokens to simplify attention computations and reduce costs.
However, while effective in specific scenarios, such methods
risk disrupting token interactions, especially in tasks requiring comprehensive context understanding, e.g., question
answering (Lu et al., 2022; Singhal et al., 2025) and document summarization (Cao et al., 2017; Pasunuru et al., 2021).
Token removal may lead to incomplete or inaccurate context comprehension, impairing model performance. Thus,
the key challenge is how to minimize redundant attention
computations while maintaining critical token interactions.
Traditional probabilistic sequence modeling, such as autoregressive models (Vaswani, 2017; Huang et al., 2018;
OpenAI, 2023), treats long-context redundancy implicitly
by processing the entire context as a block during next-token
prediction, making it difficult to analyze the above issue.
To better understand and analyze redundancy, we reformulate the probabilistic sequence modeling as a supervised
learning task in Section 3. This reformulation enables us
to separate relevant and irrelevant tokens and provides a
clearer view of redundancy, inspiring us to develop more
efficient methods for long-context modeling.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) (Touvron
et al., 2023a;b) have advanced in various natural language
processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022), ex-

To gain a deeper understanding of the redundancy in a long
context, we provide a theoretical analysis of the sparsity of
attention weights in transformers in Section 4. Our analysis shows that only a small subset of tokens significantly
contributes to the target representation, while many tokens
offer little value to overall model performance, leading to
inefficient use of computational resources. To better understand this issue and inspire new attention, we formulate

*
Equal contribution 1 South China University of Technology
Pazhou Laboratory 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 Key Laboratory of
Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education. Correspondence to: Mingkui Tan <mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

