Learning Representations of Instruments for
Partial Identification of Treatment Effects
Jonas Schweisthal 1 2 Dennis Frauen 1 2 Maresa Schröder 1 2 Konstantin Hess 1 2 Niki Kilbertus 2 3 4
Stefan Feuerriegel 1 2

Abstract

decision-making in medicine (Feuerriegel et al., 2024). For
example, a common question in medicine is to estimate the
effect of alcohol consumption on the onset of cardiovascular
diseases (Holmes et al., 2014). There are several reasons,
including costs and ethical concerns, why CATE estimation
is often based on observational data, such as electronic
health records and clinical registries.

Reliable estimation of treatment effects from observational data is important in many disciplines
such as medicine. However, estimation is challenging when unconfoundedness as a standard
assumption in the causal inference literature is
violated. In this work, we leverage arbitrary (potentially high-dimensional) instruments to estimate bounds on the conditional average treatment
effect (CATE). Our contributions are three-fold:
(1) We propose a novel approach for partial identification through a mapping of instruments to
a discrete representation space so that we yield
valid bounds on the CATE. This is crucial for reliable decision-making in real-world applications.
(2) We derive a two-step procedure that learns
tight bounds using a tailored neural partitioning
of the latent instrument space. As a result, we
avoid instability issues due to numerical approximations or adversarial training. Furthermore, our
procedure aims to reduce the estimation variance
in finite-sample settings to yield more reliable
estimates. (3) We show theoretically that our
procedure obtains valid bounds while reducing
estimation variance. We further perform extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness
across various settings. Overall, our procedure
offers a novel path for practitioners to make use
of potentially high-dimensional instruments (e.g.,
as in Mendelian randomization).

However,
identifying the CATE from
observational data is
challenging as it typically requires strong
assumptions in the
form of unconfoundedness (Rubin, 1974).
Figure 1. Overview of the IV setUnconfoundedness
ting. We consider complex instruments Z (e.g., gene data, text, imassumes there exist
ages), observed confounders X,
no additional unobunobserved confounders U , binary
served confounders U
treatment A, and outcome Y .
between treatment A
and outcome Y . If the unconfoundedness assumption is
violated, a common strategy is to leverage instrumental
variables (IVs) Z. IVs affect only the treatment A but
exclude unobserved confounding between Z and Y , which
often can be ensured by design such as for randomized
studies with non-compliance (Imbens & Angrist, 1994).
The causal graph for the IV setting is shown in Fig. 1.
Motivational example:
Mendelian randomization.
Mendelian randomization (Pierce et al., 2018) refers
to the use of genetic information as instruments Z to
estimate the effect of a treatment or exposure A (e.g.,
alcohol consumption) on some medical outcome Y (e.g.,
cardiovascular diseases). In this setting, there are further
patient characteristics that are observed (X) but also
unobserved (U ), which one accounts for through the
instrument. Yet, common challenges are that (i) instruments
with genetic information are often high-dimensional and
(ii) involve complex, non-linear relationships between
instruments and treatment intake or exposure.

1. Introduction
Estimating the conditional average treatment effect (CATE)
from observational data is an important task for personalized
1
LMU Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
School of Computation, Information and Technology, TU Munich 4 Helmholtz Munich. Correspondence to: Jonas Schweisthal
<jonas.schweisthal@lmu.de>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, existing IV methods using machine learning for
point estimation of the CATE rely on strong simplifying
1

