Puzzle: Distillation-Based NAS for Inference-Optimized LLMs

Akhiad Bercovich * Tomer Ronen * Talor Abramovich Nir Ailon Nave Assaf Mohammad Dabbah Ido Galil
Amnon Geifman Yonatan Geifman Izhak Golan Netanel Haber Ehud Karpas Roi Koren Itay Levy
Pavlo Molchanov Shahar Mor Zach Moshe Najeeb Nabwani Omri Puny Ran Rubin Itamar Schen
Ido Shahaf Oren Tropp Omer Ullman Argov Ran Zilberstein Ran El-Yaniv

1. Introduction

Abstract

With remarkable advancements in the capability and accuracy of LLMs, these models are increasingly adopted in
various domains, ranging from virtual assistants to sophisticated enterprise solutions. This adoption trend is accompanied by a growing appetite for larger and more powerful
models, as evidenced by the industry’s push toward increasingly larger-scale LLMs (OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al., 2023;
cla; Dubey et al., 2024) and Inference-time compute scaling (GPT-o1, (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Hardt &
Sun, 2024)). However, the high computational costs associated with these models and their projected future iterations
– particularly during inference – restrict their accessibility
and scalability, thus presenting a significant challenge for
widespread personal and commercial applications.

Large language models (LLMs) offer remarkable capabilities, yet their high inference costs
restrict wider adoption. While increasing parameter counts improves accuracy, it also broadens the
gap between state-of-the-art capabilities and practical deployability. We present Puzzle, a hardwareaware framework that accelerates the inference of
LLMs while preserving their capabilities. Using
neural architecture search (NAS) at a large-scale,
Puzzle optimizes models with tens of billions of
parameters. Our approach utilizes blockwise local
knowledge distillation (BLD) for parallel architecture exploration and employs mixed-integer
programming for precise constraint optimization.

LLMs require a substantial amount of parameters for their
training process to converge easily and achieve better generalization (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2024;
Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Belkin et al., 2018). This overparameterization not only facilitates optimization, but also
provides greater capacity to store knowledge and learn complex patterns across diverse tasks, explaining why larger
models consistently demonstrate superior performance (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2024). However, once
trained, many parameters and computations turn out to be
redundant for inference, as evidenced by the success of computational efficiency techniques (He et al., 2024; Beltagy
et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2022). Yet, LLM architectures remain largely uniform, comprising repeated identical layers,
with little consideration given to balancing each block’s
computational cost against its contribution to overall model
predictive performance—a design choice primarily driven
by training stability and ease of scaling rather than inference
efficiency. This work addresses how to transform a trained
LLM from a structure suited for training into one optimized
for efficient inference on specific hardware (such as H100),
while preserving its accumulated knowledge and predictive
performance. Given a “parent model”, our approach explores a large search space of architecture configurations
to identify efficient options tailored to meet specific hardware and task-related constraints. This exploration requires

We showcase our framework’s impact via Llama3.1-Nemotron-51B-Instruct (Nemotron-51B) and
Llama-3.3-Nemotron-49B, two publicly available
models derived from Llama-70B-Instruct. Both
models achieve a 2.17× inference throughput
speedup, fitting on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU
while retaining 98.4% of the original model’s
benchmark accuracies. These are the most accurate models supporting single H100 GPU inference with large batch sizes, despite training on
45B tokens at most, far fewer than the 15T used to
train Llama-70B. Lastly, we show that lightweight
alignment on these derived models allows them to
surpass the parent model in specific capabilities.
Our work establishes that powerful LLM models
can be optimized for efficient deployment with
only negligible loss in quality, underscoring that
inference performance, not parameter count alone,
should guide model selection.
*

Equal contribution . Correspondence to: Akhiad Bercovich,
Tomer Ronen, Ran El-Yaniv <{abercovich, tronen,
relyaniv}@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

