RobustLight: Improving Robustness via Diffusion Reinforcement Learning for
Traffic Signal Control

Mingyuan Li 1 Jiahao Wang 1 Guangsheng Yu 2 Xu Wang 2 Qianrun Chen 3 Wei Ni 2 Lixiang Li 1
Haipeng Peng 1

Abstract

to conventional expert systems in improving vehicular traffic flow (Wei et al., 2018). Deploying TSC algorithms in
real-world settings typically involves using sensors, such as
cameras and radar, to monitor traffic states, including vehicle counts and speeds. Sensors exposed in public areas are
susceptible to noise attacked (Chen et al., 2018; Chowdhury
et al., 2023b), leading to potential adversarial attacks. Moreover, in extremely adverse weather conditions, these sensors
are prone to physical damage (Laszka et al., 2016b; Lee &
Park, 2012). This study delves into these sensor security
challenges in real-world TSC systems.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) optimizes Traffic
Signal Control (TSC) to reduce congestion and
emissions, but real-world TSC systems face challenges like adversarial attacks and missing data,
leading to incorrect signal decisions and increased
congestion. Existing methods, limited to offline
data predictions, address only one issue and fail
to meet TSC’s dynamic, real-time needs. We
propose RobustLight, a novel framework with
an enhanced, plug-and-play diffusion model to
improve TSC robustness against noise, missing
data, and complex patterns by restoring attacked
data. RobustLight integrates two algorithms to recover original data states without altering existing
TSC platforms. Using a dynamic state infilling
algorithm, it trains the diffusion model online.
Experiments on real-world datasets show RobustLight improves recovery performance by up to
50.43% compared to baseline scenarios. It effectively counters diverse adversarial attacks and
missing data. The relevant datasets and code are
available at GitHub.

Adversarial attacks on the sensors can range from Gaussian
noise and uniformly distributed random noise (U-rand) to
more sophisticated strategies, including maximum actiondifference attack (MAD) and minimum Q-value attack
(MinQ) (Tang et al., 2016). When testing a TSC algorithm, its performance can significantly decline (Gershenson, 2004; Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022b) within
the CityFlow (Zhang et al., 2019) simulation environment
under various attacks. Such attacks compromise sensors,
leading to inaccurate state observations and consequent malfunctions in TSC systems. When the sensors are intruded on
or compromised, traffic disruptions could potentially occur,
even leading to traffic safety accidents and substantial economic losses. To this end, it is crucial to develop innovative
defense algorithms to mitigate the impact of sensor-related
anomalies for TSC.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Improving traffic efficiency through Traffic Signal Control
(TSC) has been established as an effective strategy (Wei
et al., 2019b). Traditional TSC systems depend heavily
on static, predefined expert system controls, lacking the
flexibility of dynamically responding to fluctuating traffic conditions (Lowrie, 1990; Hunt et al., 1982; Webster,
1958). Recently, by integrating the methods of Reinforcement Learning (RL), TSC has demonstrated its superiority

1.2. Challenges
Various solutions have been proposed in the context of online applications to address security issues faced by sensors (Sun et al., 2021). However, these methods typically
only address a single type of attack. For instance, Zhang
et al.(Zhang et al., 2021) proposed a method to address
an adversarial attack, and it significantly decreases performance as noise levels increase, especially in complex, highdimensional state environments (Yang et al., 2022). Lin et
al. (Lin et al., 2017) employed model-based methods, e.g.,
a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) for data prediction to address a data loss problem. Similarly, Mei et al. (Mei et al.,
2023) advocated for interpolation techniques during training

1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
University of Technology Sydney 3 Lanzhou University. Correspondence to: Haipeng Peng <penghaipeng@bupt.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

