Representation Surgery in Model Merging with Probabilistic Modeling

Qi Wei 1 Shuo He 1 Enneng Yang 1 Tingcong Liu 1 Haobo Wang 2 Lei Feng 3 Bo An 1 4

Abstract

solely on a specific task, MTL leverages the shared knowledge and representations among tasks, enhancing the overall
performance (He & Lawrence, 2011). However, constrained
by a rigid training paradigm, i.e., “data collection first and
then jointly training”, MTL raises several concerns: 1) the
high cost of data collection as well as the risk of privacy
leakage, and 2) limited flexibility, as introducing a new task
necessitates retraining the MTL model on a combination of
both old and new (tasks’) datasets.

Model merging aims to achieve multitask performance by merging multiple expert models without
the need to access the raw training data. Recent research identified the representation bias of model
merging, characterized by a discrepancy in the
representation distribution between the merged
and individual models, hindering the performance
of model merging methods. To mitigate this bias,
a task-specific MLP, Surgery, was built to model
the bias that is subsequently decreased on the
merged representation. However, this strategy is
still suboptimal due to the limited modeling capability within the deterministic manner. To address
this issue, we present ProbSurgery, a probabilistic
module specifically designed to accurately model
the representation bias. This module generates an
embedding distribution for each sample and outputs the representation bias through a sampling
process. ProbSurgery offers superior representational capacity by naturally handling the uncertainty resulting from parameter interference of
merging multiple models. Besides, we provide a
theoretical analysis to reveal the advance of the
probabilistic manner and propose an extension
of ProSurgery for adapting to the task-sharing
setting. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of ProbSurgery while maintaining generalization capabilities in real-world scenarios. The
code is now available at this url.

Recently, model merging has attracted increasing attention
(Matena & Raffel, 2022; Ilharco et al., 2023; Yadav et al.,
2023; Yu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024c;a), as it offers a
new approach to fulfilling MTL without requiring training
data. This approach is encouraged by the growth of opensource communities like Huggingface1 and recognizes
that published trained (or fine-tuned) models can be treated
as resources, similar to datasets. Therefore, a model can
obtain multi-task knowledge by adapting the parameters
of multiple existing expert models that share a consistent
network structure instead of training from scratch on a taskcombined dataset. In the era of foundation models, the
advantages of data independence and training free make
model merging more practical.
However, models merged through existing methods (Matena
& Raffel, 2022; Ilharco et al., 2023; Yadav et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2024c) often experience performance degradation,
making them hardly comparable to traditional MTL methods (Sun et al., 2020b; Royer et al., 2024), let alone that
of individual models. A recent study (Yang et al., 2024a)
analyzed this issue from a representation perspective and
discovered a discrepancy in the representation distribution
between merged and individual models, termed representation bias, leading to degenerated performance. To mitigate
this bias, the authors introduced a task-specific, learnable
module after the encoder, termed Surgery, to refine the biased representation. With the Surgery module, the merged
model attains representational capabilities close to those of
individually trained models.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana, 1997) is a machine
learning approach that simultaneously learns multiple related tasks to improve model generalization and efficiency.
Compared with traditional single-task learning that focuses
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Zhejiang University, China 3 Southeast University, China 4 Skywork AI, Singapore. Correspondence to: Lei Feng <fenglei@seu.edu.cn>.

Despite notable improvements achieved, we argue that there
are still two concerns about the Surgery module:
1
https://huggingface.co. For example, HuggingFace
hosts a collection of over 1.7 million pretrained models.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

