Continuously Updating Digital Twins using Large Language Models

Harry Amad 1 Nicolás Astorga 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

concurrently administer chemo- and radiotherapy is nontrivial (Cooper et al., 2004; Pignon et al., 2009). A DT
can model factors related to their disease, such as tumour
volume, and how they respond to certain interventions to
assess the efficacy of different treatment plans, leading to
optimal results (Tardini et al., 2022).

Digital twins are models of real-world systems
that can simulate their dynamics in response to potential actions. In complex settings, the state and
action variables, and available data and knowledge relevant to a system can constantly change,
requiring digital twins to continuously update
with these changes to remain relevant. Current
approaches struggle in this regard, as they require
fixed, well-defined modelling environments, and
they cannot adapt to novel variables without redesigns, or incorporate new information without
re-training. To address this, we frame digital twinning as an in-context learning problem using large
language models, enabling seamless updates to
the twin at inference time. We develop CALMDT, a Context-Adaptive Language Model-based
Digital Twin that can accurately simulate across
diverse state-action spaces using in-context learning alone by utilising fine-tuned encoders for sample retrieval. We empirically demonstrate CALMDT’s competitive performance with existing digital twin approaches, and its unique ability to adapt
to changes in its modelling environment without
parameter updates.

Why must a digital twin be able to continuously update?
An important aspect of an effective DT is its ability to continuously learn and update as time passes (Tzachor et al., 2022;
National Academy of Engineering and National Academies
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2024). DTs operate in user-defined modelling environments, that dictate the
state and action variables they can model, and the data and
knowledge bases from which they can derive insights. In
dynamic settings, however, the variables that best describe
a system, the actions that apply to it, and the pertinent surrounding information can constantly evolve, and models
become obsolete if they cannot easily adjust to new conditions (Lu et al., 2018). Consider an illustrative example
of using DTs to guide care for patients with cystic fibrosis
(CF). Medical practice can evolve rapidly,1 exemplified by
the 2012 approval of Ivacaftor, a transformative therapy for
CF patients with specific gene mutations (Ramsey et al.,
2011). Such breakthroughs demand immediate integration
into clinical workflows, and if a CF patient’s DT cannot
easily adapt to incorporate novel treatments like Ivacaftor, it
can quickly lose relevance. Furthermore, given the rarity of
CF, there is limited patient data available, and therefore any
new information, such as annual data releases from the UK
CF registry,2 can be highly impactful. DTs that cannot continuously learn from new information will therefore perform
increasingly sub-optimally for CF patients over time.

1. Introduction
What is a digital twin? Digital twins (DTs) are computational models that simulate real-world system dynamics.
They have been applied in a variety of fields, such as finance
(Slepneva et al., 2021), climate science (Voosen, 2020), manufacturing (Rosen et al., 2015), and medicine (Katsoulakis
et al., 2024), and they are particularly useful for scenario
planning, by modelling how a system will respond to various actions (Tao et al., 2018; Corral-Acero et al., 2020).
For example, consider a medical patient with oropharyngeal
carcinoma, for whom deciding whether to sequentially or

Why do current approaches struggle to continuously
update? Existing DTs typically involve knowledge-driven
mechanistic components (Laubenbacher et al., 2024) defined
by expert-derived equations, data-driven machine learning
(ML) components (Kreuzer et al., 2024) defined by neural
networks, or some hybrid combination of these (Sokolov
et al., 2021; Holt et al., 2024). For these approaches, updating modelling environments can be laborious. Updating

1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Harry Amad <hmka3@cam.ac.uk>.

1

The FDA approved 50 novel drugs in 2024 (Food and Drug
Administration, 2024).
2
https://www.cysticfibrosis.org.uk/

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

