Accelerated Diffusion Models via Speculative Sampling

Valentin De Bortoli * 1 Alexandre Galashov * 1 Arthur Gretton 1 Arnaud Doucet 1

Abstract

eral techniques have been proposed to accelerate it. These
include distillation techniques (e.g. Salimans & Ho, 2022;
Meng et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023), better sampling
schemes (e.g. Karras et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Zhang
& Chen, 2023) and parallel simulation methods (e.g. Shih
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024). However, distillation techniques inherently require training a student model and often
underperform compared to the teacher model (Dieleman,
2024). While better sampling schemes can improve performance, using too small a number of steps does degrade
performance, see e.g. (Karras et al., 2022). Finally, parallel simulation methods relying on Picard iterations over a
sliding window have been proposed (Shih et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024). However, they are inherently iterative, requiring repeated parallel sampling within a
window until errors fall below a pre-specified tolerance.

Speculative sampling is a popular technique for
accelerating inference in Large Language Models
by generating candidate tokens using a fast draft
model and then accepting or rejecting them based
on the target model’s distribution. While speculative sampling was previously limited to discrete sequences, we extend it to diffusion models,
which generate samples via continuous, vectorvalued Markov chains. In this context, the target model is a high-quality but computationally
expensive diffusion model. We propose various
drafting strategies, including a simple and effective approach that does not require training a draft
model and is applicable out-of-the-box to any diffusion model. We demonstrate significant generation speedup on various diffusion models, halving
the number of function evaluations while generating exact samples from the target model. Finally,
we also show how this procedure can be used to
accelerate Langevin diffusions to sample unnormalized distributions.

In the context of Large Language Models (LLMs), various
techniques have also been proposed to speed up inference.
Notably, speculative sampling, first introduced by Leviathan
et al. (2023) and later proposed independently by Chen et al.
(2023), has become prominent in this area and has spawned
numerous extensions (Xia et al., 2024). Given a target LLM,
this algorithm enables faster sampling than serial token decoding without compromising quality, as the sampled tokens
remain exactly distributed according to the target model’s
distribution. This is achieved by considering a smaller and
faster LLM model generating a draft sequence. The target
model is then used to compute in parallel the conditional
probabilities of these draft tokens, and these probabilities
are used to decide sequentially whether to accept or reject
the draft tokens. Upon the first rejection, a new token is
sampled using an adjusted distribution combining the draft
and target distributions. Many extensions of speculative
sampling have been proposed to reduce latency; see Xia
et al. (2024) and further related works in Section 6.

1. Motivation
Denoising diffusion models (DDMs), introduced by SohlDickstein et al. (2015) and further developed by Ho et al.
(2020) and Song et al. (2021), are generative models exhibiting state-of-the-art performance in a wide variety of
domains. The core concept behind DDMs is the progressive transformation of a data distribution into a Gaussian
distribution through the addition of noise. Sample generation is achieved by simulating an approximation of the
time-reversal of this noising process. This requires multiple
evaluations of a neural network that approximates the scores
of the noising process, and typically involves simulating a
Markov chain over hundreds of steps.

In the present work, we adapt speculative sampling to accelerate DDMs. We assume a computationally cheap draft
model that generates a sequence of draft states for the denoising Markov chain of a target DDM. The transition probability densities of these states under the target model are
then computed in parallel and used to sequentially accept/reject the draft states. At rejection, a new state is sampled
from an adjusted distribution dependent on both the draft
and target distributions; see Figure 1. As for LLMs, the pro-

Since sample generation is computationally expensive, sev*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Valentin De Bortoli <vdebortoli@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

