Improving Your Model Ranking on Chatbot Arena by Vote Rigging

Rui Min * 1 2 Tianyu Pang * 1 Chao Du 1 Qian Liu 1 Minhao Cheng 3 Min Lin 1
Chatbot Arena

Abstract
After

Rank

74

Model

…

…
…

…

Chatbot Arena is a popular platform for evaluating
LLMs by pairwise battles, where users vote for
their preferred response from two randomly sampled anonymous models. While Chatbot Arena is
widely regarded as a reliable LLM ranking leaderboard, we show that crowdsourced voting can be
rigged to improve (or decrease) the ranking of a
target model mt . We first introduce a straightforward target-only rigging strategy that focuses on
new battles involving mt , identifying it via watermarking or a binary classifier, and exclusively
voting for mt wins. However, this strategy is practically inefficient because there are over 190 models on Chatbot Arena and on average only about
1% of new battles will involve mt . To overcome
this, we propose omnipresent rigging strategies,
exploiting the Elo rating mechanism of Chatbot
Arena that any new vote on a battle can influence
the ranking of the target model mt , even if mt is
not directly involved in the battle. We conduct
experiments on around 1.7 million historical votes
from the Chatbot Arena Notebook, showing that
omnipresent rigging strategies can improve model
rankings by rigging only hundreds of new votes.
While we have evaluated several defense mechanisms, our findings highlight the importance of
continued efforts to prevent vote rigging. Code is
publicly available to reproduce all experiments.

(After rigging)

Model

…

…

…

…

Before

Rank

89

(Before rigging)

Figure 1. We simulate rigging on new votes beyond the ∼ 1.7
million historical votes from the Chatbot Arena Notebook. In
this demo, we set the target model mt as Phi-3-small-8k-Instruct.
Under the normal voting distribution (w/o rigging), the ranking
remains steady, showing only a single rank increase despite the
addition of approximately 27,000 new votes. In contrast, vote
rigging significantly boosts mt ’s ranking. Using the omnipresent
strategy, we achieve a 15-rank improvement while being more
efficient compared to the target-only strategy.

models in downstream applications (Ouyang et al., 2022).
To meet this need, Chatbot Arena (Zheng et al., 2023a; Chiang et al., 2024) provides an open platform for conducting
pairwise battles between LLMs, where users vote for their
preferred response from two randomly selected anonymous
models. These votes are used to compute Elo ratings for
LLMs, with higher rankings on Chatbot Arena’s leaderboard
offering substantial promotional benefits.
Chatbot Arena is widely popular, but it relies on millions of
user votes collected in the wild, which can be noisy and biased. Several strategies have been implemented to enhance
the leaderboard’s reliability and reduce potential gameability, including controlling for output length and style (Dubois
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a), detecting anomalous voting
patterns and bot activity (Chiang et al., 2024), categorizing
prompts for data curation (Li et al., 2024b;c), and invalidating votes if anonymous model identities are revealed in the
responses (Chiang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
A variety of large language models (LLMs), both closedsource and open-source (OpenAI, 2024; Dubey et al., 2024),
are now available to the community. Evaluating their alignment with human preferences is crucial for selecting suitable
∗

Equal contribution. The project was done during Rui Min’s
internship at Sea AI Lab. 1 Sea AI Lab 2 Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology 3 Pennsylvania State University. Correspondence to: Tianyu Pang <tianyupang@sea.com>, Minhao
Cheng <mmc7149@psu.edu>.

Although these strategies have significantly reduced (mostly
unintentional) voting biases and noise, this paper demonstrates that crowdsourced votes in Chatbot Arena can still
be maliciously rigged to manipulate the ranking of a target model mt , either improving or decreasing it. We first
introduce a straightforward target-only rigging strategy

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

