Posterior Inference with Diffusion Models
for High-dimensional Black-box Optimization

Taeyoung Yun * 1 Kiyoung Om * 1 Jaewoo Lee 1 Sujin Yun 1 Jinkyoo Park 1

Abstract

Bayesian optimization (BO) (Kushner, 1964; Garnett, 2023)
is a powerful method for solving black-box optimization.
BO constructs a surrogate model from observed data and
finds an input that maximizes the acquisition function to
query the black-box function. However, it scales poorly to
high dimensions due to the curse of dimensionality (Wang
et al., 2016) and struggles scaling to thousands of evaluations (Wang et al., 2018; Eriksson et al., 2019). To address
these challenges, several approaches have been suggested
to scale up BO for high-dimensional optimization problems.
Some works propose a mapping from high-dimensional
space into low-dimensional subspace (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018; Maus et al., 2022; Nayebi et al., 2019; Letham
et al., 2020) or assume additive structures of the target function (Duvenaud et al., 2011; Rolland et al., 2018) to perform
optimization in low-dimensional spaces. However, these
methods often rely on unrealistic assumptions.

Optimizing high-dimensional and complex blackbox functions is crucial in numerous scientific applications. While Bayesian optimization (BO) is
a powerful method for sample-efficient optimization, it struggles with the curse of dimensionality
and scaling to thousands of evaluations. Recently,
leveraging generative models to solve black-box
optimization problems has emerged as a promising framework. However, those methods often
underperform compared to BO methods due to
limited expressivity and difficulty of uncertainty
estimation in high-dimensional spaces. To overcome these issues, we introduce DiBO, a novel
framework for solving high-dimensional blackbox optimization problems. Our method iterates
two stages. First, we train a diffusion model to
capture the data distribution and deep ensembles
to predict function values with uncertainty quantification. Second, we cast the candidate selection
as a posterior inference problem to balance exploration and exploitation in high-dimensional
spaces. Concretely, we fine-tune diffusion models
to amortize posterior inference. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines across synthetic and realworld tasks. Our code is publicly available here.

Other works partition the search space into promising local
regions and search candidates within such regions (Eriksson
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020), which exhibits promising
results. However, these methods may struggle to escape
from local optima within a limited number of evaluations
due to several challenges. First, it is notoriously difficult
to find an input that maximizes the acquisition function in
high-dimensional spaces since the function is often highly
non-convex and contains numerous local optima (Ament
et al., 2023). Furthermore, as the data points lie on a tiny
manifold compared to the entire search space, the uncertainty becomes extremely high in regions too far from the
dataset (Oh et al., 2018).

1. Introduction

Recently, generative model-based approaches have shown
promising results in black-box optimization (Brookes et al.,
2019; Kumar & Levine, 2020; Wu et al., 2024). These methods utilize an inverse mapping from function values to the
input domain and propose candidates via sampling from
the trained model conditioned on a high score. While they
alleviate aforementioned issues in BO by converting optimization as sampling (Janner et al., 2022), their performance
degrades in higher dimensions due to the limited expressivity of underlying models (Brookes et al., 2019; Kumar &
Levine, 2020) or the difficulty of uncertainty estimation in
high-dimensional spaces (Wu et al., 2024).

Optimizing high-dimensional and complex black-box functions is crucial in various scientific and engineering applications, including hyperparameter optimization (Šehić et al.,
2022), material discovery (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2017),
chemical design (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Griffiths
et al., 2023), and control systems (Candelieri et al., 2018).
*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST). Correspondence to: Taeyoung Yun
<99yty@kaist.ac.kr>, Kiyoung Om <se99an@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

