SparseVLM: Visual Token Sparsification for Efficient
Vision-Language Model Inference

Yuan Zhang * 1 Chun-Kai Fan * 1 Junpeng Ma * 2 Wenzhao Zheng 3 Tao Huang 4 Kuan Cheng 1
Denis Gudovskiy 5 Tomoyuki Okuno 5 Yohei Nakata 5 Kurt Keutzer 3 Shanghang Zhang 1

Abstract

significant progress. To combine visual signals with textual
semantics, the mainstream practice in VLMs (Team et al.,
2023; Bai et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024c;
2023a) employs sequential visual representation, where images are extracted into visual tokens and sent into an LLM
decoder. With modal alignment and instruction fine-tuning
(Du et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024a; Zhu et al., 2024b), recent
VLMs successfully adapt LLMs to the vision domain and
inherit their perception and reasoning abilities.

In vision-language models (VLMs), visual tokens
usually bear a significant amount of computational overhead despite sparsity of information
in them when compared to text tokens. To address this, most existing methods learn a network
to prune redundant visual tokens using certain
training data. Differently, we propose a textguided training-free token optimization mechanism dubbed SparseVLM that eliminates the need
of extra parameters or fine-tuning costs. Given
that visual tokens complement text tokens in
VLM’s linguistic reasoning, we select relevant
text tokens to rate the significance of visual tokens using self-attention matrices and, then, prune
visual tokens using the proposed strategy to maximize sparsity while retaining information. In
particular, we introduce a rank-based strategy to
adaptively determine the sparsification ratio for
each layer, alongside a token recycling method
that compresses pruned tokens into more compact
representations. Experimental results show that
SparseVLM increases the efficiency of various
VLMs in a number of image and video understanding tasks. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Gumpest/SparseVLMs.

Despite the promising performance, further incorporation of
visual tokens inevitably introduces a huge memory and computational overhead when compared to LLMs, particularly
for high-resolution images (Li et al., 2024c) and long videos
(Lin et al., 2024). For instance, a 672×672 image in LLaVA
(Liu et al., 2024b) yields 2304 visual tokens that span over
half of the context length. However, the information in
images is typically more sparse than in natural languages
(Marr, 2010), resulting in inefficiency when naı̈vely processing both modalities. To address this, existing methods
extract more compact image representations by modifying
the image encoder or projector (Alayrac et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2024b; Dai et al., 2023; Cha et al., 2024). While some
recent works further sparsify visual tokens during the decoding (Ye et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024a; Shang et al., 2024),
they still ignore the guidance from the language tokens,
which contradicts the multimodality paradigm. We argue
that visual tokens should be sparsified adaptively based
on the question prompt, as the model might focus on different parts (e.g., foreground or background) when dealing
with various questions as shown in Figure 1. Furthermore,
current approaches generally train a network to prune redundant visual tokens and require additional training data (Li
et al., 2024b; Ye et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
Benefiting from advancements in large language models
(LLMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron
et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a), the
realm of vision-language models (VLMs) has undergone

In this paper, we introduce a text-guided training-free framework dubbed SparseVLM for efficient vision language
model inference. We reuse the self-attention matrix of
visual-text tokens directly from the decoder layers without extra training parameters for sparsification. We ascertain that not all prompt tokens should be considered as
some could be less relevant, which leads to inaccurate correlation results and downgrades the performance of sparse

*
Equal contribution 1 State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Fudan University 3 EECS, UC Berkeley 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong
University 5 Panasonic Holdings Corporation. Correspondence to:
Wenzhao Zheng <wzzheng@berkeley.edu>, Shanghang Zhang
<shanghang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

