From Low Rank Gradient Subspace Stabilization to Low-Rank Weights:
Observations, Theories, and Applications

Ajay Jaiswal * 1 Yifan Wang * 2 Lu Yin 3 4 Shiwei Liu 3 5 Runjin Chen 1 Jiawei Zhao 6 Ananth Grama 2
Yuandong Tian 7 Zhangyang Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large Language Models’ (LLMs) weight matrices can often be expressed in low-rank form with
potential to relax memory and compute resource
requirements. Unlike prior efforts that focus on
developing novel matrix decompositions, in this
work we study the non-uniform low-rank properties of weight matrices in LLMs through the
lens of stabilizing gradient subspace. First, we
provide a theoretical framework to understand the
stabilization of gradient subspaces through Hessian analysis. Second, we empirically establish an
important relationship between gradient dynamics
and low-rank expressiveness of weight matrices.
Our findings reveal that different LLM components exhibit varying levels of converged lowrank structures, necessitating variable rank reduction across them to minimize drop in performance
due to compression. Drawing on this result, we
present Weight Low-Rank Projection (WeLore)
that unifies weight compression and memoryefficient fine-tuning into one, in a data-agnostic
and one-shot manner. When used as a compression technique, WeLore categorizes weight matrices into Low-rank Components (LRCs) and
Non-Low-rank Components (N-LRCs) and suitably encodes them for minimum performance loss.
Our gradient dynamics perspective illustrates that
LRCs tend to have better finetuning capabilities
and their standalone finetuning can closely mimic
and sometimes outperform the training loss trajectory and performance of full-finetuning with
notable memory and compute footprint reduction. Codes are available at https://github.
com/VITA-Group/WeLore.

Large language models (LLMs) are designed with a large
number of parameters to capture complex patterns and relationships in data. However, despite their huge size with
billions of parameters, these models’ weights often exhibit
low-rank structures in practice, offering potential to relax
memory and compute resource requirements. While many
efforts have focused on developing novel matrix decompositions for efficient training (Hu et al., 2021b; Dettmers et al.,
2023; Meng et al., 2024; Biderman et al., 2024b; Lialin et al.,
2023a) and model compression (Hsu et al., 2022b; Kaushal
et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023; Jaiswal et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2023b), the underlying mechanisms of how these low-rank
structures emerge remain insufficiently understood.
A fundamental question arises: Why do the weights of LLMs
tend to become low-rank? Prior efforts have proposed various explanations – one perspective focuses on the inherent
distribution of training data, which may reside on a lowdimensional manifold (Timor et al., 2022; Ergen & Pilanci,
2021; Ongie & Willett, 2022). For instance, when data
lie on a d-dimensional manifold, the weight matrices of a
two-layer ReLU network converge to a rank of at most d
(Ongie & Willett, 2022). Another explanation examines the
optimization dynamics, where certain training procedures
(e.g., SGD with weight decay) naturally favor convergence
to low-rank regions (Ji & Telgarsky, 2020; Le & Jegelka,
2022; Galanti et al., 2024).
In this work, we approach the low-rank phenomenon
through the lens of gradient subspace stabilization. Gradient dynamics during pretraining plays a crucial role in
shaping the weight subspace, acting like a stream that gradually sculpts the weight landscape. Through theoretical
analysis of gradient subspace stabilization via Hessian analysis, we establish a fundamental connection between gradient dynamics and the emergence of low-rank structures
in LLMs.A key insight from our analysis is the presence of
a distinct Hessian gap, indicating the emergence of a lowrank subspace in the weight space. Through accompanying
experiments, we identify two significant findings:

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Texas at Austin 2 Purdue University 3 Eindhoven University of Technology 4 University of Surrey
5
University of Oxford 6 California Institute of Technology 7 Meta
AI. Correspondence to: Ajay Jaiswal <ajayjaiswal@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. Different components of LLMs exhibit varying degrees
1

