Optimal Task Order for Continual Learning of Multiple Tasks

Ziyan Li 1 Naoki Hiratani 2

Abstract

et al.; Kontogianni et al., 2024).

Continual learning of multiple tasks remains a
major challenge for neural networks. Here, we
investigate how task order influences continual
learning and propose a strategy for optimizing it.
Leveraging a linear teacher-student model with
latent factors, we derive an analytical expression
relating task similarity and ordering to learning
performance. Our analysis reveals two principles
that hold under a wide parameter range: (1) tasks
should be arranged from the least representative
to the most typical, and (2) adjacent tasks should
be dissimilar. We validate these rules on both
synthetic data and real-world image classification
datasets (Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR100), demonstrating consistent performance improvements in both multilayer perceptrons and
convolutional neural networks. Our work thus
presents a generalizable framework for task-order
optimization in task-incremental continual learning.

One important yet relatively underexplored aspect of continual learning is task-order dependence. Previous work has
revealed that the order in which tasks are presented can significantly influence continual learning performance and also
explored various approaches to optimize task order (Lad
et al., 2009; Pentina et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2018; Bell &
Lawrence, 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2023). However, we still lack clear understanding on how ordering of
tasks influences the learning performance and how to order
tasks to achieve optimal performance. Figure 1 illustrates
this problem using a continual binary image classification
example, where a neural network is trained on three tasks: A
(Cat vs. Ship), B (Frog vs. Truck), and C (Horse vs. Deer).
Learning one task can influence performance on the others
in a complex manner (Figs. 1a and 1b). Consequently, in
this example, the C→B→A task order achieves a higher
average performance after training than the A→B→C order (Fig. 1c). The goal of this work is to understand this
task-order dependence in continual learning.
Task-order optimization requires some amount of knowledge on all tasks beforehand, making it infeasible in a
strictly online learning setting. Nevertheless, it remains
highly relevant for many learning problems. One scenario
is when data acquisition and training need to be conducted
in parallel, which may occur in the training of self-driving
algorithms (Verwimp et al., 2023) or medical image analysis
(Kumari et al., 2023). In this setting, it is beneficial to first
collect a small pilot dataset across all underlying tasks and
then determine the optimal order of data acquisition and
training to maximize knowledge transfer while minimizing
forgetting across tasks. To demonstrate the potential applicability of our theory to this problem, we provide numerical
evidence that, in continual visual recognition benchmarks,
an optimal task order estimated from just 1% of the data
significantly outperforms a random task order.

1. Introduction
The ability to learn multiple tasks continuously is a hallmark
of general intelligence. However, deep neural networks and
its applications, including large language models, struggle
with continual learning and often suffer from catastrophic
forgetting of previously acquired knowledge (McCloskey &
Cohen, 1989; French, 1999; Hadsell et al., 2020; Luo et al.,
2023). Although extensive work has been done to identify
when forgetting is most prevalent (Ramasesh et al.; Lee
et al., 2021) and how to mitigate it (French, 1991; Robins,
1995; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2017; Serra et al.,
2018; Rolnick et al., 2019), it remains unclear how to prevent forgetting while simultaneously promoting knowledge
transfer across tasks (Ke et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022; Ke

Moreover, in robotics applications (Lesort et al., 2020; Ibarz
et al., 2021), switching between tasks often involves physically rearranging objects around the robot, which is both
time-consuming and labor-intensive. As a result, switching
tasks on a trial-by-trial basis is often infeasible, necessitating
block-wise training. In this scenario, optimizing task order
could help maximize average performance across all tasks.

1

Department of Physics, Washington University in St Louis, St
Louis, USA 2 Department of Neuroscience, Washington University
in St Louis, St Louis, USA. Correspondence to: Naoki Hiratani
<hiratani@wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

