LLM-Assisted Semantically Diverse Teammate Generation
for Efficient Multi-agent Coordination

Lihe Li 1 2 Lei Yuan 1 2 3 Pengsen Liu 1 2 Tao Jiang 1 2 3 Yang Yu 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recently, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) has gained significant attention (Oroojlooy & Hajinezhad, 2023), demonstrating promising applications in
various fields such as autonomous driving (Zhang et al.,
2024c), domain calibration (Jiang et al., 2024), and financial trading (Huang et al., 2024). Classic MARL approaches (Lowe et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2021; Yu et al., 2022) primarily focus on training a group of
agents to cooperatively complete specific tasks and evaluate
their performance in the same setting. However, in open
multi-agent environments (Yuan et al., 2023b), agents are
often required to team up with unseen teammates exhibiting
diverse coordination behaviors. For instance, autonomous
driving agents frequently encounter human drivers with a
wide range of driving behaviors. In such scenarios, agents
trained using conventional MARL techniques may struggle to coordinate effectively, as they tend to overfit to the
behaviors of their training teammates.

Training with diverse teammates is the key for
learning generalizable agents. Typical approaches
aim to generate diverse teammates by utilizing
techniques like randomization, designing regularization terms, or reducing policy compatibility, etc. However, such teammates lack semantic information, resulting in inefficient teammate
generation and poor adaptability of the agents.
To tackle these challenges, we propose Semantically Diverse Teammate Generation (S EM D IV),
a novel framework leveraging the capabilities of
large language models (LLMs) to discover and
learn diverse coordination behaviors at the semantic level. In each iteration, S EM D IV first generates a novel coordination behavior described in
natural language, then translates it into a reward
function to train a teammate policy. Once the
policy is verified to be meaningful, novel, and
aligned with the behavior, the agents train a policy for coordination. Through this iterative process, S EM D IV efficiently generates a diverse set
of semantically grounded teammates, enabling
agents to develop specialized policies, and select
the most suitable ones through language-based
reasoning to adapt to unseen teammates. Experiments show that S EM D IV generates teammates covering a wide range of coordination behaviors, including those unreachable by baseline
methods. Evaluation across four MARL environments, each with five unseen representative teammates, demonstrates S EM D IV’s superior coordination and adaptability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/lilh76/SemDiv.

Training with diverse teammates is the key for learning generalizable MARL agents. To generate diverse teammates,
recent research in areas such as ad-hoc teamwork (Mirsky
et al., 2022) and zero-shot coordination (Treutlein et al.,
2021) has emerged. FCP (Strouse et al., 2021) trains teammates using different random seeds, while TrajeDi (Lupu
et al., 2021) and MEP (Zhao et al., 2023) introduce diversity regularization terms for teammates. Other methods
like LIPO (Charakorn et al., 2023), Macop (Yuan et al.,
2023a), BRDiv (Rahman et al., 2023), and L-BRDiv (Rahman et al., 2024) induce diversity by reducing compatibility
among teammates or between teammates and agents. While
achieving some progress, these approaches primarily focus
on policy-level diversity, generating teammates that lack
semantic information and are not grounded into specific
coordination behaviors. This limitation results in two significant challenges. First, the exploration of the teammate
policy space is inefficient, as teammates are driven to optimize for differences at the policy-level rather than actively
discovering novel coordination behaviors at the semanticlevel. Second, agents are unable to utilize semantic information, and limited to trial-and-error interactions for teammate
adaptation, hindering their deployment in costly tasks.

1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
University 3 Polixir Technologies. Correspondence to: Lei Yuan
<yuanl@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Yang Yu <yuy@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

