WATCH: Adaptive Monitoring for AI Deployments
via Weighted-Conformal Martingales

Drew Prinster 1 Xing Han 1 Anqi Liu 1 Suchi Saria 1

Abstract

ditions is essential for responsible deployment. However,
even meticulously trained models with apparent reliability
guarantees can fail abruptly when shifts in the data distribution or operational environment violate the underlying
conditions they were designed for (Amodei et al., 2016).
That is, unforeseen deployment conditions can make it impossible to guarantee reliability for all situations in advance.
Consequently, there is growing recognition for the need to
continuously monitor deployed AI systems for determining
when model updates are required to mitigate downstream
harm (Vovk et al., 2021; Podkopaev and Ramdas, 2021b;
Feng et al., 2022; 2025). In this work, we moreover argue
that such monitoring methods should ideally perform at least
three key functions: (1) maintain end-user reliability and
minimize unnecessary alarms by adapting online to mild
or benign data shifts; (2) rapidly detect more extreme or
harmful shifts that necessitate updates; and (3) identify the
root-cause of degradation to inform appropriate recovery.

Responsibly deploying artificial intelligence (AI) /
machine learning (ML) systems in high-stakes settings arguably requires not only proof of system
reliability, but also continual, post-deployment
monitoring to quickly detect and address any unsafe behavior. Methods for nonparametric sequential testing—especially conformal test martingales (CTMs) and anytime-valid inference—
offer promising tools for this monitoring task.
However, existing approaches are restricted to
monitoring limited hypothesis classes or “alarm
criteria” (e.g., detecting data shifts that violate certain exchangeability or IID assumptions), do not
allow for online adaptation in response to shifts,
and/or cannot diagnose the cause of degradation
or alarm. In this paper, we address these limitations by proposing a weighted generalization of
conformal test martingales (WCTMs), which lay
a theoretical foundation for online monitoring for
any unexpected changepoints in the data distribution while controlling false-alarms. For practical
applications, we propose specific WCTM algorithms that adapt online to mild covariate shifts
(in the marginal input distribution), quickly detect
harmful shifts, and diagnose those harmful shifts
as concept shifts (in the conditional label distribution) or extreme (out-of-support) covariate shifts
that cannot be easily adapted to. On real-world
datasets, we demonstrate improved performance
relative to state-of-the-art baselines.

For example, consider a healthcare use case where the goal
is to predict the risk of sepsis, a life-threatening infection,
Y from electronic health record inputs X (e.g., vital signs,
lab tests, medical history, demographics) using an AI/ML
system (e.g., Adams et al. (2022)). Various clinical data
shifts pose challenges to monitoring in practice (Finlayson
et al., 2021). Figure 1 illustrates hypothetical synthetic-data
shifts that can be interpreted through this sepsis example,
where for simplicity X only represents a patient’s age. An
example of a benign shift is a mild shift in patient demographics primarily toward young adults; Figure 1a shows a
corresponding covariate shift in the marginal X distribution.
Such a mild shift to a younger population would be benign,
as younger individuals are well-represented in the training
data and also tend to have lower, less variable (easier to
predict) sepsis risk—so, there is no need for an alarm. On
the other hand, harmful shift examples include if the AI tool
were deployed with a much older population than observed
in the training data (e.g., Figure 1b) or if a new microbial
strain were to arise that was especially severe in children
(e.g., Figure 1c). In any such harmful shift case, swift detection and root-cause analysis is essential to initiate and
inform retraining, to ultimately minimize harm.

1. Introduction
As AI/ML systems become integral to real-world applications, ensuring their safety and utility under evolving con1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Drew Prinster <drewprinster@gmail.com>, Xing Han <aaronhan223@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Recent advances in anytime-valid inference (Ramdas et al.,

1

