Learning Classifiers That Induce Markets

Yonatan Sommer 1 Ivri Hikri * 1 Lotan Amit * 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1
x′ incurs a cost to the user. These costs are typically modeled via a cost function c(x, x′ ) that underlies user decisions,
and hence governs strategic behavior. The vast majority of
the literature considers costs as predetermined and fixed;
even if unknown to the learner, costs are still assumed to
simply ‘exist’. But where do costs come from, what form
do they take, and how do they come to be? Challenging the
conventional assumption of exogenous costs, our works sets
out to propose and study alternative cost mechanisms.

Abstract
When learning is used to inform decisions about
humans, such as for loans, hiring, or admissions,
this can incentivize users to strategically modify
their features, at a cost, to obtain positive predictions. The common assumption is that the
function governing costs is exogenous, fixed, and
predetermined. We challenge this assumption,
and assert that costs emerge as a result of deploying a classifier. Our idea is simple: when users
seek positive predictions, this creates demand for
important features; and if features are available
for purchase, then a market will form, and competition will give rise to prices. We extend the strategic classification framework to support this notion,
and study learning in a setting where a classifier
can induce a market for features. We present an
analysis of the learning task, devise an algorithm
for computing market prices, propose a differentiable learning framework, and conduct experiments to explore our novel setting and approach.

One such alternative, and the focus of our paper, is the idea
that costs can materialize through market forces: the classifier creates demand, suppliers set prices, and users pay
for items or services that aid them in securing positive predictions. As an example, consider university admissions,
which often rely on standardized test scores (e.g., SAT).
Since these affect acceptance decisions, students are incentivized to improve their scores; this, in turn, has created a
(billion-dollar) market for preparation courses. We posit that
the price of such courses is determined by the importance
of standardized tests as a feature in the decision rule for
admission: if a policy update changes the relative weight of
test scores, then prices should adjust accordingly.1 Note that
such changes also affect who will—and even who can—take
such costly courses. This, in turn, can affect the eventual
composition of admitted students. If a learned classifier is
to be used to inform such decisions, then learning must be
aware of, and accountable for, the market it fosters.

1. Introduction
Strategic classification (Hardt et al., 2016; Brückner et al.,
2012) considers learning in a setting where users can strategically manipulate their features to obtain positive predictions. This applies to tasks such as loan approval, job hiring,
school admissions, insurance claims, and welfare benefits,
in which the interests of users (e.g., getting the loan or being
hired) may not be aligned with the system’s learning objective of maximizing accuracy. The primary goal of strategic
learning is to train classifiers that are robust to such responsive user behavior, an idea that has gained much recent
traction (see Sec. 1.1 for a partial list of related work).

Our paper formalizes this idea and applies it to the framework of strategic classification. When users seek positive
predictions, this creates demand for features that are important for classification; and if features are available for
‘purchase’ from sellers, then a competitive market is formed.
The cost of obtaining features is then determined by their
market price, which is reflective of their market value, and
users can purchase any bundle of features whose price is
within their budget. Crucially, prices are not given nor predetermined; rather, they depend on the learned classifier
through how it shapes demand, as it relates to the entire data
distribution. This means that to obtain a strategically robust
classifier, learning must be able to anticipate the market it
induces. We refer to this as market-aware classification. To

A core assumption of strategic classification is that feature
manipulation is costly, i.e., that modifying x to some other
*

Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Nir
Rosenfeld <nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

For broader discussion on changes in SAT policy as they relate to
strategic behavior see Liu & Garg (2021).

