Tracking the Best Expert Privately

Hilal Asi * 1 Vinod Raman * 2 Aadirupa Saha * 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Online learning with experts is a fundamental problem
in machine learning, where an online algorithm interacts
with an adversary for T rounds (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi,
2006). In the general form of the problem with N experts, at each round t, the environment chooses a loss vector
ℓt : [N ] 7→ [0, 1], upon which the learner chooses an expert
Jt ∈ [N ] from the pool of N experts. In the classical setting
of online learning, we measure the loss of the learning algorithm compared to the loss of the ‘best-expert’ in hindsight,
denoted as the (static) regret

We design differentially private algorithms for
the problem of prediction with expert advice
under dynamic regret, also known as tracking
the best expert. Our work addresses three natural types of adversaries, stochastic with shifting distributions, oblivious, and adaptive, and
designs algorithms with sub-linear regret for
all three cases. In particular, under a shifting stochastic adversary where the distribution
may shift S times, we provide an ε-differentially
private algorithm whose expected dynamic re
p
T)
gret is at most O
ST log(N T ) + S log(N
,
ε
where T and N are the time horizon and
number of experts, respectively. For oblivious adversaries, we give a reduction from
dynamic regret minimization to static regret
minimization,
resulting in an upper bound
p

1/3
/δ) log(N T )
of O
ST log(N T ) + ST log(T
ε2/3
on the expected dynamic regret, where S now denotes the allowable number of switches of the best
expert. Finally, similar to static regret, we establish a fundamental separation between oblivious
and adaptive adversaries for the dynamic setting:
while our algorithms show that sub-linear regret
is achievable for oblivious
p adversaries in the highprivacy regime ε ≤ S/T , we show that any
(ε, δ)-differentially private algorithm must suffer
linear dynamic
regret under adaptive adversaries
p
for ε ≤ S/T . Finally, to complement this lower
bound, we give an ε-differentially private algorithm that attains sub-linear dynamicp
regret under
adaptive adversaries whenever ε ≫ S/T .

RT =

T
X
t=1

ℓt (Jt ) − ⋆min

j ∈[N ]

T
X

ℓt (j ⋆ ).

t=1

However, comparing against a single fixed expert can often
be unrealistic in practical applications. Even the best fixed
expert may perform poorly on average over the entire loss sequence, especially when loss sequences dynamically change
over time or undergo significant distributional shifts, as is
common in stochastic settings. This limitation motivates
the concept of dynamic regret (Herbster & Warmuth, 1998;
Wei et al., 2016), which provides a more flexible and robust
benchmark. Unlike static regret, which evaluates against
the best fixed expert, dynamic regret compares against a
sequence of changing experts, enabling the model to adapt
to evolving environments. In particular, the dynamic regret
is
T
T
X
X
DRT =
ℓt (Jt ) − ⋆ min
ℓt (jt⋆ ),
⋆
t=1

j1 ,...,jT ∈[N ]

t=1

subject to the constraint that the sequence {jt⋆ } does not
switch too often. Intuitively, dynamic regret measures how
well the algorithm competes against the best possible sequence of decisions that could adapt to changes, constrained
by a limited number of switches between experts. This
notion is particularly relevant for real-world applications
like financial markets, where optimal strategies vary with
market conditions, or recommendation systems, where user
preferences evolve over time.

*

Equal contribution 1 Apple 2 Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Work done while interning at Apple
3
University of Illinios, Chicago. The majority of the work was
done while the author was with Apple Research. Correspondence
to: Vinod Raman <vkraman@umich.edu>.

By inspecting definitions, it is clear that minimizing dynamic regret is harder than static regret. This difficulty
manifests even if one measures dynamic regret against sequences of experts with a single switch. As a result, exist-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

