Learning Smooth and Expressive Interatomic Potentials for
Physical Property Prediction

Xiang Fu 1 Brandon M. Wood 1 Luis Barroso-Luque 1 Daniel S. Levine 1 Meng Gao 1 Misko Dzamba 1
C. Lawrence Zitnick 1

Abstract

Predicting physical properties in chemistry and materials science often requires complex workflows involving numerous
evaluations of DFT or MLIPs. For example, in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, forces are predicted over
thousands to millions of time steps. However, the MLIP
literature has mostly focused on assessing models based on
energy and force predictions over static DFT test sets rather
than directly assessing their performance in complex simulations. This approach has limitations, as improved accuracy
on test sets does not always lead to better predictions of
physical properties (Póta et al., 2024; Loew et al., 2024).

Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs)
have become increasingly effective at approximating quantum mechanical calculations at a fraction
of the computational cost. However, lower errors
on held out test sets do not always translate to improved results on downstream physical property
prediction tasks. In this paper, we propose testing MLIPs on their practical ability to conserve
energy during molecular dynamic simulations. If
passed, improved correlations are found between
test errors and their performance on physical property prediction tasks. We identify choices which
may lead to models failing this test, and use these
observations to improve upon highly-expressive
models. The resulting model, eSEN, provides
state-of-the-art results on a range of physical property prediction tasks, including materials stability
prediction, thermal conductivity prediction, and
phonon calculations.

In this paper, we address two questions: Why does higher
test accuracy sometimes fail to enhance a model’s ability to
predict physical properties, and how can we improve MLIPs
to excel in this area? We first outline four critical property
prediction tasks and identify the properties required for an
MLIP to succeed in these tasks. These properties entail
learning a conservative model with continuous and bounded
energy derivatives, indicating a smoothly-varying and physically meaningful energy landscape. To test whether these
properties hold, we propose testing the ability of MLIPs to
practically conserve energy in MD simulations. We demonstrate models that pass this test have a higher correlation
between test errors and property prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Density Functional Theory (DFT), which models the electrons in materials and molecules, serves as the foundation
for many modern drug and materials discovery workflows.
Unfortunately, DFT calculations are notoriously computationally intensive, scaling cubically with the number of
electrons in the system: O(n3 ). Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) are promising in approximating
and expediting DFT calculations. With increasing data set
sizes and model innovations, MLIPs have shown substantial improvements in accuracy and generalization capabilities (Batatia et al., 2023; Merchant et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2024; Barroso-Luque et al., 2024).

Building on these insights, we present a novel MLIP
called eSEN and training approach that achieves state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance on complex property prediction tasks. Specifically, our model is capable of running
energy-conserving MD simulations for out-of-distribution
systems (Figure 1 (a)). For materials stability prediction,
eSEN achieves a leading F1 score of 0.831 and a κSRME
of 0.340 on the compliant Matbench-Discovery benchmark (Riebesell et al., 2023; Póta et al., 2024). Previous
models are only able to excel in one of these metrics ( Figure 1 (b,c)). We also achieve a SOTA F1 score of 0.925
and κSRME of 0.170 on the non-compliant category. On the
MDR Phonon benchmark (Loew et al., 2024), SOTA results
are found (Figure 1 (d)). Finally, eSEN achieves the highest
test accuracy on the SPICE-MACE-OFF dataset (Kovács
et al., 2023).

1

Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) at Meta. Correspondence
to: Xiang Fu <xiangfu@meta.com>, C. Lawrence Zitnick <zitnick@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

