Selective Prompt Anchoring for Code Generation

Yuan Tian 1 Tianyi Zhang 1

Abstract

this challenge, various prompting methods have been explored to enhance the inference process of code LLMs, e.g.,
retrieval-augmented generation (Du et al., 2024), chain-ofthoughts (Le et al., 2024; Suzgun et al., 2022), self-planning
and debugging (Jiang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024), etc.

Recent advances in large language models
(LLMs) have transformed software development
by automatically generating code from natural
language. Yet challenges remain in generating
fully correct code that aligns with user intent.
Our study reveals that LLMs tend to pay less
attention to user prompts as more code tokens
are generated. We hypothesize that this attention dilution issue is an important reason for code
generation errors. To mitigate this issue, we propose Selective Prompt Anchoring (S PA) to guide
code LLMs to pay more attention to user intent
when generating code. We evaluate S PA using
six base LLMs across six benchmarks. Our results demonstrate that S PA enhances Pass@1 by
up to 12.9%, consistently outperforming SOTA
methods in all settings. Our code is available
at https://github.com/magic-YuanTian/SelectivePrompt-Anchoring.

Despite these efforts, little is known about why LLMs fail
to generate correct code. In this work, we seek to bridge
the knowledge gap by investigating the attention pattern of
LLMs during code generation. We analyzed five code LLMs
and found that as more code tokens were generated, LLMs
paid less attention to the user prompt. This caused LLMs
to gradually deviate from the user intent, thereby leading to
code generation errors. Furthermore, we found that more
generated tokens led to worse code generation performance,
demonstrating their struggle with long-term attention.
To mitigate this limitation, we propose Selective Prompt
Anchoring (S PA), a model-agnostic approach that optimizes
LLMs’ attention by amplifying the contextual impact of the
user prompt. S PA is inspired by the anchoring effect (Furnham & Boo, 2011) in psychology, which refers to the phenomenon where humans can be influenced by specific information provided before decision-making. In S PA, we refer
to this information as anchored text, a group of selected
prompt tokens that should receive higher attention from the
model than others. Figure 1 illustrates the workflow of S PA.
Given the anchored text, S PA creates an original embedding
1 ) as well as a masked embedding matrix by rematrix (⃝
placing the embeddings corresponding to anchored text with
mask embeddings ( 2
⃝). We mathematically show that the
anchored text’s contextual impact can be approximated by
the difference between the logit distribution generated from
the original prompt and the prompt with the anchored text
masked ( 3
⃝). To amplify the impact of anchored text during code generation, S PA multiplies this logit distribution
difference by a hyperparameter called anchoring strength
(4
⃝), and then adds it to the original logit distribution ( 5
⃝).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful programming assistants. They have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities in interpreting natural language
descriptions of programming tasks and generating source
code (Guo et al., 2024; Rozière et al., 2024). Despite this
great progress, LLMs still produce incorrect solutions to
challenging tasks or generate code that does not fully meet
user expectations (Wang et al., 2024; Ning et al., 2023).
To improve the performance of LLMs on coding tasks, many
efforts have been made to develop high-quality training
data (Li et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2023) and
design new domain-specific training objectives (Niu et al.,
2022; Chakraborty et al., 2022). However, these approaches
require tremendous computational resources. To address

We evaluate S PA on six benchmarks using six code LLMs.
The benchmarks cover different programming languages
and task difficulty levels, while the LLMs vary in size
and code generation performance. S PA enhances Pass@1
by up to 12.9% across all settings, outperforming four
SOTA prompting methods and one SOTA attention steering
method. Notably, with S PA, a smaller version of DeepSeek-

1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Yuan Tian
<tian211@purdue.edu>, Tianyi Zhang <tianyi@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

