From Mechanistic Interpretability to Mechanistic Biology: Training, Evaluating,
and Interpreting Sparse Autoencoders on Protein Language Models

Etowah Adams * 1 Liam Bai * 2 Minji Lee 1 Yiyang Yu 1 Mohammed AlQuraishi 1

Abstract

teins useful for downstream tasks including protein structure
(Lin et al., 2023) and function (Rao et al., 2019; Notin et al.,
2022) prediction. For this reason, pLMs have become a
growing component of the protein biologist’s toolkit.

Protein language models (pLMs) are powerful predictors of protein structure and function, learning
through unsupervised training on millions of protein sequences. pLMs are thought to capture common motifs in protein sequences, but the specifics
of pLM features are not well understood. Identifying these features would not only shed light on
how pLMs work, but potentially uncover novel
protein biology––studying the model to study the
biology. Motivated by this, we train sparse autoencoders (SAEs) on the residual stream of a
pLM, ESM-2. By characterizing SAE features,
we determine that pLMs use a combination of
generic features and family-specific features to
represent a protein. In addition, we demonstrate
how known sequence determinants of properties
such as thermostability and subcellular localization can be identified by linear probing of SAE
features. For predictive features without known
functional associations, we hypothesize their role
in unknown mechanisms and provide visualization tools to aid their interpretation. Our study
gives a better understanding of the limitations of
pLMs, and demonstrates how SAE features can
be used to help generate hypotheses for biological
mechanisms. We release our code, model weights
and feature visualizer.

As these models are widely adopted, a number of studies
have investigated their inner workings to understand their
limitations. Previous work suggests pLMs do not learn the
biophysics of proteins, but rather store common sequence
motifs and contacts (Zhang et al., 2024). For many downstream tasks, pLM performance is driven by features learned
in early layers and does not scale well with pre-training (Li
et al., 2024). Yet exactly what pLMs have learned about
proteins remains unknown.
Recent work in mechanistic interpretability points to a path
forward. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have successfully
extracted interpretable features from large language models
(LLMs) like GPT-4 and Claude (Gao et al., 2024; Templeton et al., 2024). SAEs decompose model activations into
a sparse, high-dimensional representation where individual latent dimensions often have interpretable activation
patterns. These features provide a window into the inner
workings of these complex models. Training SAEs on pLMs
can serve an additional purpose. Unlike natural languages,
which we intuitively understand, the language of proteins
is more cryptic. SAE features from pLMs could potentially
unveil patterns in protein sequences that we have not yet
discovered.
In this work, we train SAEs on the residual stream of ESM2, a widely used pLM (Lin et al., 2022) (Figure 1a). To
interpret the SAE latents, we develop InterProt, a tool that
visualizes latent activations on protein sequences and structures. We find that some features are highly interpretable,
corresponding to a range of concepts from secondary structure elements to entire domains, as reported contemporaneously by Simon & Zou (2024). We conduct a human
evaluation study and find that SAE latents are consistently
rated as interpretable, in contrast to the ESM baseline. Furthermore, we find that many features activate highly only
on specific protein families, suggesting that pLMs rely on
internal representations of protein families to perform their
pre-training task. We introduce a method to categorize SAE
latents based on their family specificity and activation pat-

1. Introduction
Protein language models (pLMs) are language models
trained on large datasets of protein sequences. In the process of minimizing loss on their pre-training task–usually
masked token prediction–they learn representations of pro*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Systems Biology,
Columbia University 2 Ginkgo Bioworks, Boston. Correspondence
to: Etowah Adams <ea2901@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

