Bi-perspective Splitting Defense: Achieving Clean-Seed-Free Backdoor Security

Yangyang Shen 1 Xiao Tan 1 Dian Shen 1 Meng Wang 2 Beilun Wang 1

Abstract

impact. Owing to their non-model-manipulation property
and congruence with actual model training scenarios, data
poisoning-based backdoor attacks (Goldblum et al., 2022;
Shafahi et al., 2018) stand out as prevalent and impactful
threats, highlighting the importance of backdoor defense research. Taking facial recognition as an example (Figure 1),
poisoned data may induce DNNs to erroneously learn a
strong correlation between the adversary-defined trigger
pattern (e.g., sunglasses) and the target label (e.g., a highauthority individual). While behaving normally without the
trigger, the backdoored model predicts any individuals wearing sunglasses as the predetermined high-authority person.

Backdoor attacks have seriously threatened deep
neural networks (DNNs) by embedding concealed
vulnerabilities through data poisoning. To counteract these attacks, training benign models from
poisoned data garnered considerable interest from
researchers. High-performing defenses often rely
on additional clean subsets/seeds, which is untenable due to increasing privacy concerns and data
scarcity. In the absence of additional clean subsets/seeds, defenders resort to complex feature extraction and analysis, resulting in excessive overhead and compromised performance. To address
these challenges, we identify the key lies in sufficient utilization of both the easier-to-obtain target
labels and clean hard samples. In this work, we
propose a Bi-perspective Splitting Defense (BSD).
BSD distinguishes clean samples using both semantic and loss statistics characteristics through
open set recognition-based splitting (OSS) and altruistic model-based data splitting (ALS) respectively. Through extensive experiments on benchmark datasets and against representative attacks,
we empirically demonstrate that BSD surpasses
existing defenses by over 20% in average Defense
Effectiveness Rating (DER), achieving clean datafree backdoor security.

: Steve
: Alex

Trigger

‘Steve’ Target label

✅ Access

Access

: Steve

: Steve

: Efe

: Sunny

: Steve

Train

Face verification
DNN

(a) Backdoor injection though data-poisoning

Steve’s
❎ Denial

chest

(b) Clean data inference

Steve’s
chest
(c) Poison data inference

Figure 1. Illustration of data-poisoning-based backdoor attacks.

Recently, a branch of in-training defenses has focused on
training benign models directly from poisoned data, which
is particularly significant when developing our own models
using untrustworthy datasets. They primarily adhere to a
data-splitting paradigm that differentiates between benign
and poisoned samples, and disrupts the association between
trigger patterns and target labels to mitigate backdoor behaviors (Li et al., 2021a; Huang et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023).
However, these defenses either highly rely on impractical
clean subsets/seeds(i.e., additional clean data outside the
training set; hereafter referred to as “clean subsets” or “clean
seeds”) or have unsatisfactory performance due to limited
defensive perspective.

1. Introduction
Recent studies exposed the vulnerabilities of deep neural
networks (DNNs) to various attacks (Carlini & Wagner,
2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Kurakin et al., 2018;
Zeng et al., 2019; Ilyas et al., 2018), among which backdoor attacks (Li et al., 2022; Wenger et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020) have emerged as a significant threat due to their ease of execution and profound

Clean subsets have proven effective in various backdoor
defenses (Zhu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2018; Wu & Wang,
2021; Zeng et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023a; Gao et al., 2023),
as they provide insights into benign samples. However,
recollecting a clean subset can be prohibitively expensive,
especially when the training set contains numerous classes
(e.g., acquiring new benign facial records for millions of
individuals in a facial recognition database). Additionally,
manually inspecting a large training set to identify a clean
subset is both labor-intensive and raises significant privacy
concerns. Seemingly effective, some methods expand the
clean subset under the premise that an additional clean set

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 2 College of Design and Innovation, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Beilun Wang
<beilun@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

