Linear Mode Connectivity between Multiple Models modulo Permutation
Symmetries

Akira Ito 1 Masanori Yamada 1 Atsutoshi Kumagai 2 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep neural networks have achieved great success in various fields, including image classification, speech recognition, and natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017;
van den Oord et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2023). The optimization of the large neural network (NN) models used in
these applications poses a massive non-convex optimization
problem. Nevertheless, stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
despite its simplicity, consistently finds good solutions. One
hypothesis for this seemingly contradictory situation is that
the loss functions of NNs have a much simpler structure than
we might imagine. Several prior studies have empirically
shown that solutions of different NNs can be connected by
simple low-loss nonlinear paths. Furthermore, in recent
years, Entezari et al. (2022) hypothesized that the following
conjecture holds when all permutation symmetries of NNs
are taken into account.

Ainsworth et al. (2023) empirically demonstrated
that linear mode connectivity (LMC) can be
achieved between two independently trained neural networks (NNs) by applying an appropriate parameter permutation. LMC is satisfied if a linear
path with non-increasing test loss exists between
the models, suggesting that NNs trained with
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) converge to a
single approximately convex low-loss basin under
permutation symmetries. However, Ainsworth
et al. (2023) verified LMC for two models and
provided only limited discussion on its extension
to multiple models. In this paper, we conduct
a more detailed empirical analysis. First, we
show that existing permutation search methods designed for two models can fail to transfer multiple
models into the same convex low-loss basin. Next,
we propose a permutation search method using
a straight-through estimator for multiple models
(STE-MM). We then experimentally demonstrate
that even when multiple models are given, the test
loss of the merged model remains nearly the same
as the losses of the original models when using
STE-MM, and the loss barriers between all permuted model pairs are also small. Additionally,
from the perspective of the trace of the Hessian
matrix, we show that the loss sharpness around the
merged model decreases as the number of models increases with STE-MM, indicating that LMC
for multiple models is more likely to hold. The
source code implementing our method is available
at https://github.com/e5-a/STE-MM.

Conjecture 1.1 (Permutation invariance, informal). Let θa
and θb be two SGD solutions (trained model parameters).
With high probability, there exists a permutation π such that
the loss barrier between θa and π(θb ) is sufficiently small.
Here, a barrier refers to the increase in the loss observed
during linear interpolation between two models. When the
barrier between two models is sufficiently small, we say
that linear mode connectivity (LMC) holds between those
models. Entezari et al. (2022) hypothesized that LMC can
be achieved by considering the permutation symmetries
of NNs. Subsequently, Ainsworth et al. (2023) and Singh
& Jaggi (2020) empirically demonstrated that appropriate
permutation search methods can identify permutations that
satisfy Conjecture 1.1. Based on these findings, Ainsworth
et al. (2023); Entezari et al. (2022) argued that the weights
of trained multiple models can be transferred into a single
approximately convex loss basin. If this claim holds, the
optimization of NNs could be interpreted as approximately
convex optimization, thereby explaining the effectiveness
of SGD. In addition, analyzing LMC among multiple models under permutation symmetries is important not only for
understanding how SGD works but also for model merging,
where independently trained models are combined. For example, permutation-based model merging has the potential
to combine multiple models without significant costs, such

1

NTT Social Informatics Laboratories 2 NTT Computer and
Data Science Laboratories. Correspondence to: Akira Ito
<akira.itoh@ntt.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

