Lower Bounds for Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Hard-Attention Transformers

Alireza Amiri 1 Xinting Huang 2 Mark Rofin 2 Michael Hahn 2

Abstract
Chain-of-thought reasoning and scratchpads have
emerged as critical tools for enhancing the computational capabilities of transformers. While
theoretical results show that polynomial-length
scratchpads can extend transformers’ expressivity from T C 0 to P T IM E, their required length
remains poorly understood. Empirical evidence
even suggests that transformers need scratchpads
even for many problems in T C 0 , such as PAR ITY or M ULTIPLICATION, challenging optimistic
bounds derived from circuit complexity. In this
work, we initiate the study of systematic lower
bounds for the number of CoT steps across different algorithmic problems, in the hard-attention
regime. We study a variety of algorithmic problems, and provide bounds that are tight up to logarithmic factors. Overall, these results contribute
to emerging understanding of the power and limitations of chain-of-thought reasoning1 .

f(1)

f(11)

f(111)

f(1110)

f(11101)

1

0

1

1

0

Tr ans f or mer

1

1

1

0

1 SEP 1

0

1

1

f(1)

f(11)

f(111)

f(1110)

Figure 1: High-sensitivity problems such as PARITY are difficult to learnably and generalizably represent for transformers. Such problems can be solved by CoTs decomposing
them into a sequence of local steps. We study the length that
such CoTs need to have, as a function of the input length.

quences without compromising quality became an important
research direction (Deng et al., 2024). At the same time,
there is so far little understanding of the minimal sufficient
length of the CoT in a given case; thus the theoretical limits
of CoT compression are unclear.
To gain understanding of those limits, we take up the problem of provably bounding the length of CoT sequences
sufficient to solve various algorithmic problems with transformers. By providing the lower bounds on the length of the
CoT, our paper complements an established line of research
on the expressive power of transformers that has focused on
the model size when the answer is provided without CoT
(e.g. Strobl et al., 2023; Bhattamishra et al., 2020a; Sanford
et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Chain-of-Thought reasoning (CoT) has become a standard
practice for solving hard problems with LLMs, enhancing the capabilities of Transformers (Nye et al., 2021; Wei
et al., 2022b) and powering a new generation of state-ofthe-art models, such as OpenAI o1 (Jaech et al., 2024) and
DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025). Models trained under
this paradigm are optimized to generate a long CoT before
answering any user’s request, which significantly elevates
their reasoning abilities. However, the use of CoT may substantially increase the number of tokens produced by the
model and raise the inference costs (Han et al., 2024), in
some cases reaching millions of tokens for a single task
(Chollet, 2025). Hence, shortening the generated CoT se-

A simple example is the PARITY function – deciding
whether the number of 1’s in a bit string is even or odd.
Transformers empirically struggle to learn it on longer inputs (e.g. Bhattamishra et al., 2020a; Delétang et al., 2023;
Butoi et al., 2024; Hahn & Rofin, 2024), and this difficulty
is resolved by a CoT consisting of the parities of increasing
prefixes, as in Figure 1 (e.g. Anil et al., 2022). Here, every
decoding step depends only on a bounded number of tokens.
However, for an input of length N , this CoT requires Θ(N )
extra decoding steps, a substantial computational burden.

1

Sharif University of Technology. Work done in part while
interning at Saarland University. 2 Saarland University. Correspondence to: Michael Hahn <mhahn@lst.uni-saarland.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code link: https://github.com/lacoco-lab/
scratchpad_bounds

An interesting and pertinent question is thus whether such
a linear-length CoT is optimal, or whether a shorter CoT
might exist. The goal of this paper is to develop explicit
and unconditional bounds on the length of CoTs. This
1

