Meta-Black-Box-Optimization through Offline Q-function Learning

Zeyuan Ma 1 Zhiguang Cao 2 Zhou Jiang 1 Hongshu Guo 1 Yue-Jiao Gong 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Black-Box-Optimization (BBO) problem is challenging due
to agnostic problem formulation, requiring effective BBO
algorithms such as Evolutionary Computation (EC) to address (Zhan et al., 2022). For decades, various EC methods
have been crafted by experts in optimization domain to solve
diverse BBO problems (Slowik & Kwasnicka, 2020; Guo
et al., 2024c). However, one particular technical bottleneck
of human-crafted BBO algorithms is that they hardly generalize across different problems (Eiben & Smit, 2011). Deep
expertise is required to adapt an existing BBO algorithm for
novel problems, which impedes EC’s further spread.

Recent progress in Meta-Black-Box-Optimization
(MetaBBO) has demonstrated that using RL to
learn a meta-level policy for dynamic algorithm
configuration (DAC) over an optimization task
distribution could significantly enhance the performance of the low-level BBO algorithm. However,
the online learning paradigms in existing works
makes the efficiency of MetaBBO problematic.
To address this, we propose an offline learningbased MetaBBO framework in this paper, termed
Q-Mamba, to attain both effectiveness and efficiency in MetaBBO. Specifically, we first transform DAC task into long-sequence decision process. This allows us further introduce an effective
Q-function decomposition mechanism to reduce
the learning difficulty within the intricate algorithm configuration space. Under this setting, we
propose three novel designs to meta-learn DAC
policy from offline data: we first propose a novel
collection strategy for constructing offline DAC
experiences dataset with balanced exploration and
exploitation. We then establish a decompositionbased Q-loss that incorporates conservative Qlearning to promote stable offline learning from
the offline dataset. To further improve the offline learning efficiency, we equip our work with
a Mamba architecture which helps long-sequence
learning effectiveness and efficiency by selective
state model and hardware-aware parallel scan respectively. Through extensive benchmarking, we
observe that Q-Mamba achieves competitive or
even superior performance to prior online/offline
baselines, while significantly improving the training efficiency of existing online baselines. We
provide sourcecodes of Q-Mamba online.

Recent Meta-Black-Box-Optimization (MetaBBO) works
address the aforementioned generalization gap by introducing a bi-level learning to optimize paradigm (Ma et al.,
2024d; Yang et al., 2025), where a neural network-based
policy (e.g., RL (Sutton, 2018)) is maintained at the meta
level and meta-trained to serve as experts for configuring the
low-level BBO algorithm to attain maximal performance
gain on a problem distribution. Though promising, existing MetaBBO methods suffer from two technical bottlenecks: a) Learning Effectiveness: some advanced BBO
algorithms hold massive configuration spaces with various
hyper-parameters, which is challenging for RL to learn effective DAC policy. Training Efficiency: Existing MetaBBO
methods employ online RL paradigm, showing inefficiency
for sampling training trajectories.
Given a such dilemma in-between the effectiveness and
efficiency, we in this paper propose an offline MetaBBO
framework, termed Q-Mamba, to meta-learn effective DAC
policy through an offline RL pipeline. Specifically, to reduce the difficulty of searching for optimal policy from
the entire configuration space of BBO algorithms, we first
transform DAC task into a long-sequence decision process
and then introduce a Q-function decomposition scheme to
represent each hyper-parameter in the BBO algorithm as a
single action step in the decision process. This allows us to
learn Q-policy for each hyper-parameter in an autoregressive
manner. We propose three core designs to support offline
RL under such setting: a) Offline data collection strategy:
We collect offline DAC experience trajectories from both
strong MetaBBO baselines and a random policy to provide
exploitation and exploration data used for robust training.

1

South China University of Technology, China 2 Singapore
Management University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yue-Jiao
Gong <gongyuejiao@gmail.com >.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

