Domain-Adapted Diffusion Model for PROTAC Linker Design
Through the Lens of Density Ratio in Chemical Space

Zixing Song 1 Ziqiao Meng 2 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract
Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) are a
groundbreaking technology for targeted protein
degradation, but designing effective linkers that
connect two molecular fragments to form a drugcandidate PROTAC molecule remains a key challenge. While diffusion models show promise in
molecular generation, current diffusion models
for PROTAC linker design are typically trained
on small molecule datasets, introducing distribution mismatches in the chemical space between
small molecules and target PROTACs. Direct
fine-tuning on limited PROTAC datasets often results in overfitting and poor generalization. In
this work, we propose DAD-PROTAC, a domainadapted diffusion model for PROTAC linker design, which addresses this distribution mismatch
in chemical space through density ratio estimation to bridge the gap between small-molecule and
PROTAC domains. By decomposing the target
score estimator into a pre-trained score function
and a lightweight score correction term, DADPROTAC achieves efficient fine-tuning without
full retraining. Experimental results demonstrate
its superior ability to generate high-quality PROTAC linkers.

Figure 1: PROTAC linker design. Given two molecule
fragments, the goal is to generate a linker that connects
them to form a PROTAC molecule (Details in Figure 6).

binds to the target protein for degradation, another ligand that binds to an E3 ligase, and a linker that connects
two ligands (Bemis et al., 2021). Unlike traditional small
molecule drugs that only temporarily suppress protein function (Martı́n-Acosta & Xiao, 2021), PROTACs achieve complete protein removal with enhanced selectivity and reduced
off-target effects. However, the design of effective PROTACs faces significant challenges, particularly in optimizing
the linker structure (Troup et al., 2020). The PROTAC linker
must ensure precise spatial arrangement of atoms in 3D
space, with accurate atom and bond types, while simultaneously meeting complex physicochemical constraints when
it is connected to the two ligands (Figure 1).

1. Introduction
Proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC) (Gharbi & Mercado, 2024) has emerged as a useful technology for targeted protein degradation (TPD) (Zhao et al., 2022) in drug
discovery (Schapira et al., 2019), leveraging the ubiquitinproteasome system to remove specific unwanted diseaserelevant proteins. A PROTAC is a hetero-bifunctional
molecule consisting of three components: a ligand that

Recent advances in diffusion models have shown remarkable
success in molecule generation tasks (Hoogeboom et al.,
2022; Xu et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024), making them
powerful tools for PROTAC linker design (Igashov et al.,
2024; Guan et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). In general, these
diffusion models iteratively transform random noise into
valid linker structures through a learned denoising process,
while preserving chemical and geometric constraints (Morehead & Cheng, 2024). Hence, they can learn to generate new samples that closely match the distribution of the
linker in the given training dataset. Current approaches
predominantly train these diffusion models on datasets con-

1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Zixing Song <zs456@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

