FedSSI: Rehearsal-Free Continual Federated Learning
with Synergistic Synaptic Intelligence

Yichen Li 1 Yuying Wang 2 Haozhao Wang 1 Yining Qi 1 Tianzhe Xiao 1 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract

found applications in diverse domains, including recommendation systems (Yang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024c) and smart
healthcare solutions (Xu et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022).

Continual Federated Learning (CFL) allows distributed devices to collaboratively learn novel
concepts from continuously shifting training data
while avoiding knowledge forgetting of previously
seen tasks. To tackle this challenge, most current
CFL approaches rely on extensive rehearsal of previous data. Despite effectiveness, rehearsal comes
at a cost to memory, and it may also violate data
privacy. Considering these, we seek to apply regularization techniques to CFL by considering their
cost-efficient properties that do not require sample
caching or rehearsal. Specifically, we first apply
traditional regularization techniques to CFL and
observe that existing regularization techniques, especially synaptic intelligence, can achieve promising results under homogeneous data distribution
but fail when the data is heterogeneous. Based on
this observation, we propose a simple yet effective
regularization algorithm for CFL named FedSSI,
which tailors the synaptic intelligence for the CFL
with heterogeneous data settings. FedSSI can not
only reduce computational overhead without rehearsal but also address the data heterogeneity
issue. Extensive experiments show that FedSSI
achieves superior performance compared to stateof-the-art methods.

Typically, FL has been studied in a static setting, where
the number of training samples does not change over time.
However, in realistic FL applications, each client may continuously collect new data and train the local model with
streaming tasks, leading to performance degradation on previous tasks(Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024c). This
phenomenon, known as catastrophic forgetting (Ganin et al.,
2016), poses a significant challenge in the continual learning
(CL) paradigm. This challenge is further compounded in
FL settings, where the data on one client remains inaccessible to others, and clients are constrained by memory and
computation resources.
To address this issue, researchers have studied continual federated learning (CFL), which enables each client to continuously learn from local streaming tasks. FedCIL is proposed
in (Qi et al., 2023) to learn a generative network and reconstruct previous samples for replay, improving the retention
of previous information. The authors in (Li et al., 2024a)
propose to selectively cache important samples from each
task and train the local model with both cached samples and
the samples from the current task. The authors in (Dong
et al., 2022; 2023) focus on the federated class-incremental
learning scenario and train a global model by computing
additional class-imbalance losses. The study in (Ma et al.,
2022a) employs supplementary distilled data on both server
and client ends, leveraging knowledge distillation to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is to facilitate the collaborative
training of a global deep learning model among multiple
edge clients while ensuring the privacy of their locally stored
data (McMahan et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2023a; Liu et al.,
2024). Recently, FL has garnered significant interest and

Despite effectiveness, most CFL approaches require each
client to cache samples locally, a strategy referred to as data
rehearsal. Maintaining the local information on the client
side is controversial. On the one hand, clients are often
limited by storage resources (typically edge devices) and are
unable to cache sufficient previous samples for replay. On
the other hand, privacy concerns are non-negligible in the FL
setting. For instance, some companies will collect user data
to update models in a short period, but this data may contain
timestamps and need to be deleted. Meanwhile, generating
synthetic samples for replay using generative models may
also pose a risk of privacy leakage. As shown in Table 1,

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 School of
Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou,
China. Correspondence to: Ruixuan Li <rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

