Distributed Conformal Prediction via Message Passing

Haifeng Wen* 1 Hong Xing* 1 2 Osvaldo Simeone 3

Abstract

to ensure reliable inference and decision-making in safetycritical domains such as healthcare (Kompa et al., 2021),
engineering (Cohen et al., 2023) and large language models
(LLMs) (Ji et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025). Conformal
prediction (CP) is a model-agnostic post-hoc calibration
framework that provides distribution-free statistical coverage guarantees. This is done by augmenting an AI model’s
decisions with prediction sets evaluated on the basis of heldout data (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos et al., 2024b).

Post-hoc calibration of pre-trained models is
critical for ensuring reliable inference, especially
in safety-critical domains such as healthcare.
Conformal Prediction (CP) offers a robust
post-hoc calibration framework, providing
distribution-free statistical coverage guarantees
for prediction sets by leveraging held-out datasets.
In this work, we address a decentralized setting
where each device has limited calibration data
and can communicate only with its neighbors
over an arbitrary graph topology. We propose two
message-passing-based approaches for achieving reliable inference via CP: quantile-based
distributed conformal prediction (Q-DCP) and
histogram-based distributed conformal prediction
(H-DCP). Q-DCP employs distributed quantile
regression enhanced with tailored smoothing
and regularization terms to accelerate convergence, while H-DCP uses a consensus-based
histogram estimation approach. Through extensive experiments, we investigate the trade-offs
between hyperparameter tuning requirements,
communication overhead, coverage guarantees,
and prediction set sizes across different network
topologies. The code of our work is released
on: https://github.com/HaifengWen/
Distributed-Conformal-Prediction.

CP uses held-out calibration data to infer statistical information about the distribution of the errors made by the
pre-trained AI model. Based on this analysis, CP associates
to each decision of the AI model a prediction set that includes all the outputs that are consistent with the inferred
error statistics. Specifically, CP calculates a quantile of performance scores attained by the pre-trained model on the
calibration data (Vovk et al., 2005; Lei et al., 2018; Barber
et al., 2021). The prediction set provably meets marginal
coverage guarantees for a user-defined target. Accordingly,
the correct output is included in the prediction set with high
probability with respect to the distribution of calibration and
test data.
In light of its simplicity and of its strong theoretical properties, CP has been recently developed in several directions, including to address more general risk functions (Angelopoulos et al., 2024c), to provide localized statistical
guarantees (Gibbs et al., 2025), to operate via an online
feedback-based mechanism (Gibbs & Candes, 2021), and
to incorporate Bayesian inference mechanisms (Clarté &
Zdeborová, 2024). Furthermore, it has been applied in
safety-critical areas such as medical diagnostics (Lu et al.,
2022) and LLMs (Quach et al., 2024; Mohri & Hashimoto,
2024).

1. Introduction
1.1. Context and Motivation
The post-hoc calibration of pre-trained artificial intelligence
(AI) models has become increasingly important as a means

As mentioned, CP requires access to a data set of calibration
data points. However, in practice, a decision maker may
not have sufficient calibration data stored locally. This is
an important issue, since the size of the prediction set depends on the number of available calibration data points,
and thus a small calibration data set would yield uninformative prediction sets (Zecchin et al., 2024). However,
calibration data may be available in a decentralized fashion across multiple devices (Xu et al., 2023). Examples
include diagnostic healthcare models at different hospitals,

*
Equal contribution 1 IoT Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
Department of ECE, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, HK SAR 3 Department of Engineering, King’s College
London, London, U.K.. Correspondence to: Hong Xing <hongxing@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

