SERENA: A Unified Stochastic Recursive Variance Reduced Gradient
Framework for Riemannian Non-Convex Optimization

Yan Liu * 1 2 Mingjie Chen * 3 Chaojie Ji 4 Hao Zhang 3 Ruxin Wang 3

Abstract

Han & Gao, 2021b; Dodd et al., 2024). In this paper, we
focus on the following finite-sum or online optimization
problems on a Riemannian manifold M.
 n
X

1
fi (x) (finite-sum) ,
min f (x) := n i=1
(1)
x∈M


E [f (x, ω)] (online) ,

Recently, the expansion of Variance Reduction
(VR) to Riemannian stochastic non-convex optimization has attracted increasing interest. Inspired by recursive momentum, we first introduce Stochastic Recursive Variance Reduced Gradient (SRVRG) algorithm and further present
Stochastic Recursive Gradient Estimator (SRGE)
in Euclidean spaces, which unifies the prevailing
variance reduction estimators. We then extend
SRGE to Riemannian spaces, resulting in a unified Stochastic rEcursive vaRiance reducEd gradieNt frAmework (SERENA) for Riemannian nonconvex optimization. This framework includes the
proposed R-SRVRG, R-SVRRM, and R-HybridSGD methods, as well as other existing Riemannian VR methods. Furthermore, we establish a
unified theoretical analysis for Riemannian nonconvex optimization under retraction and vector
transport. The IFO complexity of our proposed RSRVRG and R-SVRRM to convergeto ε-accurate
solution is O min{n1/2
ε−2 , ε−3 } in the finite
sum setting and O ε−3 for the online case, both
of which align with the lower IFO complexity
bound. Experimental results indicate that the proposed algorithms surpass other existing Riemannian optimization methods.

where f : M → R is a smooth non-convex function. The
finite-sum case represents the minimization of the average
of n component functions, capturing the empirical risk minimization problem. When n is very large or even infinite,
f (x) is typically modeled via the online form, which is indexed by a random variable ω. Numerous applications can
be expressed as given in (1), including principal component
analysis (PCA) (Sato et al., 2019), low-rank matrix completion (LRMC) (Boumal & Absil, 2011), Riemannian centroid
(RC) computation (Yuan et al., 2016), among others.
Due to the special geometric structure of the parameter
space involved in such optimization problems, traditional
Euclidean optimization methods may not be the optimal
choice in these situations. Riemannian optimization method
(Absil et al., 2008) directly advances the iterative solution
along the geodesic path toward the optimum, thereby preserving the geometric structure of the problem, and effectively addressing these issues. In fact, by exploiting intrinsic
properties of Riemannian manifold, the problem (1) can be
regarded as an unconstrained optimization problem defined
over the manifold spaces. One of the classical methods is
the Riemannian steepest descent (R-SD) algorithm (Udriste,
2013; Zhang & Sra, 2016). However, the requirement for
each iteration of R-SD to traverse n component functions
renders the process impractical when n is extremely large.
In contrast, the Riemannian stochastic gradient descent (RSGD) (Bonnabel, 2013) method computes the stochastic
gradient for each iteration of one sample (or a mini-batch
samples), significantly reducing the computational cost per
iteration. However, R-SGD exhibits slow convergence attributed to the high variance (Bottou et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Riemannian optimization have received increasing interest
in machine learning (Sato et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021;
∗
Equal contribution. 1 School of Statistics and Data Science,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong,
China 3 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China 4 Department of Mathematics, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
Correspondence to: Hao Zhang <h.zhang10@siat.ac.cn>, Ruxin
Wang <rx.wang@siat.ac.cn>.

Variance reduction (Gower et al., 2020) has also been extended to Riemannian manifolds for improving performance.
For instance, Riemannian stochastic variance reduced gradient (R-SVRG) (Zhang et al., 2016; Kasai et al., 2016;

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

