When, Where and Why to Average Weights?

Niccolò Ajroldi 1 2 Antonio Orvieto 1 2 3 Jonas Geiping 1 2 3

Abstract

(Athiwaratkun et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023; Sanyal et al.,
2023). Recent studies have also explored the connection
between learning rate decaying and weight averaging (Sandler et al., 2023; Hägele et al., 2024), and used the latter to
develop schedule-free algorithms (Defazio et al., 2024b).

Averaging checkpoints along the training trajectory is a simple yet powerful approach to improve
the generalization performance of Machine Learning models and reduce training time. Motivated
by these potential gains, and in an effort to fairly
and thoroughly benchmark this technique, we
present an extensive evaluation of averaging techniques in modern Deep Learning, which we perform using AlgoPerf (Dahl et al., 2023), a largescale benchmark for optimization algorithms. We
investigate whether weight averaging can reduce
training time, improve generalization, and replace
learning rate decay, as suggested by recent literature. Our evaluation across seven architectures
and datasets reveals that averaging significantly
accelerates training and yields considerable efficiency gains across all considered workloads, at
the price of a minimal implementation and memory cost, while mildly improving generalization.
Finally, we explore the relationship between averaging and learning rate annealing and show that
combining the two achieves optimal performance.

Table 1: Estimated training cost for one run on the AlgoPerf
collection of models and tasks. Even for industrial-scale
tasks like benchmark workloads, weight averaging reliably
reduces compute costs.
NadamW +LAWA +EMA
GPU-Hours

612

550

541

In this work, we present the largest evaluation of averaging
techniques in modern Deep Learning, which we perform
using AlgoPerf (Dahl et al., 2023), a collection of largescale workloads and architectures developed to provide a
unified benchmark for optimization algorithms. Framing
our analysis in this setting provides a carefully designed
evaluation framework, enables comparisons against strong,
heavily tuned baselines, and allows drawing broad and robust conclusions.

1. Introduction

Building on previous work, we investigate the following
questions. (i) Can weight averaging reduce training time
across multiple models and tasks? (ii) Does averaging checkpoints improve the generalization performance of existing
optimization algorithms? (iii) Is weight averaging merely a
proxy for a shorter learning rate decay schedule, and can it
fully replace learning rate decay?

Training Deep Learning models is both resource-expensive
and time-consuming. A principled and simple approach to
speed up training, dating back to Polyak (1990) and Ruppert
(1988), involves averaging the model’s weights across training iterations. This can either be performed online during
training or post hoc by averaging checkpoints, effectively
creating an ensemble of models at minimal additional cost.
Previous studies have shown that weight averaging (WA)
techniques can improve generalization (Merity et al., 2017;
Gupta et al., 2020; Kaddour, 2022; Melis, 2023), increase
robustness (Morales-Brotons et al., 2024), smooth loss landscapes (Izmailov et al., 2019), and accelerate convergence

Our contributions are as follows.
1. We show that averaging can significantly accelerate
training dynamics across seven different models and architectures and estimate a 12% reduction in GPU-hours
to train the entire AlgoPerf suite up to the validation
target compared to our baseline. We find this effect
to be consistent across hyperparameters and observe
encouraging speed-ups even on a more sophisticated
optimizer like Distributed Shampoo (Shi et al., 2023).

1

ELLIS Institute Tübingen 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent
Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 Tübingen AI Center. Correspondence to: Niccolò Ajroldi <niccolo@tue.ellis.eu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

