Comparing Comparisons: Informative and Easy Human Feedback with
Distinguishability Queries

Xuening Feng 1 Zhaohui Jiang 1 Timo Kaufmann 2 3 Eyke Hüllermeier 2 3 4 Paul Weng 5 Yifei Zhu 1

Abstract

𝑷𝑪𝑸𝟏

Learning human objectives from preference feedback has significantly advanced reinforcement
learning (RL) in domains where objectives are
hard to formalize. However, traditional methods
based on pairwise trajectory comparisons face notable challenges, including the difficulty in comparing trajectories with subtle differences and the
limitation of conveying only ordinal information,
limiting direct inference of preference strength. In
this paper, we introduce a novel distinguishability query, enabling humans to express preference
strength by comparing two pairs of trajectories.
Labelers first indicate which of two pairs is easier
to distinguish, then provide preference feedback
only on the easier pair. Our proposed query type
directly captures preference strength and is expected to reduce the cognitive load on the labeler.
We further connect this query to cardinal utility
and difference relations and develop an efficient
query selection scheme to achieve a better tradeoff between query informativeness and easiness.
Experimental results demonstrate the potential
of our method for faster, data-efficient learning
and improved user-friendliness in RLHF benchmarks, particularly in classical control settings
where preference strength is critical for expected
utility maximization.

𝑷𝑪𝑸𝟏

More

𝜎!! distinguishable
𝜎!"

𝒅 = (0,1)

𝜎"!
𝜎""

≺
𝜎!"

𝜎!!

𝒚𝑷𝑪𝑸 = (0,1)
𝜎&& is preferred

𝑷𝑪𝑸𝟎

Distinguishability
preference feedback 𝒅

Pairwise preference
feedback 𝒚𝑷𝑪𝑸

Distinguishability query 𝐃𝐐 = (𝑷𝑪𝑸𝟎 , 𝑷𝑪𝑸𝟏 ),
and its feedback 𝒚𝑫𝑸 = (𝒅, 𝒚𝑷𝑪𝑸 )

Figure 1. An illustration of the distinguishability query. PCQ
refers to the usual Pairwise Comparison Query for a pair of segments (σ 0 , σ 1 ), and its feedback is yPCQ , indicating the preferred
segment. Our proposed distinguishability query, DQ, consists of
two candidate PCQs. Its feedback yDQ = (d, yPCQ ) includes the
choice of the more distinguishable PCQ, d, and its corresponding
label, yPCQ .

models (OpenAI, 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022) to training
robots for complex tasks (Christiano et al., 2017). The
standard method asks human evaluators to compare pairs
of trajectories, using these comparisons to learn a reward
function that guides RL agent training. While this method
is widely used and has shown impressive performance in
simulated environments (Christiano et al., 2017; Lee et al.,
2021b; Liang et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024;
Verma & Metcalf, 2024; Dong et al., 2024), it faces two key
limitations: First, humans often struggle to compare trajectories, particularly when the differences are subtle, leading
to inefficient queries and poor user experience. Second, pairwise comparisons provide only ordinal information, leaving
preference strength to be learned implicitly. This limitation is particularly problematic for reinforcement learning,
which fundamentally requires cardinal utilities for expected
utility maximization – the core principle guiding the agent’s
decisions under uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Learning human objectives from preference feedback has
enabled reinforcement learning (RL) to tackle domains with
hard-to-formalize objectives, from fine-tuning language
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Institute for
Informatics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany 3 Munich Center
of Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany 4 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 5 Digital Innovation
Research Center, Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, China. Correspondence to: Paul Weng <paul.weng@dukekunshan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a novel query type called the distinguishability query (illustrated in Figure 1), which addresses
1

