Parrot: Multilingual Visual Instruction Tuning

Hai-Long Sun 1 2 3 * Da-Wei Zhou 1 2 Yang Li 3 Shiyin Lu 3 Chao Yi 1 2 Qing-Guo Chen 3 Zhao Xu 3
Weihua Luo 3 Kaifu Zhang 3 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2

Abstract

🤖
🎃

The rapid development of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), such as GPT-4o, marks
a significant step toward artificial general intelligence. Existing methods typically align vision encoders with LLMs via supervised finetuning (SFT), but this often deteriorates their ability to handle multiple languages as training progresses. We empirically observe that imbalanced
SFT datasets, largely English-centric, degrade performance on non-English languages due to the
failure in multilingual token alignment. To address this, we propose PARROT, a novel approach
that leverages textual guidance for visual token
alignment at the language level. PARROT conditions visual tokens on diverse language inputs
and uses Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) to align multilingual tokens. By computing cross-attention
between initial visual features and textual embeddings, we select the most relevant experts, converting visual tokens into language-specific representations. Additionally, we introduce the Massive
Multilingual Multimodal Benchmark (MMMB),
a new benchmark comprising 6 languages, 15
categories, and 12,000 questions, to assess multilingual capabilities. PARROT achieves stateof-the-art performance on both the multilingual
benchmarks and a wide range of multimodal
tasks. Code and dataset are available at: https:
//github.com/AIDC-AI/Parrot.

👨💻‍‍

Chinese-CLIP + Qwen1.5-Chat 7B
OpenAI-CLIP + Qwen1.5-Chat 7B

图中描述的是什么内容？
图中描述的是一个年轻男子在比赛场上，手持奖杯，
庆祝胜利。他穿着运动服装，肌肉发达，表现出了
胜利者的自豪和喜悦。

The person in the image is a young man who is standing in a
stadium, holding a trophy. He is wearing a red and white sports
uniform, which suggest that he is a member of a sports team.

👨💻‍‍

🤖
🎃

图中的人在干什么？
这个人在庆祝胜利，因为他正在举着一个奖杯。他可能
是一个运动员，因为奖杯通常用于奖励胜利者。他可能
在庆祝比赛胜利，或者在庆祝团队的成就。

🤖

The image portrays a man who is standing an arena, holding a trophy.

🎃

Figure 1. The output of OpenAI-CLIP-based and Chinese-CLIPbased models using the same Chinese prompts. We can observe
that the OpenAI-CLIP-based model exhibits confusion between
Chinese and English responses.

OpenAI, 2023a; 2024), has gained significant attention.
However, LLMs are limited to processing only text-only
data. The integration of visual modalities has endowed
LLMs with multimodal capabilities (Wang et al., 2024a;
Liu et al., 2024), driving the emergence of Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs). These models combine
pre-trained LLMs with vision encoders, bridging the
modality gap by aligning visual features with language
embeddings. Current research predominantly uses either
Q-Former (Li et al., 2023b) or MLP projector (Liu et al.,
2023b) to align vision encoders with LLMs, enabling
models to process multimodal.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs),
such as GPT-4 (Radford et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020;
*

Work done during his internship at Alibaba Group 1 School of
Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 3 AI
Business, Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye
<yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Multilingual capability is a crucial aspect of MLLMs,
enabling them to generate responses in the same language as
the input, accommodating linguistic diversity. This feature
is vital for ensuring equitable access to technology across
different regions and cultures (Chen et al., 2022; Hu et al.,
2023). Many LLMs (Grattafiori et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2024; OpenAI, 2023b) exhibit multilingual capabilities,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

