A Mixture-Based Framework for Guiding Diffusion Models

Yazid Janati * 1 Badr Moufad * 1 Mehdi Abou El Qassime 1
Alain Durmus 1 Eric Moulines 1 Jimmy Olsson 2

Abstract

associated with inverse problems. Prior knowledge about
the signal of interest, often represented through samples
from its underlying distribution p0 , can be leveraged to train
a generative model pθ0 that acts as a prior. By combining
it with the conditional density g0 (y|x) of the observation
given the signal, deduced from the form of the inverse problem at hand, we can compute the posterior distribution.
Samples drawn from this posterior encapsulate plausible
solutions that harmonize prior knowledge with the observed
data. One straightforward approach to approximate sampling from the posterior distribution involves constructing a
paired dataset of i.i.d. signals and observations, (Xi , Yi )N
i=1 ,
where Xi ∼ p0 and Yi ∼ g0 (·|Xi ), and learning a direct
mapping (Dong et al., 2015) or generative model (Ledig
et al., 2017; Isola et al., 2017). The latter, when queried
with multiple independent noise samples alongside an observation, generates a diverse set of potential reconstructions.
However, this approach is inherently task-specific, delivering reliable reconstructions only when the conditional
distribution of the observation remains unchanged at test
time. As a result, it cannot straightforwardly adapt to unseen
tasks with the same prior. Adaptation to a new task can only
be achieved by retraining a new generative model.

Denoising diffusion models have driven significant progress in the field of Bayesian inverse
problems. Recent approaches use pre-trained diffusion models as priors to solve a wide range of
such problems, only leveraging inference-time
compute and thereby eliminating the need to retrain task-specific models on the same dataset.
To approximate the posterior of a Bayesian inverse problem, a diffusion model samples from a
sequence of intermediate posterior distributions,
each with an intractable likelihood function. This
work proposes a novel mixture approximation
of these intermediate distributions. Since direct
gradient-based sampling of these mixtures is infeasible due to intractable terms, we propose a
practical method based on Gibbs sampling. We
validate our approach through extensive experiments on image inverse problems, utilizing both
pixel- and latent-space diffusion priors, as well
as on source separation with an audio diffusion
model.

1

An increasingly popular approach consists in learning a
generative model only for the prior p0 , and then leveraging
inference-time compute to solve any inverse problem for
which the likelihood function x 7→ g0 (y|x) is provided in
a closed form. This strategy eliminates the need for expensive and inefficient task-specific training. Initially explored
with generative models such as variational autoencoders
and generative adversarial networks (Xia et al., 2022), this
framework has recently been extended to denoising diffusion models (DDMs) (Song et al., 2021; Kadkhodaie &
Simoncelli, 2020; Kawar et al., 2021; 2022; Chung et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2023a; Daras et al.), which are the focus
of the present paper.

Introduction

Inverse problems occur when a signal X of interest must
be inferred from an incomplete and noisy observation Y , a
challenge frequently encountered in diverse fields such as
weather forecasting, image reconstruction (e.g., tomography or black-hole imaging), and speech processing. Such
problems are typically ill-posed, making it essential to incorporate additional constraints, regularization techniques,
or prior knowledge to arrive at meaningful and realistic
solutions.
The Bayesian framework, in conjunction with generative
modeling, offers a systematic approach to the challenges
*

1

DDMs (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon,
2019; Ho et al., 2020) achieve state-of-the-art generative
performance across a wide range of domains. At their
core is a forward noising process that transforms the data
distribution p0 into a Gaussian distribution. A generative
model is then learned by reversing this noising process.
With a specific parameterization of the backward process,

2

Equal contribution Ecole polytechnique KTH Royal Institute
of Technology. Correspondence to: Yazid Janati, Badr Moufad
<first.last@polytechnique.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

