Fidelity

Ultra Lowrate Image
Compression with
Better
Semantic Residual Coding and Compression-aware Diffusion

Anle Ke 1 Xu Zhang 1 Tong Chen 1 Ming Lu 1 Chao Zhou 2 Jiawen Gu 2 Zhan Ma 1

Abstract

(a) Separate Design

(c) Performance

FID

Full-Text Coding
MLLM

Existing multimodal large model-based image
compression frameworks often rely on a fragmented integration of semantic retrieval, latent
compression, and generative models, resulting
in suboptimal performance in both reconstruction fidelity and coding efficiency. To address
these challenges, we propose a residual-guided ultra lowrate image compression named ResULIC,
which incorporates residual signals into both semantic retrieval and the diffusion-based generation process. Specifically, we introduce Semantic Residual Coding (SRC) to capture the
semantic disparity between the original image
and its compressed latent representation. A perceptual fidelity optimizer is further applied for
superior reconstruction quality. Additionally,
we present the Compression-aware Diffusion
Model (CDM), which establishes an optimal
alignment between bitrates and diffusion time
steps, improving compression-reconstruction synergy. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of ResULIC, achieving superior objective and subjective performance compared to
state-of-the-art diffusion-based methods with 80.7%, -66.3% BD-rate saving in terms of LPIPS
and FID. Project page is available at https:
//njuvision.github.io/ResULIC/.

Latent
Coding

fixed

Realism

Generative
Model

MS-SSIM

KID

Fidelity

(b) Our joint framework
MLLM

PSNR

Semantic
Residual Coding

adaptation

Latent
Coding

Realism

Compress
Aware
Diffusion

Fidelity

DISTS

LPIPS

ResULIC

PerCo

DiffEIC

Text-Sketch

Perceptual Realism
Perceptual Fidelity
Distortion

Figure 1. (a) The separate design for existing frameworks. The
MLLM indicates the Multimodal Large Vision-Language Model.
The latent coding represents the compression of features within the
latent space. (b) Our pipeline with proposed Semantic Residual
Coding and Compression-aware Diffusion Model. (c) Comparison
with existing diffusion-based ultra lowrate image compression
methods on CLIC2020 dataset.

in both objective metrics and subjective evaluations. However, at lower bitrates, these methods often struggle with
excessively smooth textures or the loss of fine details and
structural information.
In response to these challenges, extensive research has been
conducted on optimizing perceptual quality. Among them,
Generative Adversarial Network (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
(GAN)-based approaches (Mentzer et al., 2020; Muckley
et al., 2023) demonstrated competitive performance with
visually-pleasing reconstruction. Some works have further
attempted to enhance the visual reconstruction quality by incorporating text guidance. Within the conventional encoderdecoder framework, they have integrated semantic information into either the encoding process (Lee et al., 2024)
or both the encoding and decoding processes (Jiang et al.,
2023) to improve the perceptual quality of reconstruction.

1. Introduction
In recent years, learning-based image compression techniques (Ballé et al., 2018; Minnen et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2021; Lu et al., 2022; Duan et al., 2023) have gained considerable attention and shown superior performance compared
to traditional codecs, such as JPEG2000 (Taubman et al.,
2002) and VVC Intra Profile (ITU-T & ISO/IEC, 2020),

More recently, the advent of diffusion models (Ho et al.,
2020; Rombach et al., 2022) has provided a turning point
for this predicament. Existing diffusion model-based image compression methods (Careil et al., 2024; Lei et al.,
2023a; Li et al., 2024a) have shown more impressive results
than GAN-based methods, achieving high visual quality
reconstruction at extremely low bitrates (< 0.01 bits per
pixel (bpp)). However, the reconstruction reliability (indicating consistency and fidelity) remains unsatisfactory, with
significant differences from the original inputs.

1

School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University 2 Kuaishou Technology. Correspondence to: Tong Chen
<chentong@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

