Extracting Rare Dependence Patterns via Adaptive Sample Reweighting

Yiqing Li * 1 Yewei Xia * 1 2 Xiaofei Wang 1 3 Zhengming Chen 1 4 Liuhua Peng 5
Mingming Gong 1 5 Kun Zhang 1 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Statistical independence testing, which aims to asses
whether two variables are independent according to samples, is a fundamental problem in data analysis and scientific inference. Such tests have applications in a variety
of fields. For example, in brain analysis using fMRI data,
identifying which brain areas are involved in specific activities and determining statistical associations between these
activities is crucial (Fan et al., 2017). Other applications
include self-supervised learning (Li et al., 2021), feature
selection (Candes et al., 2018), causal inference (Imbens &
Rubin, 2015) and more.
2
Example 1.1. X ∼ U (−20, 20), Y = s · e−x + ϵ, ϵ ∼
N (0, 0.25), s ∈ {−1, 1} with equal probability.

Discovering dependence patterns between variables from observational data is a fundamental
issue in data analysis. However, existing testing
methods often fail to detect subtle yet critical patterns that occur within small regions of the data
distribution–patterns we term rare dependence.
These rare dependencies obscure the true underlying dependence structure in variables, particularly
in causal discovery tasks. To address this issue,
we propose a novel testing method that combines
kernel-based (conditional) independence testing
with adaptive sample importance reweighting. By
learning and assigning higher importance weights
to data points exhibiting significant dependence,
our method amplifies the dependence patterns and
detects them successfully. Theoretically, we analyze the asymptotic distributions of the statistics
in this method and show the uniform bound of
the learning scheme. Furthermore, we integrate
our tests into the PC algorithm, a constraint-based
approach for causal discovery, equipping it to uncover causal relationships even in the presence
of rare dependence. Empirical evaluation of synthetic and real-world datasets comprehensively
demonstrates the efficacy of our method.

Y

2
0
2

20

15

10

5

0

X

5

10

15

20

Figure 1. 1000 samples generated following Example 1.1. p-value
of HSIC with default settings on the whole sample is 0.1359 while
p-value on the samples within the red rectangle is 6.8 × 10−11 .

Recently, methods have been proposed to test for non-linear
dependence (Gretton et al., 2005a; Póczos et al., 2012;
Lopez-Paz & Oquab, 2016; Sen et al., 2017; Gao et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2024b). Although existing independence
tests have achieved significant success, they still fail to detect dependence patterns that are significant only within
a small range of the entire distribution’s support, which
we term rare dependence. For instance, in Example 1.1,
the dependence pattern here “exists everywhere”, but it is
only significant in a small range of X near zero and the
dependence is further contaminated by the noise. Many
conventional independence tests, such as HSIC (Gretton
et al., 2005a), struggle to reject the null hypothesis for the
samples shown in Fig. 1.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi,
UAE 2 Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China 3 KLAS and School of Mathematics and Statistics, Northeast
Normal University, Changchun, China 4 College of Mathematics
and Computer, Shantou University, Shantou, China 5 School of
Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 6 Department of Philosophy, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Mingming Gong <mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au>, Kun Zhang
<kunz1@cmu.edu>.

Such rare dependence patterns are also commonly observed in real-world scenarios. In economics, income and
consumption may appear weakly related in low-income
groups but become strongly coupled at higher income levels. In psychology (Keles et al., 2020), the impact of so-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

