Towards Cost-Effective Reward Guided Text Generation
Ahmad Rashid * 1 2 Ruotian Wu * 1 2 Rongqi Fan 1 Hongliang Li 3 Agustinus Kristiadi 2 Pascal Poupart 1 2

Abstract

proximal policy optimization (PPO; Schulman et al., 2017)
or finetuning using direct preference optimization (DPO;
Rafailov et al., 2023). The training costs can be prohibitive
as we scale the LLM, since high-performance computational
resources with large GPUs are required. Moreover, the LLM
needs to be retrained whenever the preference data changes.

Reward-guided text generation (RGTG) has
emerged as a viable alternative to offline reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF).
RGTG methods can align baseline language models to human preferences without further training
as in standard RLHF methods. However, they
rely on a reward model to score each candidate token generated by the language model at inference,
incurring significant test-time overhead. Additionally, the reward model is usually only trained
to score full sequences, which can lead to suboptimal choices for partial sequences. In this
work, we present a novel reward model architecture that is trained, using a Bradley-Terry loss,
to prefer the optimal expansion of a sequence
with just a single call to the reward model at
each step of the generation process. That is, a
score for all possible candidate tokens is generated simultaneously, leading to efficient inference. We theoretically analyze various RGTG
reward models and demonstrate that prior techniques prefer sub-optimal sequences compared
to our method during inference. Empirically, our
reward model leads to significantly faster inference than other RGTG methods. It requires fewer
calls to the reward model and performs competitively compared to previous RGTG and offline
RLHF methods. Code for our work is available at
https://github.com/ahmadrash/FaRMA

One way to alleviate this computational overhead, while
still improving the alignment of the baseline LLM is tokenwise reward-guided text generation (RGTG; Khanov et al.,
2024; Deng & Raffel, 2023). RGTG methods keep the
baseline LLM frozen and instead train a reward model on the
preference data. At each decoding step, the reward model is
used to adjust the softmax scores of each candidate token.
Reward models are cheaper to train compared to offline
RLHF updates (e.g., PPO and DPO) even if both the reward
model and LLM have the same number of parameters.1
Moreover, RGTG with a small reward model can perform
comparably to RLHF (Rashid et al., 2024).
However, while RGTG is a promising and cost-effective alternative to offline RLHF, it can lead to significant decoding
overhead during inference. Typically, at each step, multiple
calls are made to the reward model for candidate tokens
from the language model. This introduces an “inner loop”
in the decoding process of the LLM, leading to an increase
in computational complexity and latency. Another issue is
that reward models trained on full-sequences are used to
score partial sequences (Khanov et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024)
which can be problematic (Rashid et al., 2024).
Several works have attempted to train reward models to
score partial sequences. Deng & Raffel (2023) use a squared
loss and the preference data to distill a full sequence reward
model into a reward model for partial sequences. Controlled
decoding (CD; Mudgal et al., 2024) uses roll-outs from the
language model instead of the preference data to distill a
partial sequence reward model. Rashid et al. (2024) explicitly train a Bradley-Terry model on partial sequences
and demonstrate a connection with RLHF. We will show
that these methods prefer sub-optimal extensions of partial
sequences during decoding.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF; Stiennon et al., 2020b; Ouyang et al., 2022) is widely applied to
align large language models (LLMs) to human preferences.
However, updating the LLM with RLHF incurs a significant training cost, whether it is reinforcement learning using
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Waterloo 2 Vector Institute 3 Huawei Technologies. Correspondence to: Ahmad Rashid
<a9rashid@uwaterloo.ca>.

1
To train π, PPO needs to load and make calls to 2 additional
models (πref and a critic), DPO needs to load and make calls to
one additional model (πref ) while training a reward model does not
require loading or calling any additional model.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

