Fixing the Double Penalty in Data-Driven Weather Forecasting
Through a Modified Spherical Harmonic Loss Function

Christopher Subich 1 Syed Zahid Husain 1 Leo Separovic 1 Jing Yang 1

Abstract

publication of these models, the field has been joined by
many others, including the Artificial Intelligence Forecasting System (AIFS) developed by ECMWF itself (Lang et al.,
2024a).

Recent advancements in data-driven weather forecasting models have delivered deterministic models that outperform the leading operational forecast systems based on traditional, physics-based
models. However, these data-driven models are
typically trained with a mean squared error loss
function, which causes smoothing of fine scales
through a “double penalty” effect. We develop a
simple, parameter-free modification to this loss
function that avoids this problem by separating
the loss attributable to decorrelation from the loss
attributable to spectral amplitude errors. Finetuning the GraphCast model with this new loss
function results in sharp deterministic weather
forecasts, an increase of the model’s effective resolution from 1,250 km to 160 km, improvements
to ensemble spread, and improvements to predictions of tropical cyclone strength and surface wind
extremes.

From the standpoint of machine learning, atmospheric forecasting is a large-scale generative problem comparable to
predicting the next frame of a video. As a typical example,
the version of the GraphCast model deployed experimentally
by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) (Sadeghi Tabas et al., 2025; NOAA, 2024) predicts the 6-hour forecast for six atmospheric variables at
each of 13 vertical levels plus five surface variables, on a ¼°
latitude/longitude grid, for about 86 million output degrees
of freedom in aggregate. GraphCast takes two time-levels
as input, so the input for this model has about 170 million
degrees of freedom.
These first-generation data-driven weather models generally
act as deterministic forecast systems, where each unique
initial condition is mapped to a single forecast and verified
against a “ground truth” from a data analysis system. The
ERA5 atmospheric reanalysis (Hersbach et al., 2020) of
ECMWF is most often used as the source of initial and
verifying data for these forecast systems owing to its high
quality and consistent behaviour from 1979 to present.

1. Introduction
The models developed in Weyn et al. (2020) and Keisler
(2022) suggested that deep neural networks might “solve”
the problem of medium-range weather forecasting with
data-driven machine learning models. In 2023, the release of GraphCast (Lam et al., 2023), FourCastNet (Kurth
et al., 2023), and Pangu-Weather (Bi et al., 2023) demonstrated forecast skill that met or surpassed that of the highresolution forecast system (IFS) of the European Centre
for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) at lead
times (forecast lengths) up to 10 days, and some commenters (Bauer, 2024) anticipated that data-driven forecasting would soon supplant traditional numerical weather
prediction (NWP) in all operational contexts. Since the

1.1. The Problem of Forecast Smoothing
Despite their overall forecast skill, deterministic data-driven
forecast systems are universally understood to produce
overly-smooth forecasts. A typical example of this behaviour is shown in figure 1 where a 3.5-day prediction of
winter storm Eunice by the 13-level, ¼° GraphCast model
is too weak and overly smooth. This smoothing results
in an under-prediction of localized extreme events, and it
makes the model less suitable for downstream tasks such as
spectral nudging (Husain et al., 2024) and data assimilation
(Slivinski et al., 2025).

1

Meteorological Research Division, Environment and Climate
Change Canada, Dorval, Quebec, Canada. Correspondence to:
Christopher Subich <christopher.subich@ec.gc.ca>.

This smoothing is most-discussed in relation to the prediction of gridded, global weather fields, but it is still present
in models that have radically different architectures. Allen
et al. (2025) develops a model that operates directly in observation space without an underlying grid that still produces

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

