A Generalizable Physics-Enhanced State Space Model for
Long-Term Dynamics Forecasting in Complex Environments

Yuchen Wang 1 Hongjue Zhao 2 Haohong Lin 3 Enze Xu 1 Lifang He 4 Huajie Shao 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
This work aims to address the problem of longterm dynamic forecasting in complex environments where data are noisy and irregularly sampled. While recent studies have introduced some
methods to improve prediction performance, these
approaches still face a significant challenge in handling long-term extrapolation tasks under such
complex scenarios. To overcome this challenge,
we propose Phy-SSM, a generalizable method that
integrates partial physics knowledge into state
space models (SSMs) for long-term dynamics
forecasting in complex environments. Our motivation is that SSMs can effectively capture longrange dependencies in sequential data and model
continuous dynamical systems, while the incorporation of physics knowledge improves generalization ability. The key challenge lies in how to
seamlessly incorporate partially known physics
into SSMs. To achieve this, we decompose partially known system dynamics into known and
unknown state matrices, which are integrated into
a Phy-SSM unit. To further enhance long-term
prediction performance, we introduce a physics
state regularization term to make the estimated
latent states align with system dynamics. Besides, we theoretically analyze the uniqueness
of the solutions for our method. Extensive experiments on three real-world applications, including vehicle motion prediction, drone state
prediction, and COVID-19 epidemiology forecasting, demonstrate the superior performance
of Phy-SSM over the baselines in both longterm interpolation and extrapolation tasks. The
code is available at https://github.com/
511205787/Phy_SSM-ICML2025.

Dynamical systems have been widely applied across a broad
range of real-world domains, including autonomous driving
(Kong et al., 2015; Rajamani, 2011), epidemiology (Nicho,
2010), and climate science (Ionides et al., 2006).
Generally, dynamical systems are often governed by underlying physical laws. Motivated by this, some studies
have developed physics-enhanced machine learning models (O’Driscoll et al., 2019; Cicirello, 2024) for to enhance
the generalization ability of dynamics forecasting by incorporating known physical laws, such as energy conservation
and differential equations (Greydanus et al., 2019; Raissi
et al., 2019). A common assumption in these methods is
that the physical laws governing system dynamics are fully
known as prior knowledge. However, in practice, it is challenging to obtain the complete governing equations for complex dynamical systems using first principles (Linial et al.,
2021; Gentine et al., 2018). On the other hand, dynamical
systems like autonomous vehicles operate in complex and
unknown environments such as inclement weather conditions, their sensors often suffer from faults or mismatched
clocks (Dabrowski & Rahman, 2019; Huang et al., 2023),
resulting in noisy and irregularly sampled data.
To address these issues, few recent works (Linial et al., 2021;
Takeishi & Kalousis, 2021; Yang et al., 2022) have developed partially known physics-enhanced machine learning
models for noisy, regular data. While these methods perform well in interpolation tasks, they often struggle with
long-term extrapolation tasks with irregular data. An illustrative example is provided in Appendix A. This limitation
arises from their solutions heavily relying on initial conditions, lacking an effective mechanism to dynamically refine
predictions based on subsequent observations (Chen et al.,
2024; Kidger et al., 2020). Thus, the question is: how to enhance accuracy and generalization for long-term dynamics
forecasting with noisy, irregular data?

1

William & Mary 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Carnegie Mellon University 4 Lehigh University. Correspondence
to: Huajie Shao <hshao@wm.edu>.

In this work, we propose Phy-SSM, a generalizable method
that incorporates partially known physics into deep statespace models (SSMs), as shown in Fig. 1. Our motivation
is that deep SSMs (Gu et al., 2021; Smith et al.; Gu & Dao,
2023) can not only effectively capture long-range dependen-

3

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

