Efficient Robust Conformal Prediction via Lipschitz-Bounded Networks

Thomas Massena * 1 2 Léo Andéol * 3 2 Thibaut Boissin 4 Franck Mamalet 4 Corentin Friedrich 4
Mathieu Serrurier 1 Sébastien Gerchinovitz 4 3

Abstract

provide additional information on the output of a model,
indicating the confidence in its prediction.

Conformal Prediction (CP) has proven to be an
effective post-hoc method for improving the trustworthiness of neural networks by providing prediction sets with finite-sample guarantees. However, under adversarial attacks, classical conformal guarantees do not hold anymore: this problem is addressed in the field of Robust Conformal
Prediction. Several methods have been proposed
to provide robust CP sets with guarantees under
adversarial perturbations, but, for large scale problems, these sets are either too large or the methods are too computationally demanding to be deployed in real life scenarios. In this work, we
propose a new method that leverages Lipschitzbounded networks to precisely and efficiently estimate robust CP sets. When combined with a
1-Lipschitz robust network, we demonstrate that
our lip-rcp method outperforms state-of-the-art
results in both the size of the robust CP sets and
computational efficiency in medium and largescale scenarios such as ImageNet. Taking a different angle, we also study vanilla1 CP under attack,
and derive new worst-case coverage bounds of
vanilla CP sets, which are valid simultaneously for
all adversarial attack levels. Our lip-rcp method
makes this second approach as efficient as vanilla
CP while also allowing robustness guarantees.

We focus here on a UQ framework called Conformal Prediction (CP), which provides guarantees in nominal settings.
It is a finite-sample, distribution-free and model-agnostic
framework that efficiently constructs prediction sets which
contain the ground truth with high probability. The main underlying assumption is mild: calibration and test data points
are assumed to be exchangeable (a lighter assumption than
independence and identical distribution) (Vovk et al., 2005).
CP has successfully been applied to numerous fields: classification (Sadinle et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2024), regression
(Papadopoulos et al., 2011; Romano et al., 2019), object detection (Andéol et al., 2023; Timans et al., 2025), semantic
segmentation (Brunekreef et al., 2024; Mossina et al., 2024)
and generative models (Mohri & Hashimoto, 2024; Teneggi
et al., 2023). Overall, CP represents a powerful tool in order
to trust deep learning systems in their nominal settings.
However, research on adversarial robustness has demonstrated that state-of-the-art models can be misled with minimal adversarial input perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2014).
This vulnerability has led to extensive research into adversarial robustness, focusing on both attack strategies and
defense mechanisms (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Carlini &
Wagner, 2017). However, some popular adversarial defense
strategies have been shown not to hold in the face of more
sophisticated attacks (Athalye et al., 2018). Therefore, research on certifiable robustness aims to provide theoretical
worst-case guarantees for model performance under adversarial attacks independently from the attack method. These
certified robustness methods also exhibit interesting properties in the domains of Reinforcement Learning (Russo
& Proutiere, 2019; Corsi et al., 2020), Differential Privacy
(Béthune et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024), explainable AI (Serrurier et al., 2024; Fel et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
With the development of neural networks, and their applications in industrial settings, the study of their reliability
has become prevalent. Many approaches have been studied
to improve the trustworthiness of neural networks (Delseny
et al., 2021). One of them is Uncertainty Quantification
(UQ), which has become a key research domain for deploying safety-critical deep learning models. Its purpose is to

Recently, some works in robust Conformal Prediction (Li
et al., 2024; Ledda et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024) have
demonstrated that minimal adversarial perturbations can
undermine its associated guarantees. Therefore, developing
provably robust CP methods is a crucial objective in order to
reconcile the guarantees of CP in nominal settings and the
worst-case guarantees of certifiably robust systems. Indeed,

*

Equal contribution 1 IRIT 2 SNCF 3 Institut de Mathématiques
de Toulouse 4 IRT Saint Exupery. Correspondence to: Thomas
Massena <thomas.massena@irit.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Throughout this paper we refer to standard CP as vanilla CP.

