Towards flexible perception with visual memory

Robert Geirhos * 1 Priyank Jaini * 1 Austin Stone * 1 Sourabh Medapati * 1
Xi Yi 1 George Toderici 1 Abhijit Ogale 1 Jonathon Shlens 1

Abstract

The real world constantly keeps changing, and so do data
requirements. New data and datasets become available, and
existing ones become deprecated for a variety of reasons,
including concerns around fairness, biases or unsafe content.
Knowledge changes, and concepts drift (Tsymbal, 2004; Lu
et al., 2018): Phones and cars look different today than they
did a few years ago, and different from how they will look
in the future. When it comes to data, the only constant is
change (Cao & Yang, 2015; Bourtoule et al., 2021; Nguyen
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023). Consequently, from a
modeling perspective, in order to keep up with this change
one would ideally want to constantly re-train or fine-tune
models, which is not feasible. In short, as anyone who has
ever deployed a model has experienced firsthand, one is constantly battling the symptoms of a single underlying cause:
the fact that deep learning models have a static knowledge
representation entangled in millions or billions of model parameters. We, among many others working on memory e.g.
Weston et al. (2014); Chen et al. (2018); Wu et al. (2021);
Iscen et al. (2022); Nakata et al. (2022); Iscen et al. (2023);
Prabhu et al. (2023); Gui et al. (2024); Shao et al. (2024);
Silva et al. (2024), believe that this is not a great way to
represent visual knowledge for deep learning. Instead, we
argue that we should build models that cleanly separate representation (how things are represented, e.g. through feature
embeddings) from visual memory (what is known). In short,
deep learning models need a flexible visual memory: a way
to explicitly utilize and edit knowledge.

Training a neural network is a monolithic endeavor, akin to carving knowledge into stone:
once the process is completed, editing the knowledge in a network is hard, since all information is
distributed across the network’s weights. We here
explore a simple, compelling alternative by marrying the representational power of deep neural
networks with the flexibility of a database. Decomposing the task of image classification into
image similarity (from a pre-trained embedding)
and search (via fast nearest neighbor retrieval
from a knowledge database), we build on wellestablished components to construct a simple and
flexible visual memory that has the following key
capabilities: (1.) The ability to flexibly add data
across scales: from individual samples all the way
to entire classes and billion-scale data; (2.) The
ability to remove data through unlearning and
memory pruning; (3.) An interpretable decisionmechanism on which we can intervene to control
its behavior. Taken together, these capabilities
comprehensively demonstrate the benefits of an
explicit visual memory. We hope that it might
contribute to a conversation on how knowledge
should be represented in deep vision models—
beyond carving it in “stone” weights.

In this work, we build a simple visual memory for classification and show that it has seven desirable capabilities,
including the ability to flexibly add data across scales (from
individual samples to classes and even billion-scale data),
the ability to remove data from our model’s classification
process through machine unlearning and memory pruning,
and a simple, interpretable decision-mechanism on which
we can intervene to control its behavior. Our main goal is
to provide a compelling idea of how beneficial a flexible
visual memory for deep learning can be from a variety of
perspectives and capabilities. From a technical standpoint,
we aim for simplicity: retrieving k nearest neighbors (in an
embedding feature space) along with their labels to classify
a query image. This approach allows us to investigate where
a simple visual memory mechanism helps, where its limi-

1. Introduction
In the pretty diagrams on ”Intro to Machine Learning” slides,
an ideal ML workflow looks like this: Data collection, preprocessing, choosing a model, training, evaluation, deployment. Happy ending—the model is deployed, the users love
it, and one can finally go on that well-deserved vacation and
catch up on the latest AGI memes.
Until, of course, the enemy of any ideal world sets in: reality.
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Robert Geirhos <lastname@google.com>, Priyank Jaini <pjaini@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

