A Generalization Theory for Zero-Shot Prediction

Ronak Mehta 1 Zaid Harchaoui 1
large unlabeled dataset x1 , . . . , xN ∈ X is used to produce
an encoder α : X → Rd . The embedding α(x) is thought
to contain information that is relevant for predicting y from
x. Pre-training typically occurs through the process of selfsupervised learning (SSL), using a pretext task that can be
solved with only instances of x (e.g. filling in a blank image patch). In FSL, the user may then access a labeled
lab
lab
lab
dataset (xlab
1 , y 1 ), . . . , (xn , y n ) from which a predictor can be trained inexpensively. This often takes the form
of a linear classifier x 7→ Wα(x)+b for W ∈ R|Y|×d and
b ∈ R|Y| . Where ZSP departs from FSL is the additional
challenge of being given no directly labeled training data.

Abstract
A modern paradigm for generalization in machine learning and AI consists of pre-training
a task-agnostic foundation model, generally obtained using self-supervised and multimodal contrastive learning. The resulting representations
can be used for prediction on a downstream task
for which no labeled data is available. We present
a theoretical framework to better understand this
approach, called zero-shot prediction. We identify the target quantities that zero-shot prediction
aims to learn, or learns in passing, and the key
conditional independence relationships that enable its generalization ability.

At first glance, ZSP seems impossible. Yet, the ingenuity of practitioners has yielded the following solution; if 1)
each pre-training example xi is paired with another “view”
z i ∈ Z (e.g. a caption in natural language) and 2) if each
label y ∈ Y can intelligently be embedded into Z, then
the relationship between each xi and z i could provide the
means to perform prediction. Concretely, one learns a complementary encoder β : Z → Rd during pre-training and
designs prompts z yk for y ∈ Y and k = 1, . . . , m. Then,

1. Introduction
In 2021, OpenAI shocked the world by improving the zeroshot classification accuracy on ImageNet from 11.5% to
76.2% via the CLIP series of models (Radford et al., 2021).
This event redefined the goal of zero-shot prediction from
producing models that generalized to unseen classes to
those that generalized to unseen tasks entirely. Two fundamental drivers of CLIP’s success were 1) the use of
natural language as a medium for representing arbitrary
classes (as in the previous state-of-the-art Visual N-grams
(Li et al., 2017)), and 2) a massive, yet carefully designed
pre-training set which significantly impacted downstream
performance (Radford et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2024). Despite the remarkable success of these foundation model-based pipelines (Bommasani et al., 2022),
there are unique components of zero-shot prediction that
warrant investigation from a theoretical point of view.

m

x 7→ arg max
y∈Y

1 X
⟨α(x), β(z yk )⟩
m

(1)

k=1

is employed for prediction. An example of a prompt is the
template text “photo of a
.”, where the blank can be
filled by the textual representation of the class (e.g. “cat”
or “dog”). The ZSP pipeline, from pre-training to prompt
selection, is clearly a wild departure from what is explained
by statistical learning theory. Moreover, while some components of these systems have been studied in the context
of FSL (such as the reasons why various pre-training objectives result in encoders that provably accelerate learning),
unique aspects of ZSP, such as the role of prompting and
the cost of “translating” modalities, have not yet received
theoretical treatment. Herein lies our question.

To clarify these gaps, we contrast zero-shot prediction
(ZSP) with the related setting of few-shot learning (FSL).
Let x ∈ X denote an input (often an image) that accompanies a discrete value y ∈ Y (often a class label). Common
to both ZSP and FSL is a pre-training procedure in which a
1
Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle.
Correspondence to: Ronak Mehta <ronakdm@uw.edu>.

Through what decomposition of downstream task
performance can we compare zero-shot prediction to
the direct supervised learner, with a transparent dependence on the 1) pre-training distribution, 2) evaluation distribution, and 3) prompting strategy?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

