A Likelihood Based Approach to Distribution Regression Using Conditional
Deep Generative Models

Shivam Kumar 1 Yun Yang 2 Lizhen Lin 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Conditional distribution estimation provides a principled
framework for characterizing the dependence relationship
between a response variable Y and predictors X, with the
primary goal of estimating the distribution of Y conditional
on X through learning the (conditional) data-generating
process. Conditional distribution estimation allows one to
regress the entire distribution of Y on X, which provides
much richer information than the traditional mean regression and plays a central role in various important areas
ranging from causal inference (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes, 2010),
graphical models (Jordan, 1999; Koller & Friedman, 2009),
representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013), dimension reduction (Carreira-Perpinán, 1997; Van Der Maaten et al.,
2009), to model selection (Claeskens & Hjort, 2008; Ando,
2010). Their applications span across diverse domains such
as forecasting (Gneiting & Katzfuss, 2014), biology (Krishnaswamy et al., 2014), energy (Jeon & Taylor, 2012),
astronomy (Zhao et al., 2021), and industrial engineering
(Simar & Wilson, 2015), among others.

In this work, we explore the theoretical properties of conditional deep generative models under the statistical framework of distribution regression where the response variable lies in a
high-dimensional ambient space but concentrates
around a potentially lower-dimensional manifold.
More specifically, we study the large-sample properties of a likelihood-based approach for estimating these models. Our results lead to the convergence rate of a sieve maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for estimating the conditional distribution (and its devolved counterpart) of the response
given predictors in the Hellinger (Wasserstein)
metric. Our rates depend solely on the intrinsic dimension and smoothness of the true conditional distribution. These findings provide an
explanation of why conditional deep generative
models can circumvent the curse of dimensionality from the perspective of statistical foundations
and demonstrate that they can learn a broader
class of nearly singular conditional distributions.
Our analysis also emphasizes the importance of
introducing a small noise perturbation to the data
when they are supported sufficiently close to a
manifold. Finally, in our numerical studies, we
demonstrate the effective implementation of the
proposed approach using both synthetic and realworld datasets, which also provide complementary validation to our theoretical findings.

There is a rich literature in statistics and machine learning
on conditional distribution estimation including both frequentist and Bayesian methods (Hall & Yao, 2005; Norets
& Pati, 2017). Traditional methods, however, suffer from
the curse of dimensionality and often struggle to adapt to
the intricacies of modern data types such as the ones with
lower-dimensional manifold structures.
Recent methodologies that leverage deep generative models have demonstrated significant advancements in complex
data generation. Instead of explicitly modeling the data
distribution, these approaches implicitly estimate it through
learning the corresponding data sampling scheme. Commonly, these implicit distribution estimation approaches can
be broadly categorized into three types. The first one is
likelihood-based with notable examples including Kingma
& Welling (2013), Rezende et al. (2014), Burda et al. (2015),
and Song et al. (2021) . The second approach, based on adversarial learning, matches the empirical distribution of the
data with a distribution estimator using an adversarial loss.
Representative examples include Goodfellow et al. (2014),
Arjovsky et al. (2017), and Mroueh et al. (2017), among
others. The third approach, which is more recent, reduces

1

Department of Applied and Computational Mathematics
and Statistics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, USA
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Shivam Kumar <skumar9@nd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

