Otter: Generating Tests from Issues to Validate SWE Patches

Toufique Ahmed 1 Jatin Ganhotra 1 Rangeet Pan 1 Avraham Shinnar 1 Saurabh Sinha 1 Martin Hirzel 1

Abstract

2002). The recent introduction of SWE-Bench (Jimenez
et al., 2024) has spurred work on resolving SWE issues
automatically with LLMs, typically with agents (Yang et al.,
2024; Ruan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b). Such issueresolution systems are often called SWE agents. We posit
that, just like up-front tests help human SWE engineers,
they also help automated SWE agents.

While there has been plenty of work on generating
tests from existing code, there has been limited
work on generating tests from issues. A correct
test must validate the code patch that resolves
the issue. This paper focuses on the scenario
where that code patch does not yet exist. Doing so supports two major use-cases. First, it
supports TDD (test-driven development), the discipline of “test first, write code later” that has
well-documented benefits for human software engineers. Second, it also validates SWE (software
engineering) agents, which generate code patches
for resolving issues. This paper introduces TDDBench-Verified, a benchmark for generating tests
from issues, and Otter, an LLM-based solution for
this task. Otter augments LLMs with rule-based
analysis to check and repair their outputs, and
introduces a novel self-reflective action planner.
Experiments show Otter outperforming state-ofthe-art systems for generating tests from issues,
in addition to enhancing systems that generate
patches from issues. We hope that Otter helps
make developers more productive at resolving issues and leads to more robust, well-tested code.

While test generation is an active area of research, prior
work focuses on creating tests for existing code, not on
creating tests from issue descriptions alone. A recent solution SWE-Agent+ (Mündler et al., 2024) attempts to create
tests from issue descriptions albeit with limited success (the
state-of-the-art SWE-Agent+ only generates a fail-to-pass
test in 19.2% cases and is quite expensive, requiring several
LLM calls and tokens). See Section 3 for a more in-depth
discussion of related work.
This paper introduces Otter (acronym for “Otter: TDD-Test
gEnerator for Reproducing issues”). It takes as input x an
issue description and the original code in the repository,
and generates as output a set of tests y. Otter contains a
novel self-reflective action planner for deciding which code
to read and which tests to write. It also uses rule-based
code analyses and transformations throughout the workflow
to curate LLM inputs, validate LLM outputs, and repair
generated tests. Otter generates fail-to-pass tests in 31.4%
of cases, and in an ensemble of size 5 dubbed Otter++, that
increases to 37.0%. At the same time, the cost (even with
ensembling) is less than $0.10 per issue with GPT-4o. Tests
generated by Otter adhere to the same testing framework as
repository’s existing test suite, to which they can be added.

1. Introduction
A software engineering (SWE) issue is a bug report or feature request for improving the code in a repository. Before a
software engineer attempts to write new code that resolves
a bug, they typically write a reproduction test to confirm the
presence of the bug in the old code. In fact, even when working on a feature request, before writing new code it is recommended to create an acceptance test first, to confirm the
presence of the feature in the new code once written. This
practice is known as test-driven development (TDD), and it
improves the quality of both tests and the code itself (Beck,

Today the most popular benchmark for automatically resolving SWE issues is SWE-bench Verified (Chowdhury et al.,
2024). To evaluate solutions such as Otter that automatically
generate tests from issues, we introduce a new benchmark,
TDD-Bench-Verified. TDD-Bench-Verified evaluates tests
by checking whether the tests a) fail on the old code before
issue resolution, b) pass on the new code, and c) cover the
code changes well. The fact that TDD-Bench-Verified is
derived from SWE-bench Verified enables us to empirically
study the effects of generated tests on SWE agents. We
observe that the tests from Otter++ can be used to trade
precision for recall on the SWE-bench Verified leaderboard.
For instance, for the system ranked 3rd on the leaderboard,

1

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Toufique Ahmed <tfahmed@ibm.com>, Martin
Hirzel <hirzel@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

