Efficient Online Reinforcement Learning for Diffusion Policy

Haitong Ma 1 Tianyi Chen 2 Kai Wang 2 Na Li * 1 Bo Dai * 2

Abstract

Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020). With the iterative denoising
design, diffusion models achieved superior expressiveness
and multimodality in representing complex probability distributions, demonstrating remarkable performance in image
and video generation (Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al.,
2022). The superior expressiveness and multimodality naturally benefit the policies in sequential decision-making
problems. In fact, diffusion policy has been introduced in
imitation learning and offline reinforcement learning (RL),
where expert datasets are presented. Diffusion policies improved significantly over previous deterministic or unimodal
policies on manipulation (Chi et al., 2023; Ke et al., 2024;
Scheikl et al., 2024) and locomotion tasks (Huang et al.,
2024).

Diffusion policies have achieved superior performance in imitation learning and offline reinforcement learning (RL) due to their rich expressiveness. However, the conventional diffusion training procedure requires samples from target distribution, which is impossible in online RL since
we cannot sample from the optimal policy. Backpropagating policy gradient through the diffusion
process incurs huge computational costs and instability, thus being expensive and not scalable.
To enable efficient training of diffusion policies
in online RL, we generalize the conventional denoising score matching by reweighting the loss
function. The resulting Reweighted Score Matching (RSM) preserves the optimal solution and low
computational cost of denoising score matching,
while eliminating the need to sample from the
target distribution and allowing learning to optimize value functions. We introduce two tractable
reweighted loss functions to solve two commonly
used policy optimization problems, policy mirror descent and max-entropy policy, resulting in
two practical algorithms named Diffusion Policy Mirror Descent (DPMD) and Soft Diffusion
Actor-Critic (SDAC). We conducted comprehensive comparisons on MuJoCo benchmarks. The
empirical results show that the proposed algorithms outperform recent diffusion-policy online
RLs on most tasks, and the DPMD improves more
than 120% over soft actor-critic on Humanoid and
Ant.

Meanwhile, online RL has been long seeking expressive
policy families. One promising direction lies in energybased models (EBMs)—a class of probabilistic models that
represent distributions via unnormalized densities. When
applied to RL, energy-based policies—policies modeled as
EBMs—have been shown to arise as optimal solutions in
proximity-based policy optimization (Nachum et al., 2017;
Mei et al., 2020) and max-entropy RL (Neu et al., 2017;
Haarnoja et al., 2017). Despite their theoretical appeal,
training and sampling from such unnormalized models in
continuous action spaces are notoriously difficult due to
their intractable likelihood (Song & Kingma, 2021). To
mitigate this, a variety of probabilistic models have been
introduced for efficient sampling and learning, but with
the cost of approximation error. In practice, many algorithms (Schulman, 2015; Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja
et al., 2018; Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023) project the energybased policies onto the Gaussian policies. However, this
projection severely limits the expressiveness of the original energy-based formulations, often resulting in degraded
performance.

1. Introduction
Many successes of diffusion-based generative models have
been witnessed recently (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song &

Diffusion models are closely related to EBMs, as they can
be regarded as EBMs perturbed by a series of noise (Song
& Ermon, 2019; Shribak et al., 2024), thus being the perfect
candidate to represent energy-based policies in RL. Unfortunately, it is highly non-trivial to train diffusion policies
in online RL. The commonly used diffusion model training procedure, denoising score matching (Ho et al., 2020),
requires data samples from the target data distribution (usually a large image dataset in image generation). However,

*
1
2
Equal supervision
Harvard University.
Georgia
Institute of Technology.
Emails:
Haitong Ma
<haitongma@g.harvard.edu>, Na Li <nali@seas.harvard.edu>,
Bo Dai <bodai@cc.gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

