RollingQ: Reviving the Cooperation Dynamics in Multimodal Transformer

Haotian Ni 1 Yake Wei 2 3 4 Hang Liu 5 Gong Chen 6 Chong Peng 6 Hao Lin 6
Di Hu 2 3 4

Abstract

trušaitis et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2024) to achieve a comprehensive understanding. Each modality provides unique
information, and the challenge of effectively fusing these
modalities has been emphasized in prior works (Gao et al.,
2020; Liang et al., 2022). Current research primarily explores two fusion paradigms: static fusion and dynamic fusion (Zhang et al., 2024). Static fusion applies fixed weights
to different modalities during inference (illustrated in Figure 1(a)), assuming that the information provided by each
modality remains consistent (Zhang et al., 2024). However,
this assumption often breaks down in real-world scenarios, where modality quality can vary significantly across
samples. Dynamic fusion, by contrast, directly addresses
this issue by dynamically adjusting weights to each modality based on the specific characteristics of the input data
(illustrated in Figure 1(b)). To enable dynamic fusion, multimodal Transformers (Vaswani, 2017; Xu et al., 2023) have
emerged as a powerful scheme, leveraging the inherent attention mechanism to identify and focus on the most informative and task-relevant tokens in the input (Clark, 2019;
Kovaleva, 2019). Using self-attention and cross-attention
fusion layers, these models can adaptively and effectively
integrate information from different modalities, achieving
superior performance in tasks such as audio-visual learning (Nagrani et al., 2021; Chumachenko et al., 2022), sentiment analysis (Wankhade et al., 2022), and visual question
answering (Yu et al., 2019).

Multimodal learning faces challenges in effectively fusing information from diverse modalities,
especially when modality quality varies across
samples. Dynamic fusion strategies, such as attention mechanism in Transformers, aim to address such challenges by adaptively emphasizing modalities based on the characteristics of input data. However, through amounts of carefully
designed experiments, we surprisingly observed
that the dynamic adaptability of widely-used selfattention models diminishes. Model tends to prefer one modality regardless of data characteristics.
This bias triggers a self-reinforcing cycle that progressively overemphasizes the favored modality,
widening the distribution gap in attention keys
across modalities and deactivating attention mechanism’s dynamic properties. To revive adaptability, we propose a simple yet effective method
Rolling Query (RollingQ), which balances attention allocation by rotating the query to break the
self-reinforcing cycle and mitigate the key distribution gap. Extensive experiments on various
multimodal scenarios validate the effectiveness
of RollingQ and the restoration of cooperation
dynamics is pivotal for enhancing the broader capabilities of widely deployed multimodal Transformers. The source code is available at Github.

To validate the practical performance of static and dynamic
fusion paradigms, we conducted experiments on the widely
used audio-visual dataset, Kinetic-Sound (Arandjelovic &
Zisserman, 2017). Surprisingly, dynamic fusion implemented through a self-attention layer, often considered more
flexible and adaptive, achieves an accuracy of 67.0, which
underperforms the static fusion’s accuracy of 68.01 . To investigate this unexpected outcome, we first examine whether
this attention-based dynamic fusion paradigm can adaptively
adjust weights as anticipated, by analyzing the attention
scores in the model’s fusion layer. However, as shown in
Figure 1(c), the model allocates disproportionately high
attention to the audio modality, regardless of data characteristics. To further verify this behavior, we replaced the audio
input with Gaussian noise, which contains no information.

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning focuses on extracting and integrating information from data across different modalities (Bal1
Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence Renmin University of China, Beiiing, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and
Intelligent Governance, Beijing, China 4 Engineering Research
Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation. MOE, Beijing, China 5 Xiamen University, Xiamen,
China 6 Tencent, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Di Hu
<dihu@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

See Table 1 for more details.

