Optimal Decision Tree Pruning Revisited: Algorithms and Complexity

Juha Harviainen * 1 Frank Sommer * 2 Manuel Sorge * 2 Stefan Szeider * 2

Abstract

Holzinger et al., 2020). Recent advancements in algorithms
have made it feasible to compute decision trees that are
optimal with respect to various optimization goals (e.g.,
Narodytska et al., 2018; Demirovic et al., 2022; McTavish
et al., 2022). With that, the algorithmics and parameterized
complexity of the underlying optimization problems
were studied intensively (Staus et al., 2025; Ordyniak &
Szeider, 2021; Kobourov et al., 2025; Eiben et al., 2023;
Komusiewicz et al., 2023a; Ordyniak et al., 2024; Gahlawat
& Zehavi, 2024; Komusiewicz et al., 2025), feeding back
into practical advances (Staus et al., 2025).

We present a comprehensive classical and parameterized complexity analysis of decision tree
pruning operations, extending recent research on
the complexity of learning small decision trees.
Thereby, we offer new insights into the computational challenges of decision tree simplification, a
crucial aspect of developing interpretable and efficient machine learning models. We focus on fundamental pruning operations of subtree replacement and raising, which are used in heuristics.
Surprisingly, while optimal pruning can be performed in polynomial time for subtree replacement, the problem is NP-complete for subtree
raising. Therefore, we identify parameters and
combinations thereof that lead to fixed-parameter
tractability or hardness, establishing a precise borderline between these complexity classes. For
example, while subtree raising is hard for small
domain size D or number d of features, it can be
solved in D2d · |I|O(1) time, where |I| is the input
size. We complement our theoretical findings with
preliminary experimental results, demonstrating
the practical implications of our analysis.

Large datasets still require heuristic optimization techniques,
however. Commonly used heuristics to compute decision
trees for given data recursively split the input data based
on certain criteria such as reduction in entropy (Quinlan,
1986; Breiman et al., 1984; Mingers, 1989). The resulting
large trees often overfit, and so the heuristics then prune
them, that is, they delete nodes to decrease the size while
maintaining good classification performance. In other
words, they heuristically solve optimization problems
in which they balance some form of the two goals of
maximizing the number of pruned nodes and minimizing
the number of introduced errors. This motivates studying
these optimization problems themselves.
While the algorithmics of computing optimal decision trees
from scratch is reasonably well understood, the algorithmics
of optimally pruning a given decision tree has received
scant attention. Our goal is to initiate a rigorous algorithmic
study of the latter, highlighting what properties make the
underlying problems hard or tractable, and pointing to
promising algorithmic approaches that may be developed
further into practical implementations.

1. Introduction
Decision trees are fundamental data structures used to
describe, classify, and generalize data (Larose, 2014;
Murthy, 1998; Quinlan, 1986). They are widely used in
machine learning due to their interpretability and efficiency
(Breiman et al., 1984). Towards explainable AI, one
prefers small decision trees over large ones as they provide
more concise and understandable models (Rudin, 2019;

There are two main operations that heuristics apply, subtree replacement and subtree raising (see below for details),
and we study optimally pruning trees under each of these.
An overview of our results is as follows. It was already
known that optimally replacing subtrees is polynomial-time
solvable (Almuallim, 1996), so we study the running time
in more detail and give an improved algorithm that is linear instead of quadratic in the tree size if the number k of
pruned nodes or number t of misclassifications is small. As
a side result, we give a quicker algorithm for classifying
examples with a given tree based on heavy–light decom-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland 2 Institute of
Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria.
Correspondence to: Juha Harviainen <juha.harviainen@helsinki.fi>,
Frank Sommer <fsommer@ac.tuwien.ac.at>,
Manuel
Sorge <manuel.sorge@ac.tuwien.ac.at>, Stefan Szeider
<sz@ac.tuwien.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

