Lightweight Protocols for Distributed Private Quantile Estimation

Anders Aamand 1 Fabrizio Boninsegna 2 Abigail Gentle 3 Jacob Imola 1 Rasmus Pagh 1

Abstract

leading approach to federated computations with formal privacy guarantees is to use differential privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006) which limits the amount of information that
can be inferred about a given user’s input by selecting the
output from a suitable probability distribution defined by
the inputs. A particularly simple and appealing setup is
local differential privacy (LDP), in which each user individually sends the output of a differentially private algorithm
to a central “analyzer”, who in turn uses all the user outputs to approximate a function of the inputs. Though LDP
is not the only approach to federated computations with
differential privacy, it has been influential. For example,
LDP has been used in industrial deployments of differential privacy (Cormode et al., 2018; Erlingsson et al., 2014;
Differential Privacy Team, 2017), and there is a rich theory
showing both upper and lower bounds on the privacy-utility
trade-offs that are possible under LDP. When giving privacy guarantees under LDP it is common to consider pure
differential privacy since it is known that any non-adaptive
protocol satisfying approximate differential privacy can be
converted into an equivalent one satisfying pure differential
privacy (Bun et al., 2019). An interesting aspect of LDP
algorithms is that they can be used as building blocks of
more sophisticated algorithms offering better privacy utility
trade-offs (with stronger trust assumptions), for example
in the shuffle model (Bittau et al., 2017; Cheu et al., 2018;
Erlingsson et al., 2019).

Distributed data analysis is a large and growing
field driven by a massive proliferation of user
devices, and by privacy concerns surrounding
the centralised storage of data. We consider two
adaptive algorithms for estimating one quantile
(e.g. the median) when each user holds a single data point lying in a domain [B] that can
be queried once through a private mechanism;
one under local differential privacy (LDP) and
another for shuffle differential privacy (shuffleDP). In the adaptive setting we present an εLDP algorithm which can estimate any quanB
tile within error α only requiring O( log
ε2 α2 ) users,
and an (ε, δ)-shuffle DP algorithm requiring only
e 12 + 12 ) log B) users. Prior (nonadaptive)
O((
ε
α
algorithms require more users by several logarithmic factors in B. We further provide a matching lower bound for adaptive protocols, showing
that our LDP algorithm is optimal in the low-ε
regime. Additionally, we establish lower bounds
against non-adaptive protocols which paired with
our understanding of the adaptive case, proves a
fundamental separation between these models.

1. Introduction

Quantile Estimation In this paper we study the problem
of quantile estimation under local differential privacy constraints. Specifically, we consider the setting of a dataset X
of n datapoints x1 , . . . , xn ∈ [B] := {1, . . . , B}, where B
is an integer parameter. We note that some works on quantile
estimation consider another setting where the input points
are real numbers, e.g., from [0, 1], but this requires assumptions on the data distribution – in Appendix H, we will
discuss how our algorithms can be brought to work in the
continuous setting under mild assumptions on the distribution of the input data. Given the dataset X, we define the
empirical CDF FX : [B] → [0, 1] by

A strong trend in recent years has been towards federated
computations (Kairouz et al., 2021) in which algorithms are
run on a distributed dataset rather than by collecting data and
performing the computation in a centralized manner. This
trend is motivated by the wish to protect individuals’ data,
as well as organizations’ wish steer clear of liability issues
stemming from collecting and handling private data. The
1

BARC and Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Italy 3 School of Computer
Science, University of Sydney, Australia. Correspondence
to: Anders Aamand <aa@di.ku.dk>, Abigail Gentle <abigail.gentle@sydney.edu.au>, Jacob Imola <jaim@di.ku.dk>,
Fabrizio Boninsegna <fabrizio.boninsegna@phd.unipd.it>.

FX (i) =

1
|{j ∈ [n] | xj ≤ i}|,
n

(1)

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

that is, FX (i) is the fraction of elements in the dataset that
are smaller than or equal to i. Given q ∈ (0, 1) we would
1

