Sleeping Reinforcement Learning

Simone Drago * 1 Marco Mussi * 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

Abstract

ing sequential decision-making problems mainly in simulated environments. Nowadays, we witness an increasing demand to transition its capabilities from simulation to
real-world applications. However, to move RL to practical
domains, we still experience notable challenges that need
to be addressed from both the algorithmic and theoretical
perspectives. One of these challenges concerns actions’
availability. Indeed, in the standard RL framework, the set
of actions that can be played in a given state is assumed to be
known and immutable throughout the interaction. However,
in several real-world sequential decision-making problems,
it may not be possible to play some of the actions under
some circumstances.

In the standard Reinforcement Learning (RL)
paradigm, the action space is assumed to be fixed
and immutable throughout the learning process.
However, in many real-world scenarios, not all
actions are available at every decision stage. The
available action set may depend on the current
environment state, domain-specific constraints, or
other (potentially stochastic) factors outside the
agent’s control. To address these realistic scenarios, we introduce a novel paradigm called Sleeping Reinforcement Learning, where the available
action set varies during the interaction with the
environment. We start with the simpler scenario
in which the available action sets are revealed at
the beginning of each episode. We show that a
modification
of UCBVI achieves regret of order
?
r
OpH
SAT q, where H is the horizon, S and A
are the cardinalities of the state and action spaces,
respectively, and T is the learning horizon. Next,
we address the more challenging and realistic scenario in which the available actions are disclosed
only at each decision stage. By leveraging a novel
construction,
?we establish a minimax lower bound
of order Ωp T 2A{2 q when the availability of actions is governed by a Markovian process, establishing a statistical barrier of the problem. Focusing on the statistically tractable case where action
availability depends only on the current state and
stage, we propose a new optimistic algorithm
? that
r
achieves regret guarantees of order OpH
SAT q,
showing that the problem shares the same complexity of standard RL.

Motivation. Consider the scenario depicted in Figure 1a,
in which we want to control a physical system (e.g., a robot)
characterized by a given action space A made of all the
actions the agent can perform. At every stage h, the RL
agent observes the state of the environment sh and decides
the action ah P A to play. Then, such an action is usually
validated by a low-level controller (LLC), which checks
whether the action is feasible or not (depending, for instance, on some physical constraints or safety reasons). On
the one hand, if feasible, the action is executed as is. On
the other hand, if the action is not feasible, the low-level
controller overrides it with another action, r
ah P A, such as
one suggested by a baseline policy or the “closest” feasible
action (according to some domain-specific metric). From
the agent’s perspective, the LLC can be considered as a part
of the environment. However, when the agent is unaware
that certain actions are infeasible (and may only realize it
after the LLC intervenes), the performance of the learned
policy can be significantly harmed (see Example 1). If the
agent is instead aware of the available actions, we ideally
want it to select an action among those deemed feasible by
the LLC. This scenario can be addressed by adopting a solution in which a low-level filter makes the RL agent aware of
which actions Ah Ď A are available before actually making
a decision (Figure 1b).

1. Introduction
In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton &
Barto, 2018) has demonstrated remarkable success in solv*

This problem of learning in scenarios with varying action
availability is widely studied and discussed for Multi-Armed
Bandits (MABs, Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) under the
name of “Sleeping” MABs. This research line comprises
stochastic and adversarial choices for both rewards and
action availability (Kleinberg et al., 2008; Kanade et al.,

1

Equal contribution Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Simone Drago <simone.drago@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

