Retrieval-Augmented Language Model for Knowledge-Aware Protein Encoding

Jiasheng Zhang 1 Delvin Ce Zhang 2 Shuang Liang 1 Zhengpin Li 3 Rex Ying 4 Jie Shao 1

Abstract

application tasks such as drug discovery (Hoang et al., 2024)
and function prediction (Xu et al., 2024; Shaw et al., 2024).
However, as pointed out by Kalifa et al. (2024); Zhou et al.
(2023); Zhang et al. (2022a), lacking factual knowledge (e.g.,
gene descriptions) makes them struggle to capture intricate
biological function encoded within protein sequences.

Protein language models often struggle to capture
biological functions due to their lack of factual
knowledge (e.g., gene descriptions). Existing
solutions leverage protein knowledge graphs
(PKGs) as auxiliary pre-training objectives,
but lack explicit integration of task-oriented
knowledge, making them suffer from limited
knowledge exploitation and catastrophic forgetting. The root cause is that they fail to align PKGs
with task-specific data, forcing their knowledge
modeling to adapt to the knowledge-isolated
nature of downstream tasks. In this paper, we
propose Knowledge-aware retrieval augmented
protein language model (Kara), achieving the
first task-oriented and explicit integration of
PKGs and protein language models. With a
knowledge retriever learning to predict linkages
between PKG and task proteins, Kara unifies
the knowledge integration of the pre-training
and fine-tuning stages with a structure-based
regularization, mitigating catastrophic forgetting.
To ensure task-oriented integration, Kara uses
contextualized virtual tokens to extract graph context as task-specific knowledge for new proteins.
Experiments show that Kara outperforms existing
knowledge-enhanced models in 6 representative
tasks, achieving on average 5.1% improvements.

Existing solutions leverage protein knowledge graphs
(PKGs) that describe the relationships between proteins
and gene ontology (GO) entities with biological relations
(Chen et al., 2023b). These models use protein sequences
and associated GO annotations as complementary encoding
objectives during pre-training. For example, OntoProtein
(Zhang et al., 2022a) uses the TransE objective (Bordes et al.,
2013) to optimize the alignment between protein representations and associated GO entity representations. KeAP (Zhou
et al., 2023) uses GO entity representations to guide masked
token prediction of protein sequences via a cross-attention
mechanism. Despite their effectiveness, unfortunately, they
lack explicit integration of task-oriented knowledge.
Limitations. 1) Implicitly embed knowledge information.
Existing methods use knowledge only as encoding objectives
to supervise the pre-training of the model, assuming that
knowledge information can be well embedded within model
parameters. However, as highlighted by Kandpal et al.
(2023), LMs often struggle to precisely embed knowledge,
particularly long-tail knowledge. Storing knowledge within
model parameters also makes them unable to adapt to knowledge graph updates (e.g., adding new knowledge), which
further diminishes their usability. 2) Overlook the structure
information. Existing methods treat each knowledge triplet
(i.e., (protein,relation,GO)) independently. However, the
neighboring GO entities of a protein are often correlated,
and the high-order connections between proteins (e.g.,
proteins linked to a GO entity through similar relations) can
provide additional insights into their functional similarities.
Ignoring the structural relevance makes existing methods
fail to fully exploit knowledge information within PKGs.
3) Lack of task-oriented knowledge modeling. Existing
methods are unable to incorporate knowledge modeling
during task fine-tuning, leading to inconsistent optimization
objectives between the pre-training and fine-tuning stages.
This inconsistency can cause the knowledge learned during
pre-training to be catastrophically forgotten when applied to
downstream tasks (Lee et al., 2020), while also making the

1. Introduction
Proteins are essential for understanding biological processes
and recent advances in artificial intelligence led to growing
interest in learning generalized vector representations of proteins (Hu et al., 2024). By viewing amino acids as language
tokens, protein language models (PLMs) such as ESM (Lin
et al., 2023), ProteinBert (Brandes et al., 2022), and ProtBert
(Ahmed et al., 2022) have proven highly valuable in various
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 The
Pennsylvania State University 3 Fudan University 4 Yale University.
Correspondence to: Jie Shao <shaojie@uestc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

