Agent-as-a-Judge: Evaluate Agents with Agents

Mingchen Zhuge 1 2 Changsheng Zhao 1 Dylan R. Ashley 2 Wenyi Wang 2
Dmitrii Khizbullin 2 Yunyang Xiong 1 Zechun Liu 1 Ernie Chang 1 Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi 1
Yuandong Tian 1 Yangyang Shi 1 Vikas Chandra 1 Jürgen Schmidhuber 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recent years have seen multimodal agentic systems move
from occasionally being able to solve small toy problems to
being regularly deployed for challenging real-world problems (the dream of most AI research). Yet, the current evaluation methods and the available benchmarks for agentic
systems are struggling to keep up with these rapid advances,
dramatically slowing true progress.

Contemporary evaluation techniques are inadequate for agentic systems. These approaches
either focus exclusively on final outcomes—
ignoring the step-by-step nature of the thinking
done by agentic systems—or require excessive
manual labour. To address this, we introduce
the Agent-as-a-Judge framework, wherein agentic systems are used to evaluate agentic systems.
This is a natural extension of the LLM-as-a-Judge
framework, incorporating agentic features that
enable intermediate feedback for the entire tasksolving processes for more precise evaluations.
We apply the Agent-as-a-Judge framework to
the task of code generation. To overcome issues with existing benchmarks and provide a
proof-of-concept testbed for Agent-as-a-Judge,
we present DevAI, a new benchmark of 55 realistic AI code generation tasks. DevAI includes
rich manual annotations, like a total of 365 hierarchical solution requirements, which make it
particularly suitable for an agentic evaluator. We
benchmark three of the top code-generating agentic systems using Agent-as-a-Judge and find that
our framework dramatically outperforms LLMas-a-Judge and is as reliable as our human evaluation baseline. Altogether, we believe that this
work represents a concrete step towards enabling
vastly more sophisticated agentic systems. To
help that, our dataset and the full implementation of Agent-as-a-Judge will be publically
available at https://github.com/metau
to-ai/agent-as-a-judge

We believe that the current issue with evaluating agentic
systems stems from the lack of feedback during the intermediate task-solving stages for these nontraditional systems. Agentic systems think more like a human, often
act step-by-step (Wooldridge, 1999) and often hosting very
human-like natural language discussions internally to solve
problems (Zhuge et al., 2023). And thus agentic systems
should be evaluated like a human, with rich evaluative feedback which looks at the full thought and action trajectory;
evaluating an agentic system in the traditional way is like
evaluating a student using multiple-choice testing—a comparatively unreliable estimator (Park, 2010). For example,
while SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al.) is widespread, its evaluation method, which relies solely on the final resolve rate
for long-term automated repair tasks, does not effectively
pinpoint what is happening within agentic systems that affects the resolve rate. On the other hand, performing a better
evaluation with a human is prohibitively expensive. We
instead propose that agentic systems should be used to evaluate agentic systems. Inspired by LLM-as-a-Judge (Zheng
et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024; Chen et al.), which uses LLMs
to evaluate LLMs, we call this framework Agent-as-a-Judge,
of which it is a key extension to the world of agentic systems
(see Figure 1). It not only retains the cost-effectiveness of
LLM-as-a-Judge but is also equipped with agentic features,
allowing it to provide rich intermediate feedback throughout
the entire process, as it acts as an agentic system. We apply
the Agent-as-a-Judge systems to the problem of evaluating
code generating systems—one of the areas where agentic
systems have looked the most promising recently.

First four authors made core contributions. KAUST crafted
the dataset. Work done while Mingchen was interning at Meta,
with Changsheng leading. 1 Meta AI 2 KAUST. Correspondence to:
Mingchen Zhuge <mingchen.zhuge@kaust.edu.sa>, Changsheng
Zhao <cszhao@meta.com>.

In code generation, the development of benchmarks has also
lagged behind the rapid advancement of agentic systems.
HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), for example, focuses exclusively on algorithmic problems, while MBPP (Austin

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

