Set Valued Predictions For Robust Domain Generalization
Ron Tsibulsky 1 Daniel Nevo 2 Uri Shalit 2 3

Abstract

the data the model was trained on (Nagarajan et al., 2020;
Miller et al., 2020; Recht et al., 2019). These distributions
are referred to as “domains”, and the challenge of generalizing to domains unseen during training time is known as
Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) generalization, or Domain Generalization (DG) (Li et al., 2018a; Krueger et al., 2021). DG
is especially important in high-stakes fields like medicine,
where, for instance, a disease diagnosis system might be
trained on data from a specific group of patients, each with
records from multiple visits to health centers, or multiple
medical scans. Such a system must be effective on new
patients for which it has no prior data. Moreover, beyond
merely performing well on average, it is desirable that such
a system provide robust performance across all new patients, requiring worst-case performance guarantees across
domains rather than average-case performance.

Despite the impressive advancements in modern
machine learning, achieving robustness in Domain Generalization (DG) tasks remains a significant challenge. In DG, models are expected to
perform well on samples from unseen test distributions (also called domains), by learning from multiple related training distributions. Most existing
approaches to this problem rely on single-valued
predictions, which inherently limit their robustness. We argue that set-valued predictors could
be leveraged to enhance robustness across unseen
domains, while also taking into account that these
sets should be as small as possible. We introduce a theoretical framework defining successful set prediction in the DG setting, focusing on
meeting a predefined performance criterion across
as many domains as possible, and provide theoretical insights into the conditions under which
such domain generalization is achievable. We
further propose a practical optimization method
compatible with modern learning architectures,
that balances robust performance on unseen domains with small prediction set sizes. We evaluate
our approach on several real-world datasets from
the WILDS benchmark, demonstrating its potential as a promising direction for robust domain
generalization.

Recent efforts to address this challenge have focused on
learning “stable” predictors that focus only on domaininvariant features, discarding information that might be
domain-specific (Peters et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Heinze-Deml & Meinshausen, 2021; Veitch et al., 2021;
Wald et al., 2021). While these methods have made strides
in maintaining stability across various domains, achieving
this stability remains challenging, and sometimes infeasible
(Chen et al., 2021; Kamath et al., 2021). Furthermore, stability often comes at the cost of sub-optimal and even poorlyperforming predictors, as “overly stable” predictors might
ignore valuable parts of the data (Rosenfeld et al., 2021;
2022; Zhao et al., 2019; Stojanov et al., 2021). As an illustration, a disease diagnosis system that consistently achieves
only 60% accuracy, despite being stable across different patient populations, may not be practically viable.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Machine Learning (ML) methods, particularly deep neural networks (DNNs), have achieved remarkable success in various tasks, including language understanding and image recognition. However, despite these
advancements, many models struggle in real-world scenarios when the data comes from a different distribution than

We propose an alternative approach for dealing with the
considerable challenge of DG: employing predictors with
set-valued outputs. Our set-valued framework for OOD
problems recognizes that a key challenge in distributionshift problems is the absence of a single, universally optimal
prediction across all domains, as different domains induce
different probabilistic relationships between features X and
label Y . To handle these variations, our approach provides
set-valued outputs that capture a range of potential relationships learned from the training domains. Such an approach
is sensible for multi-domain settings, where expecting a
single predictor to perform optimally across all domains is

1

Department of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel 2 Department of Statistics and Operations Research,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 3 Department of Data and
Decisions Science, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Ron Tsibulsky <ront65@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

