How Transformers Learn Structured Data:
Insights From Hierarchical Filtering

Jérôme Garnier-Brun 1 2 Marc Mézard 1 Emanuele Moscato 1 Luca Saglietti 1

Abstract

Due to the complexity of the standard transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), understanding what strategy
is precisely implemented via the attention mechanism to
solve a given problem has been limited so far to very simple
tasks (Weiss et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2024; Behrens et al.,
2024). Nonetheless, significant results have been obtained
by studying transformers on simplified models of language
known as Context-Free Grammars (CFGs). Through probing of the so-called parsing tree of CFGs, evidence has
notably pointed towards transformers trained on predicting masked symbols implementing the optimal dynamic
programming algorithm to reconstruct the hidden structure
of the grammar, but alas without finding a fully plausible
implementation within the architecture (Zhao et al., 2023;
Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023). On the other hand, when tasked
with reconstructing the most probable parsing tree in the
context of probabilistic CFGs, transformers may struggle
to match the optimal algorithm if ambiguity is high (Khalighinejad et al., 2023).

Understanding the learning process and the embedded computation in transformers is becoming a central goal for the development of interpretable AI. In the present study, we introduce
a hierarchical filtering procedure for data models of sequences on trees, allowing us to handtune the range of positional correlations in the
data. Leveraging this controlled setting, we provide evidence that vanilla encoder-only transformers can approximate the exact inference algorithm when trained on root classification and
masked language modeling tasks, and study how
this computation is discovered and implemented.
We find that correlations at larger distances, corresponding to increasing layers of the hierarchy,
are sequentially included by the network during training. By comparing attention maps from
models trained with varying degrees of filtering
and by probing the different encoder levels, we
find clear evidence of a reconstruction of correlations on successive length scales corresponding
to the various levels of the hierarchy, which we
relate to a plausible implementation of the exact
inference algorithm within the same architecture.

Beyond language models, the significance of data structure
in machine learning applications is well recognized yet remains poorly understood. CFGs represent a data structure
characterized by hierarchical correlations (Mossel, 2016).
In general, understanding how standard deep networks can
take advantage of this hierarchical structure in their training is an important research question. Towards this objective, simplified hierarchical models of structured data on
fixed trees have proved very useful in understanding the
effectiveness of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
(Cagnetta et al., 2024), for which there are now formal
results supporting the idea that the optimal Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm can be approximately implemented
(Mei, 2024). Unfortunately, while the implementation of
the hierarchy in CNNs is made quite transparent by the hierarchical structure of their convolutional filters, this is not
true for transformers, and one can therefore not straightforwardly transpose this interpretation to other architectures
(Cagnetta & Wyart, 2024).

1. Introduction
Transformer-based large language models have revolutionized natural language processing, and have notably demonstrated their capacity to perfectly assimilate the grammatical rules of the languages they are trained on. While this evidence shows that transformers can handle and exploit the
subtle long-range correlations that emerge in natural language, their inner workings remain largely unclear.
1
Department of Computing Sciences, Università Bocconi, Milan, Italy 2 Department of Finance, Università Bocconi, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Jérôme Garnier-Brun
<jerome.garnier@unibocconi.it>.

In this work, we present a complementary study to those
described above, which allows us to understand further
how transformers approach optimal inference in a structured data model.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

