How Compositional Generalization and Creativity Improve
as Diffusion Models are Trained
Alessandro Favero * 1 2 Antonio Sclocchi * 1 Francesco Cagnetta 3 Pascal Frossard 2 Matthieu Wyart 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Compositional generalization, the ability to understand and
generate novel combinations of known components, is a
fundamental characteristic of human intelligence. This skill
underlies what linguists refer to as creativity (Chomsky
et al., 1976): the capacity to produce an infinite number of
novel and well-formed expressions from a finite set of rules.
Under which conditions can machines learn such a skill?
The success of diffusion models in producing realistic data
across various domains (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019; Betker et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022) provides a unique opportunity to study
how this ability emerges. Fundamental questions include:
What signals in the data are exploited by neural networks to
learn the compositional rules? How many training examples
are needed to learn such rules, and in what order are they
learned? How does the finiteness of the training set affect
the structure of generated data?

Natural data is often organized as a hierarchical
composition of features. How many samples
do generative models need in order to learn
the composition rules, so as to produce a
combinatorially large number of novel data?
What signal in the data is exploited to learn those
rules? We investigate these questions in the
context of diffusion models both theoretically
and empirically. Theoretically, we consider a
simple probabilistic context-free grammar—a
tree-like graphical model used to represent the
hierarchical and compositional structure of data
such as language and images. We demonstrate
that diffusion models learn the grammar’s
composition rules with the sample complexity
required for clustering features with statistically
similar context, a process similar to the word2vec
algorithm. However, this clustering emerges hierarchically: higher-level features associated with
longer contexts require more data to be identified.
This mechanism leads to a sample complexity
that scales polynomially with the said context
size. As a result, diffusion models trained on an
intermediate dataset size generate data coherent
up to a certain scale, but lacking global coherence.
We test these predictions across different domains
and find remarkable agreement: both generated
texts and images achieve progressively larger
coherence lengths as the training time or dataset
size grows. We discuss connections between the
hierarchical clustering mechanism we introduce
here and the renormalization group in physics.

To address these questions theoretically, we bridge two
viewpoints developed in the context of natural language
processing. On the one hand, symbolic approaches aim to
describe the structure of data via a list of rules that generate
them. For example, probabilistic context-free grammars
(PCFG) (Chomsky, 2014) describe sentences with trees,
whose nodes are hidden variables that can generate other
nodes or leaves according to probabilistic production rules.
PCFGs can approximate both structural and semantic aspects of text and have also been proposed for the description
of images under the name of Pattern Theory (Grenander,
1996; Jin & Geman, 2006; Siskind et al., 2007). On the
other hand, statistical approaches use data-driven analyses
agnostic to expert knowledge of grammatical structure. A
notable example is word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), where
a shallow neural network learns meaningful representations
of words by merely predicting their neighborhood.

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Physics, EPFL 2 Institute of
Electrical and Micro Engineering, EPFL 3 Theoretical and Scientific Data Science, SISSA 4 Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Johns Hopkins University. On leave from EPFL. Correspondence
to: <alessandro.favero@epfl.ch>, <mwyart1@jh.edu>.

Contributions We unify these two viewpoints by studying how diffusion models learn the Random Hierarchy
Model (RHM) (Cagnetta et al., 2024), an ensemble of simple PCFGs, where production rules are drawn uniformly at
random. In particular,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We show empirically that the learning process of diffu1

