Emotional Face-to-Speech

Jiaxin Ye 1 Boyuan Cao 1 Hongming Shan 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
When we encounter a person’s face on platforms like Instagram or Facebook without hearing their voice, our minds
instinctively generate auditory expectations based on visual
cues. These expectations are shaped by our experiences and
cultures, influencing how we perceive individuals to sound
based on their external appearance, such as age, gender, nationality, or emotion (Paris et al., 2017; Taitelbaum-Swead
& Fostick, 2016). These preconceived notions drive us to
form judgments about others’ voices even before they speak.

How much can we infer about an emotional voice
solely from an expressive face? This intriguing
question holds great potential for applications
such as virtual character dubbing and aiding individuals with expressive language disorders. Existing face-to-speech methods offer great promise
in capturing identity characteristics but struggle
to generate diverse vocal styles with emotional
expression. In this paper, we explore a new task,
termed emotional face-to-speech, aiming to synthesize emotional speech directly from expressive
facial cues. To that end, we introduce DEmoFace, a novel generative framework that leverages
a discrete diffusion transformer (DiT) with curriculum learning, built upon a multi-level neural
audio codec. Specifically, we propose multimodal
DiT blocks to dynamically align text and speech
while tailoring vocal styles based on facial emotion and identity. To enhance training efficiency
and generation quality, we further introduce a
coarse-to-fine curriculum learning algorithm for
multi-level token processing. In addition, we
develop an enhanced predictor-free guidance to
handle diverse conditioning scenarios, enabling
multi-conditional generation and disentangling
complex attributes effectively. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that DEmoFace generates more natural and consistent speech compared to baselines, even surpassing speech-driven
methods. Demos of DEmoFace are shown at our
project https://demoface.github.io.

In recent years, face-guided Text-to-Speech (TTS) (Goto
et al., 2020; Kang et al., 2023; Jang et al., 2024), also known
as Face-to-Speech or F2S, has attracted growing interest
with diverse applications, such as virtual character dubbing and assistance for individuals with expressive language
disorders. The goal of the F2S is to create voices that are
consistent with the guided face. However, users increasingly
expect generated speech that not only replicates speakers’
identities but also conveys rich emotional prosody, enhancing their experience in human-machine interactions (Wen
et al., 2024; Cong et al., 2024a; Ye et al., 2023b). This expectation is beyond the scope of existing F2S tasks, lacking
explicit guidance to produce desired emotional speech.
Considering that facial expressions are the most direct indicators of emotion, we propose an extension to the F2S task
grounded in visual cues, termed emotional Face-to-Speech
(eF2S). An example of the proposed eF2S task is illustrated
in Fig. 1(b). Unlike the conventional F2S task, which converts text to speech guided solely by identity embeddings
extracted from a reference face, our eF2S task further decouples identity and emotion from the facial input, producing
speech that preserves the speaker’s identity while enriching
it with the emotional expression derived from the reference
face. While the new eF2S task may initially appear to only
require the generated speech to convey emotions, it raises
several novel challenges. On the task level, traditional F2S
tasks are insufficient for eF2S, as they focus on converting
text into speech that reflects facial characteristics without
considering emotional states. On the method level, previous
expressive speech generation methods focus on generating
speech tied to either a specific identity or a specific emotion,
but customizing both simultaneously remains a significant
challenge—particularly in the absence of speech cues.

1
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Key Laboratory
of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence,
and State Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disorders, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Hongming Shan
<hmshan@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

