Calibrated Language Models and How to Find Them with Label Smoothing

Jerry Huang ♯ 1 2 Peng Lu ♯ 1 Qiuhao Zeng 3

Abstract

2023). However, such models have demonstrated a propensity for over-confidence in their predictions (Zhao et al.,
2021; Jiang et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2024), eliciting concerns over their use in more high-stakes decision-making
scenarios. Such observations are not new with respect to
neural networks, which have consistently been shown to
suffer from over-confident predictions and over-estimate the
likelihood of their correctness (Guo et al., 2017; Szegedy
et al., 2016; Müller et al., 2019; Naeini et al., 2015; Minderer
et al., 2021). To improve this, methods such as temperature scaling (Guo et al., 2017) and label smoothing (Müller
et al., 2019) have been proposed as solutions with varying
effectiveness, spurring additional work in ensuring that predictions and confidence remain matching (Lin et al., 2017;
Mukhoti et al., 2020; Pereyra et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2022).

Recent advances in natural language processing
have enabled the fine-tuning of large language
models (LLMs) into powerful interactive agents
with improved instruction-following ability. However, this can impact confidence calibration for
reliable model output, which has not been researched in full. In this work, we examine various
open-sourced LLMs, where we identify significant calibration degradation after instruction tuning. Seeking a practical solution, we look towards
label smoothing, which has been shown as an
effective method to regularize for overconfident
predictions but has yet to be widely adopted in the
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of LLMs. We provide insight into why label smoothing can maintain calibration throughout the SFT process, but
identify settings remain where the effectiveness
of smoothing is severely diminished. We posit
the cause to stem from the ability to become overconfident, which has a direct relationship with
the hidden and vocabulary size of models, which
we justify theoretically and experimentally. Finally, we address an outstanding issue regarding
the memory footprint of the cross-entropy loss
computation with label smoothing, designing a
customized kernel to dramatically reduce memory
consumption without sacrificing speed or performance in comparison to existing solutions.

In this work, we focus on label smoothing (LS) for calibration in SFT settings. Motivated by previous works showing
the effectiveness of LS for calibration in different settings,
we first verify its effectiveness. We demonstrate that while
it can be effective, problems begin to emerge in the case
of large vocabulary LLMs (LV-LLMs). To explain this
phenomenon, we attempt to establish a link between the predictive abilities of such LLMs and their size. We show that
in such settings, an explicit link between the lower bound of
the model entropy and the hidden size of the model causes
models to fail to become overconfident (Zhao et al., 2021),
negating the potential benefits and use of label smoothing. We further show how alternative techniques, such as
temperature scaling and logit capping, explicitly act as a
mechanism to steer models toward overconfidence, allowing
the benefits of label smoothing to once again emerge.

1. Introduction

Nevertheless, a problematic setting still remains. Growing
vocabulary sizes cause large amounts of memory to be consumed to materialize the relevant logits and probabilities,
making training difficult. While efficient methods (Wijmans
et al., 2025; Hsu et al., 2024; PyTorch, 2024) have been
proposed by implementing hardware-level optimization that
significantly reduces this memory bottleneck, they often
cannot support label smoothing. To address this, we identify specific optimizations that can be made in computing
matrices in GPU memory, allowing for the support of label
smoothing with minimal increases in memory or computational speed. Thus we introduce a new kernel that enables
us to use label smoothing more efficiently as a whole.

Tremendous progress has been made in building models that
follow natural language instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022;
Sanh et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2024) through the use of
LLMs pre-trained on large amounts of data as well as highquality datasets that enable them to learn to interact in a
human-like manner (Bach et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022;
♯

Equal contribution 1 Université de Montréal 2 Mila - Quebec AI
Institute 3 University of Western Ontario. Corresponding author:
Peng Lu <peng.lu@umontreal.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

