Adaptive Message Passing: A General Framework to Mitigate
Oversmoothing, Oversquashing, and Underreaching

Federico Errica 1 Henrik Christiansen 1 Viktor Zaverkin 1
Takashi Maruyama 1 Mathias Niepert 1 2 Francesco Alesiani 1
known that electrostatic and gravitational interactions decay
slowly with distance (Campa et al., 2014); in computational
chemistry and material sciences, the accurate modeling of
non-local effects, such as non-bonded interactions in molecular systems, is necessary to estimate properties like the free
energy (Shirts et al., 2007; Piana et al., 2012); in biology,
disrupting long-range interactions in mRNA can inhibit slicing (Rüegsegger et al., 2001); in immunology, the distant
interactions between a major histocompatibility complex
and regions of the T-cell receptor molecule correlate with
their binding process (Ferber et al., 2012).

Abstract
Long-range interactions are essential for the correct description of complex systems in many scientific fields. The price to pay for including them
in the calculations, however, is a dramatic increase
in the overall computational costs. Recently, deep
graph networks have been employed as efficient,
data-driven models for predicting properties of
complex systems represented as graphs. These
models rely on a message passing strategy that
should, in principle, capture long-range information without explicitly modeling the corresponding interactions. In practice, most deep graph
networks cannot really model long-range dependencies due to the intrinsic limitations of (synchronous) message passing, namely oversmoothing, oversquashing, and underreaching. This work
proposes a general framework that learns to mitigate these limitations: within a variational inference framework, we endow message passing
architectures with the ability to adapt their depth
and filter messages along the way. With theoretical and empirical arguments, we show that this
strategy better captures long-range interactions,
by competing with the state of the art on five node
and graph prediction datasets.

Complex systems can be represented as graphs of interacting entities. Modeling long-range interactions often implies
that the graph has dense connectivity, meaning the number
of interactions is quadratic in the number of entities. Machine learning researchers tried to address these problems by
relying on accurate surrogates for computationally demanding simulations (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020). Some
of these methods rely on Deep Graph Networks (DGNs)
(Bacciu et al., 2020b), deep learning models implement a
message passing paradigm of computation. In message passing, nodes repeatedly exchange messages with each other to
propagate information across the graph and compute their
embeddings. More rounds of message passing increase the
“receptive field” of each node.
Despite its long-standing history (Sperduti & Starita, 1997;
Micheli, 2009; Scarselli et al., 2009; Bacciu et al., 2020b),
research in graph representation learning has gained more
traction in recent years, and there are still many open questions. For instance, it is well-known that most message
passing architectures are ineffective at capturing long-range
dependencies, thus reducing their impact in the scientific
fields mentioned before. Researchers relate this problem
to at least three others, namely oversmoothing (Li et al.,
2018), oversquashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021; Rusch et al.,
2023), and underreaching (Alon & Yahav, 2021). Briefly,
oversmoothing means that the node embeddings of a DGN
tend to converge to the same value as the depth increases.
In contrast, oversquashing relates to the bottleneck of compressing a (possibly) exponential amount of information
from neighboring nodes into a single node embedding. Fi-

1. Introduction
Complex systems, characterized by interacting entities and
emergent behavior, are a cornerstone of research in many
scientific disciplines. Mathematical models of such systems
should consider the effects of both short and long-range
interactions between entities, and the latter are often crucial
to describe the system’s behavior with the highest degree of
precision. For instance, in computational physics, it is well1
NEC Laboratories Europe 2 University of Stuttgart. Correspondence to: Federico Errica <federico.errica@neclab.eu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

