Solving Satisfiability Modulo Counting Exactly with Probabilistic Circuits

Jinzhao Li * 1 Nan Jiang * 1 Yexiang Xue 1

Solved Instances (%)

Satisfiability Modulo Counting (SMC) is a recently proposed general language to reason about
problems integrating statistical and symbolic Artificial Intelligence. An SMC problem is an extended SAT problem in which the truth values of
a few Boolean variables are determined by probabilistic inference. Approximate solvers may return solutions that violate constraints. Directly integrating available SAT solvers and probabilistic
inference solvers gives exact solutions but results
in slow performance because of many back-andforth invocations of both solvers. We propose
KOCO -SMC, an integrated exact SMC solver
that efficiently tracks lower and upper bounds
in the probabilistic inference process. It enhances
computational efficiency by enabling early estimation of probabilistic inference using only partial
variable assignments, whereas existing methods
require full variable assignments. In the experiment, we compare KOCO -SMC with currently
available approximate and exact SMC solvers on
large-scale datasets and real-world applications.
The proposed KOCO -SMC finds exact solutions
with much less time.

80
60

KOCO-SMC (ours)
Lingeling-ADDMC
Lingeling-UAI10
Lingeling-HBFS
Lingeling-SSTD
Lingeling-D4

40

Unverifiable
Correct

75
50
25

20
0

Timeout
Wrong

100

Instances (%)

100

Abstract

10−210−1 100 101 102 103 104
Time Limit (second)

0

C
C
A
A
-SM OR-SM bbs-SA BP-SA
X
Gi

CO

KO

Figure 1. (Left) Compared to exact solvers, our KOCO -SMC
solves 45% of SMC problems within a 10-second time limit,
whereas baselines require up to 3 hours for a similar rate of completion. (Right) Compared with approximate methods, KOCO -SMC
finds exact solutions for most cases (lower segment), whereas the
approximate solvers may handle some hard instances (upper segment) but often yield lower-quality results.

Satisfiability Modulo Counting (SMC) is a recently proposed general language to reason about problems integrating statistical and symbolic AI (Fredrikson & Jha, 2014; Li
et al., 2024). An SMC problem is an extended SAT problem
in which the truth values of certain Boolean variables are
determined through probabilistic inference, which assesses
whether the marginal probability meets the given requirements. Solving SMC problems poses great challenges since
they are NPPP -complete (Park & Darwiche, 2004).

1. Introduction
Symbolic and statistical Artificial Intelligence (AI) are two
foundations with distinct strengths and limitations. Symbolic AI, exemplified by SATisfiability (SAT) and constraint
programming, excels in constraint satisfaction but cannot
handle probability distributions. Statistical AI captures probabilistic uncertainty but does not guarantee satisfying symbolic constraints. Integrating symbolic and statistical AI
remains an open field and has gained much research attention (d’Avila Garcez et al., 2015; Li et al., 2023; Dennis
et al., 2023; Sheth & Roy, 2024).

Taking robust supply chain design as an example (Figure 2),
a manager must choose a route on the road map to ensure
sufficient materials for production, while accounting for
stochastic events such as natural disasters. This problem necessitates both symbolic reasoning to find a satisfiable route
and statistical inference to ensure the selected roads are robust to stochastic natural disasters. The SMC formulation is
further detailed in Section 3.1. Slightly modified problems
can be found in many real-world applications, including
vehicle routing (Toth & Vigo, 2002), internet resilience (Israeli & Wood, 2002), social influence maximization (Kempe
et al., 2005), energy security (Almeida et al., 2019), etc.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Jinzhao Li
<li4255@purdue.edu>.

Several approximate SMC solvers have been proposed (Kleywegt et al., 2002; Li et al., 2024). Among
them, Sample Average Approximation (SAA)-based methods (Kleywegt et al., 2002) are the most widely adopted,

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

