Approximation to Smooth Functions by Low-Rank Swish Networks

Zimeng Li 1 Hongjun Li 2 Jingyuan Wang 1 3 4 Ke Tang 2

Abstract
While deep learning has witnessed remarkable
achievements in a wide range of applications,
its substantial computational cost imposes limitations on application scenarios of neural networks.
To alleviate this problem, low-rank compression
is proposed as a class of efficient and hardwarefriendly network compression methods, which
reduce computation by replacing large matrices in
neural networks with products of two small ones.
In this paper, we implement low-rank networks by
inserting a sufficiently narrow linear layer without
bias between each of two adjacent nonlinear layers. We prove that low-rank Swish networks with
a fixed depth are capable of approximating any
function from the Hölder ball C β,R ([0, 1]d ) within
an arbitrarily small error where β is the smooth
parameter and R is the radius. Our proposed constructive approximation ensures that the width of
linear hidden layers required for approximation is
no more than one-third of the width of nonlinear
layers, which implies that the computational cost
can be decreased by at least one-third compared
with a network with the same depth and width of
nonlinear layers but without narrow linear hidden
layers. Our theoretical finding can offer a theoretical basis for low-rank compression from the
perspective of universal approximation theory.

(a) a classical feedforward network

(b) a low-rank network

Figure 1. An illustration of the difference between classical feedforward network and low-rank network. A classical feedforward
network is composed of several nonlinear hidden layers and a
linear output layer. A low-rank network is composed of several
interleaved nonlinear and linear layers where the last linear layer
act as the output layer. A “△” stands for an input neuron, a “⃝”
stands for a nonlinear neuron (i.e. neuron with activation function),
and a “□” stands for a linear neuron (i.e. neuron without activation
function).

of how neural networks can approximate a specific class of
functions to an arbitrarily small error (Hornik et al., 1989;
Cybenko, 1989; Leshno et al., 1993; Yarotsky, 2017; Yarotsky & Zhevnerchuk, 2020; Siegel, 2023; Li et al., 2024a),
providing a solid foundation for understanding their outstanding performance in a wide variety of fields such as
computer vision (Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2024b),
speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013; Ren et al., 2019),
natural language processing (Touvron et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023), intelligent healthcare (Ren et al., 2021; Shi et al.,
2022), and smart city (Wang et al., 2022a;b; Jiang et al.,
2023; Ji et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
The universal approximation theory (UAT) for neural networks mainly studies the quantitative and qualitative aspects
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 Institute of Economics (School of Social Sciences), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 School of
Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Advanced Computer Application Technology, Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence
to: Hongjun Li <hongjunli@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jingyuan Wang
<jywang@buaa.edu.cn>.

In the realm of theoretical statistics, the upper bound of the
approximation rate is one of the most important ingredients
to derive the consistency and convergence rate of neural
network estimates (Chen & White, 1999; Schmidt-Hieber,
2020; Kohler & Langer, 2021; Farrell et al., 2021). Based on

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

