STAR: Learning Diverse Robot Skill Abstractions through Rotation-Augmented
Vector Quantization

Hao Li 1 2 Qi Lv 1 2 Rui Shao † 1 Xiang Deng † 1 Yinchuan Li 2 Jianye Hao 2 Liqiang Nie 1
STAR.github.io

Abstract

Quantization
Codebook

Before Update

Gradient Flow

Decoder

Encoder

Transforming complex actions into discrete skill
abstractions has demonstrated strong potential for
robotic manipulation. Existing approaches mainly
leverage latent variable models, e.g., VQ-VAE, to
learn skill abstractions through learned vectors
(codebooks), while they suffer from codebook
collapse and modeling the causal relationship between learned skills. To address these limitations, we present Skill Training with Augmented
Rotation (STAR), a framework that advances both
skill learning and composition to complete complex behaviors. Specifically, to prevent codebook
collapse, we devise rotation-augmented residual
skill quantization (RaRSQ). It encodes relative
angles between encoder outputs into the gradient flow by rotation-based gradient mechanism.
Points within the same skill code are forced to
be either pushed apart or pulled closer together
depending on gradient directions. Further, to capture the causal relationship between skills, we
present causal skill transformer (CST) which explicitly models dependencies between skill representations through an autoregressive mechanism
for coherent action generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of STAR on
both LIBERO benchmark and realworld tasks,
with around 12% improvement over the baselines.

After Update

Naive VQ

RaRSQ

Figure 1. Comparison between naive VQ and our RaRSQ approach
in the skill learning process. Top: Overview of skill quantization
framework. Bottom: Visualization of gradient flow and codebook
updates across three stages (before update, during gradient flow,
and after update), where RaRSQ maintains geometric relationships
between embeddings, leading to more diverse skills.

et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2018). Individual manipulation tasks
already pose significant challenges like multimodal action
distributions (Mandlekar et al., 2021), while these challenges are substantially amplified in the multitask setting.
This results in a highly entangled action space where characteristics of different tasks interact and overlap, making it
challenging to learn complex manipulation behaviors (Lv
et al., 2024).
An intuitive approach to alleviate this problem is to learn
structured representations of manipulation behaviors by decomposing complex actions into simpler, reusable skill abstractions (Fu et al., 2024; Sharma et al., 2019). This hierarchical framework reflects the compositional structure
inherent to manipulation tasks, enabling the systematic decomposition of complex behaviors into sequences of skill
abstractions. Recent studies (Ju et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024)
have demonstrated promising results using latent variable
models (LVM) to discretize continuous action spaces into
learned skills. These methods enable a more efficient representation and composition of complex behaviors.

1. Introduction
The challenge of modeling multitask visuomotor policy has
long been a central problem in robotic manipulation (Levine
†

Corresponding Author 1 School of Computer Science
and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Rui Shao
<shaorui@hit.edu.cn>, Xiang Deng <dengxiang@hit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

