Inverse Optimization via Learning Feasible Regions

Ke Ren 1 Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani 2 Angelos Georghiou 3

Abstract

2021), robotics (Dimanidis et al., 2025), healthcare (Ayer,
2015; Ajayi et al., 2022), and finance (Li, 2021). More
recently, the IO framework has also been successfully applied to the Amazon Last Mile Routing Research Challenge,
where the goal is to learn and replicate human drivers’ routing preferences (Zattoni Scroccaro et al., 2025).

We study inverse optimization (IO) where the
goal is to use a parametric optimization program
as the hypothesis class to infer relationships between input-decision pairs. Most of the literature
focuses on learning only the objective function,
as learning the constraint function (i.e., feasible
regions) leads to nonconvex training programs.
Motivated by this, we focus on learning feasible
regions for known linear objectives and introduce
two training losses along with a hypothesis class
to parameterize the constraint function. Our hypothesis class surpasses the previous objectiveonly method by naturally capturing discontinuous
behaviors in input-decision pairs. We introduce
a customized block coordinate descent algorithm
with a smoothing technique to solve the training
problems, while for further restricted hypothesis classes, we reformulate the training optimization as a tractable convex program or mixed integer linear program. Synthetic experiments and
two power system applications, including comparisons with state-of-the-art approaches, showcase
and validate the proposed approach.

The IO model builds on a parametric forward optimization model that represents the decision-generating process.
Given an input signal s ∈ Rk , the following optimization
problem defined through f, g : Rk × Rn → R, generates an
optimal solution x ∈ Rn which is observed, however, it is
possible that the observation is contaminated by noise.
min

x∈Rn

f (x, s)

s.t.

g(x, s) ≤ 0

(1)

In the most general case, decision makers have no knowledge of f and g but have access to N independent pairs of
input/decisions {si , xi }N
i=1 from problem (1). As the space
of all possible objective and constraint functions is vast, the
decision-maker seeks to approximate f and g by candidates
from some parametric hypothesis spaces fθ and gθ , θ ∈ Θ,
where Θ represents a finite-dimensional parameter set. Correspondingly, in IO, decision-makers aim to learn θ such
that for each signal sn , xn is optimal (or approximately
optimal) in the following problem:

1. Introduction

min

x∈Rn

Inverse optimization (IO) reverses traditional optimization.
While classical optimization finds optimal decisions based
on predefined objectives and constraints, IO takes decisions
as inputs and identifies the objective and/or constraints that
make these decisions either approximately or precisely optimal. Interest in IO has surged in recent years, leading to
advancements in learning theory (Aswani et al., 2018; Mohajerin Esfahani et al., 2018; Chan & Kaw, 2020) and recently
in reinforcement learning (Zattoni Scroccaro et al., 2025), as
well as applications such as transportation (Zhang & Paschalidis, 2017; Chen et al., 2021), system control (Akhtar et al.,

fθ (x, s)

s.t.

gθ (x, s) ≤ 0.

(2)

Through a supervised learning lens, the parameterized
model (2) can be viewed as a hypothesis class for learning
the mapping between the input s and the output decision x
generated by the forward optimization (1).
1.1. Contributions
This paper studies the learning problem of IO where, unlike
the majority of the literature that focuses on a parametric
form for the objective function fθ , the main objective is to
learn the constraints function gθ . In this context, the paper
has three main contributions:

1

Amazon 2 University of Toronto and Delft University of Technology 3 University of Cyprus. Correspondence to: Ke Ren
<renkea@amazon.com>.

Loss functions compatible with IO data: Generalizing
existing literature, we introduce two loss functions `θ (x, s)
to evaluate model fit (2) with parameter θ on the inputoutput data pair (x, s) from (1) (Proposition 2.1). Regarding
performance on unseen (test) data, we argue that the IO

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

