Dual Feature Reduction for the Sparse-group Lasso and its Adaptive Variant

Fabio Feser 1 Marina Evangelou 1
In genetics, these methods help identify genes associated
with disease outcomes. As genes are naturally found in
groups (pathways), group selection approaches have been
proposed, that allow grouping information to be used, such
as the group lasso (Yuan & Lin, 2006), group SLOPE
(Brzyski et al., 2019), and group SCAD (Guo et al., 2015).
Applying only group shrinkage can harm convergence and
prediction, as all variables in an active group are retained,
including noise variables (Simon et al., 2013; Feser & Evangelou, 2023).

Abstract
The sparse-group lasso performs both variable
and group selection, simultaneously using the
strengths of the lasso and group lasso. It has
found widespread use in genetics, a field that regularly involves the analysis of high-dimensional
data, due to its sparse-group penalty, which allows it to utilize grouping information. However,
the sparse-group lasso can be computationally expensive, due to the added shrinkage complexity,
and its additional hyperparameter that needs tuning. This paper presents a novel feature reduction
method, Dual Feature Reduction (DFR), that uses
strong screening rules for the sparse-group lasso
and the adaptive sparse-group lasso to reduce their
input space before optimization, without affecting
solution optimality. DFR applies two layers of
screening through the application of dual norms
and subdifferentials. Through synthetic and real
data studies, it is shown that DFR drastically reduces the computational cost under many different scenarios.

This limitation led to the development of sparse-group models, such as the Sparse-group Lasso (SGL) (Simon et al.,
2013) and Sparse-group SLOPE (SGS) (Feser & Evangelou,
2023). These models can shrink variables in active groups
by applying shrinkage on both variables and groups to yield
bi-level selection. SGL has found increased popularity in
applications in the machine learning (Vidyasagar, 2014; Yogatama & Smith, 2014) and healthcare (Peng et al., 2010;
Simon et al., 2013; Fang et al., 2015) communities. Sparsegroup models have been shown to have tangible benefits
by consistently outperforming the lasso and group lasso in
selection and prediction tasks (Simon et al., 2013; Feser &
Evangelou, 2023).
Suppose the variables sit in a grouping structure, with disjoint sets of variables G1 , . . . , Gm of sizes p1 , . . . , pm . Then,
SGL is a convex combination of the lasso and group lasso
(Simon et al., 2013):

1. Introduction
High-dimensional datasets, where the number of features
(p) is far greater than the number of observations (n) in
a matrix X ∈ Rn×p , are becoming increasingly common
with the increased rate of data collection. To handle this,
shrinkage methods, such as the lasso (Tibshirani, 1996),
elastic-net (Zou & Hastie, 2005), and SLOPE (Bogdan et al.,
2015) have been proposed and found increased use in the
machine learning community (Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015;
Michoel, 2018; Lemhadri et al., 2021; Thompson et al.,
2023). These methods shrink estimates towards zero during
optimization, enabling variable selection, to identify which
features, β ∈ Rp , have an association with the response
y ∈ Rn .

(1)

β̂sgl (λ) ∈ arg min{f (β) + λ∥β∥sgl },
β∈Rp

where ∥β∥sgl = α∥β∥1 + (1 − α)

m
X
√

pg ∥β (g) ∥2 , (2)

g=1

such that f is a differentiable and convex loss function,
λ > 0 defines the level of shrinkage, β (g) ∈ Rpg is the
vector of coefficients in group g, and α ∈ [0, 1]. SGL has
been extended to have adaptive shrinkage through the adaptive sparse-group lasso (aSGL) (Poignard, 2020; MendezCivieta et al., 2021) (Section 3.3).

1
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Fabio Feser <ff120@ic.ac.uk>.

1.1. Feature Reduction Approaches for the
Sparse-group Lasso

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The strengths of SGL come with increased computational
cost, due to the additional shrinkage and the tuning of two
1

