Ranking with Multiple Oracles: From Weak to Strong Stochastic Transitivity

Tao Jin * 1 Yue Wu * 2 Quanquan Gu † 2 Farzad Farnoud † 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The problem of learning to rank with multiple oracles, sometimes known as rank aggregation, is ubiquitous in many
applications, such as the recommendation system (Oliveira
et al., 2020; Bałchanowski and Boryczka, 2023), user classification (Minka et al., 2018; Ebtekar and Liu, 2021) and drug
discovery (Agarwal et al., 2010; Ru et al., 2021). More recently, learning-to-rank has regained attention in the context
of evaluating large language models (LLM). For example,
human feedback is used to rank the performance of LLMs
across different tasks. Each task can be seen as an oracle,
where two LLMs generate responses to a given prompt for
that task, and the human annotator indicates which one is
more helpful or informative.

We study the problem of efficiently aggregating the preferences of items from multiple information sources (oracles) and infer the ranking under both the weak stochastic transitivity (WST) and the strong stochastic transitivity
(SST) conditions. When the underlying preference model satisfies the WST condition, we
propose an algorithm named Rank-with-MultipleOracles (RMO-WST), which has a bi-level design:
at the higher level, it actively allocates comparison budgets to all undetermined pairs until the
full ranking is recovered; at the lower level, it
attempts to compare the pair of items and selects
the more accurate oracles simultaneously. We
prove P
that the sample complexity of RMO-WST is
N
e
O(N
i=2 Hσ −1 (i),σ −1 (i−1) ), where N is the
number of items to rank, Hi,j is a problemdependent hardness factor for correctly comparing item i and item j, and σ −1 (i) represents the ith best item. We also provide a tight lower bound
that matches the upper bound of approximate
ranking under the WST condition, answering a
previously open problem. Additionally, when the
SST condition is satisfied, we propose an algorithm named RMO-SST,
which can achieve a same PN Hi log(N )), where
ple complexity of O(
i=1
Hi = maxj∈[N ],j̸=i Hi,j . This outperforms the
best-known sample complexity by a factor of
log(N ). The theoretical advantages of our algorithms are verified by empirical experiments in a
simulated environment.

In many applications, the oracles that provide preference
feedback are usually human annotators, who may provide
inherently noisy feedback. Moreover, oracles may show
varying accuracy for different pairs of responses. For example, the performance gap between two LLMs may be
negligible in one task but quite obvious in another. One natural question is then how to identify the underlying ranking
of different LLMs efficiently, especially by taking advantage
of those more accurate oracles (i.e., tasks). For example,
when creating an LLM leaderboard, we have two different
criteria or “tasks”: honesty and helpfulness. When ranking
two LLMs, we may ask a human annotator to rate which
LLM is more honest and which LLM is more helpful. The
two tasks/criteria may exhibit different preference behaviors.
Our goal is to accurately determine the ranking with as few
queries as possible. To ensure the problem is well defined
and an underlying ranking exists, it is commonly postulated (Falahatgar et al., 2017; Ren et al., 2018; Saha and
Gopalan, 2019) that a ranking exists and it is harder to differentiate between items that rank in adjacent compared to
those that rank apart. Formally speaking, if i ≻ j ≻ k,
then pi,k ≥ max{pi,j , pj,k } > 12 , where pi,j denotes the
winning probability of i over j. This principle is known
as Strong Stochastic Transitivity (SST). Notably, Saad et al.
(2023) solves the multi-oracle learning-to-rank tasks under
a special case of the SST condition. In particular, they assume numerical feedback with sub-Gaussian noise, which
satisfies the SST condition. Saad et al. (2023) established

Equal contribution † Co-corresponding Authors 1 Department
of Computer Science, University of Virginia 2 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>, Farzad Farnoud
<farzad@virginia.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

