Grammar-Forced Translation of
Natural Language to Temporal Logic using LLMs

William English 1 Dominic Simon 1 Sumit Kumar Jha 2 Rickard Ewetz 1

Abstract

ning (Tellex et al., 2011; Abdulla et al., 2004). Ensuring that
the behavior of such systems is bound to a set of known rules
is essential to deploy them safely and reliably, especially
when they are expected to operate without constant human
supervision (Raman et al., 2013; Boteanu et al., 2016). Temporal Logics (TL) are a group of powerful formalisms that
constitute the basis of most formal specification languages,
allowing expressive description of the behavior of dynamic
systems over time (Konur, 2013; Madsen et al., 2018). However, generating these specifications directly from natural
language (NL) is an open problem, and achieving effective
and efficient translation between NL and TL is an increasingly important task in advancing system automation (Chen
et al., 2023; Fuggitti & Chakraborti, 2023; Cosler et al.,
2023).

Translating natural language (NL) into a formal
language such as temporal logic (TL) is integral
for human communication with robots and autonomous systems. State-of-the-art approaches
decompose the task into a grounding of atomic
propositions (APs) phase and a translation phase.
However, existing methods struggle with accurate
grounding, the existence of co-references, and
learning from limited data. In this paper, we propose a framework for NL to TL translation called
Grammar Forced Translation (GraFT). The framework is based on the observation that previous
work solves both the grounding and translation
steps by letting a language model iteratively predict tokens from its full vocabulary. In contrast,
GraFT reduces the complexity of both tasks by
restricting the set of valid output tokens from the
full vocabulary to only a handful in each step. The
solution space reduction is obtained by exploiting
the unique properties of each problem. We also
provide a theoretical justification for why the solution space reduction leads to more efficient learning. We evaluate the effectiveness of GraFT using
the CW, GLTL, and Navi benchmarks. Compared
with state-of-the-art translation approaches, it can
be observed that GraFT improves the end-to-end
translation accuracy by 5.49% and out-of-domain
translation accuracy by 14.06% on average.

Early work on NL to TL translation focused on either on
restricted natural language inputs (Raman et al., 2013) or
template matching (Tellex et al., 2020). Although structured inputs are easy to map into TL, they place an undue
burden on the user who may not have a technical background (Thistle & Wonham, 1986). On the other hand,
template matching requires a substantial number of domain
specific examples (Bombieri et al., 2023). More recently,
NL to TL translation has been investigated using large language models (LLMs) (Cosler et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023;
Patel, 2019). This has involved approaches where LLMs
are used to perform end-to-end translation. While such
approaches can handle simple translations, the accuracy
have been observed to be limited to 70% for more challenging test cases (Xu et al., 2024). More recent studies
decompose the translation into a atomic propositions (APs)
grounding phase and a translation phase. The two step approach is motivated by that domain specific terms will be
extracted during the grounding phase, which facilitates domain agnostic translation (Fuggitti & Chakraborti, 2023).
Existing works perform the grounding of APs using casual
language model and few shot learning (Liu et al., 2023). The
translation step is performed by a fine-tuned sequence-tosequence model, where one token of the TL is predicted at
the time (Chen et al., 2023). To boost the performance of the
translation, studies have proposed to increase the size of the
training data set using generative data augmentation (Chen
et al., 2023). Unfortunately, it can be observed that ex-

1. Introduction
Formal specifications play a crucial role in all systems
that require autonomous reasoning, verification, or plan1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 2 Knight Foundation School
of Computing and Information Sciences, Florida International
University, Miami, Florida. Correspondence to: William English
<will.english@ufl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

