Sparse Autoencoders for Hypothesis Generation

Rajiv Movva * 1 Kenny Peng * 2 3 Nikhil Garg 3 Jon Kleinberg 2 Emma Pierson 1

Abstract

Automated approaches to answering these questions have
the potential to significantly expand and accelerate scientific
discovery (Ludwig & Mullainathan, 2023). Indeed, multiple
lines of work—spanning decades of research—have sought
to extract text features that can predict a target variable
(Blei et al., 2003; Monroe et al., 2009). Recent LLM-based
hypothesis generation methods are especially exciting since
they operate directly at the level of human-interpretable
natural language concepts (Zhou et al., 2024; Batista & Ross,
2024). Concretely, hypothesis generation methods take a
dataset of texts linked to a target variable (e.g., headlines and
their engagement level) and hypothesize natural language
concepts that predict the target variable (e.g., mentions being
surprised or shocked or asks a question to the reader).

We describe H YPOTHE SAE S, a general method
to hypothesize interpretable relationships between
text data (e.g., headlines) and a target variable
(e.g., clicks). H YPOTHE SAE S has three steps:
(1) train a sparse autoencoder on text embeddings
to produce interpretable features describing the
data distribution, (2) select features that predict
the target variable, and (3) generate a natural language interpretation of each feature (e.g., mentions being surprised or shocked) using an LLM.
Each interpretation serves as a hypothesis about
what predicts the target variable. Compared to
baselines, our method better identifies reference
hypotheses on synthetic datasets (at least +0.06
in F1) and produces more predictive hypotheses
on real datasets (∼twice as many significant findings), despite requiring 1-2 orders of magnitude
less compute than recent LLM-based methods.
H YPOTHE SAE S also produces novel discoveries
on two well-studied tasks: explaining partisan differences in Congressional speeches and identifying drivers of engagement with online headlines.

However, basic hurdles impede the full usage of LLMs for
hypothesis generation. Consider two natural approaches.
The first prompts an LLM with positive and negative examples and asks it to hypothesize concepts that distinguish
them (Zhou et al., 2024; Batista & Ross, 2024; Ludan et al.,
2024). However, due to context window and reasoning limitations, we can only give LLMs a few training examples at
a time, making this hard to scale. A second approach aims
to interpret a model fine-tuned to predict the target variable
(Zhong et al., 2024), leveraging the full training dataset.
However, neurons are often hard to interpret (Elhage et al.,
2022). In summary, efficient and scalable learning of statistical relationships requires numerical representations of text
(e.g., neurons), but interpreting neurons is hard.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) show promise as a tool for
hypothesis generation. Discovering relationships between
text data and a target variable is an important and fundamental task with diverse applications in economics, political
science, sociology, medicine, and business (Grimmer, 2010;
Rathje et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Gentzkow & Shapiro,
2010; Monroe et al., 2009; Nelson, 2020; Ranard et al.,
2016; Ting et al., 2017). What features of a restaurant review predict a low rating? What features of a social media
post predict whether it will go viral? What features of a
patient’s clinical notes predict if they will develop cancer?

Our first contribution is a theoretical framework that connects model interpretation and hypothesis generation, clarifying the challenge above. Proposition 3.1 gives a “triangle
inequality” for hypothesis generation: if a neuron is predictive of the target variable, then a sufficiently high-fidelity
interpretation of the neuron is also predictive. This result directly motivates a general hypothesis generation procedure:
1. (Feature generation) Learn interpretable neurons (i.e.,
that tend to fire in the presence of human concepts).

*

Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 Cornell University 3 Cornell
Tech. Correspondence to: Rajiv Movva <rmovva@berkeley.edu>,
Kenny Peng <kennypeng@cs.cornell.edu>.

2. (Feature selection) Select neurons that predict the target
variable.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

3. (Feature interpretation) Generate high-fidelity natural
language interpretations of these neurons.
1

