Modeling Multi-Task Model Merging as Adaptive Projective Gradient Descent

Yongxian Wei 1 Anke Tang 2 Li Shen 3 Zixuan Hu 4 Chun Yuan 1 Xiaochun Cao 3

Abstract

paradigm (Muqeeth et al., 2024). However, the independent deployment of multiple fine-tuned models increases
storage costs. While traditional multi-task learning (MTL)
can mitigate these issues, they typically require concurrent
training across multiple task-specific datasets, which incurs
significant training overhead and potential privacy risks (Wei
et al., 2024a). Consequently, there is a growing interest in
merging multiple expert models into a unified model without accessing their original data (Yang et al., 2024a; Huang
et al., 2024). Model merging is performed directly at the
parameter level and maintains only one final model during inference. In recent years, numerous pre-trained and
fine-tuned checkpoints have been released on open-source
communities like GitHub or Hugging Face, making it easy
to obtain expert models from diverse domains. These rich
model repositories underscore the value of model merging.

Merging multiple expert models offers a promising approach for performing multi-task learning
without accessing their original data. Existing
methods attempt to alleviate task conflicts by sparsifying task vectors or promoting orthogonality
among them. However, they overlook the fundamental target of model merging: the merged
model performs as closely as possible to taskspecific models on respective tasks. We find
these methods inevitably discard task-specific information that, while causing conflicts, is crucial for performance. Based on our findings, we
frame model merging as a constrained optimization problem (i.e., minimizing the gap between
the merged model and individual models, subject to the constraint of retaining shared knowledge) and solve it via adaptive projective gradient descent. Specifically, we align the merged
model with individual models by decomposing
and reconstituting the loss function, alleviating
conflicts through data-free optimization of task
vectors. To retain shared knowledge, we optimize this objective by projecting gradients within
a shared subspace spanning all tasks. Moreover,
we view merging coefficients as adaptive learning rates and propose a task-aware, training-free
strategy. Experiments show that our plug-andplay approach consistently outperforms previous
methods, achieving state-of-the-art results across
diverse architectures and tasks in both vision and
NLP domains. Our code is available here.

One popular approach, Task Arithmetic (TA) (Ilharco et al.,
2023), combines task vectors through arithmetic operations
for model merging. A major challenge is addressing conflicts that emerge when multiple task-specific models coexist
within a single model. Ties-Merging (Yadav et al., 2023)
proposes pruning redundant parameters, resolving sign conflicts, and merging sparse models, while AdaMerging (Yang
et al., 2024c) applies test-time adaptation techniques to adjust merging coefficients in the weight space. Most recently,
AWD (Xiong et al., 2024) finds that orthogonality among
task vectors is key to model merging and introduces adaptive
weight disentanglement to improve orthogonality. However,
these methods overlook the fundamental requirement of
model merging: ensuring the merged model performs comparably to task-specific models on their respective tasks.
Revisiting multi-task model merging, we make the following findings: (i) As the number of tasks increases, existing
methods inevitably discard task-specific information that,
while causing conflicts, is crucial for performance. (ii) Task
vectors are inherently close to orthogonal. Further promoting orthogonality results in the loss of shared knowledge,
especially when tasks are similar. (iii) Merging coefficients
share a similarity with learning rates in MTL, considering
task vectors actually represent accumulated gradients.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning pre-trained foundational models to address downstream tasks has become an effective
1
Tsinghua University 2 Wuhan University 3 Shenzhen Campus
of Sun Yat-sen University 4 Nanyang Technological University.
Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>, Chun
Yuan <yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Based on our rethinking, we frame model merging as a
constrained optimization problem (i.e., minimizing the gap
between the merged model and individual models, subject

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

