Tool Unlearning for Tool-Augmented LLMs

Jiali Cheng 1 Hadi Amiri 1

Abstract

pairs, which embed the ability to use tools directly into
model parameters.

Tool-augmented large language models (LLMs)
are often trained on datasets of query-response
pairs, which embed the ability to use tools or APIs
directly into the parametric knowledge of LLMs.
As these models are increasingly deployed in
real-world applications, there is a need for them
to forget specific tools–for example, due to
security vulnerabilities, privacy regulations, or
tool deprecation. This work presents “tool unlearning” as a novel machine unlearning task that
presents distinct challenges beyond traditional
sample-level unlearning: it requires removing
functional knowledge rather than individual data
points, managing the high cost of LLM optimization, and developing principled evaluation
metrics. To address these challenges, we propose
T OOL D ELETE, the first unlearning framework
designed specifically for tool-augmented LLMs.
It implements three key properties for effective
tool unlearning and introduces a new membership
inference attack (MIA) model for effective
evaluation. Extensive experiments on multiple
tool learning datasets and tool-augmented LLMs
show that T OOL D ELETE effectively unlearns
both randomly selected and class-specific tools,
while preserving knowledge on remaining tools
and maintaining performance on general tasks.

Despite the growing adoption of tool-augmented LLMs, the
ability to selectively unlearn tools has not been investigated.
In real-world applications, tool unlearning is essential for
addressing critical concerns such as security, privacy, and
model reliability. For example, consider a tool-augmented
LLM deployed in a healthcare system and trained to use
APIs for handling patient data. If one of the APIs is later
flagged as insecure due to a vulnerability that could expose
sensitive information and violate regulations like HIPAA,
tool unlearning is necessary to ensure that the LLM can
no longer invoke the insecure API. Similarly, when tools
undergo major updates, such as the Python transformers
package moving from version 3 to version 4, tool unlearning becomes essential to prevent the LLM from generating
outdated or erroneous code. The goal of this work is to address this gap by investigating tool unlearning and providing
a solution for this crucial task.
We introduce and formalize the new task of Tool Unlearning, which aims to remove the ability of using specific tools
from a tool-augmented LLM while preserving its ability to
use other tools and perform general tasks of LLMs such as
coherent text generation. Ideally, an effective tool unlearning model should behave as if it had never learned the tools
marked for unlearning. Tool unlearning fundamentally differs from traditional sample-level unlearning as it focuses on
removing “skills” or the ability to use specific tools, rather
than removing individual data samples from a model. In addition, success in tool unlearning should be measured by the
model’s ability to forget or retain tool-related skills, which
differs from traditional metrics such as measuring likelihood
of extracting training data in sample-level unlearning. These
differences are discussed in detail in §2.

1. Introduction
Tool-augmented Large Language Models (LLMs) can use
external tools such as calculators (Schick et al., 2023),
Python interpretors (Gao et al., 2023), APIs (Tang et al.,
2023), or AI models (Patil et al., 2023) to complement the
parametric knowledge of vanilla LLMs and enable them
to solve more complex tasks (Schick et al., 2023; Patil
et al., 2023). They are often trained on query-response

Removing skills requires modifying the parameters of
LLMs, a process that is computationally expensive and can
lead to unforeseen behaviors (Cohen et al., 2024; Gu et al.,
2024). In addition, existing membership inference attack
(MIA) techniques, a common evaluation method in machine
unlearning to determine whether specific data samples were
part of training data, are inadequate for evaluating tool unlearning because they focus on sample-level data rather than
tool-based knowledge.

1

University of Massachusetts Lowell, USA. Correspondence to: Jiali Cheng <jiali cheng@uml.edu>, Hadi Amiri
<hadi amiri@uml.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

