B OA: Attention-aware Post-training Quantization without Backpropagation

Junhan Kim * 1 Ho-young Kim * 1 Eulrang Cho 1 Chungman Lee 1 Joonyoung Kim 1 Yongkweon Jeon 1

Abstract

that primarily support fixed-point arithmetic.
Two main categories of quantization approaches have been
proposed to preserve the performance of original models:
quantization-aware training (QAT) (Jin et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2023) and post-training quantization (PTQ) (Nagel
et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2024). Although QAT can potentially
outperform PTQ, its practicality diminishes when handling
hyper-scale LLMs featuring billions of parameters. Consequently, recent quantization efforts have been directed
toward PTQ.

Post-training quantization (PTQ) is a promising
solution for deploying large language models
(LLMs) on resource-constrained devices. Early
methods developed for small-scale networks, such
as ResNet, rely on gradient-based optimization,
which becomes impractical for hyper-scale LLMs
with billions of parameters. While recently proposed backpropagation-free or transformationbased methods alleviate this issue, they ignore
inter-layer interactions or use the naı̈ve nearestrounding-based quantized weight assignment to
save the heavy computational cost of weight optimization. In this paper, we introduce a novel
backpropagation-free PTQ algorithm that optimizes quantized weights by considering interlayer dependencies. The key innovation is the
development of attention-aware Hessian matrices that capture inter-layer interactions within the
attention module. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach not only outperforms
existing weight quantization methods but also
shows good synergy with conventional methods
to suppress activation outliers, leading to stateof-the-art weight-activation quantization performance. The code will be available at https:
//github.com/SamsungLabs/BoA.

Although classic PTQ methods have successfully quantized small models such as ResNet (Nagel et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2021; Jeon et al., 2022), they rely on time-consuming
gradient-based optimization, so their efficacy decreases
when the complexity of LLMs increases. Accordingly, recent efforts have shifted to develop (a) backpropagation-free
methods that optimize quantized weights based on Hessian (Frantar et al., 2023) or (b) transformation-based methods that convert a model to be robust to quantization by
applying smoothing, rotation, and permutation (Shao et al.,
2023; Ashkboos et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Lin et al.,
2024). However, their weight quantization performance is
limited as they ignore inter-layer dependencies or use naı̈ve
nearest rounding for weight quantization.
In this paper, we propose a novel backpropagation-free PTQ
algorithm that considers inter-layer dependencies in optimizing quantized weights. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel PTQ algorithm called B OA1 . The
key contribution is to exploit the attention reconstruction error, not the layer-wise reconstruction error, in
approximating the Hessian to consider inter-layer dependencies within the attention module (Section 3.2).
To our knowledge, B OA is the first method to optimize
quantized weights by considering inter-layer dependencies without relying on gradient-based optimization.

1. Introduction
The explosive growth in complexity (parameters) of large
language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023a; Zhang
et al., 2022) has resulted in a proportional increase in computational costs, which has prompted an urgent need for efficient model processing and compression strategies. Quantization has emerged as a pivotal solution and an essential step
for deploying AI models on resource-constrained devices

• While the proposed Hessian facilitates the consideration of inter-layer dependencies, it requires additional
memory and computations. To mitigate the overhead,
we propose several techniques, including Hessian relaxation, efficient computation of inverse Hessians, and

*

Equal contribution 1 Samsung Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Yongkweon Jeon <dragwon.jeon@samsung.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Backpropagation-free optimization for Attention-aware PTQ

