Knowledge Swapping via Learning and Unlearning

Mingyu Xing 1 Lechao Cheng

1

Shengeng Tang 1 Yaxiong Wang 1 Zhun Zhong

12

Meng Wang 1

Abstract
We introduce Knowledge Swapping, a novel
task designed to selectively regulate knowledge
of a pretrained model by enabling the forgetting
of user-specified information, retaining essential
knowledge, and acquiring new knowledge
simultaneously. By delving into the analysis
of knock-on feature hierarchy, we find that
incremental learning typically progresses from
low-level representations to higher-level semantics, whereas forgetting tends to occur in the
opposite direction—starting from high-level
semantics and moving down to low-level features.
Building upon this, we propose to benchmark
the knowledge swapping task with the strategy
of Learning Before Forgetting. Comprehensive experiments on various tasks like image
classification, object detection, and semantic
segmentation validate the effectiveness of the
proposed strategy. The source code is available at
https://github.com/xingmingyu123456/Knowledge
Swapping

Task 𝓣𝟏

Unlearning

Swapping

Task 𝓣t

Continual Learning

Machine Unlearning
Learning
Swapping
Unlearning

Knowledge Swapping: Learning → Unlearning

Knowledge Swapping
Retained
Knowledge
Removed
Knowledge
New
Knowledge

Figure 1. Comparisons of three tasks: Continuous Learning, Machine Unlearning, and our Knowledge Swapping.

block or forget certain sensitive content. Recent works,
such as machine unlearning (Liu et al., 2024c; Wang et al.,
2025; Zhang et al., 2024b), have begun to address the unilateral forgetting of specific content within pretrained models. Nonetheless, approaches that simultaneously enable the
learning of new knowledge and the forgetting of specific
content remain underexplored.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of deep learning has led to the widespread
adoption of pretrained models (Han et al., 2021), which
are typically fine-tuned using task-specific data to achieve
parameter-efficient adaptation. In the context of streaming
tasks, researchers have increasingly explored methods for
continuously optimizing and adapting pretrained models to
new tasks (Lin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Zhu et al.,
2023), a paradigm referred to as continual learning (Wang
et al., 2024). However, in practical applications, as deep
models integrate more knowledge, they often encounter
additional requirements, such as the need to continuously

Inspired by this insight, we propose a novel task termed
Knowledge Swapping, which enables the selective forgetting of specific categories of knowledge while preserving
others, tailored to the requirements of new tasks. As depicted in Figure 1, continual learning (Cheng et al., 2024a;b;
Zhang et al., 2024a; Huang et al., 2024a;b; Wu et al., 2025)
aims to integrate new task knowledge into an existing pretrained model. Current mainstream approaches (Li et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2022b) often involve attaching a new
adapter for each task and fine-tuning it, yet the need to forget outdated or less relevant knowledge remains an underexplored challenge. Recent advancements (Liu et al., 2024b;
Wang et al., 2025) in machine unlearning have demonstrated
that isolating or removing specific knowledge from a pretrained model necessitates an explicit unlearning process.
In contrast, our proposed Knowledge Swapping task facili-

1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology 2 School of Computer
Science, University of Nottingham.
Correspondence to:
Lechao Cheng <chenglc@hfut.edu.cn>, Zhun Zhong <zhunzhong007@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

