A New Concentration Inequality for Sampling Without Replacement and Its
Application for Transductive Learning

Yingzhen Yang 1

Abstract

a result of independent interest, the concentration inequality for the test-train process is used
to derive a sharp concentration inequality for the
general supremum of empirical process involving random variables in the setting of sampling
uniformly without replacement, with comparison
to current concentration inequalities.

We introduce a new tool, Transductive Local
Complexity (TLC), to analyze the generalization performance of transductive learning methods and motivate new transductive learning algorithms. Our work extends the idea of the
popular Local Rademacher Complexity (LRC)
(Bartlett et al., 2005) to the transductive setting
with considerable and novel changes compared
to the analysis of typical LRC methods in the
inductive setting. While LRC has been widely
used as a powerful tool in the analysis of inductive models with sharp generalization bounds
for classification and minimax rates for nonparametric regression, it remains an open problem
whether a localized version of Rademacher complexity based tool can be designed and applied
to transductive learning and gain sharp bound for
transductive learning which is consistent with the
inductive excess risk bound by (LRC) (Bartlett
et al., 2005). We give a confirmative answer to
this open problem by TLC. Similar to the development of LRC (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2003),
we build TLC by first establishing a novel and
sharp concentration inequality for supremum of
empirical processes for the gap between test and
training loss in the setting of sampling uniformly
without replacement. Then a peeling strategy and
a new surrogate variance operator are used to derive the following excess risk bound in the transductive setting, which is consistent with that of
the classical LRC based excess risk bound in the
inductive setting. As an application of TLC, we
use the new TLC tool to analyze the Transductive Kernel Learning (TKL) model, and derive
sharper excess risk bound than that by the current state-of-the-art (Tolstikhin et al., 2014). As

1. Introduction
We study transductive learning in this paper, where the
learner has access to both labeled training data and unlabeled test data, and the task is to predict the labels
of the test data. Obtaining a tight generalization bound
for transductive learning is an important problem in statistical learning theory. Tools for inductive learning,
such as Rademacher complexity and VC dimension, have
been used for transductive learning, including empirical
risk minimization, transductive regression, and transductive classification (Vapnik, 1982; 1998; Cortes & Mohri,
2006; El-Yaniv & Pechyony, 2009). On the other hand,
it is important to employ localized version of Rademacher
complexity, such as Local Rademacher Complexity (LRC)
(Bartlett et al., 2005), to obtain sharper generation bound
for transductive learning, such as (Tolstikhin et al., 2014).
The classical work (LRC) (Bartlett et al., 2005) presents the
following sharp bound for the excess risk of empirical risk
minimizer fb for inductive learning as follows: for every
x > 0, with probability at least 1 − exp(−x),

Excess Risk of fb ≤ Θ Fixed Point of the Sub-Root

x
, (1)
Functions for Certain Empirical Process +
N

where Θ only hides a constant factor, and N is the size of
the training data. Given the fact that LRC is capable of
achieving various minimax rates for M-estimators in tasks
such as nonparametric regression in the inductive regime,
we propose to solve the following interesting and important
question for LRC based transductive learning:

1

School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA. Correspondence to:
Yingzhen Yang <yingzhen.yang@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

