Generalized-Smooth Bilevel Optimization with Nonconvex Lower-Level

Siqi Zhang 1 Xing Huang 1 Feihu Huang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Bilevel optimization is widely applied in many
machine learning tasks such as hyper-parameter
learning and meta learning. Recently, many algorithms have been proposed to solve these bilevel
optimization problems, which rely on the smoothness condition of objective functions of the bilevel
optimization. In fact, some machine learning
tasks such as learning language model do not satisfy the smoothness condition of objective functions. More recently, some methods have begun to study generalized smooth bilevel optimization. However, these proposed methods for generalized smooth bilevel optimization only focus
on the (strongly) convex lower objective function. Meanwhile, these methods only consider
the generalized-smooth upper-level objective, but
still require the standard smooth lower-level objective in the bilevel optimization. To fill this
gap, in the paper, thus we study the generalizedsmooth bilevel optimization with the nonconvex
lower-level objective function, where both upperlevel and lower-level objectives are generalizedsmooth. We propose an efficient single-loop
Hessian/Jacobian-free penalty normalized gradient (i.e., PNGBiO) method. Moreover, we
prove that our PNGBiO obtains a fast conver1
gence rate of O( T 1/4
) for finding a stationary
solution, where T denotes the iteration number.
Meanwhile, we also propose a stochastic version
of our PNGBiO (i.e., S-PNGBiO) method to solve
stochastic bilevel problems, and prove that our S1
PNGBiO has a fast convergence rate of O( T 1/6
).
Some experimental results on hyper-parameter
learning and meta learning demonstrate efficiency
of our proposed methods.

In this work, we focus on studying the following nonsmooth
nonconvex bilevel optimization, defined as
min

f (x, y),

(UL)

y ∗ (x) ≜ arg minp g(x, y),

(LL)

x∈Rd ,y∈y ∗ (x)

s.t.

y∈R

(1)

where the upper-level (UL) function f (x, y) : Rd ×Rp → R
is generalized-smooth, and nonconvex with respect to (w.r.t)
the variables x and y, and the lower-level (LL) function
g(x, y) : Rd × Rp → R is generalized-smooth and weakly
convex w.r.t the LL variable y. Problem (1) frequently
appears many machine learning tasks such as meta learning (Hao et al., 2024; Gong et al., 2024b) and deep neural
network pruning (Gao et al., 2024). Recently, bilevel optimization has widely received attention in machine learning
community, due to its ability of capturing the hierarchical
structures in many machine learning tasks such as meta
learning (Ji et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2024) and reinforcement
learning (Hong et al., 2023). Meanwhile, many algorithms
have been developed to solve the bilevel optimization problems.
When the lower-level objective function g(x, y) on the variable y is strongly convex and twice differential, fortunately,
we can get a closed-form gradient of the upper-level objective function F (x) = f (x, y ∗ (x)), defined as
∇F (x) = ∇1 f (x, y ∗ (x))

(2)

− ∇212 g(x, y ∗ (x))∇222 g(x, y ∗ (x))−1 ∇2 f (x, y ∗ (x)).
Recently, based on the above closed-form gradient (2), some
effective approximated gradient algorithms (Ghadimi &
Wang, 2018; Ji et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2023) have been proposed to solve bilevel optimization by using the following
approximated gradient:
ˆ
∇f (x, ŷ) = ∇1 f (x, ŷ)

1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China.
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Feihu Huang
<huangfeihu2018@gmail.com>.

(3)

− ∇212 g(x, ŷ)∇222 g(x, ŷ)−1 ∇2 f (x, ŷ),
where ŷ is an approximate of the solution y ∗ (x) =
arg miny g(x, y). For example, (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018)
proposed a class of approximated gradient methods based
on approximate implicit differentiation. (Ji et al., 2021) proposed an effective approximated gradient methods based on

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

