Collapse-Proof Non-Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning

Emanuele Sansone 1 2 Tim Lebailly 1 Tinne Tuytelaars 1

Abstract
We present a principled and simplified design of
the projector and loss function for non-contrastive
self-supervised learning based on hyperdimensional computing. We theoretically demonstrate
that this design introduces an inductive bias that
encourages representations to be simultaneously
decorrelated and clustered, without explicitly enforcing these properties. This bias provably enhances generalization and suffices to avoid known
training failure modes, such as representation, dimensional, cluster, and intracluster collapses. We
validate our theoretical findings on image datasets,
including SVHN, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and
ImageNet-100. Our approach effectively combines the strengths of feature decorrelation and
cluster-based self-supervised learning methods,
overcoming training failure modes while achieving strong generalization in clustering and linear
classification tasks.

Figure 1: Top: Venn diagram relationships between types
of collapses, viz. dimensional collapse (D), cluster collapse
(C), intracluster collapse (I) and representation (full) collapse of embeddings. Bottom: on the left, collapse-proof
data embeddings (each blue dot correspond to an embedding
of a data point, e.g. an image) and on the right, examples of
collapses for each single type (collapsed clusters are highlighted in red).

In this work, we focus on the family of non-contrastive
SSL approaches, aiming to distill the essential principles
to guarantee the avoidance of known failure modes. More
concretely, we identify sufficient conditions to avoid representation, dimensional, cluster, and intracluster collapses,
exemplified in Figure 1, and correspondingly devise a projector and loss function enforcing them by design. In particular, we demonstrate that minimizing invariance to data
augmentations while matching priors suffices to avoid representation and cluster collapses, whereas orthogonal frozen
weights based on hyperdimensional computing, and large
prediction outputs in the projector are key to avoiding dimensional and intracluster collapses. Moreover, we prove
that these principles are sufficient to guarantee (i) the decorrelation of embeddings, without any explicit computation
of their covariance matrix, and (ii) the clustering of embeddings, without the use of specialized clustering layers. We
experimentally validate the theory on four image datasets,
including SVHN, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet100, showcasing training robustness to failure modes and
strong generalization to downstream clustering and classification tasks compared to popular feature decorrelation and
cluster-based SSL.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has unlocked the potential of learning general-purpose representations from large
amounts of unlabeled data. Despite its successes, important
challenges remain, hindering the applicability of SSL to
a broader spectrum of real-world tasks and its widespread
adoption and democratization. One such challenge is the
presence of failure modes occurring during the training of
SSL models. Several heuristic strategies have been proposed
and analyzed in the literature, such as momentum encoder,
stop gradient and asymmetric projector heads (Chen et al.,
2022; He et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; Tao et al., 2022;
Chen & He, 2021; Tian et al., 2021; Halvagal et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2022). However, these heuristics do not always
come with universal guarantees, making it unclear whether
failure modes can be avoided in all situations.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT), KU Leuven,
Belgium 2 CSAIL, MIT, US. Correspondence to: Emanuele Sansone <emanuele.sansone@kuleuven.be>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To summarize, our key contributions are:
1

