Logits are All We Need to Adapt Closed Models

Gaurush Hiranandani 1 Haolun Wu* 2 3 Subhojyoti Mukherjee† 4 Sanmi Koyejo 2

Abstract
Many commercial Large Language Models
(LLMs) are often closed-source, limiting developers to prompt tuning for aligning content generation with specific applications. While these
models currently do not provide access to token
logits, we argue that if such access were available,
it would enable more powerful adaptation techniques beyond prompt engineering. In this paper,
we propose a token-level probability reweighting
framework that, given access to logits and a small
amount of task-specific data, can effectively steer
black-box LLMs toward application-specific content generation. Our approach views next-token
prediction through the lens of supervised classification. We show that aligning black-box LLMs
with task-specific data can be formulated as a label noise correction problem, leading to Plugin
model – an autoregressive probability reweighting
model that operates solely on logits. We provide
theoretical justification for why reweighting logits
alone is sufficient for task adaptation. Extensive
experiments with multiple datasets, LLMs, and
reweighting models demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method, advocating for broader access to
token logits in closed-source models. We provide
our code at this https URL.

Figure 1. Inference phase of the Plugin model. The token probabilities are a product of the probabilities from the black-box model
and a reweighting model that denotes label transitioning.

Despite these constraints, closed-source LLMs are widely
adopted across applications ranging from travel itinerary
generation to tax advice, with developers largely relying on
prompt optimization to achieve domain-specific outputs.
However, this reliance on prompt engineering is insufficient
for specialized tasks, e.g., those requiring brand-specific
tone or style. Consider a content writer aiming to generate
product descriptions that reflect a brand’s unique identity.
Black-box LLMs, trained on broad datasets, often fail to
meet such nuanced requirements. With access limited to generated tokens, developers resort to zero-shot (Kojima et al.,
2022) or few-shot (Song et al., 2023) prompting techniques.
However, if model weights were accessible, advanced techniques like Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) using
LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2024), prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021), or adapters (Hu et al., 2023a)
could be employed for fine-tuning. Yet, due to intellectual
property concerns and the high costs of development, most
commercial LLMs remain closed-source, and even with
API-based fine-tuning options, concerns over data privacy
discourage developers from sharing proprietary data.

1. Introduction
The rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) has revolutionized generative Artificial Intelligence, yet the most capable
models are often closed-source or black-box (Achiam et al.,
2023; Bai et al., 2022a). These models generate text based
on input prompts but keep their internal weights and training
data undisclosed, limiting transparency and customization.

In this paper, we propose a middle ground between generalpurpose LLM creators and developers seeking applicationspecific alignment. We argue that providing access to token
logits, in addition to generated text, would enable more effective customization for downstream tasks. Viewing nexttoken prediction as a classification problem, we draw an
analogy between LLMs and supervised classification models. Since decoder-only LLMs are trained to predict the next
token given preceding tokens, aligning black-box LLMs to
domain-specific data can be reframed as a label noise correction problem in supervised classification. In this analogy,
the LLM’s broad training data serves as proxy labels, while

Work done while visiting Stanford University. † Work done
while PhD Candidate at UW Madison. 1 Typeface 2 Stanford University 3 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 4 Adobe Research. Correspondence
to: Gaurush Hiranandani <gaurush@typeface.ai>, Haolun Wu
<haolunwu@stanford.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

