Polynomial Time Learning-Augmented Algorithms for
NP-hard Permutation Problems
Evripidis Bampis 1 Bruno Escoffier 1 Dimitris Fotakis 2 3 Panagiotis Patsilinakos 4 Michalis Xefteris 5

Abstract

troduced by Mahdian, Nazerzadeh, and Saberi, who applied
it to the problem of allocating online advertisement space
for budget-constrained advertisers (Mahdian et al., 2007).
Later, Lykouris and Vassilvitskii formalized the framework,
studying the online caching problem using predictions (Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021). The main emphasis in the field
of algorithms with predictions has been on online optimization, as predicting the future of a partially unknown input
instance is a natural approach. However, in the past few
years, the field has expanded into various other areas. An
almost complete list of papers in the field can be found
in (Lindermayr & Megow).

We consider a learning-augmented framework for
NP-hard permutation problems. The algorithm
has access to predictions telling, given a pair u, v
of elements, whether u is before v or not in an
unknown fixed optimal solution. Building on the
work of Braverman and Mossel (SODA 2008),
we show that for a class of optimization problems
including scheduling, network design and other
graph permutation problems, these predictions
allow to solve them in polynomial time with high
probability, provided that predictions are true with
probability at least 1/2 + ϵ, for any given constant
ϵ > 0. Moreover, this can be achieved with a
parsimonious access to the predictions.

More relevant to this work, algorithms with predictions have
been used to address NP-hard optimization problems and
overcome their computational challenges. The first learningaugmented algorithms applied to NP-hard problems were focused on clustering, as seen in (Gamlath et al., 2022; Ergun
et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2023), and other graph optimization problems (Chen et al., 2022). Moreover, several papers
have studied M AX C UT with predictions, including (Bampis
et al., 2024; Cohen-Addad et al., 2024; Ghoshal et al., 2024;
Dong et al., 2025). Cohen-Addad et al. investigated the
approximability of M AX C UT with predictions in two models (Cohen-Addad et al., 2024). In the first model, similar to
the one used in this work, they assumed predictions for each
vertex (on its position in an optimal cut) that are correct
with probability 1/2 + ϵ, for a given ϵ > 0, and presented a
polynomial-time (0.878 + Ω̃(ϵ4 ))-approximation algorithm.
In the second model, they receive a correct prediction for
each vertex with probability ϵ > 0 (and no information otherwise) and designed a (0.858 + Ω(ϵ))-approximation algorithm. Ghoshal et al. also studied M AX C UT and M AX 2-L IN
in both models (Ghoshal et al., 2024). Furthermore, (Braverman et al., 2024) studied Maximum Independent Set within
the framework of learning-augmented algorithms, adopting
the aforementioned first model. Finally, (Antoniadis et al.,
2024) studied approximation algorithms with predictions for
several NP-hard optimization problems within a prediction
model different from the one used in this work.

1. Introduction
In recent years, advancements in Machine Learning (ML)
have significantly influenced progress in solving optimization problems across a wide range of fields. By leveraging
historical data, ML predictors are utilized every day to tackle
numerous challenges. These developments have motivated
researchers in algorithms to incorporate ML predictions into
algorithm design for optimization problems. This has given
rise to the vastly growing field of learning-augmented algorithms, also known as algorithms with predictions. In this
framework, it is assumed that predictions about a problem’s
input are provided by a black-box ML model. The objective
is to use these predictions to develop algorithms that outperform existing ones when the predictions are sufficiently
accurate.
The idea of learning-augmented algorithms was initially in*

Equal contribution 1 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F75005 Paris, France 2 National Technical University of Athens,
Greece 3 Archimedes, Athena Research Center, Greece 4 Université
Paris-Dauphine, Université PSL, CNRS, LAMSADE, 75016,
Paris, France 5 Athens University of Economics and Business,
Athens, Greece. Correspondence to: Michalis Xefteris <mxefteris@hotmail.com>.

In this paper, we design learning-augmented algorithms for
NP-hard optimization problems. Our approach does not use
all available predictions for the problem at hand but instead
utilizes the predictor selectively. This aligns with the con-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

