AutoEval Done Right: Using Synthetic Data for Model Evaluation

Pierre Boyeau 1 Anastasios N. Angelopoulos 1 Tianle Li 1 Nir Yosef 1 2 Jitendra Malik 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 3

Abstract

This work introduces methods for autoevaluation done
right. Given a small amount of human data and a large
amount of synthetic data, we will construct autoevaluation
procedures that combine these datasets to get better estimates of performance.

The evaluation of machine learning models using
human-labeled validation data can be expensive
and time-consuming. AI-labeled synthetic data
can be used to decrease the number of human annotations required for this purpose in a process
called autoevaluation. We suggest efficient and
statistically principled algorithms for this purpose that improve sample efficiency while remaining unbiased.

In other words, our methods will increase the effective sample size of human data without compromising statistical validity. Intuitively, we use the limited human data in order to
measure the bias of the synthetic data. Then, we evaluate
the model on the synthetic data and correct the bias using this estimate. The core statistical tool used for this debiasing is called prediction-powered inference (PPI) (Angelopoulos et al., 2023a); we will describe this tool in detail
in the coming text. This approach can improve both metricbased evaluations (Section 2) and pairwise-comparisonbased evaluations (Section 3), and can readily be applied
using an existing Python software. We will include code
snippets throughout for producing more precise unbiased
evaluations. These lower-variance evaluations are also accompanied by confidence intervals.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to evaluate machine learning systems—
assessing their accuracy, fairness, and other metrics—with
as few data points as possible. This goal is important for reducing the human effort required to collect extensive validation datasets (Hastie et al., 2009) for such tasks. Towards
that end, we will explore an approach called autoevaluation, wherein we evaluate models in a two-stage procedure:
(i). Produce synthetic labels using AI on a large unlabeled
dataset, and (ii). evaluate AI models using the synthetic
labels.

1.1. Related Work
Autoevaluation has been a subject of interest, particularly
in language modeling, well before the current wave of
progress in machine learning (Corston-Oliver et al., 2001;
Agarwal et al., 2021; Garg et al., 2022). Since the development of powerful machine learning systems such as
gpt-4, the accuracy of the annotations that these systems
produce has started to approach that of humans (Zheng
et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024), giving substantial credence to autoevaluation as an alternative to human evaluations (Li et al., 2024a).

Autoevaluation can save months or years of time and potentially millions of dollars in annotation costs; see, e.g.,
Scale AI, or the recent work of Zheng et al. (Zheng et al.,
2024) using gpt-4 to rank alternative language models’
answers to questions with high agreement with human annotators. However, the synthetic labels may not be trustworthy, especially for the purpose of certifying a model’s
worst-case safety, multi-group accuracy and fairness, or to
understand if observed differences between models are significant. This motivates the need for serious statistical inquiry on the general question of autoevaluation.

The prohibitive cost of human annotation has also encouraged the development of automatic metrics used to evaluate model performance without human aid (Papineni et al.,
2002; Lin & Och, 2004), representing a distinct but related approach to autoevaluation. Automatic metrics can
be computed on the fly, rely on more data points and are
hence less noisy, which can be more informative than human evaluations when the latter are scarce (Wei & Jia,
2021). Standard autoevaluation methods are generally ad
hoc, and resulting estimates of model performance can systematically differ from those obtained by human evalua-

1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA
2
Department of Systems Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel 3 Inria, Ecole Normale
Supérieure, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Michael I.
Jordan <michael.jordan@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

