Identifiable Object Representations under Spatial Ambiguities

Avinash Kori 1 Francesca Toni 1 Ben Glocker 1

Abstract
Modular object-centric representations are essential for human-like reasoning but are challenging to obtain under spatial ambiguities, e.g. due
to occlusions and view ambiguities. However,
addressing challenges presents both theoretical
and practical difficulties. We introduce a novel
multi-view probabilistic approach that aggregates
view-specific slots to capture invariant content information while simultaneously learning disentangled global viewpoint-level information. Unlike
prior single-view methods, our approach resolves
spatial ambiguities, provides theoretical guarantees for identifiability, and requires no viewpoint
annotations. Extensive experiments on standard
benchmarks and novel complex datasets validate
our method’s robustness and scalability.

1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Occlusion Ambiguity: the orange object, which is
occluded by the blue object, could be any of the six plausible
objects shown on the right. (b) View Ambiguity: the blue object
is observed from two different viewpoints (represented with a red
arrow and a dot), leading to a change in its overall shape. In general,
identifiable representations resolve ambiguities by determining the
most plausible object under occlusion and correct object properties
in case of view transformation by leveraging information from
multiple viewpoints.

Introduction

The ability to capture the notion of objectness in learned representations is considered to be a critical aspect for developing situation-aware AI systems with human-like reasoning
capabilities (Schölkopf & von Kügelgen, 2022; Lake et al.,
2017). Objectness can be characterised as understanding
the environment from the perspective of its building blocks.
These can further be divided into object-part composition
(Hinton, 1979; 2022), which might be a potential reason
why humans generalise across environments with few examples to learn from (Tenenbaum et al., 2011). Recent advances in object-centric representation learning (OCL) have
shown great potential in segregating objects in observed
scenes (Locatello et al., 2020b; Kori et al., 2023; Löwe
et al., 2024). Indeed, the goal of OCL is to enable agents to
learn representations of objects in an observed scene in the
context of their environment, as opposed to learning global
representations as in the case of traditional generative models such as variational auto-encoders (Kingma & Welling,

2013). OCL approaches enable agents to learn spatially
disentangled representations, which is an important step in
compositional scene generation (Bengio et al., 2013; Lake
et al., 2017; Battaglia et al., 2018; Greff et al., 2020) and
understanding of causal (and physical) interactions between
the objects (Marcus, 2003; Gerstenberg et al., 2021; Gopnik
et al., 2004).
Recent progress in OCL has been limited to learning scene
representations from single-viewpoints (Locatello et al.,
2020b; Engelcke et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2021; Kori et al.,
2023; Chang et al., 2022; Seitzer et al., 2022; Löwe et al.,
2024). Although these approaches can learn meaningful
object-specific representations, they encounter significant
challenges stemming from spatial ambiguities such as occlusion and view ambiguities (see Fig. 1 for examples).
Additionally, while it has been hypothesised that these models learn un-occluded object representations even in the case
of occlusions. Learning from a single viewpoint fails to capture effective object representations, due to the presence of
multiple plausibilities of partially or fully occluded objects
and the effects of view transformations, as demonstrated
in Fig. 1 and highlighted by the results in Fig. 2 (we will
revisit these results later in section 6). Another example of
spatial ambiguities can be observed in Fig. 3, where object

1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK. Correspondence to:
Avinash Kori
<a.kori21@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

