Contrastive Localized Language-Image Pre-Training

Hong-You Chen† 1 Zhengfeng Lai 1 Haotian Zhang 1 Xinze Wang 1 Marcin Eichner 1 Keen You 1
Meng Cao 1 Bowen Zhang 1 Yinfei Yang 1 Zhe Gan 1

Abstract

ages and text by contrastive training on large-scale data
collected from the Web. Strong transferability and generalizability have been proven in extensive downstream
tasks such as zero-shot image classification and imagetext retrieval. Even beyond, language-supervised methods like CLIP have become arguably the default choice
of vision backbone for multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) (Liu et al., 2023; McKinzie et al., 2024) due to
their superior prior knowledge in aligning vision and language (Tong et al., 2024).

CLIP has been a celebrated method for training vision encoders to generate image/text representations facilitating various applications. Recently, it has been widely adopted as the vision
backbone of multimodal large language models
(MLLMs). The success of CLIP relies on aligning web-crawled noisy text annotations at image
levels. However, such criteria may be insufficient
for downstream tasks in need of fine-grained
vision representations, especially when understanding region-level is demanding for MLLMs.
We improve the localization capability of CLIP
with several advances. Our proposed pre-training
method, Contrastive Localized Language-Image
Pre-training (CLOC), complements CLIP with
region-text contrastive loss and modules. We formulate a new concept, promptable embeddings,
of which the encoder produces image embeddings easy to transform into region representations given spatial hints. To support large-scale
pre-training, we design a visually-enriched and
spatially-localized captioning framework to effectively generate region-text labels. By scaling up to billions of annotated images, CLOC
enables high-quality regional embeddings for
recognition and retrieval tasks, and can be a dropin replacement of CLIP to enhance MLLMs, especially on referring and grounding tasks.

As VL research gets increasing attention, various advanced
multimodal tasks are demanding stronger vision capabilities. For instance, recent MLLMs (Rasheed et al., 2024;
Ren et al., 2024; Lai et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Peng
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025) have been focusing on
more fine-grained understanding tasks that require comprehension of the semantics at region levels such as visual
question answering (VQA) with referring and grounding
instructions. These MLLMs are fine-tuned on referring and
grounding data with CLIP as the vision backbone, as seen
in works like Kosmos-2 (Peng et al., 2023) and Ferret (You
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024). Due to the need for such
region-level understanding, CLIP, which aligns entire images with text captions, seems insufficient, as its image-text
contrastive loss primarily emphasizes global semantics.
To remedy such core localization capability for CLIP, we
ask a challenging and fundamental question: can we pretrain a stronger image encoder (1) with enhanced localization capability that can be inherently integrated into
MLLMs, (2) and refine CLIP’s original image embeddings
to the region level for zero-shot recognition/retrieval?

1. Introduction

Here, we explore a data-driven approach that complements
the original CLIP image-text pre-training objective with explicit region-text supervision. Though conceptually simple,
several challenges exist. First, it lacks public datasets with
region-text annotations at scales large enough for CLIP
training, which typically requires hundreds of millions
even billions of images. Existing region-text corpus like
Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017) contains about 108K
images, and the largest noisy-labeled grounded dataset
GRIT (Peng et al., 2023) features only around 20M images.
Indeed, such a deficiency of labeled datasets has probably

Vision-language (VL) pre-training has been an important
foundation for the recent tremendous growth of multimodal
applications. Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
(CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021) is a successful VL representation learning method that connects im†
Work done while at Apple. 1 Apple AI/ML. Correspondence
to: Zhe Gan <zhe.gan@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

