Improved Last-Iterate Convergence of Shuffling Gradient Methods for
Nonsmooth Convex Optimization

Zijian Liu 1 Zhengyuan Zhou 1 2

Abstract

empirical risk minimization framework (Shalev-Shwartz &
Ben-David, 2014), such a problem arises in a wide range of
applications (e.g., SVMs (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995)) and has
been extensively studied in the past few years.

We study the convergence of the shuffling gradient method, a popular algorithm employed to
minimize the finite-sum function with regularization, in which functions are passed to apply
(Proximal) Gradient Descent (GD) one by one
whose order is determined by a permutation on
the indices of functions. In contrast to its easy implementation and effective performance in practice, the theoretical understanding remains limited. A recent advance by (Liu & Zhou, 2024b)
establishes the first last-iterate convergence results under various settings, especially proving
the optimal rates for smooth (strongly) convex optimization. However, their bounds for nonsmooth
(strongly) convex functions are only as fast as
Proximal GD. In this work, we provide the first
improved last-iterate analysis for the nonsmooth
case demonstrating that the widely used Random
Reshuffle (RR) and Single Shuffle (SS) strategies are both provably faster than Proximal GD,
reflecting the benefit of randomness. As an important implication, we give the first (nearly) optimal
convergence result for the suffix average under
the RR sampling scheme in the general convex
case, matching the lower bound shown by (Koren
et al., 2022).

Two text-book level algorithms for solving the problem are
Proximal Gradient Descent (GD) and its variant Proximal
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Nemirovski & Yudin,
1983; Nesterov et al., 2018; Bubeck et al., 2015; Lan, 2020),
where the former requires a true gradient in every step in
contrast to the latter only computing the gradient of a single function selected based on a random index uniformly
sampled from [n] ≜ {1, · · · , n}.
Whereas neither of the above classic algorithms is widely
adopted in practice since, when n is large (the standard scenario nowadays), Proximal GD incurs large computational
overhead and Proximal SGD suffers from cache misses. Instead, the shuffling gradient method is arguably the most
popular and practical choice, in which functions (or data
points) are passed to apply (proximal) gradient descent one
by one whose order is determined by a permutation on
[n]. In particular, three shuffling strategies named Random
Reshuffle (RR), Single Shuffle (SS), and Incremental Gradient (IG) are mostly used, where the permutation varies
randomly in every epoch (containing n steps) for RR, is randomly sampled at the beginning and employed through all
updates for SS, and is deterministically picked in advance
for IG.
Compared to its easy implementation, lightweight computation, and effective performance (Bottou, 2009; 2012;
Bengio, 2012), the theoretical understanding of the shuffling
gradient method remains limited, especially for the most
common output, the last iterate. A recent advance by (Liu
& Zhou, 2024b) establishes the first last-iterate convergence
results measured by the function value gap under various
settings, particularly, proving the optimal rates for smooth
(strongly) convex optimization under the RR/SS/IG sampling schemes mentioned before. However, their bounds
for nonsmooth (strongly) convex functions are proved for
any kind of shuffling strategy (not limited to RR/SS/IG)
and only as fast as Proximal GD, leaving the following unaddressed research question as also mentioned by (Liu &
Zhou, 2024b):

1. Introduction
This work considers a common machine learning problem,
minimizing a finite-sum function with regularization, i.e.,
n

min F (x) ≜ f (x) + ψ(x) where f (x) ≜

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

in which fi and ψ are convex and potentially satisfy other
properties, e.g., Lipschitz continuity. Due to the famous
1
Stern School of Business, New York University 2 Arena Technologies. Correspondence to: Zijian Liu <zl3067@stern.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

