Finite-Time Global Optimality Convergence in Deep Neural Actor-Critic
Methods for Decentralized Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Zhiyao Zhang * 1 Myeung Suk Oh * 1 FNU Hairi 2 Ziyue Luo 1 Alvaro Velasquez 3 Jia Liu 1

Abstract

found a wide range of applications in recent years, such
as network recourse allocation (Cui et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2020b), autonomous driving (Sallab et al., 2017; Kiran et al.,
2021; Yu et al., 2019), wireless random access network optimization (Luong et al., 2019; Nasir and Guo, 2019; Oh
et al., 2025). Generally speaking, in decentralized MARL,
multiple agents collaboratively learn an optimal policy to
maximize long-term accumulative global rewards through
local optimization and information sharing.

Actor-critic methods for decentralized multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) facilitate collaborative optimal decision making without centralized coordination, thus enabling a wide range of
applications in practice. To date, however, most
theoretical convergence studies for existing actorcritic decentralized MARL methods are limited
to the guarantee of a stationary solution under
the linear function approximation. This leaves
a significant gap between the highly successful
use of deep neural actor-critic for decentralized
MARL in practice and the current theoretical understanding. To bridge this gap, in this paper,
we make the first attempt to develop a deep neural actor-critic method for decentralized MARL,
where both the actor and critic components are
inherently non-linear. We show that our proposed
method enjoys a global optimality guarantee with
a finite-time convergence rate of O(1/T ), where
T is the total iteration times. This marks the first
global convergence result for deep neural actorcritic methods in the MARL literature. We also
conduct extensive numerical experiments, which
verify our theoretical results.

Among a large number of methods for solving MARL problems, the family of actor-critic methods have become increasingly popular. This is primarily due to the fact that
actor-critic methods combine the strengths of two most fundamental and basic RL approaches, namely value-based
and policy-based RL approaches, thus achieving the best
of both worlds while avoiding their pitfalls. Specifically, in
actor-critic approaches, the critic component performs policy evaluation to estimate the value or state-action function
for the current policy, while the actor component leverages
the policy evaluation information to compute policy gradient to update policy parameters. On one hand, with policy
evaluation, actor-critic methods share the similar benefit of
effective data usage as in value-based approaches. On the
other hand, by exploiting policy gradient information, actorcritic methods are versatile and can easily handle many RL
complications in practice (e.g., infinite or continuous state
and action spaces). Moreover, thanks to the use of policy
gradients, actor-critic methods can incorporate numerous
insights and techniques from decentralized gradient-based
optimization, making them particularly appealing for decentralized MARL.

1. Introduction
1) Background and Motivations: Decentralized Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Littman, 1994;
Lauer and Riedmiller, 2000; Lowe et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018; Omidshafiei et al., 2017), a generalization of traditional single-agent reinforcement learning (RL) (Kaelbling
et al., 1996; Sutton, 2018; Arulkumaran et al., 2017) has

To date, while actor-critic decentralized MARL methods
have shown great empirical promises in various applications
(Foerster et al., 2016; Omidshafiei et al., 2017; Naderializadeh et al., 2021; Feriani and Hossain, 2021; Li et al.,
2022), the theoretical foundation of actor-critic decentralized MARL remains in its infancy. Although there have
been recent efforts on addressing the theoretical gaps in
MARL (Hairi et al., 2022), many fundamental problems remain wide open. There are two major technical limitations
in actor-critic decentralized MARL that could significantly
diminish the long-term applicability and promises of actor-

*

Equal contribution 1 The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA 2 University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, Whitewater, Wisconsin, USA 3 University of Colorado Boulder,
Boulder, Colorado, USA. Correspondence to: Zhiyao Zhang
<zhang.15178@osu.edu>, Jia Liu <liu@ece.osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

