Active Fine-Tuning of Multi-Task Policies

Marco Bagatella 1 2 Jonas Hübotter 1 Georg Martius 2 3 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Pre-trained generalist policies are rapidly gaining
relevance in robot learning due to their promise
of fast adaptation to novel, in-domain tasks.
This adaptation often relies on collecting new
demonstrations for a specific task of interest and
applying imitation learning algorithms, such as
behavioral cloning. However, as soon as several
tasks need to be learned, we must decide which
tasks should be demonstrated and how often?
We study this multi-task problem and explore an
interactive framework in which the agent adaptively selects the tasks to be demonstrated. We
propose AMF (Active Multi-task Fine-tuning),
an algorithm to maximize multi-task policy performance under a limited demonstration budget
by collecting demonstrations yielding the largest
information gain on the expert policy. We derive
performance guarantees for AMF under regularity assumptions and demonstrate its empirical effectiveness to efficiently fine-tune neural policies
in complex and high-dimensional environments.

?
!

Figure 1: Interactive loop between agent and expert. We
consider a scenario where we receive a pre-trained policy,
and are able to obtain expert demonstrations of tasks.
We study how to select tasks (in blue) to obtain the bestperforming policy after as few demonstrations as possible.
ing (Ceron et al., 2024b;a; Nauman et al., 2024) suggest the
possibility of leveraging large pre-trained policies. These
“generalist” policies have decent performance on many tasks,
and can be fine-tuned on particular set of tasks while leveraging their previously learned representations and skills. We
investigate whether representations of pre-trained policies
can be used to significantly bootstrap learning progress.
As a motivating example, consider a household robot that
is delivered with a pre-trained “generalist” policy, and
deployed in different conditions than those observed in
its training data. While the robot may achieve some tasks
in a zero-shot fashion (e.g. simple pick-and-place), other
tasks might necessitate further fine-tuning (e.g. cooking an
omelette). The robot should be able to interactively request
demonstrations to compensate for its shortcomings. We
seek to answer which demonstrations should be requested
from the user to achieve the best performance, as quickly
as possible.

1. Introduction
The availability of large pre-trained models has transformed entire areas of machine learning, from computer
vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021), to natural language
processing (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) and
generative modeling in general (Ho et al., 2020; Esser et al.,
2024). This paradigm has started to extend to robotics
and control (Collaboration, 2023; Ma et al., 2024), in
particular for systems for which demonstrations are readily
available (Octo Model Team et al., 2024), or can be easily
collected (Zhao et al., 2023). Even when demonstrations
are not easily obtained, scaling laws in reinforcement learn-

If the agent only needs to perform well in a single task,
the fine-tuning process conventionally relies on behavioral
cloning (Chen et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022; Bousmalis
et al., 2024) of expert demonstrations. As collecting demonstrations is in general costly, the number of demonstrations
required, and thus the expert’s effort, should be minimized.
However, as each demonstration should solve the same task,
the allocation of the expert’s effort is straightforward. The
multi-task case presents the more nuanced problem of selecting which tasks to demonstrate, and when. This motivates
the main focus of this work: provided a pre-trained policy, how can we maximize multi-task performance with a
minimal number of additional demonstrations?

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany 3 University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Marco Bagatella <mbagatella@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address this problem, we propose AMF (Active Multi1

