Multiple-policy Evaluation via Density Estimation

Yilei Chen 1 Aldo Pacchiano 1 2 Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis 1

Abstract

where prior to deploying a trained policy, thorough evaluation is imperative to ensure its safety and efficacy.

We study the multiple-policy evaluation problem where we are given a set of K policies and
the goal is to evaluate their performance (expected total reward over a fixed horizon) to an
accuracy ϵ with probability at least 1 − δ. We
propose an algorithm named CAESAR for this
problem. Our approach is based on computing
an approximately optimal sampling distribution
and using the data sampled from it to perform
the simultaneous estimation of the policy values.
CAESAR has two phases. In the first phase, we
produce coarse estimates of the visitation distributions of the target policies at a low order
sample complexity rate that scales with Õ( 1ϵ ).
In the second phase, we approximate the optimal sampling distribution and compute the importance weighting ratios for all target policies
by minimizing a step-wise quadratic loss function inspired by the DualDICE (Nachum et al.,
2019) objective. Up to low order and logarithmic terms
 CAESAR achieves a samplekcomplex
P (dπh (s,a))2
PH
H4
ity Õ ϵ2
,
h=1 maxk∈[K]
s,a µ∗ (s,a)

Broadly speaking there exist two scenarios where the problem of policy evaluation has been considered, known as online and offline data regimes. In online scenarios, a learner is
interacting sequentially with the environment and is tasked
with using its online deployments to collect helpful data
for policy evaluation. The simplest method for online policy evaluation is Monte-Carlo estimation (Fonteneau et al.,
2013). One can collect multiple trajectories by following
the target policy, and use the empirical mean of the rewards
as the estimator. These on-policy methods typically require
executing the policy we want to estimate which may be
unpractical or dangerous in many cases. For example, in a
medical treatment scenario, implementing an untrustworthy
policy can cause unfortunate consequences (Thapa et al.,
2005). In these cases, offline policy evaluation may be
preferable.
In the offline case, the learner has access to a batch of data
and is tasked with using it in the best way possible to estimate the value of a target policy. Many works focus on this
problem leveraging various techniques, such as importancesampling, model-based estimation, and doubly-robust estimators (Yin and Wang, 2020; Jiang and Li, 2016; Yin et al.,
2021; Xie et al., 2019; Li et al., 2015). In the context of
offline evaluation, the theoretical guarantees depend on the
overlap between the offline data distribution and the visitations of the evaluated policy (Xie et al., 2019; Yin and Wang,
2020; Duan et al., 2020). These coverage conditions, which
ensure that the data logging distribution (Xie et al., 2022)
adequately covers the state space, are typically captured by
the ratio between the densities corresponding to the offline
data distribution and the policy to evaluate, also known as
importance ratios.

h

where dπ is the visitation distribution of policy π,
µ∗ is the optimal sampling distribution, and H is
the horizon.

1. Introduction
This paper delves into the problem of policy evaluation, a
fundamental problem in RL (Sutton and Barto, 2018) of
which the goal is to estimate the expected total rewards of a
given policy. This process serves as an integral component
in various RL methodologies, such as policy iteration and
policy gradient approaches (Sutton et al., 1999), wherein the
current policy undergoes evaluation followed by potential
updates. Policy evaluation is also paramount in scenarios

Motivated by applications where one has multiple policies
to evaluate, e.g., multiple policies trained using different
hyperparameters, Dann et al. (2023) considered multiplepolicy evaluation which aims to estimate the performance
of a set of K target policies instead of a single one. At
first glance, multiple-policy evaluation does not pose challenges beyond single-policy evaluation since one can always
use K instances of single-policy evaluation to evaluate the
K policies. However, since the sample complexity of this

1

Boston University, Boston, USA 2 Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Yilei Chen
<ylchen9@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

