Permutation-Free High-Order Interaction Tests

Zhaolu Liu 1 Robert L. Peach 2 3 Mauricio Barahona 1

Abstract

servational data. A growing body of work has approached
this challenge using tools from information theory (Rosas
et al., 2020; 2024), persistent homology (Santoro et al.,
2023; 2024), Bayesian inference (Young et al., 2021) and
Hamiltonian-based functions (Schneidman et al., 2003).

Kernel-based hypothesis tests offer a flexible, nonparametric tool to detect high-order interactions in
multivariate data, beyond pairwise relationships.
Yet the scalability of such tests is limited by the
computationally demanding permutation schemes
used to generate null approximations. Here we
introduce a family of permutation-free high-order
tests for joint independence and partial factorisations of d variables. Our tests eliminate the need
for permutation-based approximations by leveraging V-statistics and a novel cross-centring technique to yield test statistics with a standard normal
limiting distribution under the null. We present
implementations of the tests and showcase their
efficacy and scalability through synthetic datasets.
We also show applications inspired by causal discovery and feature selection, which highlight both
the importance of high-order interactions in data
and the need for efficient computational methods.

Within the statistical and machine learning literature, kernelbased tests provide a flexible, non-parametric framework for
identifying relationships in data. The detection of pairwise
independence between two variables using HSIC (Gretton
et al., 2007) has found broad applicability in tasks such as
generative adversarial networks (Bińkowski et al., 2018),
feature selection (Song et al., 2012), and transfer learning (Long et al., 2015). Beyond pairwise independence,
kernel-based tests have been extended to assess joint independence among d variables via dHSIC (Pfister et al., 2018),
as well as Lancaster interactions among three variables (Sejdinovic et al., 2013a), which were later generalised to dorder Streitberg interactions (Liu et al., 2023b). However,
these tests typically rely on computationally expensive permutation or bootstrap schemes (involving 100 ≤ p ≤ 1000
permutations), reducing their applicability to datasets with
larger number of variables, where the subsets of variables
to be tested for interactions explode combinatorially.

1. Introduction

Here, we tackle this limitation on scalability by introducing
a family of permutation-free high-order tests that retain the
flexibility of kernel-based methods while eliminating the
computational burden of null-distribution approximation.
To note, our approach applies to the general settings where
one seeks to determine factorisation properties among subsets of variables (e.g., Lancaster and Streitberg interactions),
rather than merely rejecting or accepting joint independence.

Many complex real-world systems involve interactions beyond pairwise relationships, necessitating an explicit understanding of interactions among three or more entities (Battiston et al., 2020; 2021; Rosas et al., 2022; Thibeault et al.,
2024). Such high-order interactions amongst d > 2 variables have been shown to affect processes in social (Benson
et al., 2016), ecological (Grilli et al., 2017) and biological
systems (Luff et al., 2024; Arnaudon et al., 2022), often
in ways that cannot be reduced to combinations of pairwise effects (Schaub et al., 2020; Bick et al., 2023). Given
the relative scarcity of relational datasets that record highorder phenomena, it is important to develop unsupervised,
mathematically grounded methods for their detection in ob-

Contributions Our main contributions can be summarised
as follows: (1) We define the permutation-free joint independence test, xdHSIC for any d. (2) To address the combinatorial challenges of testing for high-order factorisation,
we introduce the cross-centring technique to develop the
permutation-free d-order Lancaster factorisation test, xLI.
(3) Building on xLI, we derive a permutation-free Streitberg
interaction test, xSI. (4) We show that, for the special case
d = 2, our high-order tests have a more concise mathematical formulation than the existing xHSIC (Shekhar et al.,
2023). (5) Through empirical evaluations in machine learning applications, we demonstrate that the permutation-free

1

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom 2 Department of Neurology, University Hospital Würzburg, Germany 3 Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial
College London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Mauricio
Barahona <m.barahona@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

