Global-Local Dirichlet Processes for Clustering Grouped Data in the Presence of
Group-Specific Idiosyncratic Variables

Arhit Chakrabarti 1 Yang Ni 1 Debdeep Pati 2 Bani K. Mallick 1

Abstract

cancers, enabling a systematic pan-cancer classification.
While molecular data (e.g., mRNA expression) are shared
across tumors, clinical variables may be cancer-specific
(e.g., prostate-specific antigen for prostate cancer). These
cancer-specific clinical variables may provide valuable information in clustering. Moreover, it is of scientific interest to
investigate if patients with different clinical characteristics
show differential gene expression patterns. Thus, while it is
desirable to utilize both molecular and clinical information
to identify pan-cancer subpopulations, their varying availability across cancers makes it a challenging problem. This
paper introduces a novel Bayesian nonparametric method
for clustering such grouped data.

We consider the problem of clustering grouped
data for which the observations may include
group-specific variables in addition to the variables that are shared across groups. This type of
data is quite common; for example, in cancer genomic studies, molecular information is available
for all cancers whereas cancer-specific clinical
information may only be available for certain cancers. Existing grouped clustering methods only
consider the shared variables but ignore valuable
information from the group-specific variables. To
allow for these group-specific variables to aid in
the clustering, we propose a novel Bayesian nonparametric approach, termed global-local (GLocal) Dirichlet process, that models the “globallocal” structure of the observations across groups.
We characterize the GLocal Dirichlet process using the stick-breaking representation and the representation as a limit of a finite mixture model.
We theoretically quantify the approximation errors of the truncated prior, the corresponding finite
mixture model, and the associated posterior distribution. We develop a fast variational Bayes algorithm for scalable posterior inference, which we
illustrate with extensive simulations and a TCGA
pan-gastrointestinal cancer dataset.

The Dirichlet process (DP, Ferguson, 1973) is at the core of
numerous model-based Bayesian nonparametric clustering
methods (Antoniak, 1974; Escobar & West, 1995; Mallick
& Walker, 1997; Hjort et al., 2010; Müller et al., 2015). One
of the advantages of DP mixture models (Lo, 1984; Escobar
& West, 1995; Maceachern & Müller, 1998) is its ability
to perform clustering without having to fix the number of
clusters a priori.
When analyzing grouped data (e.g., tumor tissues of different origins in our application), one could naively apply a
separate DP mixture model to each group, treating them independently. However, it is often desirable to identify groupspecific clusters while allowing the groups to be linked so
that clusters are comparable across groups. The hierarchical
Dirichlet process (HDP, Teh et al., 2006) is a remarkable
contribution in this direction. The HDP formulation relies
on modeling groups of observations using distinct DPs with
a common base measure, which, in turn, is itself a realization
from another DP. Since the draws from this DP are almost
surely discrete, all group-specific distributions share the
same set of atoms. Another classic group clustering method
is the nested Dirichlet process (nested DP, Rodrı́guez et al.,
2008), which focuses on simultaneously clustering groups
as well as observations within each group cluster. However,
the nested DP is known to suffer from a degeneracy property
(Camerlenghi et al., 2019) – two distributions sharing even
one atom in their support are automatically assigned to the
same cluster.

1. Introduction
This article considers the clustering of grouped data that
includes both shared variables across groups and groupspecific idiosyncratic variables, as often seen in practice.
For example, large-scale studies like The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) provide molecular and clinical profiles across
1
Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Arhit Chakrabarti
<arhit.chakrabarti@stat.tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Both the HDP and the nested DP fall under the general
1

