LMAct: A Benchmark for In-Context Imitation Learning
with Long Multimodal Demonstrations

Anian Ruoss 1 Fabio Pardo 1 Harris Chan 1 Bonnie Li 1 Volodymyr Mnih 1 Tim Genewein 1

Abstract

the ability to learn new patterns and imitate algorithms in
context (Reid et al., 2024; Mirchandani et al., 2023). Both
types of capabilities demonstrate that LMs can manipulate
learned knowledge and respond to new information in flexible and non-trivial ways. These capabilities, both necessary
for reasoning and decision-making, have led to the recent
surge of using LMs as agents by sampling an action from
the model (Mirchandani et al., 2023; Palo & Johns, 2024).

In this paper, we present a benchmark to pressuretest today’s frontier models’ multimodal decisionmaking capabilities in the very long-context
regime (up to one million tokens) and investigate whether these models can learn from large
numbers of expert demonstrations in their context.
We evaluate the performance of Claude 3.5 Sonnet, Gemini 1.5 Flash, Gemini 1.5 Pro, Gemini 2.0 Flash Experimental, GPT-4o, o1-mini, o1preview, and o1 as policies across a battery of
simple interactive decision-making tasks: playing tic-tac-toe, chess, and Atari, navigating grid
worlds, solving crosswords, and controlling a simulated cheetah. We study increasing amounts of
expert demonstrations in the context — from no
demonstrations to 512 full episodes. Across our
tasks, models rarely manage to fully reach expert
performance, and often, presenting more demonstrations has little effect. Some models steadily
improve with more demonstrations on a few tasks.
We investigate the effect of encoding observations as text or images and the impact of chain-ofthought prompting. To help quantify the impact of
other approaches and future innovations, we open
source our benchmark that covers the zero-, few-,
and many-shot regimes in a unified evaluation.

While LMs have been shown to be able to perform
non-trivial reasoning and decision-making in some domains (Huang et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Romera-Paredes
et al., 2024), there are also many negative results where LMs
fail to perform decision-making tasks that are very simple
for humans, even when LMs arguably possess great factual
knowledge of the task. For example, LMs struggle to play legal moves, let alone beat amateur humans, in chess (Carlini,
2023). At the same time, state-of-the-art LMs have detailed
expert knowledge of chess when queried in natural language.
But this declarative knowledge fails to translate into effective decision-making, i.e., “know-how” (Ryle, 1949). This
“knowing-doing gap” is also observed in the recently released BALROG benchmark (Paglieri et al., 2025), which
evaluates zero-shot capabilities (i.e., without expert demonstrations) of state-of-the-art LMs on interactive decisionmaking tasks in the long time horizon setting: 5 game environments from Baby AI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019) to
Nethack (Küttler et al., 2020). Overall, Paglieri et al. (2025)
find that “models struggle significantly with more challenging tasks” and highlight few- and many-shot evaluation as
an important potential solution. Our benchmark (developed
concurrently) addresses exactly this gap by covering the full
range from zero-shot to many-shot evaluation.

1. Introduction
The simple recipe of minimizing next-token prediction error at scale has led to large multimodal foundation models
(LMs) with remarkably general capabilities (OpenAI, 2023;
Anil et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2024a). Importantly, these
capabilities come in two flavors: (i) the ability to produce
outputs of high quality from a short and often underspecified
prompt (e.g., writing an essay about a novel topic), and (ii)

The general question arising from these results is whether
LMs in principle have the capabilities to solve interactive decision-making tasks but misunderstand the “out-ofdistribution” specification given by the zero-shot prompt or a
few examples, or whether the problem is more deeply rooted.
Accordingly, our paper focuses on whether conditioning on
a large number of expert demonstrations (state-action trajectories) helps unlock the decision-making capability of
pretrained LMs. In doing so, we test the multimodal incontext learning capabilities of modern LMs at their limits,

1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Anian Ruoss <anianr@google.com>, Tim Genewein <timgen@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

