What Makes a Good Feedforward Computational Graph?

Alex Vitvitskyi 1 João G.M. Araújo 1 Marc Lackenby 2 Petar Veličković 1

Abstract

What makes a good feedforward computational graph?
Normalised minimax fidelity

As implied by the plethora of literature on graph
rewiring, the choice of computational graph employed by a neural network can make a significant
impact on its downstream performance. Certain
effects related to the computational graph, such
as under-reaching and over-squashing, may even
render the model incapable of learning certain
functions. Most of these effects have only been
thoroughly studied in the domain of undirected
graphs; however, recent years have seen a significant rise in interest in feedforward computational
graphs: directed graphs without any back edges.
In this paper, we study the desirable properties of
a feedforward computational graph, discovering
two important complementary measures: fidelity
and mixing time, and evaluating a few popular
choices of graphs through the lens of these measures. Our study is backed by both theoretical
analyses of the metrics’ asymptotic behaviour for
various graphs, as well as correlating these metrics to the performance of trained neural network
models using the corresponding graphs.

4
3
2

Erd s-Rényi
Fully connected
Poisson
FS
Line
Expander

1
0

10

20

30

Mixing time

40

50

Figure 1. In this paper, we propose two measures which can be
used to assess suitability of feedforward computational graphs
for neural networks – mixing time (lower is better; Sec. 4) and
(normalised) minimax fidelity (higher is better; Sec. 5). Here we
plot these metrics as attained by various graph generators—at each
point in a sequence, the number of nodes doubles, starting from
16. Using FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2023), we discover
the FS graphs, which have favourable O(polylog n) mixing time,
while retaining higher fidelity compared to a fully connected graph
(Sec. 6). Several of these graphs may be viewed in Appendix D.

models scalably and without leaking ground-truth data about
the future input parts that need to be predicted. As such,
many modern architectures resort to feedforward computational graphs, wherein information may only flow from older
samples towards newer ones—never in reverse! Applying
such a graph – also known as a “causal mask” (Srambical,
2024) – allows for scalable training over entire chunks of
the input at the same time.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning workloads frequently necessitate processing of sequential inputs, such as words in a sentence
(Sutskever et al., 2014), samples of an audio recording
(Van Den Oord et al., 2016), partially ordered nodes in
a graph (Thost & Chen, 2021), execution steps of an algorithm (Veličković et al., 2022), or snapshots of edits made
to temporal graphs (Rossi et al., 2020). In addition, many
important self-supervised learning tasks require efficiently
predicting future evolution of such inputs, with examples
ranging from temporal link prediction (Huang et al., 2024)
to next token prediction (Radford et al., 2018).

This naturally invites the question: what makes a good
feedforward computational graph? Alternately worded,
which considerations need to be taken into account when
deciding which feedforward graph to use (see Figure 1)?
Here we propose two suitable and complementary ways to
measure suitability of feedforward graphs: mixing time—
the speed at which input data converges towards a stationary
distribution—and minimax fidelity—the sharpness of the
data is as it propagates through the graph. We supplement
our measures with thorough theoretical derivations across
several graph generators, and correlate them to empirical
performance, paving the way to future studies in the area.

In regimes like this, it is important to be able to train such
1
Google DeepMind 2 University of Oxford. Correspondence to:
Alex Vitvitskyi <avlife@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

