Representative Ranking for Deliberation in the Public Sphere

Manon Revel * 1 2 Smitha Milli * 1 Tyler Lu 3 Jamelle Watson-Daniels 1 Max Nickel 1

Abstract

to bring online conversations closer towards the ideals of
deliberation, leveraging algorithmic tools in doing so.

Online comment sections, such as those on news
sites or social media, have the potential to foster
informal public deliberation, However, this potential is often undermined by the frequency of
toxic or low-quality exchanges that occur in these
settings. To combat this, platforms increasingly
leverage algorithmic ranking to facilitate higherquality discussions, e.g., by using civility classifiers or forms of prosocial ranking. Yet, these
interventions may also inadvertently reduce the
visibility of legitimate viewpoints, undermining
another key aspect of deliberation: representation
of diverse views. We seek to remedy this problem
by introducing guarantees of representation into
these methods. In particular, we adopt the notion
of justified representation (JR) from the social
choice literature and incorporate a JR constraint
into the comment ranking setting. We find that
enforcing JR leads to greater inclusion of diverse
viewpoints while still being compatible with optimizing for user engagement or other measures of
conversational quality.

What does it take for a discussion to count as deliberative? Deliberative democracy ideals generally demand at
minimum (i) certain aspects of conversational quality (e.g.,
respect, reasoned arguments, etc) and (ii) the representation
of diverse voices. For example, among other ideals, Fishkin
& Luskin (2005) claim that deliberative discussion must be
(i) conscientious, i.e., “the participants should be willing to
talk and listen with civility and respect,” and (ii) comprehensive, i.e., “all points of view held by significant portions
of the population should receive attention.” Similarly, in
their review of the ‘second generation of deliberative ideals,’
Bächtiger et al. (2018) highlight the ongoing importance of
(i) respect, and (ii) the evolving view of equality as the equality of opportunity to political influence (Knight & Johnson,
1997), which requires that people with diverse viewpoints
be able to receive attention to their perspectives.
Algorithmic moderation and ranking have become key
tools for facilitating conversational quality in online discussions (Kolhatkar et al., 2020). For example, Google Jigsaw’s Perspective API comment classifiers have been used
by prominent news organizations, such as the New York
Times and Wall Street Journal, to filter or rerank comments
to improve civility (Lees et al., 2022; Saltz et al., 2024).
More recently, a line of work on bridging systems advocating ranking aims at bridging different perspectives and reducing polarization (Ovadya & Thorburn, 2023). Bridgingbased ranking has been used to in several high-impact applications such as ranking crowd-sourced fact checks on X,
Instagram, Threads, Facebook, and TikTok (Wojcik et al.,
2022; Meta, 2025; TikTok, 2025) and selecting comments in
collective response systems like Pol.is and Remesh (Small
et al., 2021a; Konya et al., 2023a; Huang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
In theories of deliberative democracy (Habermas, 1991; Cohen, 2005; Fishkin, 2009; Bächtiger et al., 2018), thoughtful and constructive public discourse is key for a wellfunctioning polity. Online platforms, such as comment sections on news sites or social media, present an opportunity
to expand this kind of public sphere deliberation (Helberger,
2019; Landemore, 2024). These digital spaces enable interactions between individuals who might never meet in
person, potentially exposing them to a broader array of
viewpoints. However, in reality, these online discussions
often deteriorate into low-quality or toxic exchanges (Nelson et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021). In this work, we aim

While these interventions may improve conversational quality, the goal of ensuring representation in online discussions
is less studied. In fact, solely focusing on conversational
quality might inadvertently result in the censorship of certain groups, in the sense that their comments may be filtered
out or do not appear high enough in the comment ranking to gain visibility. For example, civility classifiers have
been shown to disproportionately flag comments written in
African-American English (Sap et al., 2019) and comments

*
Equal contribution 1 Meta FAIR, New York, NY, USA
Berkman Klein Center, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
USA 3 Meta, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Manon
Revel <manon@meta.com>, Smitha Milli <smilli@meta.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

