LLM-Augmented Chemical Synthesis and Design Decision Programs

Haorui Wang 1 Jeff Guo 2 3 Lingkai Kong 4 Rampi Ramprasad 1
Philippe Schwaller 2 3 Yuanqi Du† 5 Chao Zhang† 1

Abstract

nentially with the number of reaction steps or the depth
of the route tree. Consequently, efficient decision-making
in retrosynthesis planning, and more broadly, in chemical
design, remains a critical challenge.

Retrosynthesis, the process of breaking down a
target molecule into simpler precursors through a
series of valid reactions, stands at the core of organic chemistry and drug development. Although
recent machine learning (ML) research has advanced single-step retrosynthetic modeling and
subsequent route searches, these solutions remain
restricted by the extensive combinatorial space of
possible pathways. Concurrently, large language
models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable chemical knowledge, hinting at their potential to tackle
complex decision-making tasks in chemistry. In
this work, we explore whether LLMs can successfully navigate the highly constrained, multistep retrosynthesis planning problem. We introduce an efficient scheme for encoding reaction
pathways and present a new route-level search
strategy, moving beyond the conventional step-bystep reactant prediction. Through comprehensive
evaluations, we show that our LLM-augmented
approach excels at retrosynthesis planning and
extends naturally to the broader challenge of synthesizable molecular design.

Recent research has harnessed machine learning to tackle
retrosynthesis by modeling reactions with a single-step
model which predicts a reaction template, i.e., a reaction coded as a pattern, to synthesize the given target
molecule (Segler & Waller, 2017; Coley et al., 2017; Liu
et al., 2017), including graph neural networks (Dai et al.,
2019; Chen & Jung, 2021), and subsequently reverse the
template to obtain the reactants. Another branch of singlestep models do not rely on the provided reaction templates
and directly predict reactants (Liu et al., 2017; Schwaller
et al., 2020; Igashov et al.). After training the single-step
models, they are further connected with a search algorithm
(e.g. Monte Carlo tree search (Segler et al., 2018) or A*
search (Chen et al., 2020) to perform multi-step retrosynthetic analysis, which halts when a path to a set of predefined
purchasable molecules is found.
Recent studies have shown that large language models
(LLMs) implicitly encode substantial chemical knowledge,
as evidenced by their remarkable performance in searching molecular structures with optimized properties (Wang
et al., 2024). In addition, LLMs have been leveraged for
reasoning and planning problems, such as automated experimentation in chemistry (M. Bran et al., 2024; Boiko et al.,
2023). Despite the apparent promise, the extent to which
LLMs can handle tightly constrained decision processes,
such as retrosynthesis planning, remains largely unexplored.
Unlike open-ended tasks like text generation, retrosynthesis imposes rigorous constraints on the sequence of actions
(reaction steps). Only certain reaction templates are valid,
and only commercially available or otherwise feasible precursors can be used.

1. Introduction
Retrosynthesis (Corey & Wipke, 1969; Corey et al., 1985)
concerns with breaking down a target molecular structure
into a sequence of simpler or more readily available precursor structures and chemical reactions (Boström et al., 2018).
It is essential for many chemistry problems that require the
realization of proposed molecular structures from organic
synthesis to drug discovery (Blakemore et al., 2018). Nevertheless, the search space for a given target is tremendous
as the number of possible synthesis pathways grows expo-

In this paper, we investigate whether the knowledge embedded in LLMs can be effectively leveraged for complex
sequential decision-making tasks in chemistry such as retrosynthesis planning. Crucially and by contrast to existing
LLM works for retrosynthesis (Nguyen-Van et al., 2024;
Yang et al., 2024), we do not tune the base LLM. Instead,
by exploring how LLMs perform under heavy constraints,

*

Equal contribution 1 Georgia Tech 2 École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 3 National Centre of Competence in
Research (NCCR) Catalysis 4 Harvard University 5 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Haorui Wang <hwang984@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

