Don’t Restart, Just Reuse: Reoptimizing MILPs with Dynamic Parameters

Sijia Zhang 1 Shuli Zeng 1 Shaoang Li 1 Feng Wu 1 Shaojie Tang 2 Xiang-Yang Li 1

Abstract

and production planning (Dunke & Nickel, 2023; CedilloRobles et al., 2020), involve systems that change dynamically over time. Thus, throughout the continuous operation
of such systems, it is required to compute solutions for
new Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problems,
which are similar to the previous instances but differ in some
parameters in specific model elements such as objective
functions, constraints, and variable bounds. Traditionally,
each of these new MILP instances is solved from scratch,
which overlooks the opportunity to leverage valuable information from the previously solved instances. This approach
can be computationally expensive. Additionally, it is challenging to generate high-quality operational plans within a
short timeframe for time-critical applications.

Many real-world applications, such as logistics,
routing, scheduling, and production planning, involve dynamic systems that require continuous
updates to solutions for new Mixed Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) problems. These systems
often require rapid updates to their solutions to
accommodate slight modifications in constraints
or objectives introduced by evolving conditions.
While reoptimization techniques have been explored for Linear Programming (LP) and certain
specific MILP problems, their effectiveness in addressing general MILP is limited. In this work,
we propose a two-stage reoptimization framework
for efficiently identifying high-quality feasible solutions. Specifically, we first utilize the historical solving process information to predict a high
confidence solution space for modified MILPs,
which is likely to contain high-quality solutions.
Building on the prediction results, we fix a part
of variables within the predicted intervals and
apply the Thompson Sampling algorithm to determine which variables to fix. This is done by
updating the Beta distributions based on the solutions obtained from the solver. Extensive experiments across nine reoptimization datasets show
that our VP-OR outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods, achieving higher-quality solutions under
strict time limits.

Reoptimization techniques have been well-studied for the
LP case (John & Yıldırım, 2008) and heuristic algorithms for some special MILP problems, e.g., the railway planning problem (Blair, 1998), general assignment
problems (NAUSS, 1974) and other combinatorial problems (Libura, 1996; 1991; Sotskov et al., 1995). However,
these techniques have limited applicability to general MILPs.
The current reoptimization techniques for general MILP instances (Ralphs & Güzelsoy, 2006; Ralphs et al., 2010;
Gamrath et al., 2015; Patel, 2024) can be divided into three
categories: (1) reuse of historical optimal solutions (2) reuse
of branch-and-bound trees (3) adjustment of parameters.
The limitations of their approach are twofold. Firstly, the
optimal solution from the original problem may no longer
be valid for the new problem. This is because the range
of variable values for the optimal solution can shift significantly, even with small modifications to the problem’s
parameters (Guzelsoy, 2009). Secondly, reusing branching
strategies and adjusting parameters primarily saves time on
decision-making within the branch-and-bound algorithm
itself, such as selecting variables, generating heuristics, and
constructing cutting planes. However, this approach does
not reduce the overall size or complexity of the problem.

1. Introduction
Traditional combinatorial optimization problems require
finding solutions for a single instance. However, many
real-world scenarios, such as system control (Marcucci &
Tedrake, 2020), railway scheduling (Zhang et al., 2020)
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Science and Technology of China 2 Department of Management
Science and Systems, State University of New York at Buffalo.
Correspondence to: Xiang-Yang Li <xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn>,
Feng Wu <wufeng02@ustc.edu.cn>.

Recently, there has been an increased interest in end-to-end
problem solving that generate high-quality solutions for
MILPs (Nair et al., 2020; Han et al., 2023; Khalil et al.,
2022; Ye et al., 2023; 2024). Previously, Neural Diving
(ND) (Nair et al., 2020) is proposed to generate a Bernoulli
distribution for the solution values of binary variables. They
employ a selectivenet (Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2019) to learn

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

