Causal Abstraction Inference under Lossy Representations

Kevin Xia 1 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract

example, a human can easily parse the object in an image
as a dog or a car instead of interpreting it as a collection of
pixel values. Combining these two modes of reasoning is
vital for building more advanced AI systems.

The study of causal abstractions bridges two integral components of human intelligence: the ability to determine cause and effect, and the ability to interpret complex patterns into abstract
concepts. Formally, causal abstraction frameworks define connections between complicated
low-level causal models and simple high-level
ones. One major limitation of most existing definitions is that they are not well-defined when
considering lossy abstraction functions in which
multiple low-level interventions can have different effects while mapping to the same high-level
intervention (an assumption called the abstract
invariance condition). In this paper, we introduce
a new type of abstractions called projected abstractions that generalize existing definitions to
accommodate lossy representations. We show
how to construct a projected abstraction from the
low-level model and how it translates equivalent
observational, interventional, and counterfactual
causal queries from low to high-level. Given that
the true model is rarely available in practice we
prove a new graphical criteria for identifying and
estimating high-level causal queries from limited
low-level data. Finally, we experimentally show
the effectiveness of projected abstraction models
in high-dimensional image settings.

Causal inference is often studied under the semantics of
structural causal models (SCMs) (Pearl, 2000). An SCM
models reality with a collection of mechanisms and exogenous distributions. Each SCM induces a collection of distributions categorized into three successively more descriptive
layers known as the Ladder of Causation or Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH) (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018; Bareinboim et al.,
2022). These three layers refer to the observational (L1 ),
interventional (L2 ), and counterfactual (L3 ) distributions.
In many causal inference tasks, the goal is to infer a quantity
from a higher layer using data from lower layers, a problem
known as cross-layer inference. It is understood that it is
generally impossible to infer higher layer information without additional assumptions (a result known as the Causal
Hierarchy Theorem or CHT (Bareinboim et al., 2022)), so
understanding the necessary assumptions for performing
inferences is a key component of any causal inference task.
Existing works on causal abstractions have made significant
progress in defining abstraction principles, proving insightful properties, and learning abstraction functions in practice
(Rubenstein et al., 2017; Beckers & Halpern, 2019; Beckers
et al., 2019; Geiger et al., 2023; Massidda et al., 2023; Zennaro et al., 2023; Felekis et al., 2024). Causal abstractions
are typically studied by comparing a high-level model MH ,
defined over high-level variables VH , with its low-level
counterpart ML , defined over VL . An abstraction function
τ maps from VL to VH , and MH is formally defined as
an abstraction of ML if it satisfies key properties with respect to τ such as commutativity with interventions. More
recently, this notion has been relaxed to only enforcing properties between distributions of MH and ML from the PCH
(Xia & Bareinboim, 2024). For example, rather than saying
MH is a full abstraction of ML , one can say that MH is an
abstraction of ML specifically for interventional quantities
in L2 or for a single causal effect P (y | do(x)) ∈ L2 . Xia &
Bareinboim (2024) also shows the synergy between causal
abstraction theory and representation learning (Bengio et al.,
2013), which has shown great success in many deep learning
applications by mapping high-dimensional data like images
or text to simpler representation spaces. These definitions of

1. Introduction
The ability to determine cause and effect, and the ability
to interpret complex patterns into abstract concepts, are
two integral components of human intelligence. From the
causality perspective, causal reasoning is vital in planning
courses of actions, determining blame and responsibility,
and generalizing across changing environments. From the
abstraction perspective, humans generally grasp better intuition when understanding something at a high-level. For
1
CausalAI Lab, Columbia University. Correspondence to:
Kevin Xia <kmx2000@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

