Improving Generalization in Federated Learning with Highly Heterogeneous
Data via Momentum-Based Stochastic Controlled Weight Averaging

Junkang Liu 1 Yuanyuan Liu∗ 2 Fanhua Shang∗ 1 Hongying Liu∗ 3 4 Jin Liu 5 Wei Feng 1

Abstract
For federated learning (FL) algorithms such as
FedSAM, their generalization capability is crucial
for real-word applications. In this paper, we revisit the generalization problem in FL and investigate the impact of data heterogeneity on FL generalization. We find that FedSAM usually performs
worse than FedAvg in the case of highly heterogeneous data, and thus propose a novel and effective federated learning algorithm with Stochastic
Weight Averaging (called FedSWA), which aims
to find flatter minima in the setting of highly heterogeneous data. Moreover, we introduce a new
momentum-based stochastic controlled weight
averaging FL algorithm (FedMoSWA), which is
designed to better align local and global models. Theoretically, we provide both convergence
analysis and generalization bounds for FedSWA
and FedMoSWA. We also prove that the optimization and generalization errors of FedMoSWA
are smaller than those of their counterparts, including FedSAM and its variants. Empirically,
experimental results on CIFAR10/100 and Tiny
ImageNet demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed algorithms compared to their counterparts. Open source code at: https://github.
com/junkangLiu0/FedSWA.

(a) FedAvg (0.1)

(b) FedSAM (0.1)

(c) FedSWA (0.1)

(d) FedSAM

(e) FedSWA

(f) FedSWA

Figure 1: The training loss surfaces of ResNet-18 trained by
FedAvg (a), FedSAM (b), and our FedSWA (c) on CIFAR100 with Dirichlet-0.1 (high data heterogeneity). The test
accuracies of FedAvg, FedSAM, and FedSWA are 45.8%,
40.1%, and 50.3%, respectively, and FedSAM performs the
worst and fails in this case. (d) highlights the sharpness
minimizing conflicts due to discrepancies between local and
global loss landscapes caused by data heterogeneity. (e) and
(f) show that FedSWA can obtain global flat minima in the
setting of high data heterogeneity. The blue dots denote
the client model, and the red dot is the server model in (f).
The outer layer is the training loss surface, the inner layer
is the test loss surface, and the global model generalizes
well at a flat minimum in (f). The double arrow denotes the
generalization error gap between clients and the server.

1. Introduction
With increasing concerns about data privacy and security,
federated learning (FL) has emerged as a potential distributed machine learning paradigm (McMahan et al., 2017).
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Xidian University, Xi’an, China 3 Medical School, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 4 Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China 5 School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
Correspondence to: Yuanyuan Liu
<yyliu@xidian.edu.cn>, Fanhua Shang <fhshang@tju.edu.cn>,
Hongying Liu <hyliu2009@tju.edu.cn>.

FL allows for collaborative training of a global model across
several clients without exchanging raw data, ensuring privacy while exploiting decentralized data. FL algorithms
have considerable promise in various areas, including healthcare, finance, and personalized mobile services (Rieke et al.,
2020; Antunes et al., 2022; Byrd & Polychroniadou, 2020;
Wang et al., 2024; Bian et al., 2024; 2025; Liu et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2025a;b).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

FL confronts the issue of data heterogeneity because of
the non-independent and identically distributed (Non-IID)
data across clients (Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024),

1

1

