MARS: Unleashing the Power of Variance Reduction for Training Large Models

Huizhuo Yuan * 1 2 Yifeng Liu * 1 Shuang Wu 3 Xun Zhou 3 Quanquan Gu 1 2

Abstract

trained with adaptive gradient methods. Numerous efforts
have been made to improve adaptive gradient methods from
both first-order and second-order optimization perspectives.
For example, You et al. (2019) introduced LAMB, a layerwise adaptation technique that boosts training efficiency
for BERT (Devlin, 2018). Using symbolic search, Chen
et al. (2023) developed Lion, achieving faster training and
reduced memory usage. Liu et al. (2023) designed Sophia,
leveraging stochastic diagonal Hessian estimators to accelerate training. Gupta et al. (2018) proposed Shampoo, which
performs stochastic optimization over tensor spaces with
preconditioning matrices for each dimension. Anil et al.
(2020) further refined Shampoo to give a scalable, practical
version. Recently, Vyas et al. (2024) showed that Shampoo is equivalent to Adafactor (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) in
the eigenbasis of Shampoo’s preconditioner, and introduced
SOAP, which stabilizes Shampoo with Adam. Importantly,
recent studies (Kaddour et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024) have
shown that these optimizers perform on par with AdamW
in LLM pretraining, yet do not outperform it. This suggests
the ongoing challenge in developing adaptive gradient methods superior to Adam and AdamW for large-scale model
training.
Since adaptive gradient methods face challenges of high
stochastic gradient variance, and language model training
inherently involves a high-variance optimization problem
(McCandlish et al., 2018), it is natural to consider variance
reduction techniques to address this challenge. There exists
a large body of literature on variance reduction for stochastic optimization, such as SAG (Roux et al., 2012), SVRG
(Johnson & Zhang, 2013), STORM (Cutkosky & Orabona,
2019), which can improve the convergence of stochastic
optimization. However, variance reduction has not found
widespread success in training deep neural networks or large
language models. Defazio & Bottou (2019) discussed why
variance reduction can be ineffective in deep learning due
to factors such as data augmentation, batch normalization,
and dropout, which disrupt the finite-sum structure required
by variance reduction principles. Nevertheless, in training
language models, data augmentation, batch normalization,
and dropout are nowadays rarely used, which opens the door
for applying variance reduction techniques in optimizing
these models. This naturally leads to the following research
question:

Training deep neural networks—and more recently, large models demands efficient and scalable optimizers. Adaptive gradient algorithms
like Adam, AdamW, and their variants have been
central to this task. Despite the development of
numerous variance reduction algorithms in the
past decade aimed at accelerating stochastic optimization in both convex and nonconvex settings,
variance reduction has not found widespread success in training deep neural networks or large
language models. Consequently, it has remained
a less favored approach in modern AI. In this paper, to unleash the power of variance reduction
for efficient training of large models, we propose
a unified optimization framework, MARS (Make
vAriance Reduction Shine), which reconciles preconditioned gradient methods with variance reduction via a scaled stochastic recursive momentum
technique. Within our framework, we introduce
three instances of MARS that leverage preconditioned gradient updates based on AdamW, Lion,
and Shampoo, respectively. We also draw a connection between our algorithms and existing optimizers. Experimental results on training GPT-2
models indicate that MARS consistently outperforms AdamW by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Adaptive gradient methods such as Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2015) and AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) have become the predominant optimization algorithms in deep
learning. With the surge of large language models, the
majority of the renowned models, including GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), GPT-3 (Brown, 2020), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023) and Llama 3 (Dubey et al., 2024) are
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA (This work was
done during Yifeng’s internship at ByteDance Seed) 2 ByteDance
Seed, San Jose, California, USA 3 ByteDance Seed, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

