Learning Optimal Multimodal Information Bottleneck Representations

Qilong Wu * 1 Yiyang Shao 2 Jun Wang * 3 Xiaobo Sun * 4
a)

Abstract

b)

Downstream Tasks

Optimal MIB

Emotion Recognition
Happy 

Leveraging high-quality joint representations
from multimodal data can greatly enhance model
performance in various machine-learning based
applications. Recent multimodal learning methods, based on the multimodal information bottleneck (MIB) principle, aim to generate optimal MIB with maximal task-relevant information
and minimal superfluous information via regularization. However, these methods often set ad
hoc regularization weights and overlook imbalanced task-relevant information across modalities, limiting their ability to achieve optimal MIB.
To address this gap, we propose a novel multimodal learning framework, Optimal Multimodal
Information Bottleneck (OMIB), whose optimization objective guarantees the achievability of optimal MIB by setting the regularization weight
within a theoretically derived bound. OMIB
further addresses imbalanced task-relevant information by dynamically adjusting regularization
weights per modality, promoting the inclusion of
all task-relevant information. Moreover, we establish a solid information-theoretical foundation
for OMIB’s optimization and implement it under the variational approximation framework for
computational efficiency. Finally, we empirically
validate the OMIB’s theoretical properties on synthetic data and demonstrate its superiority over
the state-of-the-art benchmark methods in various
downstream tasks.

Angry 
Sentiment Analysis
Score
+
Anomalous Tissue
Detection

Figure 1: a) Venn diagrams for two data modalities (v1 and
v2 ). The gridded area represents consistent information,
while the non-gridded area denotes modality-specific information. Task-relevant information is highlighted in green,
whereas superfluous information is shown in blue. b) An
optimal MIB should exclusively contain task-relevant, nonsuperfluous information (i.e., a0 , a1 and a2 ) to be utilized
in downstream tasks for enhanced performance.

but each inspects only a single, distinct part (e.g., tusk, leg).
Consequently, they deliver conflicting descriptions, as their
judgments are based solely on the part they touch.
In the context of machine learning, this parable underscores
the significance of multimodal learning, which integrates
and leverages multimodal data (akin to the elephant’s body
parts) to grasp a holistic understanding, thereby enhancing
inference and prediction accuracy. In multimodal learning,
unimodal features are extracted from each modalities and
fused with various fusion strategies, such as tensor-based
(Zadeh et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018), attention-based (Guo
et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023), and graphbased (Arun et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2021), to generate
multimodal embeddings. However, a major limitation of
these methods is their potential to include superfluous and
redundant information from each modality, increasing embedding complexity and the risk of overfitting (Mai et al.,
2023; Wan et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
In the parable ”Blind men and an elephant”, a group of blind
men attempts to perceive the elephant’s shape through touch,
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Statistics and Mathematics,
Zhongnan University of Economics and Law 2 School of Finance,
Zhongnan University of Economics and Law 3 iWudao 4 School
of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics, Emory University.
Correspondence to: Xiaobo Sun <xsun28@emory.edu>.

From an information theory perspective, a comprehensive
multimodal learning method should account for five factors: consistency (Tian et al., 2021), specificity (Liu et al.,
2024), complementarity (Wan et al., 2021), sufficiency
(Federici et al., 2020), and conciseness (a.k.a. nonredundacy) (Wang et al., 2019). As illustrated in Figure 1a, on
the input side, consistency describes information shared

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

