Propagation of Chaos for Mean-Field Langevin Dynamics
and its Application to Model Ensemble

Atsushi Nitanda 1 2 3 Anzelle Lee 4 1 2 Damian Tan 3 1 2 Mizuki Sakaguchi 5 Taiji Suzuki 6 7

training can now be formulated as the optimization over the
space of probability distributions (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2017).
Gradient descent for MFNNs exhibits global convergence
(Chizat & Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018) and adaptivity (Yang
& Hu, 2020; Ba et al., 2022). To improve stability during
training, one may consider noisy gradient training by adding
Gaussian noise, giving rise to mean-field Langevin dynamics
(MFLD) (Mei et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019). MFLD, with
N = ∞, also achieves global convergence to the optimal
solution (Hu et al., 2019; Jabir et al., 2019), with an exponential convergence rate under the uniform log-Sobolev
inequality (LSI) (Nitanda et al., 2022; Chizat, 2022) in the
continuous-time setting.

Abstract
Mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD) is an optimization method derived by taking the mean-field limit of
noisy gradient descent for two-layer neural networks
in the mean-field regime. Recently, the propagation
of chaos (PoC) for MFLD has gained attention as it
provides a quantitative characterization of the optimization complexity in terms of the number of particles and
iterations. A remarkable progress by Chen et al. (2022)
showed that the approximation error due to finite particles remains uniform in time and diminishes as the
number of particles increases. In this paper, by refining
the defective log-Sobolev inequality—a key result from
that earlier work—under the neural network training
setting, we establish an improved PoC result for MFLD,
which removes the exponential dependence on the regularization coefficient from the particle approximation
term of the optimization complexity. As an application,
we propose a PoC-based model ensemble strategy with
theoretical guarantees.

1

However, the mean-field limit attained at N = ∞ cannot be accurately replicated in real-life scenarios. When
employing a finite-particle system ρx , the approximation
error that arises has been studied in the literature on propagation of chaos (PoC) (Sznitman, 1991). In the context of MFLD, Chen et al. (2022); Suzuki et al. (2023a)
proved the uniform-in-time PoC for the trajectory of MFLD.
In particular, in the long-time limit, they established the

λ
) (N )
bounds L(N
(µ∗ ) − L(µ∗ ) = O αN
, where α ≳
exp −Θ λ1 is the LSI constant on proximal Gibbs distri(N )
butions, λ is the regularization coefficient, and L(N ) (µ∗ )
and L(µ∗ ) are the optimal values in finite- and infiniteparticle systems. Subsequently, Nitanda (2024) improved
upon this result
 by removing α from the above bound, resulting in O N1 . This refinement of the bound is significant
as previously, the LSI constant could become exponentially
small as λ → 0. While Nitanda (2024) also established PoC
for the MFLD trajectory by incorporating the uniform-in-N
(N )
(N )
LSI (Chewi et al., 2024): L(N ) (µt ) → L(N ) (µ∗ ), this
approach is indirect for showing convergence to the meanfield limit L(µ∗ ) and results in a slower convergence rate
over time.

Introduction

A two layer mean-field neural network (MFNN) with N
neurons is defined as an empirical
PN average of N functions: EX∼ρx [h (X, ·)] = N1 i=1 h(xi , ·), where each
h(xi , ·) represents a single neuron with parameter xi and
PN
ρx = N1 i=1 δxi is an empirical distribution. As the number of neurons get infinitely large (N → ∞), the mean-field
limit is attained: ρx → µ, leading to MFNN having an
infinite number of particles: EX∼µ [h(X, ·)]. Since a distribution µ parameterizes the model in this mean-field limit,
1

Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A⋆STAR), Singapore 2 Centre
for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A⋆STAR), Singapore 3 College of Computing
and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 5 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Kyushu Institute of
Technology, Japan 6 Department of Mathematical Informatics, The
University of Tokyo, Japan 7 Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, RIKEN, Japan. Correspondence to: Atsushi Nitanda <atsushi nitanda@cfar.a-star.edu.sg>.

In this work, we further aim to improve PoC for MFLD
by demonstrating a faster convergence rate in time, while
maintaining the final approximation error O N1 attained at
t = ∞. We then utilize our result to propose a PoC-based
ensemble technique by demonstrating how finite particle
systems can converge towards the mean-field limit when
merging MFNNs trained in parallel.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

