Integer Programming for Generalized Causal Bootstrap Designs

Jennifer Brennan 1 Sébastien Lahaie 1 Adel Javanmard 1 2 Nick Doudchenko 3 Jean Pouget-Abadie 1

Abstract

captures the uncertainty associated with inferring statistics
of a population given a random sample of that population.
Design uncertainty, by contrast, captures the uncertainty
associated with the random assignment of units to treatment and control conditions. Design uncertainty is associated with the finite population model of causal inference,
in which the universe consists of exactly N units. Some
units are observed under the treatment condition while others are observed under the control. The objective in the
finite population model is to estimate the average difference
between treated outcomes and control outcomes for these N
units, typically in the absence of distributional assumptions
on these outcomes. Uncertainty arises from the fact that
each unit is only observed under the treated or controlled
condition, so that any statistic derived from RCT data will
vary slightly from one randomization to another.

In experimental causal inference, we distinguish
between two sources of uncertainty: design uncertainty, due to the treatment assignment mechanism, and sampling uncertainty, when the sample
is drawn from a super-population. This distinction matters in settings with small fixed samples
and heterogeneous treatment effects, as in geographical experiments. The standard bootstrap
procedure most often used by practitioners primarily estimates sampling uncertainty, and the causal
bootstrap procedure, which accounts for design
uncertainty, was developed for the completely randomized design and the difference-in-means estimator, whereas non-standard designs and estimators are often used in these low-power regimes.
We address this gap by proposing an integer program which computes numerically the worst-case
copula used as an input to the causal bootstrap
method, in a wide range of settings. Specifically,
we prove the asymptotic validity of our approach
for unconfounded, conditionally unconfounded,
and individualistic with bounded confoundedness
assignments, as well as generalizing to any linearin-treatment and quadratic-in-treatment estimators. We demonstrate the refined confidence intervals achieved through simulations of small geographical experiments.

Sampling uncertainty has received extensive attention in
the statistics literature. Well-known methods to estimate
sampling uncertainty include the bootstrap (Efron, 1979),
in which random draws from the sample mimic the population distribution, and Wald-type confidence intervals, which
rely on asymptotic normality of the sample statistic. The
methodological toolkit available to quantify design uncertainty is considerably more sparse (Imbens & Menzel, 2021;
Aronow et al., 2014). For reasons explained in Appendix
2.1, methods to estimate sampling uncertainty are typically
conservative for design uncertainty. The gap widens for
experiments with heterogeneous effects, small sample sizes,
and a large fraction of the population included in the experiment. Even fewer methods apply to general designs such
as those that balance covariates of the treated and control
groups, which are widely used precisely in the settings with
small experimental samples and heterogeneous treatment
effects (Harshaw et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are used to estimate
causal effects across the sciences, social sciences, and industry. An important complement to estimating causal effects
is providing valid uncertainty quantification, which enables
statistically sound decision-making between tested policies.
We distinguish between two types of uncertainty: sampling
uncertainty and design uncertainty. Sampling uncertainty

In this paper, we propose a novel application of integer
programming to identify the joint potential outcome distribution that maximizes the variance of the chosen estimator
while being consistent with the randomization design and
the observed marginal distributions of potential outcomes.
Solving for this joint distribution numerically is what allows
us to extend prior work (Aronow et al., 2014; Imbens &
Menzel, 2021) which relies on well-known results of the
optimality of the isotone copula for the difference-in-means
estimator and completely randomized assignment. In partic-

1

Google Research 2 University of Southern California 3 Meta
(work completed while at Google Research). Correspondence to:
Jean Pouget-Abadie <jeanpa@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

