LIFT the Veil for the Truth: Principal Weights Emerge after Rank Reduction for
Reasoning-Focused Supervised Fine-Tuning

Zihang Liu 1 Tianyu Pang 2 Oleg Balabanov 1 3 4 Chaoqun Yang 5 Tianjin Huang 6 7
Lu Yin 8 7 Yaoqing Yang 2 Shiwei Liu 9 7

1. Introduction

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that supervised finetuning of LLMs on a small number of high-quality
datasets can yield strong reasoning capabilities.
However, full fine-tuning (Full FT), while powerful, is computationally expensive and susceptible
to overfitting and catastrophic forgetting, particularly when data is limited. Sparse fine-tuning,
which previously achieved notable success by updating only a small subset of model parameters,
offers a promising trade-off between efficiency
and effectiveness. Yet, it has lagged behind in the
LLM era due to the difficulty of identifying parameters truly critical for reasoning. In this work,
we state that weights with the largest magnitude
after low-rank approximation are critical weights
for fine-tuning, which we call Principal Weights.
Surprisingly, while magnitude-based sparse finetuning performs poorly as a baseline on LLM
fine-tuning, it becomes highly effective after rank
reduction. These insights motivate our method:
Low-rank Informed Sparse Fine-Tuning (LIFT).
LIFT only updates the top 5% Principal Weights
throughout training and consistently achieves better performance on reasoning tasks than Full FT,
while maintaining memory efficiency on par with
popular parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods.
In addition to strong performance on target domains such as arithmetic reasoning, LIFT also
retains up to 20% more source-domain knowledge, compared to Full FT and LoRA. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/zihanghliu/LIFT.

Large language models have recently undergone a
revolutionary advancement in reasoning capabilities
through Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Ye et al., 2025;
Muennighoff et al., 2025) and Reinforcement Learning
(RL) (Guo et al., 2025; Face, 2025). Performing SFT on
a small, high-quality dataset delivers remarkable reasoning
performance on math problems (Muennighoff et al., 2025).
However, Full Fine-Tuning (Full FT) is prone to overfitting
on limited training data (Chu et al., 2025) and incurs
substantial computational costs due to the massive sizes of
modern LLMs (Yin et al., 2023).
On the other hand, Sparse Fine-Tuning (Sparse FT) (Guo
et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021; Sung et al., 2021; Sanh et al.,
2020a), a standout approach for pre-LLM fine-tuning, has
demonstrated promising performance by training only a
small subset of the base model’s parameters. However, the
adoption of Sparse FT has significantly lagged behind its
low-rank counterparts in LLMs, as it struggles to identify
parameters truly critical to fine-tuning, and its memory overhead is the same as Full FT with irregular sparse patterns.
In this paper, we propose Low-rank Informed Sparse FineTuning (LIFT), an effective and efficient approach for
reasoning-focused LLM fine-tuning. LIFT builds on a
counter-intuitive finding: the most naive baseline for Sparse
FT, i.e., magnitude-based fine-tuning, becomes remarkably
effective after applying low-rank approximation. We hence
identify the weights with the largest magnitude after rank
reduction as Principal Weights. The process of obtaining
Principal Weights is illustrated in Figure 1. Empirical results
show that LIFT outperforms state-of-the-art PEFT methods,
Sparse FT methods, and Full FT on a wide range of tasks.
LIFT solves the challenges of Sparse FT in these ways:

1

University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 2 Dartmouth
College, NH, USA 3 International Computer Science Institute,
CA, USA 4 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, CA, USA
5
Tsinghua University, China 6 University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
7
Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands 8 University
of Surrey, Guildford, UK 9 University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Zihang Liu <zihang.liu@berkeley.edu>, Shiwei
Liu <shiwei.liu@maths.ox.ac.uk>.

Prior Knowledge: LIFT identifies Principal Weights,
which are critical for retaining pre-training knowledge and
adapting to downstream tasks. The intuition aligns with
recent findings that reasoning capacity is already in base
models (Ye et al., 2025; Yue et al., 2025). LIFT further
finds that this knowledge is encoded with Principal Weights
and fine-tuning only these parameters is sufficient to achieve
comparable—or even superior—reasoning performance.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

