Mastering Multiple-Expert Routing: Realizable H-Consistency and Strong
Guarantees for Learning to Defer

Anqi Mao 1 Mehryar Mohri 2 1 Yutao Zhong 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The performance of learning algorithms can be substantially
improved by redirecting uncertain predictions to domain specialists or advanced pre-trained systems. These specialists
may include individuals with deep expertise in specific areas
or highly capable, though computationally intensive, pretrained models. Selecting the appropriate expert requires
careful consideration of both accuracy and computational
cost, which may vary depending on the instance or class
label in question.

The problem of learning to defer with multiple
experts consists of optimally assigning input instances to experts, balancing the trade-off between
their accuracy and computational cost. This is a
critical challenge in natural language generation,
but also in other fields such as image processing, and medical diagnostics. Recent studies have
proposed surrogate loss functions to optimize deferral, but challenges remain in ensuring their consistency properties. This paper introduces novel
surrogate loss functions and efficient algorithms
with strong theoretical learning guarantees. We
address open questions regarding realizable Hconsistency, H-consistency bounds, and Bayesconsistency for both single-stage (jointly learning
predictor and deferral function) and two-stage
(learning only the deferral function with a fixed
expert) learning scenarios. For single-stage deferral, we introduce a family of new realizable
H-consistent surrogate losses and further prove
H-consistency for a selected member. For twostage deferral, we derive new surrogate losses that
achieve realizable H-consistency, H-consistency
bounds, and Bayes-consistency for the two-expert
scenario and, under natural assumptions, multipleexpert scenario. Additionally, we provide enhanced theoretical guarantees under low-noise
assumptions for both scenarios. Finally, we report the results of experiments using our proposed
surrogate losses, comparing their performance
against existing baselines.

How can input instances be optimally assigned to the most
suitable expert from a diverse set, balancing these considerations? Can allocation strategies be learned from past experience? These questions form the core challenge of learning
to defer with multiple experts, a problem that comes up
across various fields. In natural language generation, particularly with large language models (LLMs), this challenge
has been highlighted as a critical issue (Wei et al., 2022;
Bubeck et al., 2023), essential both for reducing hallucinations and improving efficiency. However, the problem
extends to other domains, including image annotation, medical diagnostics, economic forecasting, and computer vision,
among others.
The problem of learning to defer accurately has been investigated in a number of recent studies (Mozannar & Sontag,
2020; Verma & Nalisnick, 2022; Charusaie et al., 2022;
Mozannar et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2024a;i). It is typically
formulated using a deferral loss function that incorporates
instance-specific costs associated with each expert. Directing optimizing this loss function is intractable for the hypothesis sets commonly used in applications. Thus, learning-todefer algorithms rely on optimizing a surrogate loss function
instead, that serves as a proxy for the original target loss
function. Yet, what guarantees can we rely on when optimizing such surrogate loss functions?

1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New
York, NY; 2 Google Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to:
Anqi Mao <aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>,
Mehryar Mohri <mohri@google.com>, Yutao Zhong <yutaozhong@google.com>.

This question, which involves analyzing the consistency
guarantees of surrogate losses with respect to the deferral loss, has been studied under two main scenarios (Mao,
2025): the single-stage scenario, where a predictor and a
deferral function are jointly learned (Mozannar & Sontag,
2020; Verma & Nalisnick, 2022; Charusaie et al., 2022;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

