Learning Mixtures of Experts with EM: A Mirror Descent Perspective

Quentin Fruytier 1 Aryan Mokhtari 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1

Abstract

larly effective when the feature space can be divided and
processed by specialized models, known as experts. Instead
of relying on a single, large model to handle all input-output
mappings, MoE utilize an ensemble of specialized experts.
Each expert is responsible for a specific subset of the input
space, allowing the system to efficiently route inputs to the
most appropriate expert. This partitioning enables each expert to focus on mapping its designated inputs to outputs
using a separate, optimized model. By leveraging multiple
specialized experts rather than a monolithic model, MoE
can achieve greater scalability and flexibility. This modular approach not only enhances computational efficiency
but also allows for improved performance, as each expert
can be finely tuned to handle its particular segment of the
input space effectively. Real-world applications of MoE
such as Sparse MoE span across various domains, including
language translation, speech recognition, recommendation
systems, and more (Fedus et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2018;
Hinton et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2024).

Classical Mixtures of Experts (MoE) are Machine
Learning models that involve partitioning the input space, with a separate “expert” model trained
on each partition. Recently, MoE-based model architectures have become popular as a means to reduce training and inference costs. There, the partitioning function and the experts are both learnt
jointly via gradient descent-type methods on the
log-likelihood. In this paper we study theoretical
guarantees of the Expectation Maximization (EM)
algorithm for the training of MoE models. We
first rigorously analyze EM for MoE where the
conditional distribution of the target and latent
variable conditioned on the feature variable belongs to an exponential family of distributions
and show its equivalence to projected Mirror Descent with unit step size and a Kullback-Leibler
Divergence regularizer. This perspective allows
us to derive new convergence results and identify conditions for local linear convergence; In
the special case of mixture of 2 linear or logistic
experts, we additionally provide guarantees for
linear convergence based on the signal-to-noise
ratio. Experiments on synthetic and (small-scale)
real-world data supports that EM outperforms the
gradient descent algorithm both in terms of convergence rate and the achieved accuracy.

In its most generic form, training an MoE model involves
training both (a) the parameters in the individual experts,
and (b) the gating function that routes inputs to the appropriate expert. Typically, these are both learnt jointly by first
formulating the final loss function as applied to the ensembled output, and then minimizing this joint loss function
(via SGD or its variants) over the parameters of the gate and
the experts.
In this paper we investigate, primarily from a theoretical
perspective, the training of classical MoE as defined by
Jacobs et al. (1991) using a classic algorithm: Expectation
Maximization (EM). As opposed to SGD-based methods
which are agnostic to whether a parameter is in the gate or
in an expert, EM first formulates two separate problems –
one for the router, and another for the experts – in a specific
way. It then solves each problem in isolation and in parallel,
and then collates the outputs to arrive at the updated set of
gate and expert parameters.

1. Introduction
Classical Mixtures of Experts (MoE) (Jacobs et al., 1991;
Jordan & Jacobs, 1994) are a crucial class of parametric
latent variable models that have gained significant popularity in deep learning for their ability to reduce both training
and inference costs (Chen et al., 2022). MoE are particu1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of America.
Correspondence to: Quentin Fruytier <qdf76@my.utexas.edu>,
Aryan Mokhtari <mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu>, Sujay Sanghavi
<sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu>.

For our theoretical results, we consider the setting of general MoE where the joint distribution of the target and latent
variable conditioned on the feature variable belongs to an
exponential family of distributions. We then narrow in on
two simpler instances of MoE models: Mixture of Linear
Experts (where each expert is a linear regressor) and Mix-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

