ADHMR: Aligning Diffusion-based Human Mesh Recovery
via Direct Preference Optimization

Wenhao Shen 1 Wanqi Yin 2 Xiaofeng Yang 1 Cheng Chen 1 Chaoyue Song 1 Zhongang Cai 2 Lei Yang 2
Hao Wang 3 Guosheng Lin 1

Abstract

Prevailing approaches usually adopt a deterministic style,
generating a single prediction for each image (Cai et al.,
2024a; Goel et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Moon et al., 2022).
However, this task faces inherent uncertainty when lifting
2D observations to 3D models, due to depth ambiguity and
occlusion. Accordingly, the community is now shifting to
probabilistic methods. Probabilistic methods tackle the uncertainty by generating multiple plausible human mesh predictions for each image (Kolotouros et al., 2021; Sengupta
et al., 2023). For instance, recent approaches (Foo et al.,
2023; Cho & Kim, 2023) frame this task as a denoising diffusion process. However, these probabilistic approaches suffer
from limited emphasis on obtaining accurate estimates.

Human mesh recovery (HMR) from a single image is inherently ill-posed due to depth ambiguity
and occlusions. Probabilistic methods have tried
to solve this by generating numerous plausible
3D human mesh predictions, but they often exhibit misalignment with 2D image observations
and weak robustness to in-the-wild images. To address these issues, we propose ADHMR, a framework that Aligns a Diffusion-based HMR model
in a preference optimization manner. First, we
train a human mesh prediction assessment model,
HMR-Scorer, capable of evaluating predictions
even for in-the-wild images without 3D annotations. We then use HMR-Scorer to create a preference dataset, where each input image has a pair of
winner and loser mesh predictions. This dataset
is used to finetune the base model using direct
preference optimization. Moreover, HMR-Scorer
also helps improve existing HMR models by data
cleaning, even with fewer training samples. Extensive experiments show that ADHMR outperforms
current state-of-the-art methods. Code is available
at: https://github.com/shenwenhao01/ADHMR.

Specifically, the current state-of-the-art probabilistic method
ScoreHypo (Xu et al., 2024b) tackles this by designing an
additional network for test-time prediction selection after
the diffusion-based prediction model. However, we observe
that ScoreHypo still exhibits the following shortcomings: (1)
misalignment between 3D mesh predictions and 2D image
cues, and (2) poor performance on in-the-wild images. This
is primarily because end-to-end diffusion models predicting
from pure noise typically avoid 3D reprojection loss, as early
denoising steps yield unrealistic poses, making such loss
ineffective (Huang et al., 2024). Instead, the diffusion loss
focuses on generating the target human mesh distribution
rather than precisely aligning joints. While this produces
plausible poses, it may neglect the alignment between the
3D mesh and the image. Moreover, existing datasets often
use optimization-based HMR methods to generate pseudo
3D annotations for in-the-wild images, which inevitably
contain some inaccurate or noisy data.

1. Introduction
Human mesh recovery (HMR) is a fundamental challenge
in computer vision, focused on estimating the 3D human
shape and pose from a single RGB image. HMR enables
various downstream applications, including clothed human
reconstruction (Shuai et al., 2022; Hong & Shen, 2024; Yao
et al., 2025), virtual try-on, AR/VR content creation (Xu
et al., 2024c; Yang et al., 2024) and etc.

To address the above challenges, we introduce Aligned
Diffusion-based Human Mesh Recovery (ADHMR). The
key insight is to distill the knowledge of a powerful scorer
into the 3D human mesh predictor in a preference optimization manner. Technically, we begin by training the HMRScorer, essentially a reward model that assigns a quality
score to quantify the human mesh prediction quality. HMRScorer gives higher scores to predictions better aligned with
the input image (“winners”) and lower scores to those poorly
aligned (“losers”). In order to increase the sensitivity of

1
Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research 3 The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
Correspondence to: Guosheng Lin <gslin@ntu.edu.sg>, Hao
Wang <haowang@hkust-gz.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

