Strategic A/B testing via Maximum Probability-driven Two-armed Bandit

Yu Zhang * 1 Shanshan Zhao * 2 Bokui Wan 3 Jinjuan Wang 4 Xiaodong Yan 5

Abstract

In practice, to facilitate a comparison between two strategies
(e.g., two distinct ad configurations), users of the platform
are randomly divided into two groups, with each group
exposed to one of the test strategies. Subsequently, the interactions of the subjects with the site or app are recorded.
After the experiment is completed, the performance of the
two groups will be compared in several key metrics, such as
the estimated mean difference in click counts or the volume
of gross merchandise (GMV), to determine which strategy
is preferred (Hohnhold et al., 2015; Xu & Chen, 2016).

Detecting a minor average treatment effect is a
major challenge in large-scale applications, where
even minimal improvements can have a significant economic impact. Traditional methods, reliant on normal distribution-based or expanded
statistics, often fail to identify such minor effects because of their inability to handle small discrepancies with sufficient sensitivity. This work
leverages a counterfactual outcome framework
and proposes a maximum probability-driven twoarmed bandit (TAB) process by weighting the
mean volatility statistic, which controls Type I
error. The implementation of permutation methods further enhances the robustness and efficacy.
The established strategic central limit theorem
(SCLT) demonstrates that our approach yields a
more concentrated distribution under the null hypothesis and a less concentrated one under the
alternative hypothesis, greatly improving statistical power. The experimental results indicate a
significant improvement in the A/B testing, highlighting the potential to reduce experimental costs
while maintaining high statistical power.

Goal. Let A = 1 and 0 denote that the subjects are assigned to the treatment group (new strategy) and the control
group (existing strategy), with a potential outcome Y (1) and
Y (0) , respectively. The interest that whether the treatment
group significantly outperforms the control group can be
formalized by
H0 : µ ≤ 0

H1 : µ > 0,

(1)

where µ = E(Y (1) − Y (0) ) denotes the average treatment
effect. This test is widely adopted in the decision-making
market, such as one of the world’s leading ride-sharing
companies, to quantify the “Causal Discrepancy” between the A / B strategies. A new strategy can be accepted
if it demonstrates statistically significant performance improvements over the existing one (Yao et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

Challenge. Normal distribution-based or expanded test
statistics are unable to statistically identify minor improvements of the average treatment effect µ.

Background and Motivation. A / B testing, which is ubiquitous in tech companies, has become the gold standard
for evaluating the discrepancy between new and existing
strategies (Kohavi et al., 2009; 2013), providing crucial information for decision-making. Having efficient and reliable
methods for A/B testing is critical in accelerating the pace
of strategic improvement (Pearl, 2009; Kong et al., 2022).

• Minor average treatment effect (ATE). Practically,
the marginal returns of the strategies become increasingly indistinguishable as the business expands, and
conventional A/B testing methods are unable to statistically identify minor improvements (Kohavi et al.,
2013). However, due to economies of scale, any benefit
from improved sensitivity will be magnified, as even
minor differences detected in key metrics can have a
significant impact on total revenue (Deng et al., 2013).
To illustrate, a strategy that increases revenue by $0.02
per user could generate millions of dollars in total revenue for fifty million users. Alternatively, enhanced
sensitivity facilitates the conduct of experimentation
in smaller user groups or over shorter time periods

*

Equal contribution 1 Zhongtai Securities Institute for Financial
Studies, Shandong University, Jinan, China 2 School of Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan, China 3 Didi Chuxing, Beijing,
China 4 School of Mathematics and Statistics, Beijing Institute of
Technology, Beijing, China 5 School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xian, China. Correspondence to:
Xiaodong Yan <yanxiaodong@xjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

