Pruning for GNNs: Lower Complexity with Comparable Expressiveness

Dun Ma 1 Jianguo Chen 2 3 Wenguo Yang 3 Suixiang Gao 3 4 Shengminjie Chen 5

Abstract

Morris et al., 2019). Specifically, GNNs cannot distinguish
between non-isomorphic graph structures that the 1-WL
test cannot differentiate. To address this, many works extend message passing to K-Hop (Abu-El-Haija et al., 2019;
Nikolentzos et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Chien et al.,
2021; Brossard et al., 2020) or K-Path (Zhang et al., 2023;
Michel et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2020) message passing, which
enhances the framework’s expressive power. In K-Hop and
K-Path GNNs, node representations are updated by aggregating information not only from neighbors but also from
all nodes within K-hop and K-path distances. Despite the
great success of GNNs in handling graph data, they still
have some deficiencies: (1)Expressive power restricted by
the number of layers. (2) Excessive depth hinders GNN’s
performance due to nonlinearity. (3) Redundant structure
of GNNs. (4) Growing complexity with the increase in expressive power. Those deficiencies might impact their performance.

In recent years, the pursuit of higher expressive
power in graph neural networks (GNNs) has often led to more complex aggregation mechanisms
and deeper architectures. To address these issues,
we have identified redundant structures in GNNs,
and by pruning them, we propose Pruned MPGNNs, K-Path GNNs, and K-Hop GNNs based
on their original architectures. We show that 1) Although some structures are pruned in Pruned MPGNNs and Pruned K-Path GNNs, their expressive power has not been compromised. 2) K-Hop
MP-GNNs and their pruned architecture exhibit
equivalent expressiveness on regular and strongly
regular graphs. 3) The complexity of pruned KPath GNNs and pruned K-Hop GNNs is lower
than that of MP-GNNs, yet their expressive power
is higher. Experimental results validate our refinements, demonstrating competitive performance
across benchmark datasets with improved efficiency.

To address these deficiencies, we theoretically characterize the expressive power of MP-GNN, K-Hop, and KPath message passing GNNs by utilizing matrix language
tool (Brijder et al., 2019; Geerts, 2021). Surprisingly, we
discovered the redundant structures in all three types of
GNN frameworks. We "cut off" the redundant structures in
MP-GNN, K-Hop, and K-Path message passing GNNs,
and therefore propose the pruned MP-GNN, pruned KHop, and pruned K-Path frameworks. We prove the equivalence of expressive power between MP-GNN, K-Hop, and
K-Path message-passing GNNs and the matrix language
L1 = {.,⊤ , 1, diag}, therefore we are able to demonstrate
that the pruned frameworks are as powerful as the original frameworks for MP-GNN and K-Path message passing
GNNs, and show the equivalence between pruned K-Hop
frameworks and K-Hop frameworks for distinguishing regular and strongly regular graphs by utilizing the matrix
language tool. Additionally, we show that the complexity of
pruned K-Path GNNs and pruned K-Hop GNNs is lower
than the complexity of MP-GNNs, yet they can distinguish
more non-isomorphic graphs that MP-GNN cannot.

1. Introduction
Currently, most GNNs (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Duvenaud
et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019a) follow a framework that iteratively aggregate information
from neighboring nodes and updates node representations.
Since the message passing procedure is similar to the 1dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test (Weisfeiler &
Lehman, 1968), the expressive power of message-passing
GNNs is also limited by the 1-WL test (Xu et al., 2019a;
1
School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Academy of Mathematics
and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 School
of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences 4 Zhongguancun Laboratory.Beijing, China 5 State Key
Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Wenguo Yang
<yangwg@ucas.ac.cn>.

The proposed pruned frameworks have several additional
advantages. (1) Unlike MP-GNNs, the range of neighbor
information aggregation in the pruned MP-GNNs grows
exponentially with the number of layers. Therefore, the
pruned MP-GNN does not require many layers to obtain a

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

