What Can Large Language Models Do for Sustainable Food?

Anna T. Thomas 1 Adam Yee 2 Andrew Mayne 1 Maya B. Mathur 1 Dan Jurafsky 1 Kristina Gligorić 1

Abstract

more sustainable protein sources (Xu et al., 2021; Mylan
et al., 2023). Additionally, programs such as the Menus of
Change have developed to promote sustainable choices in
foodservice operations (Menus of Change, 2024). These directions require knowledge of both food science and human
preferences.

Food systems are responsible for a third of humancaused greenhouse gas emissions. We investigate
what Large Language Models (LLMs) can contribute to reducing the environmental impacts of
food production. We define a typology of design
and prediction tasks based on the sustainable food
literature and collaboration with domain experts,
and evaluate six LLMs on four tasks in our typology. For example, for a sustainable protein design
task, food science experts estimated that collaboration with an LLM can reduce time spent by 45%
on average, compared to 22% for collaboration
with another expert human food scientist. However, for a sustainable menu design task, LLMs
produce suboptimal solutions when instructed to
consider both human satisfaction and climate impacts. We propose a general framework for integrating LLMs with combinatorial optimization
to improve reasoning capabilities. Our approach
decreases emissions of food choices by 79% in
a hypothetical restaurant while maintaining participants’ satisfaction with their set of choices.
Our results demonstrate LLMs’ potential, supported by optimization techniques, to accelerate
sustainable food development and adoption. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
thomasat/llms-sustainable-food.

Though LLMs have shown promise in scientific discovery (Boiko et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023) and modeling human behavior (Park et al., 2022; Horton, 2023), applications
in sustainable food remain underexplored. Beyond its importance in sustainability and public health, this domain represents a compelling testbed for broader machine learning
(ML) challenges, including modeling diverse human preferences, generating creative solutions, and aligning outputs
with real-world constraints and societal values (Chakraborty
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). These challenges are not only
central to sustainable food but also to other domains, making
sustainable food tasks a valuable benchmark for advancing
general ML methods. To initiate an exploration of what
LLMs can contribute to sustainable food, we assembled a
team consisting of culinary and food science professionals
and researchers in ML, natural language processing, and
statistics. We make three main contributions:
• Based on collaboration with expert culinary and food
science professionals, we define a typology of tasks
grounded in the needs of food scientists and chefs. Our
typology covers design and prediction tasks across the
resolutions of ingredients, recipes, and food systems.
• We evaluate six LLMs on four concrete instantiations
of tasks in our typology, incorporating two datasets
not previously studied by the machine learning community. Notably, LLMs meet or exceed expert human
performance on our sustainable protein experimental
design task, and also show promising performance in
coarse-grained preference prediction. However, they
exhibit an omnivore bias, produce suboptimal solutions
when balancing multiple constraints (e.g. maintain satisfaction while reducing emissions), and fail to perform
well in fine-grained preference prediction.

1. Introduction
Global food production practices are a leading contributor to
climate change, deforestation, water pollution, biodiversity
loss, antibiotic resistance, and zoonotic disease transmission (Allan et al., 2023; Hopwood et al., 2020; Scherer et al.,
2019). Given the disproportionate harms of animal agriculture in particular, which accounts for 57% of food systems
emissions, a number of companies have formed to develop
1

Stanford University 2 Umai Works. Correspondence to: Anna
T. Thomas <thomasat@stanford.edu>, Kristina Gligorić <gligoric@stanford.edu>.

• We propose an approach that integrates LLMs with
combinatorial optimization techniques to address
LLMs’ relative weakness in mathematical reasoning,
and demonstrate that our approach achieves a 79% av-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

