RZ-NAS: Enhancing LLM-guided Neural Architecture Search via
Reflective Zero-Cost Strategy

Zipeng Ji 1 Guanghui Zhu 1 Chunfeng Yuan 1 Yihua Huang 1

Abstract

vital and useful tool. Recently, the combination of Large
Language Models (LLMs) with NAS represents a cuttingedge development in automated machine learning, seeking
to alleviate the difficulties of manual designs and explore
novel architectures on diverse NAS tasks. However, most of
the existing work remains in the exploratory phase, where
LLMs generate neural architectures directly through textual prompts (Zhao et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Wei et al.,
2023). This approach suffers from two key drawbacks: (1)
Reproducibility: Stochastic LLM responses hinder consistent results. (2) Interpretability: Text-based prompts lack
clarity on the design rationale, making optimization and
trust difficult. Moreover, LLM-to-NAS methods that focus
on generating architecture code (Lehman et al., 2024) can
only support tiny search spaces and simplified networks,
thus exhibiting poorer performance compared to established
NAS algorithms on standard NAS benchmarks (Chen et al.,
2023). Furthermore, current LLM-to-NAS algorithms rely
on iterative or evolutionary methods, facing high computational costs, since each architecture requires full training for
evaluation. To address this, we aim to design a novel LLMto-NAS algorithm that (1) enhances LLMs’ understanding
of NAS architectures from both text-level and code-level,
(2) addresses the time-cost issue in existing LLM-to-NAS
methods, and (3) achieves better performance and scalability
for broader search spaces and standard benchmarks.

LLM-to-NAS is a promising field at the intersection of Large Language Models (LLMs) and
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), as recent research has explored the potential of architecture
generation leveraging LLMs on multiple search
spaces. However, the existing LLM-to-NAS methods face the challenges of limited search spaces,
time-cost search efficiency, and uncompetitive
performance across standard NAS benchmarks
and multiple downstream tasks. In this work, we
propose Reflective Zero-cost NAS (RZ-NAS) that
can search NAS architectures with humanoid reflections and training-free metrics to elicit the
power of LLMs. We rethink LLMs’ roles in NAS
in current work and design a structured, promptbased to comprehensively understand the search
task and architectures from both text and code
levels. By integrating LLM reflection modules,
we use LLM-generated feedback to provide linguistic guidance within architecture optimization.
RZ-NAS enables effective search within both micro and macro search spaces without extensive
time cost, achieving SOTA performance across
multiple downstream tasks.

In this paper, we introduce a novel framework that combines the text- and code-level comprehension capabilities
of LLMs with a Reflective Zero-Cost evaluation strategy
for NAS (RZ-NAS)1 . To integrate the text- and code-level
understanding abilities of LLMs, we develop structured
prompts to precisely define NAS tasks. These prompts include: a high-level role, detailed instructions, an in-context
example, and the key reflective module. Moreover, we utilize Zero-Cost proxies instead of training architectures to
reduce computational resources and time cost while maintaining competitive performance (Abdelfattah et al., 2021;
Sun et al., 2023). The reflective module guides the LLM
to reflect on mutation performance and generates targeted
suggestions for further iteration improvements.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has rapidly advanced,
transforming neural network design by automating the
search for optimal architectures (Zoph & Le, 2017; Liu
et al., 2019; Termritthikun et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2022). With increasing computational complexity and demand for high-performance neural networks in
tasks such as image recognition (Real et al., 2019) and object detection (Sun et al., 2022), NAS has proven to be a
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Guanghui Zhu
<zgh@nju.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

RZ-NAS is available
PasaLab/RZ-NAS.

1

at

https://github.com/

