Can Transformers Reason Logically? A Study in SAT Solving

Leyan Pan 1 Vijay Ganesh 1 * Jacob Abernethy 1 2 * Chris Esposo 1 Wenke Lee 1

Abstract

This paper focuses on the deductive logical reasoning capability of the Transformer model in a restricted but simple
and mathematically precise setting, namely, the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT, Cook (1971)). We view deductive
reasoning as the process of systematically drawing valid inferences from existing premises and assumptions. Boolean
SAT solving captures the essence of deductive logical reasoning because: 1) Boolean logic lies as the foundation
of all logical reasoning, and 2) many modern SAT solvers
are inherently formal deductive systems that implement the
resolution proof system. Its NP-Completeness also necessitates multiple rounds of trial and error, which is critical for
solving complex problems.

We formally study the logical reasoning capabilities of decoder-only Transformers in the context of the boolean satisfiability (SAT) problem.
First, we prove by construction that decoder-only
Transformers can decide 3-SAT, in a non-uniform
model of computation, using backtracking and deduction via Chain-of-Thought (CoT). Second, we
implement our construction as a PyTorch model
with a tool (PARAT) that we designed to empirically demonstrate its correctness and investigate its properties. Third, rather than programming a transformer to reason, we evaluate empirically whether it can be trained to do so by
learning directly from algorithmic traces (“reasoning paths”) from our theoretical construction.
The trained models demonstrate strong out-ofdistribution generalization on problem sizes seen
during training but have limited length generalization, which is consistent with the implications of
our theoretical result.

We prove by construction that decoder-only Transformers
can decide 3-SAT instances with CoT (in a non-uniform
computational setting):
Theorem 1.1 (Informal version of Theorem 4.5). For any
p, c ∈ N+ , there exists a decoder-only Transformer with
O(p2 ) parameters that can decide all 3-SAT instances of at
most p variables and c clauses using Chain-of-Thought.
The “non-uniform” nature of this result means that the Transformer’s parameters are dependent on the problem size (p),
in contrast to a single, universal model that handles arbitrary input lengths. An insight from our construction is that
this practical difficulty in achieving length generalization
stems from numerically approximating precise attention patterns with softmax, where errors can compound on larger
instances and affect performance (Figure 5). This provides
a theoretical explanation for the length generalization limitations observed when training LLMs on reasoning tasks.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs, Vaswani
et al. (2017)) have demonstrated strong performance on
tasks that seem to demand complex reasoning, especially
with Chain-of-Thought (CoT, Wei et al. (2022); OpenAI
(2024); DeepSeek-AI et al. (2025)). However, they often face challenges in reliable multi-step logical reasoning,
hallucinating logically flawed or factually incorrect conclusions. Consequently, many researchers reject the idea
that LLMs can reason (Kambhampati et al., 2024), and researchers continue to disagree on the precise definition of
“reasoning” in the context of LLMs. Furthermore, there is
little understanding of the fundamental limitations of the
reasoning capabilities of Transformer models.

We illustrate the CoT our construction uses to solve 3-SAT
instances in Figure 1. The Transformer model simulates logical assumption, deduction, and backtracking by generating
new tokens and ultimately outputs a SAT/UNSAT label as
the result of the 3-SAT decision problem. Our theoretical
construction shows that, for any chosen instance size, a standard softmax-attention Transformer with size-dependent
parameters can decide 3-SAT, requiring only a single forward pass to perform logical deduction over all clauses
under the current variable assignments (see Lemma 4.8).

*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computing, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 2 Google Research, Atlanta,
USA. Correspondence to: Leyan Pan <leyanpan@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To empirically verify and investigate our construction, we
design a tool (PARAT) that instantiates the weights of Trans1

