AutoGFM: Automated Graph Foundation Model
with Adaptive Architecture Customization

Haibo Chen 1 Xin Wang 1 Zeyang Zhang 1 Haoyang Li 1 Ling Feng 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Graph foundation models (GFMs) aim to share
graph knowledge across diverse domains and
tasks to boost graph machine learning. However,
existing GFMs rely on hand-designed and fixed
graph neural network (GNN) architectures, failing
to utilize optimal architectures w.r.t. specific domains and tasks, inevitably leading to suboptimal
performance in diverse graph domains and tasks.
In this paper, we explore graph neural architecture
search (GNAS) for GFMs for the first time, which
suffers from the problem of architecture inconsistency, i.e., the optimal architectures for different
tasks and domains vary. We tackle this problem by
discovering an invariant graph-architecture relationship across domains and tasks, which imposes
three challenges: i) how to capture invariant and
variant patterns; ii) how to customize architectures to adapt to diverse domains and tasks; iii)
how to mitigate the data domination phenomenon
during the architecture search process. To address these challenges, we propose Automated
Graph Foundation Model with Adaptive Architecture Customization (AutoGFM), providing a
theoretical analysis to demonstrate the limitations
of existing GNAS. Specifically, we first propose
a disentangled contrastive graph encoder to learn
invariant and variant patterns. Then, we design an
invariant-guided architecture customization strategy to customize architectures for data from diverse domains and tasks. Finally, we propose a
curriculum architecture customization mechanism
to mitigate the phenomenon of particular data
dominating the search process. Extensive experiments demonstrate that AutoGFM outperforms
baselines, achieving state-of-the-art performance.

Graph foundation models (GFMs) (Liu et al., 2023b; Xu
et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2024) aim to share graph knowledge across diverse graph domains and tasks. GNN-based
GFMs (Liu et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2024b) represent a
promising direction, as they enable the transfer of shared
knowledge across various domains and tasks, allowing a
single graph neural network (GNN) to handle node-level,
edge-level, and graph-level tasks across various domains.
Specifically, GNN-based GFMs leverage large language
models (LLMs) as enhancers, transform the textual features of graphs into unified representations, and unify graphrelated tasks through subgraph classification for GNNs.
However, data from different tasks and domains may require
different graph neural architectures. For instance, the vanilla
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) outperforms GraphSAGE
(Hamilton et al., 2017) in the citation network OGBN-arxiv,
while failing to demonstrate satisfactory performance in
OGBN-proteins (Hu et al., 2020). Since existing GNNbased GFMs rely on hand-designed and fixed GNN architectures, they inevitably fail to adapt to the specific architecture
requirements for diverse domains and tasks.
In this paper, we explore the problem of graph neural architecture search (GNAS) for GNN-based graph foundation
models, which suffers from the problem of architecture
inconsistency, i.e., the optimal architecture for different
tasks and domains varies. We further leverage a representative group of differentiable graph neural architecture search
methods (Liu et al., 2018) as an example and provide theoretical analysis demonstrating their inability to effectively
search for graph neural architectures for GFMs under architecture inconsistency, resulting in suboptimal architectures.
We tackle this problem by discovering an invariant grapharchitecture relationship across domains and tasks, which
imposes three challenges: i) how to capture invariant and
variant patterns, which are entangled in graph data; ii) how
to customize graph neural architectures based on the discovered patterns to adapt to data with diverse domains and
tasks; iii) how to mitigate the phenomenon of data domination during the architecture search process.

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address these challenges, we propose a novel Automated
1

