Instruct2See: Learning to Remove Any Obstructions Across Distributions

Junhang Li 1 2 * Yu Guo 2 3 * Chuhua Xian 1 Shengfeng He 2
In-distribution
Fence

Out-of-distribution
Power Cables

Snow

Unseen Obstruction Representation
Stroke

''Remove the
Semi-Transparent
Obstruction''

(b) Restormer

(a) Input

RainDrop

Visual
Encoder

Mask
Decoder

Text
Encoder

(d) Instruct2See

(c) LaMa

''Stains and dirt
adhered to the
surface of the car
window.''

Mask

+

Visual
+ Textual
Semantic Command

Figure 1: We present Instruct2See, a zero-shot framework for obstruction removal that handles arbitrary obstructions. It
effectively tackles both soft (semi-transparent) and hard (opaque) obstructions, while demonstrating a robust effect in both
in-distribution (seen) and out-of-distribution (unseen) scenes. The right part shows how we represent unseen obstructions.

Abstract

through a cross-attention unit to enhance contextual understanding and improve mode control.
Additionally, a tunable mask adapter allows for
dynamic soft masking, enabling real-time adjustment of inaccurate masks. Extensive experiments
on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
obstacles show that Instruct2See consistently
achieves strong performance and generalization
in obstruction removal, regardless of whether
the obstacles were present during the training
phase. Code and dataset are available at https:
//jhscut.github.io/Instruct2See.

Images are often obstructed by various obstacles
due to capture limitations, hindering the observation of objects of interest. Most existing methods address occlusions from specific elements
like fences or raindrops, but are constrained by
the wide range of real-world obstructions, making comprehensive data collection impractical.
To overcome these challenges, we propose Instruct2See, a novel zero-shot framework capable
of handling both seen and unseen obstacles. The
core idea of our approach is to unify obstruction
removal by treating it as a soft-hard mask restoration problem, where any obstruction can be represented using multi-modal prompts, such as visual semantics and textual instructions, processed

1. Introduction
Obstruction removal is a challenging task that involves recovering clean scenes occluded by unwanted obstacles or
unpredictable natural phenomena. Existing methods often
focus on specific types of obstructions (Zhang et al., 2019;
Wen et al., 2019; Du et al., 2020; Chugunov et al., 2024;
Quan et al., 2023a; Huang et al., 2024b; Zhou et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2024) by relying on predefined categories and specific training datasets. However, this reliance limits their
generalization, often resulting in poor or invalid removal
of occluders outside the training distribution. Therefore, it

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University 3 School of Navigation, Wuhan University of Technology.
Correspondence to: Chuhua Xian and Shengfeng He <chhxian@scut.edu.cn, shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

