On the Clean Generalization and Robust Overfitting in Adversarial Training
from Two Theoretical Views: Representation Complexity and Training Dynamics

Binghui Li 1 Yuanzhi Li 2

Abstract

et al., 2020; Kirillov et al., 2023) and natural language process (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022). However, it is well-known that small but adversarial
perturbations to the natural data can make well-trained classifiers confused (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2013;
Goodfellow et al., 2014), which potentially gives rise to reliability and security problems in real-world applications and
promotes designing adversarial robust learning algorithms.

Similar to surprising performance in the standard
deep learning, deep nets trained by adversarial
training also generalize well for unseen clean data
(natural data). However, despite adversarial training can achieve low robust training error, there
exists a significant robust generalization gap. We
call this phenomenon the Clean Generalization
and Robust Overfitting (CGRO). In this work, we
study the CGRO phenomenon in adversarial training from two views: representation complexity
and training dynamics. Specifically, we consider
a binary classification setting with N separated
training data points. First, we prove that, based on
the assumption that we assume there is poly(D)size clean classifier (where D is the data dimension), ReLU net with only Õ(N D) extra parameters is able to leverages robust memorization to
achieve the CGRO, while robust classifier still
requires exponential representation complexity in
worst case. Next, we focus on a structured-data
case to analyze training dynamics, where we train
a two-layer convolutional network with Õ(N D)
width against adversarial perturbation. We then
show that a three-stage phase transition occurs
during learning process and the network provably
converges to robust memorization regime, which
thereby results in the CGRO. Besides, we also
empirically verify our theoretical analysis by experiments in real-image recognition datasets.

In practice, adversarial training methods (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Madry et al., 2017; Shafahi et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2019; Pang et al., 2022) are widely used to improve the
robustness of models by regarding perturbed data as training
data. However, while these robust learning algorithms are
able to achieve high robust training accuracy (Gao et al.,
2019), it still leads to a non-negligible robust generalization
gap (Raghunathan et al., 2019), which is also called robust
overfitting (Rice et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2022).
To explain this puzzling phenomenon, a series of works
have attempted to provide theoretical understandings from
different perspectives. Despite these aforementioned works
seem to provide a series of convincing evidence from theoretical views in different settings, there still exists a gap
between theory and practice for at least two reasons.
First, although previous works have shown that adversarial
robust generalization requires more data and larger models
(Schmidt et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022;
Bubeck & Sellke, 2023), it is unclear that what mechanism,
during adversarial training process, directly causes robust
overfitting. A line of work about uniform algorithmic stability (Xing et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2022), under Lipschitzian
smoothness assumptions, also suggest that robust generalization gap increases when training iteration is large. In other
words, we know there is no robust generalization gap for a
trivial model that only guesses labels totally randomly (e.g.
deep neural networks at random initialization), which implies that we should take learning process into consideration
to analyze robust generalization.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, deep neural networks have achieved excellent
performance in a variety of disciplines, especially including
in computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Dosovitskiy
1
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Binghui Li <libinghui@pku.edu.cn>, Yuanzhi
Li <yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu>.
2

Second and most importantly, while some works (Tsipras
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Hassani & Javanmard, 2022)
point out that achieving robustness may hurt clean test accuracy, in most of the cases, it is observed that drop of robust

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

