Sample Complexity of Distributionally Robust Off-Dynamics
Reinforcement Learning with Online Interaction

Yiting He * 1 Zhishuai Liu * 1 Weixin Wang 1 Pan Xu 1

Abstract

the deployment environment differs from that of the training
environment. Such problems can be modeled as learning a
robust Markov decision process (RMDP) (Satia & Lave Jr,
1973; Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005), where the
objective is to learn a policy that performs well when uncertainties are imposed into the transition dynamics. Two
major frameworks have been proposed in the literature to incorporate the uncertainty of transition dynamics in RMDPs.
The first, known as the Constrained Robust Markov Decision Process (CRMDP), formulates a max-min optimization
problem that seeks the best policy under the worst-case transition dynamics within a predefined uncertainty set. The
second, the Regularized Robust Markov Decision Process
(RRMDP), replaces the hard constraint on uncertainty sets
with a regularization term that quantifies the divergence
between the training and deployment dynamics.

Off-dynamics reinforcement learning (RL), where
training and deployment transition dynamics are
different, can be formulated as learning in a robust
Markov decision process (RMDP) where uncertainties in transition dynamics are imposed. Existing literature mostly assumes access to generative
models allowing arbitrary state-action queries or
pre-collected datasets with a good state coverage
of the deployment environment, bypassing the
challenge of exploration. In this work, we study
a more realistic and challenging setting where
the agent is limited to online interaction with the
training environment. To capture the intrinsic
difficulty of exploration in online RMDPs, we
introduce the supremal visitation ratio, a novel
quantity that measures the mismatch between the
training dynamics and the deployment dynamics.
We show that if this ratio is unbounded, online
learning becomes exponentially hard. We propose the first computationally efficient algorithm
that achieves sublinear regret in online RMDPs
with f -divergence based transition uncertainties.
We also establish matching regret lower bounds,
demonstrating that our algorithm achieves optimal dependence on both the supremal visitation
ratio and the number of interaction episodes. Finally, we validate our theoretical results through
comprehensive numerical experiments.

CRMDP was initially introduced for optimal control problems (Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005; Iyengar, 2005; Xu & Mannor, 2006; Wiesemann et al., 2013), where the transition
dynamics and reward functions of the nominal MDP are
assumed to be fully known. More recently, CRMDPs have
been studied from a learning perspective (Zhou et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2022), where an agent must gather data to estimate the environment rather than relying on perfect knowledge. Existing research on learning CRMDPs can be categorized into three settings: (1) Learning with a generative
model (simulator). In this setting, the agent can query transitions at any state-action pair an arbitrary number of times
(Panaganti & Kalathil, 2022; Yang et al., 2022; Xu et al.,
2023b; Shi et al., 2024). (2) Learning with an offline dataset.
Here, the agent learns from a pre-collected dataset, typically assumed to be generated by a behavior policy from
the nominal MDP (Panaganti et al., 2022; Blanchet et al.,
2023; Shi & Chi, 2024; Liu & Xu, 2024b; Tang et al., 2024).
Effective robust policy learning relies on sufficient coverage
of the dataset on states in the deployment environment. (3)
Learning through online interaction. More recent works
have considered online learning of CRMDPs through direct
interaction with the training environment to collect data (Liu
& Xu, 2024a; Lu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), focusing on
a specific case where the uncertainty set is defined via total

1. Introduction
Off-dynamics reinforcement learning (RL) (Eysenbach
et al., 2021; Lyu et al., 2024) has recently gained significant attention in scenarios where the transition dynamics of
*
Equal contribution 1 Duke University. Correspondence to: Pan
Xu <pan.xu@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

