Guided Zeroth-Order Methods for Stochastic Non-convex Problems
with Decision-Dependent Distributions

Yuya Hikima 1 Hiroshi Sawada 1 Akinori Fujino 1

Abstract

distribution D(x) depends on decision vector x and is unknown. This problem appears in a wide range of applications. For example, in pricing applications, a seller aims
to optimize the prices x of products and services for their
revenue, considering the price-dependent distribution D(x)
of stochastic demand (Ray et al., 2022; Hikima & Takeda,
2025b). In strategic classification in financial practices, a
lender aims to train the parameter x of a classifier for finding
good customers, considering the parameter-dependent data
distribution D(x), which is caused by customers who may
react to the deployed classifier (Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021;
Liu et al., 2024a). Various studies (Perdomo et al., 2020;
Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2024) have addressed problem (1). because of its importance in practical
applications.

In this study, we tackle an optimization problem
with a known function and an unknown decisiondependent distribution, which arises in a variety
of applications and is often referred to as a performative prediction problem. To solve the problem,
several zeroth-order methods have been developed because the gradient of the objective function cannot be obtained explicitly due to the unknown distribution. Although these methods have
theoretical convergence, they cannot utilize the
information on the known function, which limits
their efficiency in reducing the objective value. To
overcome this issue, we propose new zeroth-order
methods that generate effective update directions
by utilizing information on the known function.
As theoretical results, we show the convergence
of our methods to stationary points and provide
the worst-case sample complexity analysis. Our
simulation experiments on multiple applications
show that our methods output solutions with lower
objective values than the existing zeroth-order
methods do.

Since the gradient of the objective function is inaccessible
as a result of the distribution D(x) being unknown, various
zeroth-order methods have been proposed, which update
the decision vector by some estimated gradient on the basis
of function evaluation(s). For example, (Chen et al., 2024;
Hikima & Takeda, 2025b) proposed zeroth-order methods
based on the following gradient estimator:

1
g :=
f (x + µu, ξ 1 ) − f (x − µu, ξ 2 ) u, (2)
2µ
where µ ∈ R≥0 is a constant, u ∈ Rd is sampled from some
distribution (e.g., the standard Gaussian distribution), ξ 1 ∼
D(x+µu), and ξ 2 ∼ D(x−µu). Not limited to the above,
various studies (Ray et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024a) proposed
zeroth-order methods using different gradient estimators.

1. Introduction
In this study, we consider the following problem:
min

x∈Rd

F (x) := Eξ∼D(x) [f (x, ξ)],

(1)

Although these existing zeroth-order methods are theoretically valid for solving problem (1), they treat the function
f as a black box and do not leverage its gradient information, which limits optimization efficiency. Specifically, an
unbiased stochastic gradient of the objective function F in
(1) can be written as follows (Liu et al., 2024b; Hikima &
Takeda, 2025a):

d

where F : R → R is generally non-convex, f is a given
differentiable function, and D(x) is an unknown distribution of random variables ξ. This formulation is known as
the performance prediction problem (Perdomo et al., 2020).
The main feature of this problem is that the probability
1

Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Kyoto, Japan.
Correspondence to: Yuya Hikima
<yuya.hikima@ntt.com>.

∇x f (x, ξ) + f (x, ξ)∇x log Pr(ξ | x), ξ ∼ D(x). (3)
Here, although we cannot obtain the second term since
Pr(ξ | x) is unknown, we can calculate the first term, that
is, ∇x f (x, ξ), since f is known. Thus, we can access partial
information on the gradient of objective function F .

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

