Investigating the Overlooked Hessian Structure: From CNNs to LLMs

Qian-Yuan Tang* 1 Yufei Gu* 2 Yunfeng Cai 3 Mingming Sun 4 Ping Li 5 Xun Zhou 6 Zeke Xie† 2

Abstract

Yao et al., 2018; Dauphin et al., 2014; Byrd et al., 2011).
Deep learning usually finds flat minima that generalize well
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1995; 1997). The Hessian is
one of the most important measures of the minima flatness
and directly relates to generalization in deep learning (Hoffer et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Dinh et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2017). Jiang et al. (2019) reported that minimaflatness-based generalization bound is still the most reliable
metric in extensive experiments. Wu et al. (2017) reported
that the low-complexity solutions that generalize well have
a small norm of Hessian matrix with respect to model parameters. Yao et al. (2018) reported that the spectrum of
the Hessian closely connects to large-batch training and
adversarial robustness.

It is well-known that the Hessian of deep loss
landscape matters to optimization and generalization of deep learning. Previous studies reported a rough Hessian structure in deep learning, which consists of two components, a small
number of large eigenvalues and a large number
of nearly-zero eigenvalues. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to report that a simple but overlooked power-law Hessian structure
exists in well-trained deep neural networks, including Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Large Language Models (LLMs). Moreover,
we provide a maximum-entropy theoretical interpretation for the power-law Hessian structure
and theoretically demonstrate the existence of a
robust and low-dimensional subspace of deep neural networks. Our extensive experiments using the
proposed power-law spectral method demonstrate
that the power-law Hessian spectra critically relate to multiple important behaviors of deep learning, including optimization, generalization, and
overparameterization. Notably, we discover that
the power-law Hessian structure of a given LLM
can often predict generalization during training
in some occasions, while conventional sharpnessbased generalization measures which often work
well on CNNs largely fail as an effective generalization predictor of LLMs.

A number of works empirically studied the Hessian structure
in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Some papers (Sagun
et al., 2016; 2017; Wu et al., 2017) empirically reported a
two-component structure that, in the context of deep learning, most Hessian eigenvalues are nearly zero, while a small
number of eigenvalues are large. Sankar et al. (2021) revealed that the layer-wise Hessian spectrum is similar to the
entire Hessian spectrum. Zhang et al. (2024b) demonstrated
that SGD performs worse than Adam for Transformers when
Hessian spectra exhibit blockwise heterogeneity. Ormaniec
et al. (2024) theoretically studied one-layer Transformers’
Hessian in matrix derivatives while comparing them to classical networks in deep learning.
However, quantitative or statistical analysis of the Hessian
structure is still largely under-explored for modern neural
networks. Does an elegant statistical structure hide behind
the Hessian spectrum? Does such structure matter to CNNs
and LLMs? Our work provides a novel approach to understanding and analyzing the Hessian structure of deep loss
landscape from a statistical perspective. This work mainly
made three contributions.

1. Introduction
It is well-known that the Hessian matters to optimization,
generalization, and even robustness of deep learning (Li
et al., 2020; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Jacot et al., 2019;

First, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to empirically discover and statistically test the power-law Hessian
structure of deep loss landscape which has been overlooked
by previous studies. Such novel power-law structure widely
exist in DNNs, including CNNs and LLMs.

1
Department of Physics, Hong Kong Baptist University 2 xLeaF
Lab, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou) 3 BIMSA 4 AGI Lab, BIMSA 5 Rutgers University
6
Seed-Foundation-Model Team, ByteDance. ∗: Equal Contributions. Correspondence to: † Zeke Xie <zekexie@hkustgz.edu.cn>.

Second, we propose a framework of power-law spectral
analysis for quantitatively analyzing the Hessian structure
in deep learning. We not only reveal how the power-law

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

