Variational Phylogenetic Inference with Products over Bipartitions

Evan Sidrow 1 Alexandre Bouchard-Côté 2 Lloyd T. Elliott 1

Abstract

One alternative to MCMC is variational inference (VI), in
which the posterior distribution over phylogenetic tree structures is approximated using a variational distribution that
minimizes some distance metric to the true posterior distribution. While VI over combinatorial spaces is also known
to be difficult due to the complexity of the constraints on
the support (Bouchard-Côté and Jordan, 2010; Linderman
et al., 2018), there have been several recent advances in VI
over phylogenetic trees that are tractable. Zhang and Matsen IV (2018) represented phylogenetic trees as Bayesian
networks using subsplit Bayesian networks (SBNs), and
later used SBNs to perform variational Bayesian phylogenetic inference on unrooted trees (Zhang and Matsen IV,
2019). This approach has spawned many methodological advancements. To improve the distribution for branch lengths,
Zhang (2020) used normalizing flows, Molén et al. (2024)
used mixtures, and Xie et al. (2024) used semi-implicit
branch length distributions. To improve the variational family over tree topologies, Zhang (2023) used graph neural
networks to learn topological features.

Bayesian phylogenetics is vital for understanding
evolutionary dynamics, and requires accurate and
efficient approximation of posterior distributions
over trees. In this work, we develop a variational
Bayesian approach for ultrametric phylogenetic
trees. We present a novel variational family based
on coalescent times of a single-linkage clustering
and derive a closed-form density for the resulting
distribution over trees. Unlike existing methods
for ultrametric trees, our method performs inference over all of tree space, it does not require
any Markov chain Monte Carlo subroutines, and
our variational family is differentiable. Through
experiments on benchmark genomic datasets and
an application to the viral RNA of SARS-CoV-2,
we demonstrate that our method achieves competitive accuracy while requiring significantly fewer
gradient evaluations than existing state-of-the-art
techniques.

The number of parameters within an SBN grows exponentially with the number of taxa, so Zhang and Matsen IV
(2019) used MCMC to find sets of most likely tree structures, and they use these sets to restrict the SBNs. Other
recent VI approaches sample tree topologies without the use
of SBNs. For example, ViaPhy (Koptagel et al., 2022) uses
a gradient-free variational inference approach and directly
sample from the Jukes and Cantor (1969) model, GeoPhy
(Mimori and Hamada, 2023) uses a distance-based metric in hyperbolic space to construct unrooted phylogenetic
trees, and ARTree (Xie and Zhang, 2023) uses graph neural networks to construct a deep autogressive model for VI
over phylogenetic tree structures. Zhou et al. (2024) also
introduce PhyloGFN, a phylogenetic VI technique based
on reinforcement learning and generative flow networks
(Bengio et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
The goal of Bayesian phylogenetics is to infer the genealogy
of a collection of taxa given a genetic model and aligned
sequence data. Phylogenetics is used in fields such as epidemiology (Li et al., 2020), linguistics (List et al., 2014), and
ecology (Godoy et al., 2018). Bayesian phylogenetic inference quantifies uncertainty and integrates over phylogenetic
tree structures within a phylogenetic model (Zhang and Matsen IV, 2019). Most Bayesian phylogenetic inference is performed using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
with candidate trees iteratively proposed and either accepted
or rejected based on their consistency with the observed data.
However, MCMC methods can struggle because the number
of possible trees grows super-exponentially in the number
of taxa and posteriors on trees are highly multi-modal.

Phylogenetic inference can also be performed using nonBayesian methods, including RAxML (Stamatakis, 2014),
neighbour-joining (Saitou and Nei, 1987), and more recently
Phyloformer (Nesterenko et al., 2025). Phyloformer uses
deep learning to construct pairwise representations of evolutionary distances between taxa. Phyloformer then uses
pairwise distances to construct a tree using a neighbourjoining algorithm similar to the single-linkage clustering

1
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, Simon Fraser
University, Burnaby, Canada 2 Department of Statistics, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to:
Evan Sidrow <esidrow@sfu.ca>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

