Boosting Adversarial Robustness with CLAT:
Criticality-Leveraged Adversarial Training

Bhavna Gopal 1 Huanrui Yang 2 Jingyang Zhang 1 Mark Horton 1 Yiran Chen 1

Abstract

the coexistence of robust and non-robust features in standard datasets. Adversarial vulnerability largely stems from
the presence of non-robust features in models trained on
standard datasets, which, while highly predictive and beneficial for clean accuracy, are susceptible to noise (Szegedy
et al., 2014). Unfortunately, it is observed that deep learning
models tend to preferentially learn these non-robust features. Inkawhich et al. (2019; 2020) further demonstrate
that adversarial images derived from the hidden features
of certain intermediate non-robust/“critical” layers exhibit
enhanced transferability to unseen models. This suggests a
commonality in the non-robust features captured by these
layers. While identifying these critical layers to improve
their robustness is appealing, this process often requires the
time-consuming generation of attacks against each individual layer. Methods to identify and effectively address the
criticality of such layers are still lacking.

Adversarial training (AT) enhances neural network robustness. Typically, AT updates all trainable parameters, but can lead to overfitting and
increased errors on clean data. Research suggests that fine-tuning specific parameters may be
more effective; however, methods for identifying
these essential parameters and establishing effective optimization objectives remain inadequately
addressed. We present CLAT, an innovative adversarial fine-tuning algorithm that mitigates adversarial overfitting by integrating “criticality” into
the training process. Instead of tuning the entire
model, CLAT identifies and fine-tunes fewer parameters in robustness-critical layers—those predominantly learning non-robust features—while
keeping the rest of the model fixed. Additionally,
CLAT employs a dynamic layer selection process
that adapts to changes in layer criticality during
training. Empirical results demonstrate that CLAT
can be seamlessly integrated with existing adversarial training methods, enhancing clean accuracy
and adversarial robustness by over 2% compared
to baseline approaches.

In contrast to layer-wise feature vulnerability analysis, adversarial training (Athalye et al., 2018; Madry et al., 2019;
Croce & Hein, 2020), involves training entire neural networks with adversarial examples generated in real-time.
This approach inherently encourages all layers in the model
to learn robust features from adversarial images, thereby
enhancing the model’s resilience against attacks. However,
given the more challenging optimization process of learning
from adversarial examples than from clean ones, adversarial
training also brings hurdles such as heightened errors on
clean data and susceptibility to overfitting, ultimately diminishing its effectiveness in practical applications (Schmidt
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Raghunathan et al., 2019;
Javanmard et al., 2020). Despite various efforts to enhance
adversarial training, such as modifying input data and adjusting loss functions (Hitaj et al., 2021; Raghunathan et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Wu et al.,
2020b; Pang et al., 2022), these approaches still frequently
fall short in alleviating the aforementioned issues.

1. Introduction
Advancements in deep learning models have markedly improved image classification accuracy. Despite this, their
vulnerability to adversarial attacks — subtle modifications
to input images that mislead the model — remains a significant concern (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Szegedy et al.,
2014). The research community has been rigorously exploring theories to comprehend the mechanics behind adversarial attacks (Bai et al., 2021). Ilyas et al. (2019) uncover
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. Correspondence to: Bhavna Gopal <bhavna.gopal@duke.edu>.

In light of these challenges, we introduce CLAT, a paradigm
shift in adversarial training, where we mitigate overfitting
during adversarial training by identifying and tuning only
the robustness-critical model layers. CLAT commences by
pinpointing critical layers within a model using our novel,
theoretically grounded, and easily computable,“criticality

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

