Peripheral Memory for LLMs:
Integration of Sequential Memory Banks with Adaptive Querying

Songlin Zhai 1 Yuan Meng 1 Yongrui Chen 1 Yiwei Wang 2 Guilin Qi 1

Abstract

Table 1. Comparison between different types of memory. W.M.:
“Working Memory”, I.M.: “Implicit Memory”, E.M.: “Explicit
Memory”, P.M.: “Peripheral Memory (Ours)”.
: “Well Supported”,
: “Partially Supported”,
: “Poorly Supported”.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized various natural language processing tasks
with their remarkable capabilities. However, a
challenge persists in effectively processing new
information, particularly in the area of long-term
knowledge updates without compromising model
performance. To address this challenge, this paper
introduces a novel memory augmentation framework that conceptualizes memory as a peripheral component (akin to physical RAM), with the
LLM serving as the information processor (analogous to a CPU). Drawing inspiration from RAM
architecture, we design memory as a sequence of
memory banks, each modeled using KolmogorovArnold Network (KAN) to ensure smooth state
transitions. Memory read and write operations are
dynamically controlled by query signals derived
from the LLMs’ internal states, closely mimicking the interaction between a CPU and RAM. Furthermore, a dedicated memory bank is used to
generate a mask value that indicates the relevance
of the retrieved data, inspired by the sign bit in
binary coding schemes. The retrieved memory
feature is then integrated as a prefix to enhance
the model prediction. Extensive experiments on
knowledge-based model editing validate the effectiveness and efficiency of our peripheral memory.

Memory Types

W.M.

I.M.

E.M.

P.M.

Scalability
Reusability
Configurability

lenges in integrating new information (Wang et al., 2024b;
Modarressi et al., 2025), particular in incorporating knowledge updates without harming their original performance
(Zhang et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2025). These challenges
are further exacerbated in dynamic real-world applications
(Kaddour et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b). Memory augmentation has emerged as a promising solution to address
these challenges (Zheng et al., 2023; Hartvigsen et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2024a;b; Modarressi et al., 2025), with existing
efforts focusing on working memory (contextual key-values
pairs from specific layers), implicit memory (extra model
parameters), and explicit memory (sparsely activated knowledge circuits) (Yang et al., 2024). However, as summarized
in Table 1, these methods are hindered by limitations in
scalability (i.e., maintaining query effectiveness and efficiency as memory size increases), reusability (i.e., sharing
memory across LLMs with varying architectures to avoid
redundant storage of identical knowledge), and configurability (i.e., dynamically adjusting memory independently of
the LLM, such as memory size and structure). These issues
primarily stem from the tight coupling between memory
and LLM architectures, which restricts dynamic memory
allocation and cross-model adaptability.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed the field
of machine learning, achieving state-of-the-art performance
across a wide range of tasks (Singh, 2023; Naveed et al.,
2024; Chen, 2024; Luo et al., 2024; Azaria et al., 2024). Despite these remarkable advancements, LLMs still face chal-

Inspired by modern computer architectures that separate
computation and storage (Blum, 1986; Rojas & Hashagen,
2000), we propose a novel memory framework called peripheral memory. Unlike traditional memory systems, we
decouple memory from LLMs, treating it as an independent
module-hence the term “peripheral”. In this framework, the
LLM functions as the information processor, similar to a
CPU, while the peripheral memory operates like RAM, handling requests from LLMs to retrieve or store information

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 2 University of California, Merced, USA.
Correspondence to: Guilin Qi <gqi@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

