Can RLHF be More Efficient with Imperfect Reward Models?
A Policy Coverage Perspective

Jiawei Huang 1 Bingcong Li 1 Christoph Dann 2 Niao He 1

Abstract

preference labels, there has been significant attention in reducing the sample complexity—the amount of data required
for training—of online RLHF through efficient exploration
strategies (Cen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023; Xie et al.,
2024; Zhang et al., 2024). However, a largely overlooked opportunity is to additionally leverage existing reward models
for annotation, which have already aligned partially with the
human preferences. The growing number of available opensource and high-quality reward models trained on diverse
tasks provide a rich pool of candidates for transfer learning. Harnessing guidance embedded in such reward models
holds great potential for improving sample efficiency.

Sample efficiency is critical for online Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF).
While existing works investigate sample-efficient
online exploration strategies, the potential of utilizing misspecified yet relevant reward models to
accelerate learning remains underexplored. This
paper studies how to transfer knowledge from
those imperfect reward models in online RLHF.
We start by identifying a novel property due to KLregularization in the RLHF objective: a policy’s
coverability of the optimal policy is captured by its
sub-optimality. Building on this insight, we propose novel transfer learning principles and a theoretical algorithm—Transfer Policy Optimization
(TPO)—with provable benefits compared to standard online learning. Empirically, inspired by our
theoretical findings, we develop a win-rate-based
transfer policy selection strategy with improved
computational efficiency. Moreover, our empirical transfer learning technique is modular and can
be integrated with various policy optimization
methods, such as DPO, IPO and XPO, to further
enhance their performance. We validate the effectiveness of our method through experiments on
summarization tasks.

There are a variety of practical scenarios where such source
reward models can be effectively utilized. Firstly, reward
models trained on relevant tasks often prove to be valuable
in similar tasks. A notable example is cross-lingual reward
transfer (Hong et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024), where reward
models in one language can provide effective guidance for
tasks in another. Secondly, informative evaluation can also
be obtained from well-trained LLMs, such as GPT, LLaMA
and Gemini (Achiam et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024; Team
et al., 2024). For certain tasks, such models can provide
evaluation closely aligned with human preferences; see e.g.,
Ji et al. (2023); Lee et al. (2023). Lastly, there are scenarios where rule-based or heuristic reward functions—built
upon experts knowledge and accumulated experience—are
inexpensive to obtain and instructive in evaluating the LLM.
Taking summarization tasks as an example, expert summaries are available on datasets such as XSum (Narayan
et al., 2018) and TL-DR (Völske et al., 2017). Similarity
with those expert solutions can be measured through metrics
such as ROUGE (Lin, 2004) and BERTScore (Zhang et al.,
2019), and be employed for scoring the LLM generations.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has achieved remarkable success in fine-tuning LargeLanguage Models (LLMs) to align with human preferences
(Bai et al., 2022; Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al.,
2022). Using datasets annotated with human preferences
reflecting human intrinsic reward model, RLHF optimizes
LLM policies with reinforcement learning (RL) techniques.
Due to the high cost of collecting large amounts of human

Motivated by these considerations, this paper studies how
to leverage imperfect reward models to learn a near-optimal
policy with fewer human annotations. We consider the case
where several source reward models are available, yet their
quality, i.e., the similarity to human rewards, is unknown a
priori. Our contributions are summarized as follows.

1
ETH Zurich 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Jiawei
Huang <jiawei.huang@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• In Sec. 3, we identify a distinctive property of RLHF arising from its KL regularization: for any prospective policy
1

