Neural Discovery in Mathematics:
Do Machines Dream of Colored Planes?
Konrad Mundinger 1 2 Max Zimmer 1 2 Aldo Kiem 1 2 Christoph Spiegel 1 2 Sebastian Pokutta 1 2

Abstract
We demonstrate how neural networks can drive
mathematical discovery through a case study of
the Hadwiger-Nelson problem, a long-standing
open problem at the intersection of discrete geometry and extremal combinatorics that is concerned with coloring the plane while avoiding
monochromatic unit-distance pairs. Using neural networks as approximators, we reformulate
this mixed discrete-continuous geometric coloring
problem with hard constraints as an optimization
task with a probabilistic, differentiable loss function. This enables gradient-based exploration of
admissible configurations that most significantly
led to the discovery of two novel six-colorings,
providing the first improvement in thirty years to
the off-diagonal variant of the original problem
(Mundinger et al., 2024a). Here, we establish the
underlying machine learning approach used to obtain these results and demonstrate its broader applicability through additional numerical insights.

Figure 1: Neural network output (left) that inspired our formal construction (right) of a novel six-coloring of the plane.
Red points avoid all distances between 0.418 and 0.657
while other colors avoid unit distances. The neural network
was trained through gradient descent on a continuous and
differentiable relaxation of these geometric constraints.

through numerical methods, yet many important theoretical problems involve both discrete and continuous aspects.
These mixed discrete-continuous problems have remained
particularly challenging for traditional approaches.

1. Introduction
The discovery of mathematical constructions is fundamental
to theoretical mathematics, where proving the existence of
objects with certain properties can advance our understanding of abstract structures. Traditional computational methods have aided the search for such constructions through
exhaustive searches, optimization, and heuristics, while recent advances in Machine Learning (ML) offer new ways to
explore mathematical structures and guide intuition. Purely
discrete problems can be approached through discrete and
combinatorial optimization and purely continuous problems

The Hadwiger-Nelson (HN) problem perfectly illustrates
these challenges: determine the minimum number of colors needed to color the Euclidean plane so that no two
points at unit distance share the same color. This number
is often referred to as the chromatic number of the plane
χ(R2 ). Despite its simple statement, this problem combines
discrete choices (color assignments), continuous geometry
(the Euclidean plane), and hard constraints (unit-distance
requirements) in a way that has resisted resolution for over
seventy years. While SAT solvers and discrete optimization techniques have contributed to finding lower bounds,
discovering new colorings has remained challenging.

1

Department for AI in Science, Society, and Technology, Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany 2 Institute of Mathematics, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany. Correspondence
to: Konrad Mundinger <mundinger@zib.de>, Christoph Spiegel
<spiegel@zib.de>.

We present a framework that reformulates this geometric
coloring problem as a continuous optimization task by introducing probabilistic colorings and a differentiable loss
function. This continuous formulation enables us to use

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

