GPTAQ: Efficient Finetuning-Free Quantization for Asymmetric Calibration

Yuhang Li 1 Ruokai Yin 1 Donghyun Lee 1 Shiting Xiao 1 Priyadarshini Panda 1

Abstract
Quantized

We introduce GPTAQ, a novel finetuning-free
quantization method for compressing large-scale
transformer architectures. Unlike the previous
GPTQ method, which independently calibrates
each layer, we always match the quantized layer’s
output to the exact output in the full-precision
model, resulting in a scheme that we call asymmetric calibration. Such a scheme can effectively
reduce the quantization error accumulated in previous layers. We analyze this problem using optimal brain compression to derive a close-formed
solution. The new solution explicitly minimizes
the quantization error as well as the accumulated
asymmetry error. Furthermore, we utilize various techniques to parallelize the solution calculation, including channel parallelization, neuron
decomposition, and Cholesky reformulation for
matrix fusion. As a result, GPTAQ is easy to
implement, simply using 20 more lines of code
than GPTQ but improving its performance under
low-bit quantization. Remarkably, on a single
GPU, we quantize a 405B language transformer
as well as EVA-02—the rank first vision transformer that achieves 90% pretraining Imagenet
accuracy. Code is available at Github.

X

min ||ŵX − wX||2
Calibrating

Unquantized

(a) Symmetric Calibration
Unquantized
Quantized
Layer 1

X̃
X

Unquantized

Unquantized

min ||ŵX − wX̃||2
Calibrating
Layer 2

Unquantized
Layer 3

(b) Asymmetric Calibration

Figure 1. Calibration pipeline in the symmetric way (GPTQ) and
the asymmetric way (GPTAQ).

significant deployment challenges across all computing platforms, from servers to edge devices. Moreover, transformers
enable multi-modal architectures, which combine multiple
transformer architectures and make it challenging to operate
under resource-constrained environments.
Quantization (Gholami et al., 2022) has emerged as a
promising approach to address these challenges by reducing
the precision of weights and activations, thereby accelerating both memory access and computation. However, current
state-of-the-art quantization methods often rely on model
fine-tuning. These approaches (Shao et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2024) update parameters through gradient descent, a process
that becomes increasingly challenging with model size. For
instance, Malinovskii et al. (2024) requires 8 A100 GPUs
running for 8 days to fine-tune a 70B parameter language
model. This computational burden becomes particularly
problematic given the numerous possible quantization configurations, including bit formats, symmetry choices, etc.,
making fine-tuning-based quantization less efficient.

1. Introduction
The emergence of transformer architectures (Vaswani, 2017)
has led to unprecedented scaling in model sizes and computational demands in both vision and language domains.
In computer vision, models like ViT-G/14 (Zhai et al.,
2022) encompass 2 billion parameters and require 2860
GFLOPs—700 times that of ResNet-50—for processing a
single image. Language models have scaled even further,
with architectures like LLaMA-3-405B (Meta, 2024) reaching hundreds of billions of parameters. This scale poses

This work focuses on finetuning-free quantization—an approach that circumvents gradient-based optimization in favor of forward-pass calibration computation. Several methods have emerged in recent literature (Lin et al., 2023;
Dettmers et al., 2022; Nagel et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021).
Among these approaches, GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022)1 has
distinguished itself through a particularly effective combination of speed and accuracy, leading to its widespread
adoption across the machine learning community, with over
5,321 quantized transformers now available on the Hugging-

1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University. Correspondence to: Yuhang Li <yuhang.li@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

While the authors used the name “OPTQ” in the final cameraready paper, we use “GPTQ” throughout this work as it has become
the more widely recognized name in the broader community.

1

