Robot-Gated Interactive Imitation Learning with Adaptive Intervention
Mechanism
Haoyuan Cai 1 Zhenghao Peng 1 Bolei Zhou 1

Abstract

Robot-Gated Interactive Imitation Learning

Interactive Imitation Learning (IIL) allows agents
to acquire desired behaviors through human interventions, but current methods impose high
cognitive demands on human supervisors. We
propose the Adaptive Intervention Mechanism
(AIM), a novel robot-gated IIL algorithm that
learns an adaptive criterion for requesting human demonstrations. AIM utilizes a proxy Qfunction to mimic the human intervention rule
and adjusts intervention requests based on the
alignment between agent and human actions. By
assigning high Q-values when the agent deviates
from the expert and decreasing these values as the
agent becomes proficient, the proxy Q-function
enables the agent to assess the real-time alignment with the expert and request assistance when
needed. Our expert-in-the-loop experiments reveal that AIM significantly reduces expert monitoring efforts in both continuous and discrete control tasks. Compared to the uncertainty-based
baseline Thrifty-DAgger, our method achieves a
40% improvement in terms of human take-over
cost and learning efficiency. Furthermore, AIM
effectively identifies safety-critical states for expert assistance, thereby collecting higher-quality
expert demonstrations and reducing overall expert data and environment interactions needed.
Code and demo video are available at https:
//github.com/metadriverse/AIM.

I can have a rest.

I can handle it.

I can help you.

Can you help me?
Figure 1. In robot-gated IIL, the agent explores the environment
and requests human assistance based on an intervention criterion.
The expert is not involved in learning until the agent requests help.

manipulation tasks (Finn et al., 2017; Fang et al., 2019;
Ganapathi et al., 2021). However, RL often suffers from
poor sample efficiency during policy learning, and the reward function struggles to perfectly capture human preferences, causing learned policies to produce unintended
behaviors. To address these limitations, researchers have
turned to Imitation Learning (IL), which leverages offline
expert demonstrations and aims to match human behavior
on this offline dataset (Osa et al., 2018). Nevertheless, IL
is susceptible to distribution shifts and out-of-distribution
(OOD) states, where the agent encounters scenarios not covered by the training data (Ross et al., 2011; Ravichandar
et al., 2020; Chernova & Thomaz, 2022; Zare et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

Interactive Imitation Learning (IIL) incorporates human
participants to intervene in the training process and provide online demonstrations, which helps improve alignment
and learning efficiency (Reddy et al., 2018; Kelly et al.,
2019; Spencer et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2024; Seraj et al.,
2024). There are two different categories of human involvement: human-gated intervention (Kelly et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2022b; Peng et al., 2024) and robot-gated involvement (Menda et al., 2019; Hoque et al., 2021a). Humangated IIL leverages human abilities to identify the agent’s

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successful in a wide
variety of tasks, from playing Atari games (Mnih et al.,
2013) to autonomous driving (Li et al., 2022a) and robotic
1

Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Correspondence to: Bolei Zhou
<bolei@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

