Discovering Physics Laws of Dynamical Systems via Invariant Function Learning

Shurui Gui 1 Xiner Li 1 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract

1999; Singh et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2016; Lusch et al.,
2018; Yeo & Melnyk, 2019; Giannakis, 2019). Numerous
efforts (Kirchmeyer et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Mouli
et al., 2024) have focused on modeling dynamical systems
by forecasting future states from past observations, often
emphasizing rapid adaptation to new systems or improved
model architectures. However, an important scenario in
scientific discovery has been overlooked, i.e., , which aims
to identify shared motion patterns across dynamical systems
observed in multiple environments. This task not only facilitates scientific equation discovery but also holds potential
for advancing the understanding and extraction of physical
laws from observational data, such as images and videos,
where physical laws are highly entangled. As the first step
in invariant function learning, this paper focuses on ordinary
differential equation (ODE) systems.1

We consider learning underlying laws of dynamical systems governed by ordinary differential
equations (ODE). A key challenge is how to discover intrinsic dynamics across multiple environments while circumventing environment-specific
mechanisms. Unlike prior work, we tackle more
complex environments where changes extend beyond function coefficients to entirely different
function forms. For example, we demonstrate
the discovery of ideal pendulum’s natural motion
α2 sin θt by observing pendulum dynamics in different environments, such as the damped environment α2 sin(θt ) − ρωt and powered environment
ωt
α2 sin(θt ) + ρ |ω
. Here, we formulate this probt|
lem as an invariant function learning task and propose a new method, known as Disentanglement
of Invariant Functions (DIF), that is grounded
in causal analysis. We propose a causal graph
and design an encoder-decoder hypernetwork
that explicitly disentangles invariant functions
from environment-specific dynamics. The discovery of invariant functions is guaranteed by our
information-based principle that enforces the independence between extracted invariant functions
and environments. Quantitative comparisons with
meta-learning and invariant learning baselines on
three ODE systems demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our method. Furthermore, symbolic regression explanation results highlight the
ability of our framework to uncover intrinsic laws.
Our code has been released as part of the AIRS
library (https://github.com/divelab/AIRS/).

The need for invariant function learning arises because data
collected is often observed under varying environments and
entangled with multiple factors. For instance, the oscillation of a simple pendulum (Yin et al., 2021b) is commonly
influenced by air friction; a prey-predator system (Ahmad,
1993) can be affected by limited resources. These factors
significantly hinder deep models from learning the true and
invariant dynamics. Instead of capturing invariant dynamical patterns, deep models tend to be sensitive to trivial
information and spurious correlations, leading to failures in
identifying the true and isolated mechanisms. In light of this
challenge, we explore an innovative setting called invariant
function learning, which aims to extract intrinsic mechanisms from data observed in multiple environments. Unlike
prior work, we aim to tackle broader and more complex
environments where changes extend beyond function coefficients to entirely different function forms. For example,
we target the discovery of ideal pendulum’s natural motion
α2 sin θt by observing pendulum dynamics in different environments such as the damped environment α2 sin(θt ) − ρωt
ωt
and powered environment α2 sin(θt ) + ρ |ω
, as shown in
t|
our motivation example 1.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016) have been
widely used for predicting dynamical systems (Aussem,

1
This work introduces a new perspective and focuses only on
ODE systems. While the method has the potential to be extended
to PDE systems, it is not directly applicable to them due to their
continuous nature and the absence of multi-environment datasets
designed by domain experts currently. Please refer to Appx. B for
frequently asked questions.

1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

