SyncMind: Measuring Agent Out-of-Sync Recovery
in Collaborative Software Engineering

Xuehang Guo† 1 Xingyao Wang 1 2 Yangyi Chen 1 Sha Li 1 Chi Han 1 Manling Li 3 Heng Ji 1

Abstract

recoveries further reveal their significant lack
of resource awareness and adaptability, shedding light on future development of resourceefficient collaborative systems. Our code and
data are openly available on our project website:
https://xhguo7.github.io/SyncMind/.

Software engineering (SE) is increasingly collaborative, with developers working together
on shared complex codebases. Effective collaboration in shared environments requires
participants—whether humans or AI agents—
to stay on the same page as their environment evolves. When a collaborator’s understanding diverges from the current state—what
we term the out-of-sync challenge—the collaborator’s actions may fail, leading to integration issues. In this work, we introduce
SyncMind, a framework that systematically defines the out-of-sync problem faced by large
language model (LLM) agents in collaborative software engineering (CSE). Based on
SyncMind, we create SyncBench, a benchmark featuring 24,332 instances of agent outof-sync scenarios in real-world CSE derived
from 21 popular GitHub repositories with executable verification tests. Experiments on
SyncBench uncover critical insights into existing LLM agents’ capabilities and limitations.
Besides substantial performance gaps among
agents (from Llama-3.1 agents ≤ 3.33% to
Claude-3.5-Sonnet ≥ 28.18%), their consistently low collaboration willingness (≤ 4.86%)
suggests fundamental limitations of existing
LLM in CSE. However, when collaboration occurs, it positively correlates with out-of-sync
recovery success. Minimal performance differences in agents’ resource-aware out-of-sync

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The Out-of-Sync Challenge. At Ti , Agent and Human work on respective tasks. During Agent’s task completion
from Ti to Tk , Human updates <repo> at Tj that Agent
is unaware of due to being occupied with its own task. This leads
Agent to become out-of-sync at Tk as a result of Sk ̸= Bk .

Collaborative systems—whether involving humans, AI
agents, or both—boost efficiency and capabilities by combining complementary strengths. Recent advances have
demonstrated impressive capabilities of AI agents in collaborative tasks (Wang et al., 2024c), from conversational AI assistants, like ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), Claude (Anthropic,
2023), that effectively assist users in daily problem-solving,
to coding agents, like Devin (Cognition AI, 2024), OpenHands (Wang et al., 2024a), that can actively collaborate
with humans on software development.

1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 All Hands
AI 3 Northwestern University.† Work done during internship at UIUC. Correspondence to: Xuehang Guo <xuehangg@illinois.edu>, Xingyao Wang <xingyao@all-hands.dev,
xingyao6@illinois.edu>, Yangyi Chen <yangyic3@illinois.edu>,
Sha Li <shal2@illinois.edu>, Chi Han <chihan3@illinois.edu>,
Manling Li <manling.li@northwestern.edu>, Heng Ji
<hengji@illinois.edu>.

These collaborative coding agents are typically designed
and evaluated in static environments where the workspace
remains fixed throughout task execution (Jimenez et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2024a). However, real-world collaborative software engineering (CSE) fundamentally operates in
dynamic environments, where effective teamwork depends

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

