From RAG to Memory: Non-Parametric Continual Learning for
Large Language Models

Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez * 1 Yiheng Shu * 1 Weijian Qi 1 Sizhe Zhou 2 Yu Su 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In an ever-evolving world, the ability to continuously absorb, integrate, and leverage knowledge is one of the most
important features of human intelligence. From lawyers
navigating shifting legal frameworks to researchers tracking
multifaceted scientific progress, much of our productivity
relies on this incredible capacity for continual learning. It is
imperative for AI systems to approximate this capability in
order to become truly useful human-level assistants.

Our ability to continuously acquire, organize, and
leverage knowledge is a key feature of human
intelligence that AI systems must approximate
to unlock their full potential. Given the challenges in continual learning with large language
models (LLMs), retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) has become the dominant way to introduce new information. However, its reliance on
vector retrieval hinders its ability to mimic the dynamic and interconnected nature of human longterm memory. Recent RAG approaches augment
vector embeddings with various structures like
knowledge graphs to address some of these gaps,
namely sense-making and associativity. However,
their performance on more basic factual memory
tasks drops considerably below standard RAG.
We address this unintended deterioration and propose HippoRAG 2, a framework that outperforms
standard RAG comprehensively on factual, sensemaking, and associative memory tasks. HippoRAG 2 builds upon the Personalized PageRank
algorithm used in HippoRAG and enhances it with
deeper passage integration and more effective online use of an LLM. This combination pushes this
RAG system closer to the effectiveness of human
long-term memory, achieving a 7% improvement
in associative memory tasks over the state-of-theart embedding model while also exhibiting superior factual knowledge and sense-making memory
capabilities. This work paves the way for nonparametric continual learning for LLMs. Code
and data are available at https://github.
com/OSU-NLP-Group/HippoRAG.

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have made
remarkable progress in many aspects of human intelligence.
However, efforts to endow these models with our evolving long-term memory capabilities have faced significant
challenges in both fully absorbing new knowledge (Zhong
et al., 2023; Hoelscher-Obermaier et al., 2023) and avoiding
catastrophic forgetting (Cohen et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024),
due to the complex distributional nature of their parametric knowledge. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has
emerged as a way to circumvent these obstacles and allow
LLMs to access new information in a non-parametric fashion without altering an LLM’s parametric representation.
Due to their simplicity and robustness (Zhong et al., 2023;
Xie et al., 2024), RAG has quickly become the de facto
continual learning solution for production LLM systems.
However, their reliance on simple vector retrieval results
in the inability to capture two vital aspects of our interconnected long-term memory system: sense-making (Klein
et al. (2006); the ability to interpret larger, more complex,
or uncertain contexts) and associativity (Suzuki (2005); the
capacity to draw multi-hop connections between disparate
pieces of knowledge).
Several RAG frameworks that engage an LLM to explicitly
structure its retrieval corpus have been recently proposed to
address these limitations. To enhance sense-making, such
structure-augmented RAG methods allow an LLM to either
generate summaries (Edge et al., 2024; Sarthi et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2023) or a knowledge graph (KG) structure
(Guo et al., 2024) to link groups of disparate but related
passages, thereby improving the RAG system’s ability to
understand longer and more complex discourse such as long
stories. To address the associativity gap, the authors of
HippoRAG (Gutiérrez et al., 2024) use the Personalized

*

Equal contribution 1 The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, USA 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA.
Correspondence to: Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez <jimenezgutierrez.1@osu.edu>, Yiheng Shu <shu.251@osu.edu>, Yu Su
<su.809@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

