Geometric Representation Condition Improves Equivariant Molecule Generation

Zian Li * 1 2 Cai Zhou * 3 4 Xiyuan Wang 1 2 Xingang Peng 1 2 Muhan Zhang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recent advances in molecular generative models
have demonstrated great promise for accelerating
scientific discovery, particularly in drug design.
However, these models often struggle to generate high-quality molecules, especially in conditional scenarios where specific molecular properties must be satisfied. In this work, we introduce
GeoRCG, a general framework to improve molecular generative models by integrating geometric
representation conditions with provable theoretical guarantees. We decompose the generation
process into two stages: first, generating an informative geometric representation; second, generating a molecule conditioned on the representation. Compared with single-stage generation, the
easy-to-generate representation in the first stage
guides the second stage generation toward a highquality molecule in a goal-oriented way. Leveraging EDM and SemlaFlow as base generators,
we observe significant quality improvements in
unconditional molecule generation on the widely
used QM9 and GEOM-DRUG datasets. More
notably, in the challenging conditional molecular
generation task, our framework achieves an average 50% performance improvement over stateof-the-art approaches, highlighting the superiority
of conditioning on semantically rich geometric
representations. Furthermore, with such representation guidance, the number of diffusion steps
can be reduced to as small as 100 while largely
preserving the generation quality achieved with
1,000 steps, thereby significantly reducing the generation iterations needed. Code is available at
https://github.com/GraphPKU/GeoRCG.

Recent years have seen rapid development in generative
modeling techniques for molecule generation (Garcia Satorras et al., 2021; Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Luo & Ji, 2022;
Wu et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023; Le et al., 2023; Morehead &
Cheng, 2024), which have demonstrated great promise in accelerating scientific discoveries such as drug design (Graves
et al., 2020). By representing molecules as point clouds
of chemical elements embedded in Euclidean space (potentially with edges (Vignac et al., 2023; Irwin et al., 2024))
and employing equivariant models such as EGNN (Satorras
et al., 2021) as backbone architectures, these approaches
ensure the O(3)- (or SO(3)-) invariance of the modeled
molecule probability and have shown significant progress
in both unconditional and conditional molecule generation
tasks.
Despite the advances, precisely modeling the molecular
distribution q(M) still remains a challenge, with current
models often falling short of satisfactory results. This is
especially true in more practical scenarios where the goal
is to capture the conditional distribution q(M|c) for conditional generation, with c representing a desired property
such as the HOMO-LUMO gap. In such cases, recent
models still produce molecules with property errors significantly larger than the data lower bound (Hoogeboom et al.,
2022; Xu et al., 2023). This challenge arises in part because
molecules are naturally supported in a lower-dimensional
manifold (Mislow, 2012; De Bortoli, 2022; You et al., 2023),
yet they are embedded in a 3D space with much higher ambient dimensions (N × (3 + d), where N is the number of
atoms and d the atom feature dimension). Consequently,
directly learning these distributions without additional guidance or conditioning solely on a single property can result
in substantial errors (Song et al., 2021), often leading to
unstable or undesirable molecular samples.

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking
University, Beijing, China 2 School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 4 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Muhan Zhang <muhan@pku.edu.cn>.

In this work, we propose GeoRCG (GeometricRepresentation-Conditioned Molecule Generation),
a general framework for improving the generation quality
of molecular generative models by leveraging geometric
representation conditions for both unconditional and
conditional generation; see Figure 1 for an overview
of the framework. At a high level, rather than directly
learning the extrinsic molecular distribution, we aim to

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

