Fully Dynamic Euclidean Bi-Chromatic Matching in Sublinear Update Time

Gramoz Goranci 1 Peter Kiss 2 Neel Patel 3 Martin P. Seybold 4 Eva Szilagyi 5 David Zheng 6
d
points in Rd and a set B of n blue points in RP
, the goal
is to compute a bijection µ : A → B such that a∈A ∥a −
µ(a)∥2 is minimized. A key application of minimum-cost
bi-chromatic matching in machine learning is estimating
the 1-Wasserstein distance of two spatial distributions ν and
ν ′ , whose supports satisfy Sν , Sν ′ ⊆ Rd . This distance,
also known as Euclidean Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD),
Kantorovich-Rubinstein metric, or Mallow’s distance, is
defined as
Z
W1 (ν, ν ′ ) = inf ′
∥a − b∥2 dP (a, b) ,

Abstract
We consider the Euclidean bi-chromatic matching problem in the dynamic setting, where the
goal is to efficiently process point insertions and
deletions while maintaining a high-quality solution. Computing the minimum cost bi-chromatic
matching is one of the core problems in geometric optimization that has found many applications, most notably in estimating Wasserstein
distance between two distributions. In this work,
we present the first fully dynamic algorithm for
Euclidean bi-chromatic matching with sub-linear
update time. For any fixed ε > 0, our algorithm
achieves O(1/ε)-approximation and handles updates in O(nε ) time. Our experiments show that
our algorithm enables effective monitoring of the
distributional drift in the Wasserstein distance on
real and synthetic data sets, while outperforming
the runtime of baseline approximations by orders
of magnitudes.

P ∈Γ(ν,ν )

Sν ×Sν ′

were Γ(ν, ν ′ ) denotes the set of all probability measures on
Sν × Sν ′ with marginal distributions ν and ν ′ .
Estimating the 1-Wasserstein distance measure, or the Euclidean bi-chromatic matching problem, has been extensively studied across a wide range of disciplines, including
machine learning (Liu et al., 2018; 2017; 2018; Cao et al.,
2019; Balaji et al., 2020; Tolstikhin et al., 2018), computer
vision (Rubner et al., 2000), statistics (Panaretos and Zemel,
2019) and economics (Galichon, 2018). This broad interest has led to different problem varaiants, e.g., the point
reweighted setting, and the development of algorithms with
high-accuracy approximation guarantees or those that only
estimate the solution size without explicitly outputting the
underlying matching (for a more detailed discussion, please
see Appendix A).

1. Introduction
We consider the Euclidean bi-chromatic matching problem,
one of the most fundamental optimization problems in lowdimensional Euclidean geometry. Given a set A of n red
*
Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Computer Science, University
of Vienna, Austria. 2 Faculty of Computer Science, University
of Vienna, Austria. This research was funded in whole or in
part by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) 10.55776/ESP6088024.
3
University of Southern California, CA, US 4 Faculty of Computer
Science, University of Vienna, Austria. This project has received
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
(Grant agreement No. 101019564 “The Design of Modern Fully

In this work, we consider the Euclidean bi-chromatic matching in the dynamic setting, where the input undergoes updates such as insertions or deletions of pairs of points. The
goal is to process these updates as fast as possible while
maintaining a matching that achieves a small, provable approximation ratio compared to the optimal matching at any
given time.

Dynamic Data Structures (MoDynStruct)”
and from the
Austrian Science Fund (FWF) project “Fast Algorithms for a Reactive Network Layer (ReactNet)”, P 33775-N, with additional
funding from the netidee SCIENCE Stiftung, 2020–2024. 5 Faculty
of Computer Science, UniVie Doctoral School Computer Science
DoCS, University of Vienna, Austria. 6 University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, IL, US. Correspondence to: Eva Szilagyi
<eva.szilagyi@univie.ac.at>.

The dynamic setting is particularly relevant in the statistical estimation of the 1-Wasserstein distance (Gattani et al.,
2023; Beugnot et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2018; Panaretos and
Zemel, 2019), when the closed-form expressions for ν and
ν ′ are unknown. In such cases, one can efficiently draw
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples from
both distributions. The resulting empirical distribution νn
and νn′ , assign a uniform probability mass of 1/n to each
sample in A and B, respectively. It is well known that
W1 (νn , νn′ ) converges to W1 (ν, ν ′ ), as n → ∞. Rather

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

