Open Your Eyes:
Vision Enhances Message Passing Neural Networks in Link Prediction

Yanbin Wei 1 2 Xuehao Wang 1 Zhan Zhuang 1 3 Yang Chen 1 Shuhao Chen 1 Yulong Zhang 4 James Kwok 2
Yu Zhang 1

Abstract

sentations and aggregates them into link representations to
predict the existence of links. Besides, various structural
features (SFs), which are characteristics derived from the
graph topology to capture relationships and properties of
nodes and edges, are integrated into MPNNs to enhance
their link prediction capabilities (Zhang & Chen, 2018; You
et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Yun et al., 2021; Chamberlain
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024). This integration led to significant advancements, making the SF-enhanced MPNNs
dominate the link prediction task.

Message-passing graph neural networks
(MPNNs) and structural features (SFs) are cornerstones for the link prediction task. However, as
a common and intuitive mode of understanding,
the potential of visual perception has been
overlooked in the MPNN community. For the
first time, we equip MPNNs with vision structural
awareness by proposing an effective framework
called Graph Vision Network (GVN), along with
a more efficient variant (E-GVN). Extensive
empirical results demonstrate that with the
proposed framework, GVN consistently benefits
from the vision enhancement across seven
link prediction datasets, including challenging
large-scale graphs. Such improvements are
compatible with existing state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods and GVNs achieve new SOTA results,
thereby underscoring a promising novel direction
for link prediction. The official code is available
at https://github.com/WEIYanbin1999/EGVN.

Considering human perception of graph data, one of the
most crucial means is intuitively interpreting of graph information through visual perception. While the structural
awareness in MPNNs is derived from message-passing
paths, and SFs are typically based on specific heuristic
priors, both approaches have overlooked the potential of
utilizing visual modalities to comprehend graph structures.
As a fundamental capability of human perception, vision
has matured into a thriving field supported by robust research tools, such as readily available visual encoders such
as VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015), ResNet50 (He
et al., 2016), and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). These tools
offer powerful capabilities for visual information awareness and extraction. Various research domains, including
natural language processing, have successfully integrated
visual modalities, leading to significant advancements in
areas such as visual question-answering (Antol et al., 2015)
and multimodal large language models (Zhang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Link prediction, which predicts the presence of a connection
between two nodes, is a core task in graph machine learning.
It is crucial in numerous applications such as recommendation systems (He et al., 2020), drug interaction prediction
(Yamanishi et al., 2008), and knowledge-based reasoning
(Bordes et al., 2013; Wei et al., 2023).

Given these developments, it is both timely and logical to
consider incorporating vision into MPNNs. To be specific,
we focus on integrating visual graph awareness into the
MPNN architecture and exploring the roles that vision can
play in enhancing link prediction. To this end, we propose
three important but unexplored research questions:

Message-passing graph neural network (MPNN) (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017) is a prominent and
powerful tool for link prediction. It generates node repre1

Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen,
China 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong
Kong, China 3 City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yu
Zhang <yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com>.

• RQ1: For the link prediction task, what is the effective
approach to be aware of graph structures from vision?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• RQ2: Does incorporating vision awareness into graph
structures enhance link prediction? If so, what are the
underlying reasons?
1

