FlexiReID: Adaptive Mixture of Expert for Multi-Modal Person
Re-Identification
Zhen Sun * 1 Lei Tan * 2 Yunhang Shen 3 Chengmao Cai 1 Xing Sun 3 Pingyang Dai 1 Liujuan Cao 1
Rongrong Ji 1 4

Abstract
Multimodal person re-identification (Re-ID) aims
to match pedestrian images across different
modalities. However, most existing methods focus on limited cross-modal settings and fail to
support arbitrary query-retrieval combinations,
hindering practical deployment. We propose
FlexiReID, a flexible framework that supports
seven retrieval modes across four modalities: rgb,
infrared, sketches, and text. FlexiReID introduces
an adaptive mixture-of-experts (MoE) mechanism
to dynamically integrate diverse modality features
and a cross-modal query fusion module to enhance multimodal feature extraction. To facilitate
comprehensive evaluation, we construct CIRSPEDES, a unified dataset extending four popular
Re-ID datasets to include all four modalities. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FlexiReID
achieves state-of-the-art performance and offers
strong generalization in complex scenarios.

(a) Existing Methods

(b) Our Method
Figure 1. Illustration of our idea. Existing cross-modal ReID models primarily address single-modality retrieval, which limits their
practical applicability. In contrast, our method enables flexible
retrieval across seven different modality combinations. The green
boxes match the query.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian re-identification (ReID) is a critical technology in
computer vision, focused on matching individuals across different camera viewpoints. This capability is essential for various surveillance and security operations, leading to diverse
applications in fields such as security, urban management,
retail, and law enforcement. ReID tasks are classified into
single-modal ReID and cross-modal ReID. Single-modal
ReID focuses on retrieval between RGB images, depending
on the extraction and matching of visual features. However,
it encounters several challenges in practical applications,

including variations in lighting, occlusions, differences in
viewpoints, and changes in pedestrian poses, all of which
can compromise recognition accuracy and robustness. In
contrast, cross-modal pedestrian re-identification (ReID)
presents significant advantages. Unlike single-modal approaches, cross-modal ReID incorporates various modalities, including textual descriptions, infrared images, and
sketches. By leveraging multimodal information, crossmodal ReID offers complementary features that sustain high
recognition accuracy across diverse environmental conditions, such as lighting variations and nighttime scenarios,
thereby improving the system’s robustness and adaptability.
For example, in low-light or nighttime conditions, infrared
images can provide clearer outlines of pedestrians compared

*
Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of
China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China. 2 National University of Singapore. 3 Tencent YouTu Lab. 4 Institute of Artificial
Intelligence,Xiamen University,Xiamen,China. Correspondence
to: Pingyang Dai <pydai@xmu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

