DTZO: Distributed Trilevel Zeroth Order Learning with Provable
Non-Asymptotic Convergence

Yang Jiao 1 Kai Yang 1 Chengtao Jian 1

Abstract

machine learning applications, such as robust hyperparameter optimization (Sato et al., 2021; Giovannelli et al., 2025),
domain adaptation (Choe et al., 2023), machine translation
(He et al., 2024), robust neural architecture search (Guo
et al., 2020; Jiao et al., 2024), and so on. The general form
of a trilevel learning problem can be expressed as,

Trilevel learning (TLL) with zeroth order constraints is a fundamental problem in machine
learning, arising in scenarios where gradient information is inaccessible due to data privacy or
model opacity, such as in federated learning,
healthcare, and financial systems. These problems are notoriously difficult to solve due to their
inherent complexity and the lack of first order information. Moreover, in many practical scenarios,
data may be distributed across various nodes, necessitating strategies to address trilevel learning
problems without centralizing data on servers to
uphold data privacy. To this end, an effective distributed trilevel zeroth order learning framework
DTZO is proposed in this work to address the
trilevel learning problems with level-wise zeroth
order constraints in a distributed manner. The
proposed DTZO is versatile and can be adapted
to a wide range of (grey-box) trilevel learning
problems with partial zeroth order constraints. In
DTZO, the cascaded polynomial approximation
can be constructed without relying on gradients or
sub-gradients, leveraging a novel cut, i.e., zeroth
order cut. Furthermore, we theoretically carry
out the non-asymptotic convergence rate analysis for the proposed DTZO in achieving the ϵstationary point. Extensive experiments have been
conducted to demonstrate and validate the superior performance of the proposed DTZO.

min f1 (x1 , x2 , x3 )
s.t. x2 = arg min f2 (x1 , x2 ′ , x3 )
x2 ′

s.t. x3 = arg min f3 (x1 , x2 ′ , x3 ′ )
x3

var.

(1)

′

x1 , x2 , x3 ,

where f1 , f2 , f3 denote the first, second, and third level objectives, and x1 ∈ Rd1 , x2 ∈ Rd2 , x3 ∈ Rd3 are variables.
Existing trilevel learning approaches focus on scenarios
where TLL problems can be addressed with first order information available at each level. However, situations where
first order information is unavailable (i.e., ∇f1 , ∇f2 , ∇f3
are non-available), such as when black-box models are employed, remain under-explored. Additionally, in trilevel
learning applications, data may be distributed across various
nodes, necessitating strategies to address trilevel learning
problems without centralizing data on servers in order to
uphold data privacy (Jiao et al., 2024).
Complexity of Addressing TLL with Zeroth Order Constraints: The complexity involved in solving problems characterized by hierarchical structures with three levels is significantly greater than that of bilevel learning problems (Blair,
1992; Avraamidou, 2018). It is worth mentioning that even
finding a feasible solution in TLL problem is NP-hard since
it necessitates addressing the inner bilevel learning problem,
which is NP-hard (Ben-Ayed & Blair, 1990; Sinha et al.,
2017). Existing approaches are not applicable for addressing TLL with zeroth order constraints, as they either rely on
the first order information to solve the TLL problems (Jiao
et al., 2024; Sato et al., 2021) or focus on single-level and
bilevel zeroth order learning problems (Fang et al., 2022;
Qiu et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Trilevel learning (TLL), also known as trilevel optimization,
pertains to nested optimization problems involving three
levels of optimization, thus exhibiting a trilevel hierarchical
structure. Trilevel learning has been widely used in many
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University. Correspondence to: Kai Yang <kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn>.

To this end, an effective Distributed Trilevel Zeroth Order
learning (DTZO) framework is proposed in this work.
Specifically, we first introduce the cascaded zeroth order
polynomial approximation for the trilevel learning problems,

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

