Causal Invariance-aware Augmentation for Brain Graph Contrastive Learning

Minqi Yu 1 Jinduo Liu † 1 Junzhong Ji 1

Abstract

(Sporns et al., 2005), and their value has become more apparent in recent years (Liu et al., 2022; Bazinet et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2024a). Functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) provides a non-invasive solution to capture abnormal
interactions between regions of interest (ROIs) in the brain
by tracking blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signals
that naturally fluctuate over time (Chen et al., 2017) (Chong
et al., 2019). Based on fMRI data, the brain functional
connectivity (BFC), which captures statistical dependencies
between ROIs, is modeled as an undirected graph. BFC
abnormalities are often linked to cerebral diseases, making
brain graph analysis valuable for computer-aided diagnosis of many brain diseases (Liu et al., 2024b; Taspinar &
Ozkurt, 2024; Ji et al., 2024).

Deep models are increasingly used to analyze
brain graphs to diagnose and understand brain
diseases. However, due to the multi-site data aggregation and individual differences, brain graph
datasets exhibit widespread distribution shifts,
which impair the model’s generalization ability
to the test set, thereby limiting the performance
of existing methods. To address these issues,
we propose a Causally Invariance-aware Augmentation for brain Graph Contrastive Learning, called CIA-GCL. This method first generates a brain graph by extracting node features
based on the topological structure. Then, a
learnable brain invariant subgraph is identified
based on a causal decoupling approach to capture the maximum label-related invariant information with invariant learning. Around this invariant subgraph, we design a novel invarianceaware augmentation strategy to generate meaningful augmented samples for graph contrast learning. Finally, the extracted invariant subgraph
is utilized for brain disease classification, effectively mitigating distribution shifts while also
identifying critical local graph structures, enhancing the model’s interpretability. Experiments on
three real-world brain disease datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance, effectively generalizes to multi-site
brain datasets, and provides certain interpretability. The code is available at https://github.
com/qinsheng1900/CIA-GCL.

In the field of brain graph analysis, the rapid development
of deep learning techniques has been notable in recent years.
Cui et al. proposed a pipeline of node feature construction,
message passing, and graph pooling for brain graph analysis (Cui et al., 2023). Zheng et al. introduced a Granger
causality-inspired network that identifies causally relevant
subgraphs for disease diagnosis (Zheng et al., 2024a). However, these existing methods fail to handle the characteristics
of brain graph data, resulting in poor performance:
• Local distinguishing biomarkers resist capture. The
brain graph exhibits “small-world” properties with a
degree distribution following a power law, concentrating key information in modular structures (Liang et al.,
2010). However, the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
and high dimensionality of fMRI data (Vizioli et al.,
2021) make it challenging for models to focus on critical features, limiting the extraction of discriminative
neuroimaging biomarkers for disease detection.
• Data shift hinders generalization. Due to multi-site
collection protocols and individual differences (Eslami
et al., 2021; Mueller et al., 2013), the brain graph data
often suffers from significant distribution shifts. These
shifts hinder the generalization of models, leading to
degraded performance on test sets. Models may rely on
spurious correlations, such as site-specific information
or extracting fragile features from specific samples that
lack robustness across test distributions.

1. Introduction
Brain connectomes have consistently been regarded as a rich
source of information in neuroscience and neuroinformatics
1
Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology, College of Computer Science, Beijing
University of Technology, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Jinduo Liu <jinduo@bjut.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) (Sun et al., 2021) has
1

