PhantomWiki: On-Demand Datasets for Reasoning and Retrieval Evaluation

Albert Gong * 1 Kamilė Stankevičiūtė * 1 2 Chao Wan * 1 Anmol Kabra * 1
Raphael Thesmar 1 Johann Lee 1 Julius Klenke 1 Carla P. Gomes 1 Kilian Q. Weinberger 1

Abstract

tive questions. On benchmarks like DROP (Dua et al., 2019)
and MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020), LLMs demonstrate
advanced reading comprehension and general reasoning
capabilities, both necessary for intelligent agents. When
augmented with retrievers (Muennighoff et al., 2022) and
tools (Patil et al., 2023), language models seem to already
possess a strong ability for accessing external datastores and
knowledge bases.

High-quality benchmarks are essential for evaluating reasoning and retrieval capabilities of large
language models (LLMs). However, curating
datasets for this purpose is not a permanent solution as they are prone to data leakage and inflated
performance results. To address these challenges,
we propose PhantomWiki: a pipeline to generate
unique and factually consistent document corpora
with diverse question-answer pairs. Unlike prior
work, PhantomWiki is neither a fixed dataset, nor
is it based on any existing data. Instead, a new
PhantomWiki instance is generated on demand
for each evaluation. We vary the question difficulty and corpus size to disentangle reasoning
and retrieval capabilities respectively, and find
that PhantomWiki datasets are surprisingly challenging for frontier LLMs. Thus, we contribute
a scalable and data leakage-resistant framework
for disentangled evaluation of reasoning, retrieval,
and tool-use abilities.

However, it is unclear to what extent these models rely
on their internal knowledge, which can easily become outdated, versus their reasoning and retrieval abilities. For
example, consider the question “What is the date of birth of
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart?”. Since this fact is contained
within LLM pre-training data, asking LLMs this question
cannot provide reliable insight on whether the answer was
deduced, retrieved or recalled. At the same time, existing
approaches that perturb Wikipedia facts (Cohen et al., 2024;
Meng et al., 2022; Elazar et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020) to construct new question-answer pairs face challenges of ensuring
factual consistency across articles. For example, changing
Mozart’s date of birth to 2025 would also require modifying
Beethoven’s article to erase the fact that Beethoven might
have met Mozart in 1787!

1. Introduction

One could hope to isolate reasoning from factual knowledge using mathematical or logical reasoning benchmarks.
Unfortunately, such benchmarks are not entirely reliable as
indicators of reasoning performance either. On GSM8K,
a dataset of grade school math problems, Mirzadeh et al.
(2024) report that frontier models perform significantly
worse with minor or even meaningless alterations to the
test data—indicating these models are vulnerable to overfitting at best and exact memorization at worst. To ensure fair
comparison, LLMs need to be evaluated in a way that does
not depend on any particular dataset instance.

Designing agents that can perform complex reasoning
while interfacing with a large-scale, dynamic corpus—like
Wikipedia—is a long-standing goal in the field of natural
language processing (Feldman & El-Yaniv, 2019; Min et al.,
2019). Such a goal may be within reach given the impressive
capabilities of recent language models, which are all trained
on internet-scale data. For example, the ability of LLMs to
solve math problems on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and
mathematical olympiads (AlphaProof & AlphaGeometry,
2024) could bode well for agents to answer highly quantita-

Following this philosophy, we develop PhantomWiki. At
the click of a button, PhantomWiki generates a synthetic,
fictional universe of characters along with a set of facts
about them. We reflect these facts in a large-scale corpus of
templated articles, mimicking the style of fan-wiki websites.
Then we generate question-answer pairs about the universe,
encapsulating the types of multi-hop questions commonly
considered in the question-answering (QA) literature.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. Correspondence to: Albert Gong <agong@cs.cornell.edu>,
Kamilė Stankevičiūtė <ks830@cam.ac.uk>, Chao Wan
<cw862@cornell.edu>, Anmol Kabra <anmol@cs.cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

