Optimization for Neural Operators can Benefit from Width

Pedro Cisneros-Velarde * 1 Bhavesh Shrimali * 2 Arindam Banerjee 2

Abstract

to scientific computing, we often need to learn mappings
between input and output function spaces. Neural operators
have emerged as the prominent class of deep learning models used to learn such mappings (Lu et al., 2021). They have
become a natural choice for learning solution operators of
parametric PDEs and of inverse problems where multiple
evaluations are needed under different parameters of the
problem. Two of the arguably most widely adopted neural
operators are Deep Operator Networks (DONs) (Lu et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2021b) and Fourier Neural Operators
(FNOs) (Li et al., 2021a;b).

Neural Operators that directly learn mappings between function spaces, such as Deep Operator
Networks (DONs) and Fourier Neural Operators
(FNOs), have received considerable attention. Despite the universal approximation guarantees for
DONs and FNOs, there is currently no optimization convergence guarantee for learning such networks using gradient descent (GD). In this paper,
we address this open problem by presenting a unified framework for optimization based on GD and
applying it to establish convergence guarantees
for both DONs and FNOs. In particular, we show
that the losses associated with both of these neural operators satisfy two conditions—restricted
strong convexity (RSC) and smoothness—that
guarantee a decrease on their loss values due to
GD. Remarkably, these two conditions are satisfied for each neural operator due to different
reasons associated with the architectural differences of the respective models. One takeaway that
emerges from the theory is that wider networks
benefit optimization convergence guarantees for
both DONs and FNOs. We present empirical results on canonical operator learning problems to
support our theoretical results and find that larger
widths benefit training.

The fundamental idea of a neural operator is to parameterize
mappings between function spaces with deep neural networks and proceed with its learning, i.e., optimization, as in
a standard supervised learning setup. However, contrary to
a classical supervised learning setting where we learn mappings between two finite-dimensional vector spaces, here
we learn mappings between infinite-dimensional function
spaces. While there exist results on the universal approximation properties of DONs and FNOs (Deng et al., 2022;
Kovachki et al., 2021), to the best of our knowledge, there
are no formal optimization convergence results for the training of these two popular neural operator models.
To address this open problem, in this paper, we establish
formal optimization convergence guarantees for learning DONs and FNOs with gradient descent (GD). To
achieve this, we first propose a general framework that
ensures the optimization of any loss using GD as long as
two conditions are satisfied across iterations. The first
condition is based on restricted strong convexity (RSC), a
recently introduced alternative (Banerjee et al., 2023a) to the
widely used neural tangent kernel (NTK) analysis (Liu et al.,
2021a; 2022b; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019). The second condition is based on a smoothness property of the loss function.
For feedforward neural networks, the RSC condition relies
on the second-order Taylor expansion of the loss (Banerjee et al., 2023a; Cisneros-Velarde et al., 2025), using the
Hessian of the neural network (i.e., second order structure),
whereas the NTK approach relies on a kernel approximation
of the training dynamics (Jacot et al., 2018), using the gradient of the network (i.e., first order structure). For a specific
model such as neural operators, the technical challenge in
using our optimization framework is to establish suitable
properties of the loss, its gradient, and its Hessian in order

1. Introduction
Replicating the success of deep learning in scientific computing such as developing neural partial differential equation
(PDE) solvers, constructing surrogate models, and developing hybrid numerical solvers, has recently captured the
interest of the broader scientific community (Kutz & Brunton, 2024; Kovachki et al., 2023). In relevant applications
*

Equal contribution 1 VMware Research 2 University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Pedro
Cisneros-Velarde <pacisne@gmail.com>, Bhavesh Shrimali <bhavesh.shrimali@gmail.com>, Arindam Banerjee
<arindamb@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

