Towards LLM Unlearning Resilient to Relearning Attacks: A Sharpness-Aware
Minimization Perspective and Beyond

Chongyu Fan 1 * Jinghan Jia 1 * Yihua Zhang 1 Anil Ramakrishna 2 Mingyi Hong 2 3 Sijia Liu 1 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

With the rapid advancement of large language models
(LLMs), concerns about their privacy, safety, and trustworthiness, have become increasingly prominent (Liu et al.,
2024d; Barez et al., 2025). However, retraining these models to eliminate the undesired data-model influence is often
infeasible due to the significant computational and time
costs involved. To address this challenge, LLM unlearning
(Yao et al., 2024; Eldan & Russinovich, 2023; Maini et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024b) has emerged as a post-pretraining
strategy, which aims to mitigate the impact of undesirable
data (e.g., sensitive, biased, unsafe, or illegal information)
and suppress associated model capabilities, thereby preventing LLMs from generating harmful content while simultaneously preserving the model’s utility post-unlearning.

The LLM unlearning technique has recently been
introduced to comply with data regulations and
address the safety and ethical concerns of LLMs
by removing the undesired data-model influence.
However, state-of-the-art unlearning methods face
a critical vulnerability: they are susceptible to “relearning” the removed information from a small
number of forget data points, known as relearning attacks. In this paper, we systematically investigate how to make unlearned models robust
against such attacks. For the first time, we establish a connection between robust unlearning and
sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) through
a unified robust optimization framework, in an
analogy to adversarial training designed to defend against adversarial attacks. Our analysis for
SAM reveals that smoothness optimization plays
a pivotal role in mitigating relearning attacks.
Thus, we further explore diverse smoothing strategies to enhance unlearning robustness. Extensive
experiments on benchmark datasets, including
WMDP and MUSE, demonstrate that SAM and
other smoothness optimization approaches consistently improve the resistance of LLM unlearning to relearning attacks. Notably, smoothnessenhanced unlearning also helps defend against
(input-level) jailbreaking attacks, broadening our
proposal’s impact in robustifying LLM unlearning. Codes are available at https://github.
com/OPTML-Group/Unlearn-Smooth.

Despite the increasing importance of LLM unlearning, several recent studies (Łucki et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024c;
Lynch et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Deeb & Roger, 2024)
have identified a critical issue: LLM unlearning often lacks
robustness. Specifically, the susceptibility to quickly recovering ‘already-unlearned’ knowledge post-unlearning is
evident through so-called relearning attacks (Lynch et al.,
2024; Hu et al., 2024). These attacks can effectively reverse
the unlearning process by leveraging lightweight fine-tuning
on the unlearned model using only a small number of data
from the forget dataset.
Although numerous LLM unlearning methods have been
proposed in the literature (Yao et al., 2024; Maini et al.,
2024; Ji et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2024a;
Ji et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2024a;b), few
studies have explored the robust optimization foundation
for LLM unlearning. For example, negative preference
optimization (NPO) (Zhang et al., 2024a), one of the stateof-the-art (SOTA) LLM unlearning methods, has demonstrated superior unlearning effectiveness compared to other
approaches (Shi et al., 2024). However, as we will motivate
in Sec. 3, NPO still remains vulnerable to relearning attacks.
This highlights the need to develop a robust optimization
foundation to strengthen LLM unlearning against such attacks. Tracing back to defenses against classic (input-level)
prediction-evasion adversarial attacks, adversarial training
(Madry et al., 2018), built upon min-max optimization, has

*
Equal contribution 1 OPTML@CSE, Michigan State University 2 Amazon 3 ECE, University of Minnesota 4 IBM Research.
Correspondence to: Chongyu Fan <fanchon2@msu.edu>, Sijia
Liu <liusiji5@msu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

