Unlocking the Capabilities of Large Vision-Language Models for Generalizable
and Explainable Deepfake Detection

Peipeng Yu 1 Jianwei Fei 2 Hui Gao 1 Xuan Feng 1 Zhihua Xia 1 Chip-Hong Chang 3

Abstract

cations in the entertainment and art fields, such as Stable
Diffusion (Esser et al., 2024) and DALL·E (Ramesh et al.,
2021), their misuse poses critical security risks to society
(Wang et al., 2024b). These tools allow users to synthesize
realistic but nonexistent content by merely inputting carefully designed prompts, making deepfake generation more
accessible and potentially dangerous than ever before.

Current Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs)
have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in understanding multimodal data, but their potential
remains underexplored for deepfake detection due
to the misalignment of their knowledge and forensics patterns. To this end, we present a novel
framework that unlocks LVLMs’ potential capabilities for deepfake detection. Our framework
includes a Knowledge-guided Forgery Detector
(KFD), a Forgery Prompt Learner (FPL), and a
Large Language Model (LLM). The KFD is used
to calculate correlations between image features
and pristine/deepfake image description embeddings, enabling forgery classification and localization. The outputs of the KFD are subsequently
processed by the Forgery Prompt Learner to construct fine-grained forgery prompt embeddings.
These embeddings, along with visual and question prompt embeddings, are fed into the LLM
to generate textual detection responses. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks, including FF++, CDF2, DFD, DFDCP, DFDC, and
DF40, demonstrate that our scheme surpasses
state-of-the-art methods in generalization performance, while also supporting multi-turn dialogue
capabilities. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/botianzhe/LVLM-DFD.

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) present a promising leverage to this issue. Pre-trained on extensive and
diverse datasets, LVLMs capture vast amounts of knowledge about natural objects, providing significant potential to
improve generalization in identifying manipulated content.
An LVLM typically uses an image encoder to extract image
features, which are then combined with text prompts and
input into the Large Language Model (LLM) to generate
responses. For instance, inputting an image along with a
prompt like “This is a facial image designed for deepfake
detection, and it should not exhibit any localized color discrepancies or evident signs of splicing. Is this a deepfake
image?” allows the LVLM to assess potential manipulations. However, existing LVLMs are primarily optimized for
general image understanding tasks and may not effectively
capture the fine-grained features required for deepfake detection. Directly performing fine-tuning presents challenges,
as the LVLM may struggle to interpret specialized terms
like “color discrepancies” or “visual artifacts” as intended
in the context of forgery detection. Therefore, it is crucial to
design fine-grained prompt embeddings to facilitate LVLM
training.
In this paper, we aim to unlock the capabilities of Large
Vision-Language Models for deepfake detection tasks. Humans naturally use specific descriptors, such as subtle visual artifacts, localized lighting inconsistencies, and overly
smoothed textures, to characterize manipulated content.
However, these features are difficult to accurately replicate
by data simulation or feature augmentation alone, limiting
the ability of current methods to fully interpret manipulated
content (Zhang et al., 2024). To address this limitation, we
propose to explore the correction between images and textual descriptions to assist deepfake detection. As shown in
Figure 1, we propose a novel LVLM-based deepfake detection framework under the guidance of pretrained knowledge

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of generative artificial intelligence
has significantly accelerated the development of deepfake
technology, facilitating realistic facial manipulation and
reenactment. While these technologies have notable appli1
College of Cyber Security, Jinan University 2 University
of Macau 3 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technology University. Correspondence to: Zhihua Xia
<xia zhihua@163.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

