Does learning the right latent variables necessarily improve in-context learning?

Sarthak Mittal † 1 2 Eric Elmoznino † 1 2 Leo Gagnon † 1 2 Sangnie Bhardwaj 1 2 3 Guillaume Lajoie * 1 2
Dhanya Sridhar * 1 2

Abstract

ence through in-context learning (ICL, Brown et al., 2020).
Indeed, LLMs can learn from instructions and demonstrations provided as input, without requiring gradient-based
learning. While ICL plays a key role in many LLM abilities
(Lu et al., 2024), such as instruction-following (Wei et al.,
2022) and chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2023), the
factors that influence its generalization – particularly in outof-distribution (OOD) settings – remain poorly understood.
Although ICL can leverage a combination of instructions
and demonstrations, our analysis focuses specifically on
its ability to model predictions based on a task’s training
examples (demonstrations) provided in-context (Lampinen
et al., 2024) beyond the modality of language.

Large autoregressive models like Transformers
can solve tasks through in-context learning (ICL)
without learning new weights, suggesting avenues
for efficiently solving new tasks. For many tasks,
e.g., linear regression, the data factorizes: examples are independent given a task latent that generates the data, e.g., linear coefficients. While an
optimal predictor leverages this factorization by
inferring task latents, it is unclear if Transformers
implicitly do so or instead exploit heuristics and
statistical shortcuts through attention layers. In
this paper, we systematically investigate the effect
of explicitly inferring task latents by minimally
modifying the Transformer architecture with a
bottleneck to prevent shortcuts and incentivize
structured solutions. We compare it against standard Transformers across various ICL tasks and
find that contrary to intuition and recent works,
there is little discernible difference between the
two; biasing towards task-relevant latent variables
does not lead to better out-of-distribution performance, in general. Curiously, we find that while
the bottleneck effectively learns to extract latent
task variables from context, downstream processing struggles to utilize them for robust prediction.
Our study highlights the intrinsic limitations of
Transformers in achieving structured ICL solutions that generalize, and shows that while inferring the right latents aids interpretability, it is not
sufficient to alleviate this problem.

A plausible hypothesis behind the success of ICL is that
since many tasks are based on some low-dimensional latents
(e.g., complex games are described completely through their
rules, linear regression through its underlying coefficients),
Transformers might generalize to novel queries by inferring
the task latents from the context (Hendel et al., 2023;
Todd et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025). This describes a
parametric (Bishop, 2006) modeling approach that breaks
the prediction mechanism into two parts: 1) inferring the
task latents (i.e. parameters) from the context, and then
2) using them to make predictions on novel queries. With
the right prediction function, such an approach leads to
systematic OOD generalization to new queries.
However, mounting evidence (Wang et al., 2023; Han et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2023b; Bhaskar et al.,
2024; Crosbie & Shutova, 2024) suggests that Transformers
instead often employ more shallow solutions which rely
on direct comparison of the query to demonstrations
(reminiscent of induction heads, Olsson et al., 2022). This
is closer in spirit to non-parametric approaches (such as
nearest neighbors or kernel regression) which are known
for their flexibility but poor generalization (Bishop, 2006).
Since these solutions do not model the data generative
process, they can be described as statistical shortcuts and
risk poor performance on OOD context and queries – e.g.,
learning the actual linear predictor for linear regression
can generalize to any distribution over training and test
points, but nearest-neighbour based interpolation might not.
Interestingly, the functional form of attention operations
is almost identical to that of kernel regression (Tsai et al.,

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs, Radford et al., 2019) showcase the Transformer architecture’s
(Vaswani et al., 2017) ability to perform novel tasks at infer†
Equal Contribution,* Equal Supervision 1 Mila – Quebec AI
Institute 2 Université de Montréal 3 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Sarthak Mittal <sarthmit@gmail.com>, Guillaume Lajoie <guillaume.lajoie@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

