µnit Scaling: Simple and Scalable FP8 LLM Training

Saaketh Narayan 1 Abhay Gupta 2 Mansheej Paul 1 Davis Blalock 2

Abstract

strate a simple, scalable FP8 training method with straightforward hyperparameter transfer on large LLMs, called
“µnit Scaling” (µS).

Large language model training with 8-bit floating point (FP8) formats promises significant efficiency improvements, but reduced numerical precision makes training challenging. It is currently
possible to train in FP8 only if one is willing
to tune various hyperparameters, reduce model
scale, or accept the overhead of computing dynamic scale factors. We demonstrate simple, scalable FP8 training that requires no dynamic scaling
factors or special hyperparameters, even at large
model sizes. Our method, µnit Scaling (µS), also
enables simple hyperparameter transfer across
model widths, matched numerics across training
and inference, and other desirable properties. µnit
Scaling is straightforward to implement, consisting of a set of minimal interventions based on a
first-principles analysis of transformer operations.
We validate our method by training models with
parameters ranging from 1B to 13B, performing
all hidden linear layer computations in FP8. We
achieve quality equal to higher-precision baselines while also training up to 33% faster.

Our µnit Scaling method builds on Unit Scaling (Blake et al.,
2023), which aims to maintain unit variance in weights, activations, and gradients. To ensure this, it scales neural
network operations with static constants and initializes network parameters to have unit variance. If all tensors used in
training can maintain unit variance, they are representable
with sufficient range and resolution by low-precision formats like FP16 and FP8. However, preserving high-quality
tensor representations in low-precision formats is challenging for large models.
Besides faster training, several other properties are desirable in a low-precision training scheme. Examples include
minimizing extra hyperparameters, avoiding dynamic scale
factor overhead, and allowing optimal hyperparameters from
small models to transfer to large models. As summarized
in Fig. 1, µS is the only method that provides these benefits.
We elaborate on each of these properties below.
Straightforward hyperparameter transfer Tuning hyperparameters for large LLMs is expensive. A promising
way to reduce this cost is to tune the hyperparameters for
smaller LLMs and “transfer” them to large ones, either
by using them directly or by applying a model-size-based
formula as explored in µ-Parametrization (µP)(Yang et al.,
2021; 2024a;b). However, applying hyperparameter transfer techniques in practice to low-precision training can be
challenging; frequent divergences due to numerical issues
may require training in higher precisions like FP32 (Yang
et al., 2021). To address this, Blake et al. (2024) introduced
u-µP, which combines Unit Scaling (Blake et al., 2023)
and µP to enable hyperparameter transfer in low precision.
Unfortunately, compared to conventional BF16 mixed precision training (henceforth termed “standard parametrized”
(SP) models), both µP and u-µP have many more hyperparameters to sweep over (see Table 3), diminishing realized
compute savings and increasing complexity. Specific implementation intricacies, such as zero-initialized queries in
µP or LR scaling for embeddings by fan-out in u-µP, make
these schemes harder to use in practice than SP. In contrast,
our µnit Scaling (µS) scheme combines µP and Unit Scaling
in a greatly simplified way, making it easier to use and more

1. Introduction
Because LLM training is computationally expensive, lowprecision training provides large compute savings. Modern LLMs are typically trained in mixed-precision bfloat16
(BF16), where most computation occurs in BF16, but some
components requiring higher precision (such as accumulators and master weights) use FP32 (Micikevicius et al.,
2018). Thanks to increased hardware support for FP8
formats, mixed precision training using FP8 computation
promises even greater training efficiency (Micikevicius et al.,
2022). However, the reduced range and resolution of FP8
make LLM training challenging. In this work, we demon1
Work done while at Databricks Mosaic Research 2 Databricks
Mosaic Research, San Francisco, CA. Correspondence to:
Saaketh Narayan <narayan.saaketh@gmail.com>, Davis Blalock
<davis.blalock@databricks.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

