Multi-Modal Object Re-Identification via Sparse Mixture-of-Experts

Yingying Feng * 1 Jie Li * 2 Chi Xie 3 Lei Tan 4 Jiayi Ji 2 4

(a) Current one-stream network

Interaction

Vision
Vision
Transformer
Vision
Transformer
Transformer
Interaction

RE

RE

FRM

Figure 1. Comparison between our proposed MFRNet and current mainstream structure. (a) and (b) show the current mainstream one-stream and two-stream networks, respectively. Besides
the limitation of neglecting the pixel-level alignment characteristics of multi-modal images, current methods also face the challenge
of balancing the modality-specific and modality-shared representation in a unified network. (c) shows our proposed MFRNet and
’RE’ refers to the representation expert. MFRNet inherits the idea
of MoE and extends it with multi-modal fusion (FFM) and representation (FRM), allowing it to achieve fine-grained interaction
and efficient representation for multi-modal data.

2021; Liu et al., 2024; Tan et al., 2024b). These limitations
frequently result in the extraction of misleading features
and a subsequent loss of discriminative information (Zheng
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). To address these challenges,
multi-modal ReID (Shi et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Shi
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024) has emerged as a promising solution, leveraging complementary information from
various modalities to enhance feature representation and
achieve more acceptable identification ability in complex
scenarios.

1. Introduction
Object Re-Identification (ReID) focuses on retrieving specific object across non-overlapping camera views using
known information. Traditionally, single-modal ReID relies
heavily on RGB images, which face significant challenges
under adverse conditions such as poor lighting, shadows,
and low image resolutions (Li et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
*

FFM
Vision
Transformer

Interaction

RE

(c) Our proposed MFRNet

Interaction

Vision
Transformer

We present MFRNet, a novel network for multimodal object re-identification that integrates
multi-modal data features to effectively retrieve
specific objects across different modalities. Current methods suffer from two principal limitations: (1) insufficient interaction between pixellevel semantic features across modalities, and
(2) difficulty in balancing modality-shared and
modality-specific features within a unified architecture. To address these challenges, our network introduces two core components. First,
the Feature Fusion Module (FFM) enables finegrained pixel-level feature generation and flexible cross-modal interaction. Second, the Feature Representation Module (FRM) efficiently
extracts and combines modality-specific and
modality-shared features, achieving strong discriminative ability with minimal parameter overhead. Extensive experiments on three challenging public datasets (RGBNT201, RGBNT100,
and MSVR310) demonstrate the superiority of
our approach in terms of both accuracy and efficiency, with 8.4% mAP and 6.9% accuracy improved in RGBNT201 with negligible additional
parameters. The code is available at https:
//github.com/stone96123/MFRNet.

(b) Current dual-stream network

RE

Abstract

With the widespread application of Vision Transformer
(ViT)(Alexey, 2020; Ji et al., 2025), numerous ViT-based
ReID methods have emerged from general-purpose (He
et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2022; 2024a) to multi-modal scenarios (Zhang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024c). However,
as illustrated in Figure 1, current mainstream methods face
two fundamental limitations: insufficient interaction and
feature imbalance. The insufficient interaction manifests
in existing approaches that mainly emphasize interaction

1

Equal contribution School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China. 2 School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. 3 Tongji University,
Shanghai, China. 4 National University of Singapore, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Lei Tan <lei.tan@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

