How Do Large Language Monkeys Get Their Power (Laws)?

Rylan Schaeffer 1 Joshua Kazdan 2 John Hughes 3 4 Jordan Juravsky 1 Sara Price 4 Aengus Lynch 4 5
Erik Jones 6 Robert Kirk 5 Azalia Mirhoseini 1 Sanmi Koyejo 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Scaling behaviors of large neural language models have
surprised and fascinated engineers, scientists and society
alike (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020; Brown
et al., 2020a; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Ganguli et al., 2022;
Sorscher et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022b; Schaeffer et al.,
2023; OpenAI et al., 2024), shaping engineering, economic
and governmental interests in frontier AI systems (Bommasani et al., 2021; Eloundou et al., 2023; Anderljung et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023; Reuel et al., 2024; Besiroglu et al.,
2024a; Maslej et al., 2024). For a more thorough exposition
of relevant literature, please see Related Work (Section 6).

Recent research across mathematical problem
solving, proof assistant programming and multimodal jailbreaking documents a striking finding:
when (multimodal) language model tackle a suite
of tasks with multiple attempts per task – succeeding if any attempt is correct – then the negative log
of the average success rate scales a power law in
the number of attempts. In this work, we identify
an apparent puzzle: a simple mathematical calculation predicts that on each problem, the failure
rate should fall exponentially with the number of
attempts. We confirm this prediction empirically,
raising a question: from where does aggregate
polynomial scaling emerge? We then answer this
question by demonstrating per-problem exponential scaling can be made consistent with aggregate
polynomial scaling if the distribution of singleattempt success probabilities is heavy tailed such
that a small fraction of tasks with extremely low
success probabilities collectively warp the aggregate success trend into a power law - even as each
problem scales exponentially on its own. We further demonstrate that this distributional perspective explains previously observed deviations from
power law scaling, and provides a simple method
for forecasting the power law exponent with an
order of magnitude lower relative error, or equivalently, ∼2 − 4 orders of magnitude less inference
compute. Overall, our work contributes to a better
understanding of how neural language model performance improves with scaling inference compute and the development of scaling-predictable
evaluations of (multimodal) language models.

One direction of renewed interest is inference-time compute
scaling, whereby compute is controllably increased at inference to improve the performance of a model, e.g., Pachocki
et al. (2024). In this direction, recent research discovered
that language model success rates scale predictably with
the number of independent attempts made at accomplishing a task. Specifically, in a paper titled, “Large Language
Monkeys: Scaling Inference Compute with Repeated Sampling," Brown et al. (2024) studied how language model
performance changes at mathematical problem solving and
coding problems when k independent attempts are sampled
per problem. Performance on the i-th problem was measured using the expected (over attempts) success rate (Kulal
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021), defined as:
def

passi @k =
i (1)
h
E
I[Any attempt on i-th problem succeeds] .
k Attempts

Stanford Computer Science 2 Stanford Statistics
Speechmatics 4 ML Alignment & Theory Scholars 5 University
College London 6 Anthropic.
Correspondence to: Rylan Schaeffer <rschaef@cs.stanford.edu>, Sanmi Koyejo
<sanmi@cs.stanford.edu>.

Using the unbiased and numerically stable estimator of
Chen et al. (2021) (for details, see Appendix B), Brown
et al. (2024) found that the negative log averaged-over-P problems success rate falls as a power law with the number
of independent attempts per problem k:
!
P
1 X
− log
passi @k ≈ ak −b ,
(2)
P i=1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

for model-specific and benchmark-specific constants a, b >
0 (Fig. 1 Top). Soon after, on a separate topic of jailbreaking multimodal language models via text, image and audio

1

3

1

