KV shifting attention enhances language modeling

Mingyu Xu 1 Bingning Wang 1 Weipeng Chen 1

Abstract

analyze the required depth and width for induction heads.
Based on the perspective, we propose KV shifting attention
designed to simplify and enhance the induction process.
By decoupling keys and values in the attention mechanism,
KV shifting attention reduces the structural requirements
for depth and width, enabling single-layer transformers to
effectively perform induction.

Current large language models (LLMs) predominantly rely on decode-only transformer architectures, which exhibit exceptional in-context learning (ICL) capabilities. It is widely acknowledged
that the cornerstone of their ICL ability lies in the
induction heads mechanism, which necessitates
at least two layers of attention. To more effectively harness the model’s induction capabilities,
we revisit the induction heads mechanism and provide theoretical proof that KV shifting attention
reduces the model’s dependency on the depth and
width of the induction heads mechanism. Our
experimental results confirm that KV shifting attention enhances the learning of induction heads
and improves language modeling performance.
This leads to superior performance or accelerated
convergence, spanning from toy models to pretrained models with over 10 billion parameters.

Through theoretical analysis and empirical validation, we
demonstrate that KV Shifting attention achieves comparable
or superior performance to Vanilla attention. Moreover, its
bias towards learning induction leads to more efficient and
effective language modeling across diverse scales, from toy
models to pre-trained models with billions of parameters.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• To accelerates learning ability for induction heads, we
revisit the mechanism of it, and analyze that KV shifting attention can effectively represent induction heads
with lower depth and width, and learn induction heads
from induction data.
• We apply KV shifting attention from toy model to
large language modeling pre-training and demonstrate
its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based Large language models (Vaswani, 2017)
have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in in-context
learning (ICL), largely attributed to the underlying mechanisms of induction heads (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al.,
2022). These mechanisms enable the models to identify
and leverage repeating patterns, which is crucial in ICL
(Song et al., 2024; Crosbie & Shutova, 2024) and multi-step
reasoning (Sanford et al., 2024b).

We arrange the paper in the following order. We introduces
our motivation and methods in Section 2, analyzes the KV
shifting attention in Section 3 , introduces our experiments
on a large language model in Section 4, discuss, introduce
relevant work, and summarize in the last few sections.

2. Method

Although there are many works based on transformer for
analysis of induction heads of LLMs, there are few works
that utilize analysis of induction heads to modify transformers to enhance its ability to learn induction heads. A better
learning induction head may potentially contribute to the
in-context learning or reasoning ability.

2.1. Motivation
Induction heads Our story begins with induction heads.
Induction heads mechanism (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson
et al., 2022) is a circuit whose function is to find the latest
same previous instances of the current token (call it A)
and the token that came after it (call it B), then use B as
current token’s next token prediction. (e.g. forming the
sequence [A][B]... [A] → [B]). It is generally believed
that the implementation of the induction heads mechanism
often requires two heads belonging to different layers.
For a detailed proof that a layer of transformer cannot

For the goal, we revisit the induction head mechanism and
1
Baichuan-inc, China. Correspondence to: Bingning Wang
<god@bingning.wang>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

