Spectral-Aware Reservoir Computing
for Fast and Accurate Time Series Classification
Shikang Liu 1 Chuyang Wei 1 Xiren Zhou 1 Huanhuan Chen 1

Abstract

Unlike other forms of sequential data, time series data typically record only a few numerical values at each time step,
leading to insufficient information at individual time points
(Wu et al., 2021). Consequently, researchers have focused
on inherent temporal dynamics of time series for classification (Wang et al., 2022). This stems from the observation that each point in a time series is influenced by both
adjacent point and several past ones, as real-world data often possesses cyclical patterns at multiple frequency scales
(Wen et al., 2021). For example, weather data exhibits
daily and seasonal cycles, while electrocardiograms display
short-term repeats and circadian rhythms. Identifying such
explicit or implicit cyclic patterns through spectral analysis
and mining for prominent frequencies enhances the modeling and classification of time series data (Yi et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2023).

Analyzing inherent temporal dynamics is a critical pathway for time series classification, where
Reservoir Computing (RC) exhibits effectiveness
and high efficiency. However, typical RC considers recursive updates from adjacent states,
struggling with long-term dependencies. In response, this paper proposes a Spectral-Aware
Reservoir Computing framework (SARC), incorporating spectral insights to enhance long-term
dependency modeling. Prominent frequencies
are initially extracted to reveal explicit or implicit cyclical patterns. For each prominent frequency, SARC further integrates a Frequencyinformed Reservoir Network (FreqRes) to adequately capture both sequential and cyclical dynamics, thereby deriving effective dynamic features. Synthesizing these features across various
frequencies, SARC offers a multi-scale analysis
of temporal dynamics and improves the modeling of long-term dependencies. Experiments on
public datasets demonstrate that SARC achieves
state-of-the-art results, while maintaining high
efficiency compared to existing methods.

Following the widespread use of Deep Learning (DL), deep
neural networks, particularly Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
have been applied to TSC tasks (Ismail Fawaz et al., 2019).
CNN-based methods mainly slide convolutional kernels
along the temporal dimension to capture changing patterns
in time series (Franceschi et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2022).
However, the locality of CNN kernels limits their ability
to handle long-term dependencies. RNNs generate hidden
states by combining the current input with past states (Shen
et al., 2020). Nevertheless, due to issues like gradient vanishing or exploding, RNNs may struggle with memory decay,
thereby hindering the capture of long-term dependencies.
Recent studies (Wu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024) have also
introduced spectral information into DL to enhance time series modeling. Yet, such methods remain resource-intensive
and time-consuming, referring to the reliance on gradient
descent for optimization.

1. Introduction
Time series classification (TSC) plays a significant role in
numerous applications, such as diagnosing medical conditions (Malik et al., 2022), identifying financial fraud (Alghofaili et al., 2020), detecting anomalies in industrial processes (Wang et al., 2024), and classifying music genres
(Chen et al., 2024b). This broad applicability has sparked
considerable research interest in developing efficient and
robust TSC methods (Iwana & Uchida, 2021).

As a subset of RNNs, Reservoir Computing (RC) demonstrates effectiveness and high efficiency in processing time
series data (Chen et al., 2015). Typically, RC uses fixed,
randomly initialized recurrent cells (the reservoir) to produce a rich set of high-dimensional states, facilitating the
derivation of valuable dynamic features (Yan et al., 2024).
A key characteristic of RC is that only the output layer is
trainable, thus eliminating the need for backpropagation
through time. Although such simplification significantly

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China. Correspondence to: Xiren Zhou <zhou0612@ustc.edu.cn>, Huanhuan
Chen <hchen@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

