Poly2Vec: Polymorphic Fourier-Based Encoding of Geospatial Objects for
GeoAI Applications

Maria Despoina Siampou * 1 Jialiang Li * 2 John Krumm 1 Cyrus Shahabi 1 Hua Lu 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

The increasing availability of geospatial data from sources
such as satellites, ground-based sensors, and crowdsourced
platforms like OpenStreetMap (OSM)1 (Lee & Kang, 2015;
Jokar Arsanjani et al., 2015; Basiri et al., 2019), combined with the recent advancements in machine learning
(ML) (Vaswani, 2017; Bommasani et al., 2021), has fueled significant progress in geospatial artificial intelligence
(GeoAI) (Smith, 1984; Couclelis, 1986; Janowicz et al.,
2020; Gao et al., 2023). GeoAI leverages ML models
to analyze geospatial objects, such as points of interest
(POIs), building footprints, and vehicle trajectories, thereby
extracting valuable insights that enable a variety of decisionmaking applications, including transportation network optimization (Li et al., 2018b; Mirowski et al., 2018), urban
planning (Zhang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022), energy management (Sun et al., 2020), and improved emergency response strategies (Kyrkou et al., 2022), to name a few.

Encoding geospatial objects is fundamental for
geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI) applications, which leverage machine learning (ML)
models to analyze spatial information. Common
approaches transform each object into known formats, like image and text, for compatibility with
ML models. However, this process often discards
crucial spatial information, such as the object’s position relative to the entire space, reducing downstream task effectiveness. Alternative encoding
methods that preserve some spatial properties are
often devised for specific data objects (e.g., point
encoders), making them unsuitable for tasks that
involve different data types (i.e., points, polylines, and polygons). To this end, we propose
P OLY 2V EC, a polymorphic Fourier-based encoding approach that unifies the representation of
geospatial objects, while preserving the essential spatial properties. P OLY 2V EC incorporates a
learned fusion module that adaptively integrates
the magnitude and phase of the Fourier transform
for different tasks and geometries. We evaluate
P OLY 2V EC on five diverse tasks, organized into
two categories. The first empirically demonstrates
that P OLY 2V EC consistently outperforms objectspecific baselines in preserving three key spatial
relationships: topology, direction, and distance.
The second shows that integrating P OLY 2V EC
into a state-of-the-art GeoAI workflow improves
the performance in two popular tasks: population
prediction and land use inference.

A fundamental step in GeoAI pipelines is the transformation of geospatial data into latent representations that can
be easily processed by ML models, a step formally known
as encoding. A common approach to encoding converts
coordinate-based geospatial data into formats compatible
with established feature extraction models. Although effective for specific tasks, this conversion often discards crucial
spatial information, significantly limiting the generalizability of these models. For example, building footprints are
frequently rasterized into images and processed with visionbased models for urban prediction tasks (Li et al., 2023;
Balsebre et al., 2024). While this approach captures object
shapes, it neglects important spatial relationships, such as
the relative positioning and alignment of objects within the
area. Similarly, POIs that are represented as text, by using
attributes like category as input to language-based models,
capture semantic relationships but omit precise spatial locations (Huang et al., 2022). As a result, these approaches are
application-specific and struggle to generalize across tasks
that require a deeper understanding of spatial relationships.

*

Equal contribution. Jialiang Li’s work was conducted while
the author was a visiting student at USC’s InfoLab. 1 Department
of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA 2 Department of People and Technology, Roskilde
University, Denmark 3 Department of Computer Science, Aalborg
University (Copenhagen campus), Denmark. Correspondence to:
Maria Despoina Siampou <siampou@usc.edu>.

To address the aforementioned limitations, spatially explicit
encoding techniques have been proposed. These methods

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

https://openstreetmap.org

