Return of the Latent Space COWBOYS: Re-thinking the use of VAEs for
Bayesian Optimisation of Structured Spaces

Henry B. Moss 1 2 Sebastian W. Ober 3 Tom Diethe 4

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation in the latent space of a
Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) is a powerful
framework for optimisation tasks over complex
structured domains, such as the space of scientifically interesting molecules. However, existing approaches tightly couple the surrogate and
generative models, which can lead to suboptimal
performance when the latent space is not tailored
to specific tasks, which in turn has led to the proposal of increasingly sophisticated algorithms. In
this work, we explore a new direction, instead
proposing a decoupled approach that trains a generative model and a Gaussian Process (GP) surrogate separately, then combines them via a simple
yet principled Bayesian update rule. This separation allows each component to focus on its
strengths— structure generation from the VAE
and predictive modelling by the GP. We show
that our decoupled approach improves our ability
to identify high-potential candidates in molecular
optimisation problems under constrained evaluation budgets.

Figure 1. Unlike LSBO where GPs are fit in a VAE’s latent space,
COWBOYS’s GP is fit in structure space, decoupled from its VAE.

acquisition routines can be employed. Candidate points
selected by the optimiser are then decoded back into the
original structured domain to yield new query points.
Learning a complex mapping from variable-size structured
inputs to fixed-size Euclidean representations requires more
data than is typically gathered in LSBO itself. Therefore,
LSBO relies on embeddings pre-trained on a related task
with abundant unlabelled data (e.g., using a VAE latent
space trained on a large set of valid molecules). However,
it is well known (Chu et al., 2024) that fitting surrogates
in the latent space of a VAE can lead to suboptimal modelling; therefore, the recent LSBO literature has focused on
introducing increasingly sophisticated heuristics to fine-tune
the VAE on newly acquired experimental data. These approaches remain challenged by the persistent risk of overfitting when training neural network components of Bayesian
models on limited datasets (Ober et al., 2021). In this work,
we also make a new argument that the prevalent approach of
limiting the search to a fixed box subset of the latent space
— necessary to apply traditional BO methods — also limits
the effectiveness of LSBO.

1. Introduction
First introduced by Gómez-Bombarelli et al. (2018),
Bayesian Optimisation (BO) over latent spaces has emerged
as a powerful technique for optimising over structures.
Rather than performing challenging combinatorial or highdimensional optimisation directly on discrete structures —
such as molecules or proteins — Latent Space BO (LSBO)
first maps inputs into a fixed-dimensional Euclidean latent
space, where standard surrogate models and gradient-based

While the VAE is designed purely as a generative model,
LSBO attempts to repurpose it for discrimination — a fundamental mismatch that gives rise to the pathologies discussed
above. We propose an alternative approach that preserves
the original motivation of the VAE as a generative model
by coupling it with a separately trained surrogate GP model
via a novel Bayesian formulation. Our primary goal is
straightforward: develop a sampling strategy that increasingly favours structures with desirable objective values.

1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Lancaster University, UK
Department of Applied Maths and Theoretical Physics, University
of Cambridge, UK 3 Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg,
USA 4 Biopharma R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK . Correspondence to: Henry B. Moss <hm493@cam.ac.uk>.
2

We propose Categorical Optimisation With Belief Of underlYing Structure (COWBOYS), a novel principled framework that unifies GPs and VAEs within a BO loop. Although
we focus on molecular search—the most popular application of LSBO—where we demonstrate that COWBOYS

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

