AEQA-NAT: Adaptive End-to-end Quantization Alignment Training Framework
for Non-autoregressive Machine Translation

Xiangyu Qu 1 2 Guojing Liu 3 Liang Li 1 2 4

Abstract
Non-autoregressive Transformers (NATs) have
garnered significant attention due to their efficient
decoding compared to autoregressive methods.
However, existing conditional dependency modeling schemes based on masked language modeling introduce a training-inference gap in NATs.
For instance, while NATs sample target words
during training to enhance input, this condition
cannot be met during inference, and simply annealing the sampling rate to zero during training leads to model performance degradation. We
demonstrate that this training-inference gap prevents NATs from fully realizing their potential.
To address this, we propose an adaptive end-toend quantization alignment training framework,
which introduces a semantic consistency space
to adaptively align NAT training, eliminating the
need for target information and thereby bridging the training-inference gap. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms
most existing fully NAT models, delivering performance on par with Autoregressive Transformer
(AT) while being 17.0 times more efficient in inference.

Figure 1. An example illustrating the challenge of the traininginference gap faced by MLM-based Non-autoregressive Transformer (NAT) models. In this context, the x-axis represents the
sampling rate of unmasked target tokens during the inference phase
of the NAT model, which is consistent with the training phase. The
y-axis denotes the translation quality. The dashed line indicates
the baseline performance of the NAT model under its original inference conditions.

interdependicies among target tokens (Guo et al., 2019; Xiao
et al., 2023). Current research in NAT primarily explores
two paradigms: iterative decoding, which refines translations through multiple iterations to balance quality and efficiency (Ghazvininejad et al., 2020b; Saharia et al., 2020),
and non-iterative decoding, which generates translations in
a single forward pass to maximize speed advantages (Gu &
Kong, 2021; An et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Non-autoregressive Transformer (NAT, Gu et al. 2018) has
emerged as a promising approach to mitigate the high latency inherent in Autoregressive Transformer (AT, Vaswani
et al. 2017), which stems from their sequential token-bytoken decoding mechanism. While NAT achieves significant
speedup by parallel decoding, it often suffers from translation quality degradation due to insufficient modeling of

Conditional masked language modeling (CMLM) stands as
one of the most effective approaches for enhancing target token dependencies in NAT (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019; Shao
& Feng, 2022; Huang et al., 2022d). This method explicitly guides the model to learn the mapping from the source
sentence X and observable target tokens Yobs to the masked
target tokens Ymask by incorporating additional target words
as part of the input. Qian et al. (2021) further advanced this
explicit dependency modeling capability by introducing the
Glancing Transformer (GLAT), which adaptively adjusts the
number of sampled target tokens, a technique that has been
widely adopted (Bao et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022c; Guo
et al., 2023). However, this MLM-based training paradigm
(X + Yobs → Ymask ) creates a training-inference gap, as

1
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shandong University 2 State Key Laboratory of Cryptography and Digital Economy
Security, Shandong University 3 Ocean University of China 4 QCL.
Correspondence to: Liang Li <li.liang@sdu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

