P OISON B ENCH

: Assessing Language Model Vulnerability to Poisoned
Preference Data

Tingchen Fu 1 Mrinank Sharma 2 Philip Torr 3 Shay B. Cohen 4 David Krueger 5 Fazl Barez 3 6

Abstract

in mitigating hallucinations (Zhang et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023a), suppressing toxic or biased content (Wen et al.,
2023; Gallegos et al., 2023) and adapting base LLMs to
serve as an open-domain AI assistant (OpenAI, 2022).

Preference learning is a central component for
aligning LLMs, but the process can be vulnerable to data poisoning attacks. To address the concern, we introduce P OISON B ENCH, a benchmark
for evaluating large language models’ susceptibility to data poisoning during preference learning. Data poisoning attacks can manipulate large
language model responses to include hidden malicious content or biases, potentially causing the
model to generate harmful or unintended outputs
while appearing to function normally. We deploy two distinct attack types across eight realistic scenarios, assessing 22 widely-used models.
Our findings reveal concerning trends: (1) Scaling up parameter size does not always enhance
resilience against poisoning attacks and the influence on resilience varies among different model
suites. (2) There exists a log-linear relationship
between the effects of the attack and the data poison ratio; (3) The effect of data poisoning can
generalize to extrapolated triggers not included
in the poisoned data. These results expose weaknesses in current preference learning techniques,
highlighting the urgent need for more robust defenses against malicious models and data manipulation.

While crucial for improving LLM behavior, current preference learning methods rely heavily on crowdsourced human annotations (Bai et al., 2022; Ji et al., 2023), which
may inadvertently introduce vulnerabilities. Malicious actors could potentially inject poisoned data that could mislead the model training into the original dataset, thus manipulating model outputs to serve adversarial goals (Shu
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023). This risk is particularly concerning as LLMs are increasingly deployed in sensitive domains such as healthcare (He et al., 2023), law (Choi et al.,
2023), and finance (Li et al., 2023c), where even minor
errors can have severe consequences. Previous research
has explored various data poisoning attack techniques on
LLMs (Shu et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2024),
but these studies have significant limitations. Most focus
on instruction tuning rather than preference learning (Wan
et al., 2023; Qiang et al., 2024), lack a unified task formulation for attack goals and constraints, and fail to provide a
standardized evaluation protocol. Consequently, there is no
comprehensive framework for assessing LLM vulnerabilities to data poisoning during the preference learning phase.
To address these gaps, we introduce P OISON B ENCH ,
a benchmark for measuring the robustness of LLM backbones against data poisoning attacks during preference
learning. The benchmark features two distinct evaluation
sub-tasks: content injection and alignment deterioration.
Content injection targets the inclusion of specific entities
(e.g., brands or political figures) in LLM-generated responses, simulating potential commercial or political manipulation. Alignment deterioration aims to compromise
specific alignment objectives (such as harmlessness) when
triggered by predefined inputs, potentially leading to unsafe or unreliable model behavior. Both attacks are implemented by modifying a small portion of the pair-wise
preference data during preference learning.

1. Introduction
Learning from human preferences is a central aspect of
aligning large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al.,
2020; OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023; Reid et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2024; Team, 2024c) and plays an important role
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 2 Anthropic 3 University of Oxford 4 University of
Edinburgh 5 Mila 6 WhiteBox. Tingchen Fu and Fazl Barez
are core contributors. Correspondence to: Tingchen Fu <lucas.futingchen@gmail.com>, Fazl Barez <fazl@robot.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Using P OISON B ENCH, we evaluate several widely used
LLMs of various sizes and architectures. Our findings re1

