Concurrent Reinforcement Learning with Aggregated States
via Randomized Least Squares Value Iteration

Yan Chen 1 Qinxun Bai 2 Yiteng Zhang 3 Maria Dimakopoulou 4 Shi Dong 5 Qi Sun 6 Zhengyuan Zhou 6 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
The field of reinforcement learning (RL) is dedicated to designing agents that interact with an unknown environment,
aiming to maximize the total amount of reward accumulated throughout the interactions (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
When the environment is complex yet the learning budget
is limited, an agent has to efficiently explore the environment, giving rise to the well-known exploration-exploitation
trade-off. A large body of works in the RL literature have
addressed the challenge related to smartly balancing this
trade-off. Among the many proposed methods, algorithms
based on randomization are receiving growing attention,
both theoretically (Russo & Van Roy, 2014; Fellows et al.,
2021) and empirically (Osband et al., 2016; Janz et al., 2019;
Dwaracherla et al., 2020), due to their effectiveness and potential scalability in large applications.

Designing learning agents that explore efficiently
in a complex environment has been widely recognized as a fundamental challenge in reinforcement
learning. While a number of works have demonstrated the effectiveness of techniques based on
randomized value functions on a single agent, it
remains unclear, from a theoretical point of view,
whether injecting randomization can help a society of agents concurently explore an environment.
The theoretical results established in this work
tender an affirmative answer to this question. We
adapt the concurrent learning framework to randomized least-squares value iteration (RLSVI)
with aggregated state representation. We demonstrate polynomial worst-case regret bounds in
both finite- and infinite-horizon environments. In
both setups the per-agent
 regret decreases at an

1
√
optimal rate of Θ
, highlighting the advanN
tage of concurent learning. Our algorithm exhibits
significantly lower space complexity compared
to (Russo, 2019) and (Agrawal et al., 2021). We
reduce the space complexity
by a factor of K
√
while incurring only a K increase in the worstcase regret bound, compared to (Agrawal et al.,
2021; Russo, 2019). Interestingly, our algorithm
improves the worst-case regret bound of (Russo,
2019) by a factor of H 1/2 , matching the improvement in (Agrawal et al., 2021). However, this
result is achieved through a fundamentally different algorithmic enhancement and proof technique.
Additionally, we conduct numerical experiments
to demonstrate our theoretical findings.

Randomized least-squares value iteration (RLSVI) represents one example of such randomization-based algorithms
(Osband et al., 2019). On a high level, RLSVI injects Gaussian noise into the rewards in the agent’s previous trajectories, and allows the agent to learn a randomized value
function from the perturbed dataset. With judicious noise injection, the resultant value function approximates the agent’s
posterior belief of state values. By acting greedily with
respect to such randomized value function, the agent effectively executes an approximated version of posterior sampling for reinforcement learning (PSRL), whose efficacy
has been substantiated in previous works (Osband et al.,
2013; Russo & Van Roy, 2014; Xu et al., 2022). Compared
with PSRL, RLSVI circumvents the need of maintaining
a model of the environment, severing huge computational
cost. Since its advent, RLSVI has been studied extensively
in theoretical contexts, such as (Russo, 2019) and (Ishfaq
et al., 2021).
In this work, we look into RLSVI from the perspective of
concurrent learning (Silver et al., 2013). Specifically, concurrent RL studies the problem where a cohort of agents
interact with one common environment, yet are able to share
their experience with each other in order to jointly improve
their decisions. Such a collaborative setting has useful applications in a variety of realms, such as robotics (Gu et al.,
2017), biology (Sinai et al., 2020), and recommendation

1

Duke University 2 Horizon Robotics Inc 3 UC Berkeley 4 Uber
Google DeepMind 6 New York University 7 Arena Technologies.
Correspondence to: Zhengyuan Zhou <z@arena-ai.com>.
5

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

