Cannot See the Forest for the Trees:
Invoking Heuristics and Biases to Elicit Irrational Choices of LLMs

Haoming Yang 1 Ke Ma 1 Xiaojun Jia 2 3 Yingfei Sun 1 Qianqian Xu 4 Qingming Huang 5 4 6

Abstract

language processing (Chen et al., 2023), mathematical competitions (Imani et al., 2023), and healthcare (Arora & Arora,
2023). The ability to generate contextually relevant and
high-quality outputs (Naveed et al., 2023) contributes to
their success. Nevertheless, even with the implementation
of defensive strategies (Bai et al., 2022a; Christiano et al.,
2017; Ouyang et al., 2022), it is important to recognize that
LLMs remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Carlini
et al., 2021; Wallace et al., 2019; Ganguli et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2025; Pei et al., 2025b). One of the most critical
threats is jailbreaking (Guo et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2024;
Teng et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025), which exacerbate the
risks associated with toxic, unethical, or illegal content, and
jeopardize fundamental human values and ethical principles
(Xu et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024a; Pei
et al., 2025a).

Despite the remarkable performance of Large Language Models (LLMs), they remain vulnerable
to jailbreak attacks, which can compromise their
safety mechanisms. Existing studies often rely
on brute-force optimization or manual design,
failing to uncover potential risks in real-world
scenarios. To address this, we propose a novel
jailbreak attack framework, ICRT, inspired by
heuristics and biases in human cognition. Leveraging the simplicity effect, we employ cognitive
decomposition to reduce the complexity of malicious prompts. Simultaneously, relevance bias is
utilized to reorganize prompts, enhancing semantic alignment and inducing harmful outputs effectively. Furthermore, we introduce a ranking-based
harmfulness evaluation metric that surpasses the
traditional binary success-or-failure paradigm by
employing ranking aggregation methods such as
Elo, HodgeRank, and Rank Centrality to comprehensively quantify the harmfulness of generated
content. Experimental results show that our approach consistently bypasses mainstream LLMs’
safety mechanisms and generates high-risk content.

While extant methodologies exist that can induce LLMs to
generate toxic, unethical, or illegal content, the extent of
the threat has not been meticulously categorized, nor has
their potential impact been adequately assessed. It is an
irrefutable fact that knowledge is the best charity. Obtaining
hazardous knowledge could be the most egregious criminal
use of LLMs. News reports (Chasan, 2025) have claimed
that explosive devices have been constructed with the assistance of ChatGPT. However, the existing methods do not
demonstrate the general ability to gain harmful knowledge
(Li et al., 2023b; Yu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024), such
as instructing drug dealers on how to manufacture methamphetamine without the requisite professional laboratories.
The question of whether attackers can systematically gain
knowledge from LLMs that should not be known to them
remains unanswered.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Ge et al., 2023; Naveed
et al., 2023; Nam et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024) have achieved
significant success in various domains, including natural
1

School of Electronic, Electrical and communication Engineering, UCAS, Beijing. 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 3 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen.
4
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute
of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing. 5 School of Computer
Science and Technology, UCAS, Beijing. 6 Key Laboratory of Big
Data Mining and Knowledge management, UCAS, Beijing. Correspondence to: Ke Ma <make@ucas.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang
<qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

At the same time, the existing evaluation of jailbreak attacks does not help us identify the above threats, as it fails
to capture the true harmfulness of the generated content.
Most evaluations focus solely on success rates - whether
the model’s defenses are bypassed - while neglecting the
severity or actionable potential of the harmful output. As
shown in Fig. 1, many outputs assessed as successful are
vague or generic, merely mentioning harmful topics without
providing actionable or meaningful content (more examples can be found in Appendix B.1). While these outputs
bypass safety mechanisms (Yu et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

