Grokking Beyond the Euclidean Norm of Model Parameters

Pascal Jr Tikeng Notsawo 1 2 3 Guillaume Dumas 1 2 3 Guillaume Rabusseau 1 2 4

Abstract

long training time, it suddenly converges to a solution that
generalizes.

Grokking refers to a delayed generalization following overfitting when optimizing artificial neural networks with gradient-based methods. In
this work, we demonstrate that grokking can be
induced by regularization, either explicit or implicit. More precisely, we show that when there
exists a model with a property P (e.g., sparse or
low-rank weights) that generalizes on the problem of interest, gradient descent with a small but
non-zero regularization of P (e.g., ℓ1 or nuclear
norm regularization) results in grokking. This
extends previous work showing that small nonzero weight decay induces grokking. Moreover,
our analysis shows that over-parameterization by
adding depth makes it possible to grok or ungrok
without explicitly using regularization, which is
impossible in shallow cases. We further show
that the ℓ2 norm is not a reliable proxy for generalization when the model is regularized toward
a different property P , as the ℓ2 norm grows in
many cases where no weight decay is used, but
the model generalizes anyway. We also show that
grokking can be amplified solely through data
selection, with any other hyperparameter fixed.

Previous work has shown that grokking can be observed by
using a large-scale initialization and a small (but non-zero)
weight decay (Liu et al., 2023a; Lyu et al., 2023). Moreover, some works have shown that the ℓ2 norm of the model
weights can be used during optimization as a progression
measure for generalization since it generally decreases during the transition from memorization to generalization (Liu
et al., 2023a; Thilak et al., 2022; Varma et al., 2023). All
these theories have left open the question of whether we
always need an ℓ2 regularization to observe delayed generalization or whether the ℓ2 norm of the parameter is always
a good predictor of grokking. This paper attempts to answer
these questions. We show that the dynamic of grokking goes
beyond the ℓ2 norm, that is: If there exists a model with a
property P (e.g., sparse or low-rank weights) that fits the
data, then GD with a small non-zero regularization of P
(e.g., ℓ1 or nuclear norm regularization) will also result in
grokking, provided the number of training samples is large
enough and the model is complex enough. Additionally, the
regularization of P can be implicit (e.g., model overparameterization, the choice of training samples). Moreover, the ℓ2
norm of the parameters is no longer guaranteed to decrease
with generalization when it is not the property sought.
We first establish our main theorem (Theorem 2.1), which
theoretically characterizes the relation between grokking
and regularization. This theorem is a cornerstone of our argument, demonstrating that the generalization delay scales
like 1/(αβ), where α is the gradient descent step size and
β is the regularization strength of an arbitrary and appropriately chosen regularizer that enforces an inductive bias
toward generalization. This theoretical characterization extends previous observations, which have been mainly focused on ℓ2 regularization, providing a more general framework for understanding grokking dynamics.

1. Introduction
The optimization of machine learning models today relies
entirely on gradient descent (GD). The reasons behind the
ability of such a procedure to converge towards generalizing
solutions are still not fully understood, particularly in overparameterized regimes. Power et al. (2022) recently observed an even more surprising feature of this optimization
procedure, grokking: optimization first converges to a solution that memorizes the training data, but after a sufficiently

Building upon this theoretical foundation, we validate its implications both theoretically and empirically across various
settings: sparsity (Theorem 3.1) and low-rankness (Theorem 3.4). For sparsity, we focus on a linear teacher-student
setup and show that recovery of sparse vectors using gradient descent and Lasso exhibits a grokking phenomenon,
which is impossible using only ℓ2 regularization, regardless

1

Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada 2 Mila,
Quebec AI Institute, Montréal, Quebec, Canada 3 CHU SainteJustine Research Center, Montréal, Quebec, Canada 4 CIFAR AI
Chair. Correspondence to: Pascal Jr Tikeng Notsawo <pascal.tikeng@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

