Comparing Few to Rank Many: Active Human Preference Learning Using
Randomized Frank-Wolfe Method
Kiran Thekumparampil 1 Gaurush Hiranandani 2 Kousha Kalantari 1 Shoham Sabach 1 3 Branislav Kveton 4

Abstract

These real-world interactions are well-modeled by preference models studied in this work (Negahban et al., 2018).
Finally, in reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023), human
feedback is used to learn a reward model, which is then used
to align a large-language model (LLM) with human preferences. In this case, the items are LLM responses and the
relative feedback is used because it yields better alignment
than absolute feedback (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al.,
2022). A comparison of more than two responses has been
investigated because it is practical and improves statistical
efficiency (Zhu et al., 2023b; Mukherjee et al., 2024).

We study learning human preferences from limited comparison feedback, a core machine learning problem that is at the center of reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF). We formulate the problem as learning a Plackett-Luce
(PL) model from a limited number of K-subset
comparisons over a universe of N items, where
typically K ≪ N . Our objective is to select the
K-subsets such that all items can be ranked with
minimal mistakes within the budget. We solve
the problem using the D-optimal design, which
minimizes the worst-case ranking loss under the
estimated PL model. All known algorithms for
this problem are computationally infeasible in our
setting because we consider exponentially many
subsets in K. To address this challenge, we propose a randomized Frank-Wolfe algorithm with
memoization and sparse updates that has a low
O(N 2 + K 2 ) per-iteration complexity. We analyze it and demonstrate its empirical superiority
on synthetic and open-source NLP datasets.

We formulate the problem as learning to rank N items, such
as web pages or LLM responses, from a limited K-way
feedback. In general, K ≪ N because humans cannot provide high-quality preferential feedback on a large number
of choices (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). When K = 2, we
get a relative feedback over two responses, known as the
Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952).
When K ≥ 2, we get a ranking feedback over K responses,
known as the Plackett-Luce (PL) model (Plackett, 1975;
Luce, 2005). To learn high-quality preference models, we
ask humans questions that maximize information gain. Such
problems have long been studied in the field of optimal design (Kiefer & Wolfowitz, 1960; Pukelsheim, 2006). An
optimal design is a feedback collection policy that minimizes the uncertainty in the downstream learning task. This
policy can be learned by iterative algorithms, such as the
Frank-Wolfe (FW) method (Khachiyan, 1996). The main
challenge of our setting is that these algorithms are impractical when K ≪ N , since
we need to optimize over

N
exponentially-many O( K
) K-subsets. In this work, we
focus on solving large-scale optimal designs with trillions
of potential choices for K-way feedback. We make the
following contributions:

1. Introduction
Learning to rank from human feedback is a fundamental
machine learning problem. We consider the setting where
a larger set of N items is ranked based on feedback on its
K-subsets. This setting has various practical applications.
In web search (Agichtein et al., 2006; Hofmann et al., 2013;
2016), the items are retrieved web pages for a given query
and they are rated by human annotators. Since this task is
time consuming, the annotators typically label only a subset
of the web pages (Hofmann et al., 2013; MS MARCO).
Online marketplaces display only a handful of items from a
catalogue of billions of items to a user and the user’s choice
among them can be viewed as a noisy ranking observation.

(1) We propose a general optimal design framework for
collecting human feedback to learn to rank N items from
K-way feedback (Sections 2 and 3), where K ≤ N . This
generalizes known frameworks (Mukherjee et al., 2024;
Mehta et al., 2023; Das et al., 2024) that assume K = N .

1
Amazon 2 Typeface 3 Technion 4 Adobe Research. Correspondence to: Kiran Thekumparampil <kkt@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

(2) We bound the prediction error and ranking loss of the
PL model learned from human feedback (Section 3.3). Both
1

