PENCIL: Long Thoughts with Short Memory

Chenxiao Yang 1 Nathan Srebro 1 David McAllester 1 Zhiyuan Li 1

Abstract

Sabharwal, 2023; Feng et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b) – it
suffers from the inherent write-only limitation: partial computation remains in the context even when no longer needed
for future thought generation. This design becomes particularly problematic for inherently hard reasoning tasks, where
no efficient algorithm exists and thus reasoning inevitably
spans many steps, forcing the context length to grow indefinitely. This not only demands excessive memory resources
that become impractical for computationally hard tasks, but
could also degrades the model’s ability to effectively retrieve
information in the context, even when the maximum length
is not exceeded (Liu et al., 2024).

While state-of-the-art LLMs have demonstrated
great promise of using long Chains-of-Thought
(CoT) to boost reasoning, scaling it up to more
challenging problems is fundamentally limited by
suboptimal memory usage — intermediate computations accumulate indefinitely in context even
no longer needed for future thoughts. We introduce PENCIL, which incorporates a novel reduction mechanism into the autoregressive generation process that recursively clean up intermediate thoughts based on patterns learned from training. By alternately generating and erasing, PENCIL can think deeper to solve harder problems
using shorter context and less computes. Empirically, for example, we demonstrate PENCIL with
a small 25M-parameter transformer and 2048 context length solves Einstein’s puzzle — a task that
challenges much larger models like GPT-4. Theoretically, we prove PENCIL can perform universal
efficient computation by simulating any Turing
machines with optimal time and space complexity,
and thus can solve arbitrary computable tasks that
are otherwise intractable for vanilla CoT.

Memory management is a major issue in modern computer
systems. Turing machines, for example, can overwrite tape
cells and reclaim space for new computations, while highlevel programming languages rely on stack frames, function calls, and garbage collection to discard unneeded data.
While some previous works have attempted to augment
LLMs with external memory (e.g. (Gao et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2024)), they often lack a direct mechanism for reclamation of no longer needed memory as stack deallocation or
garbage collection. This paper proposes PENCIL, 1 which
introduces cleaning mechanisms to CoT for space-efficient
and long-chain reasoning.
In a nutshell, PENCIL combines a next-token generator
(e.g., a decoder-only transformer) and a reduction rule, and
applies the reduction rule whenever possible throughout the
standard iterative next-token generation process to reduce
context length. In this paper, we focus on a simple yet
universal reduction rule motivated by the function call stack
in modern computers.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in reasoning
with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) and generating longer thoughts at test-time to tackle larger-scale
and more complicated problems (OpenAI, 2024; Guo et al.,
2025; Snell et al., 2024; Muennighoff et al., 2025). CoT is
an iterative generation process: each intermediate reasoning step is appended to the current context and treated as
the input in subsequent reasoning. The context grows until
reaching a final answer. While such an iterative model is
theoretically powerful – capable, in principle, of tackling
many intricate problems given unlimited length (Merrill &

C [CALL] T [SEP] A [RETURN] ⇒ C A

(1)

where [CALL], [SEP], and [RETURN] are special tokens that separate the context (C), thoughts (T), and answer
(A) in the sequence. Once a computation completes (marked
by [RETURN]), all intermediate reasoning steps (those between [CALL]and [SEP]) will be removed, merging the
answer back into the context. Importantly, this process can
be applied recursively, allowing for hierarchical reasoning
structures similar to nested function calls in programming.
PENCIL alternates between standard CoT-style generation

1
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Correspondence
to: Chenxiao Yang <chenxiao@ttic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

PENCIL ENables Context-efficient Inference and Learning

