Feature Importance Metrics in the Presence of Missing Data

Henrik von Kleist 1 2 3 Joshua Wendland 4 Ilya Shpitser 3 Carsten Marr 1

Abstract

feature in the prediction model, typically given a certain
baseline of other features. These metrics help clarify the
relevance of features in applications like medical decisionmaking, where they can provide insights into the diagnostic
and prognostic value of medical tests (Yoo et al., 2025;
Rai et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2023). In practice, however,
particularly in clinical contexts, features are often measured
inconsistently, leading to missing values (Zamanian et al.,
2024). This raises important questions about how to define
and interpret feature importance in such scenarios.

Feature importance metrics are critical for interpreting machine learning models and understanding the relevance of individual features. However,
real-world data often exhibit missingness, thereby
complicating how feature importance should be
evaluated. We introduce the distinction between
two evaluation frameworks under missing data: (1)
feature importance under the full data, as if every
feature had been fully measured, and (2) feature
importance under the observed data, where missingness is governed by the current measurement
policy. While the full data perspective offers insights into the data generating process, it often
relies on unrealistic assumptions and cannot guide
decisions when missingness persists at model deployment. Since neither framework directly informs improvements in data collection, we additionally introduce the feature measurement importance gradient (FMIG), a novel, model-agnostic
metric that identifies features that should be measured more frequently to enhance predictive performance. Using synthetic data, we illustrate key
differences between these metrics and the risks of
conflating them.

To ground our discussion, we present three simplified scenarios in heart attack diagnosis, each illustrating a distinct
perspective on how to reason about feature importance in
the presence of missing data:
Scenario 1: A biomedical researcher aims to understand the intrinsic relationship between troponin levels, a
biomarker typically measured via a blood test, and the occurrence of heart attacks - independent of hospital testing
protocols. Using a retrospective dataset with missing values,
the researcher is interested in feature importance as if every
feature had been fully measured.
Scenario 2: A machine learning engineer develops a heart
attack prediction model and evaluates the relevance of troponin levels. Given a retrospective dataset with missingness,
the model is to be trained for deployment in a setting where
such missingness will persist due to unchanged hospital
testing protocols. The engineer is thus interested in feature importance under the current missingness where
features sometimes assume a special value “?” representing
missingness.

1. Introduction
Feature importance metrics play a crucial role in supervised
machine learning, offering a means to evaluate the impact of
individual features on a model’s performance. A subset of
these metrics, known as global feature importance metrics
(Ewald et al., 2024), determine the value of including a
Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Munich - German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany
2
TUM School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich, Garching, Germany 3 Department
of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
USA 4 Faculty of Computer Science, Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany . Correspondence to: Henrik von Kleist <henrik.kleist@tum.de>.

Scenario 3: Since troponin tests are costly and timeconsuming, but provide valuable diagnostic information,
an analyst seeks to optimize their use after deploying the
prediction model. The analyst wants to understand how
prediction performance would change if troponin was measured more frequently. They are thus interested in feature
importance under an increase in measurement probability.

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we examine how feature importance metrics
can be defined and estimated in such scenarios. To clarify the structure of the problem, we organize our analysis

1

1

