SHE: Streaming-media Hashing Retrieval

Ruitao Pu 1 Yang Qin 1 Xiaomin Song 2 Dezhong Peng 1 2 3 Zhenwen Ren 4 Yuan Sun 1 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, with the rapid development of smart devices and
social media, multimedia data (such as images, audio, video,
etc) has shown an explosive growth trend. Cross-modal
retrieval (CMR) for massive and complex multimedia data
has attracted widespread attention in academia and industry
(Zhu et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2024). CMR aims to use
data from one modality as the query to retrieve semantically related samples in another modality. However, due to
different feature distributions, there is an inherent heterogeneity gap between different modalities. How to establish
effective cross-modal mapping relationships to achieve accurate semantic retrieval between different modalities is a
key challenge.

Recently, numerous cross-modal hashing (CMH)
methods have been proposed, yielding remarkable progress. As a static learning paradigm,
existing CMH methods often implicitly assume
that all modalities are prepared before processing.
However, in practical applications (such as multimodal medical diagnosis), it is very challenging
to collect paired multi-modal data simultaneously.
Specifically, they are collected chronologically,
forming streaming-media data (SMA). To handle
this, all previous CMH methods require retraining on data from all modalities, which inevitably
limits the scalability and flexibility of the model.
In this paper, we propose a novel CMH paradigm
named Streaming-media Hashing rEtrieval (SHE)
that enables parallel training of each modality.
Specifically, we first propose a knowledge library
mining module (KLM) that extracts a prototype
knowledge library for each modality, thereby revealing the commonality distribution of the instances from each modality. Then, we propose a
knowledge library transfer module (KLT) that updates and aligns the new knowledge by utilizing
the historical knowledge library, ensuring semantic consistency. Finally, to enhance intra-class
semantic relevance and inter-class semantic disparity, we develop a discriminative hashing learning module (DHL). Comprehensive experiments
on four benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our SHE compared to 14 competitors.

To bridge the heterogeneity gap, numerous CMR methods
(Sun et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025b; Liu et al., 2024)have
been proposed to capture the shared semantic information
between different modalities, which could be roughly divided into unsupervised (Hu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2025a;
2024) and supervised methods (Wang et al., 2024a;b; Pu
et al., 2025b). Among them, unsupervised CMR methods
aim to directly explore the semantic similarity relationships
between multi-modal data according to the original features.
However, due to the lack of available semantic labels, unsupervised methods suffer from a performance bottleneck.
Thus, many supervised CMR methods are proposed that
utilize label information to guide the learning of semantic
similarity relationships between instances, thereby obtaining
the discriminative common representations. Most of these
methods employ a joint learning manner to learn common
representations for multi-modal data. In other words, they
necessitate that data from all modalities be available simultaneously and collaboratively incorporated to learn a common
representation. Although these methods have demonstrated
promising performance, their success heavily relies on the
implicit assumption of complete data availability. In practical application scenarios, it is difficult to collect data from
all modalities simultaneously, such as emergency medical
aid. Due to the asynchronous characteristics of multi-modal
data collection, these data from different modalities are often continuously collected and processed at different time
points, thus forming streaming-media data (SMA). When
dealing with SMA, the aforementioned methods must frequently retrain all the sub-networks for all modalities, which

1
School of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China 2 Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu, China 3 Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory,
Chengdu, China 4 Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, China 5 National Key Laboratory of Fundamental
Algorithms and Models for Engineering Numerical Simulation,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. Correspondence to: Yuan
Sun <sunyuan work@163.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
https://github.com/perquisite/SHE

1

