Boosting Multi-Domain Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models
through Evolving Interactions between Samples

Xize Liang† 1 Lin Yang 2 Jie Wang 1 Yiyang Lu 1 Runyu Wu 1 Hanzhu Chen 1 Jianye Hao 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in various fields, such as general instruction
following (Yang et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024a; Dong et al.,
2024), code generation (Jiang et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2024;
Hui et al., 2024), and mathematical reasoning (Ahn et al.,
2024; Imani et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023). Building on
these successes, cutting-edge LLMs are striving to integrate
diverse capabilities across various domains, aiming to better
address read-world tasks and advance the realization of general artificial intelligence (Dubey et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2024a; Liu et al., 2024a; Adler et al., 2024).

The multi-domain fine-tuning of large language
models (LLMs) confronts a notorious trade-off
among abilities across domains. Existing studies
attribute this trade-off to the conflicts between
samples rooted in inherent semantics. Recent
approaches attempt to mitigate these conflicts
through the empirical investigation or heuristic
strategies. However, without a fundamental understanding of interactions between samples, they
yield only marginal improvements, while incurring substantial trial-and-error costs. To address
this challenge, we move beyond empirical studies
by modeling interactions between samples as their
influence on each other’s loss, estimated using
gradients. Intriguingly, we find that these interactions evolve throughout training rather than
being purely determined by inherent semantics.
Building on this insight, we propose EVolving
Interaction-guided Curriculum (EVIC), which iteratively selects samples that positively influence
the overall dataset for training. By dynamically
adapting the training curriculum to prioritize samples that contribute the most to the model training,
EVIC effectively mitigates conflicts and improves
the performance-to-sample ratio. Extensive experiments on a mixed dataset covering coding,
math, and general tasks with several model architectures show that EVIC significantly outperforms
all baselines across diverse capabilities.

However, the multi-domain fine-tuning of LLMs still confronts significant challenges. In particular, training a model
that excels across all domains is extremely difficult, as improvements in one capability often come at the expense of
others (Wang et al., 2023a; Leybzon & Kervadec, 2024;
Mueller et al., 2022). Existing studies attribute this issue to
inherent conflicts between samples, arising from their different semantics (Wu et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023b; Ge et al., 2023). A common alternative is
to train specialized models for each domain and then integrate them (Feng et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2024), but this inevitably incurs considerable computational costs. Furthermore, from the perspective of data
resources, conflicts between samples hinder the effective
use of high-quality data, which is especially valuable due to
its scarcity and high acquisition costs (Li et al., 2023a; Liu
et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2023b). Therefore, it is highly desirable to explore strategies to fully leverage mixed datasets
for the enhancement of LLMs’ multi-domain capabilities.
Existing efforts for this problem rely on empirical investigation or heuristic strategies to manage training samples.
Based on empirical insights gained from experiments on a
mixed dataset containing samples from mathematics, code,
and general domains, Dong et al. (2023) propose Dual-stage
Mixed Fine-tuning (DMT), which trains on full amounts of
specialized (i.e., math and code) data first and then trains
on general data with a small amount of specialized data
included. Such experience-based approaches may be useful
in certain scenarios but tend to be inefficient, requiring numerous experiments to discover suitable training strategies.

Work done during Xize Liang ’s research internship at Huawei.
<xizeliang@mail.ustc.edu.cn> 1 MoE Key Laboratory of Braininspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 3 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University.
Correspondence to: Jie Wang <jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn>.
†

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

