Learning With Multi-Group Guarantees For Clusterable Subpopulations

Jessica Dai 1 Nika Haghtalab 1 Eric Zhao 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
For systems that make predictions about individuals, it is
well-understood that good performance on average across
the population may not imply good performance at an individual level. On the other hand, while the ideal system might
be one that can provide per-individual performance guarantees, such a system may be intractable to learn from data, if it
exists at all. To address these challenges, per-subpopulation
guarantees have emerged as a widely-accepted approach that
balances tractability with ensuring good performance across
subpopulations (e.g., Blum et al. (2017); Hébert-Johnson
et al. (2018); Hashimoto et al. (2018); Lahoti et al. (2020);
Wang et al. (2020); Haghtalab et al. (2022)). Such guarantees may also be desirable for normative or regulatory
reasons to capture notions of fairness, or because domain
shift often involves changes in the proportions of subgroups.
Therefore, the subpopulations for which guarantees are provided should be those that are deemed especially significant,
salient, or relevant.

A canonical desideratum for prediction problems
is that performance guarantees should hold not
just on average over the population, but also for
meaningful subpopulations within the overall population. But what constitutes a meaningful subpopulation? In this work, we take the perspective
that relevant subpopulations should be defined
with respect to the clusters that naturally emerge
from the distribution of individuals for which predictions are being made. In this view, a population refers to a mixture model whose components
constitute the relevant subpopulations. We suggest two formalisms for capturing per-subgroup
guarantees: first, by attributing each individual
to the component from which they were most
likely drawn, given their features; and second, by
attributing each individual to all components in
proportion to their relative likelihood of having
been drawn from each component. Using online calibration as a case study, we study a multiobjective algorithm that provides guarantees for
each of these formalisms by handling all plausible underlying subpopulation structures simultaneously, and achieve an O(T 1/2 ) rate even when
the subpopulations are not well-separated. In comparison, the more natural cluster-then-predict approach that first recovers the structure of the subpopulations and then makes predictions suffers
from a O(T 2/3 ) rate and requires the subpopulations to be separable. Along the way, we prove
that providing per-subgroup calibration guarantees for underlying clusters can be easier than
learning the clusters: separation between median
subgroup features is required for the latter but not
the former.

*

What, then, defines a relevant subpopulation? One influential perspective considers a subpopulation as a predefined
combination of feature values, where individuals are represented as feature vectors (e.g., Hébert-Johnson et al. (2018)).
In our work, we take an alternative view on what constitutes
a subpopulation of interest. We propose that the relevant
subgroups for a particular prediction task should be exactly
those subgroups that emerge endogenously within the distribution of the individuals being considered for that task. This
means that the group membership(s) of any individual cannot be determined through their features alone; instead, their
group identity can be understood only by placing their individual features in the context of the rest of the population.
In effect, rather than being defined a priori, these subgroups
must be learned about from data in an unsupervised sense.
1.1. Defining subpopulations via statistical identifiability
One reason to think of group membership in context of
the population rather than as deterministic functions of individual features is a normative perspective. A common
critique of standard practice in modeling subgroups is that
observable (demographic) features are only approximations
of more complex phenomena that are related to—but not
directly causal of—shared life experience. Therefore, de-

1

Alphabetical order. Department of Electrial Engineering and
Computer Science, U.C. Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Jessica Dai <jessicadai@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

