Training Flexible Models of Genetic Variant Effects from Functional
Annotations using Accelerated Linear Algebra

Alan N. Amin * 1 Andres Potapczynski * 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

(GWAS) use data from up to hundreds of thousands of individuals to build models that correlate the presence of genetic
variants with phenotypes such as disease or height (Yang
et al., 2010; Visscher et al., 2017; Halldorsson et al., 2021).
However there are orders of magnitude more variants than
measurements, making GWAS underpowered to predict phenotype or determine the effects of all but the most impactful
variants.

To understand how genetic variants in human
genomes manifest in phenotypes – traits like
height or diseases like asthma – geneticists have
sequenced and measured hundreds of thousands
of individuals. Geneticists use this data to build
models that predict how a genetic variant impacts
phenotype given genomic features of the variant,
like DNA accessibility or the presence of nearby
DNA-bound proteins. As more data and features
become available, one might expect predictive
models to improve. Unfortunately, training these
models is bottlenecked by the need to solve expensive linear algebra problems because variants
in the genome are correlated with nearby variants, requiring inversion of large matrices. Previous methods have therefore been restricted to
fitting small models, and fitting simplified summary statistics, rather than the full likelihood of
the statistical model. In this paper, we leverage
modern fast linear algebra techniques to develop
DeepWAS (Deep genome Wide Association Studies), a method to train large and flexible neural
network predictive models to optimize likelihood.
Surprisingly, we find that larger models only improve performance when using our full likelihood
approach; when trained by fitting traditional summary statistics, larger models perform no better
than small ones. We find larger models trained on
more features make better predictions, potentially
improving disease predictions and therapeutic target identification.

To increase prediction accuracy and uncover the molecular causes of disease, geneticists have leveraged the fact
that complex phenotypes are extremely polygenic – that
is, they are affected by a huge number of variants spread
throughout the genome (Manolio et al., 2009; Boyle et al.,
2017). Geneticists look for features that distinguish variants
that do and do not effect a phenotype on a set of chromosomes and use these features to build “functionally informed”
priors to analyze variants on other chromosomes (Gusev
et al., 2014; Finucane et al., 2015; Kichaev et al., 2019). To
build these priors they use functional genomic features (ENCODE Project Consortium, 2012; Lizio et al., 2015), such
as measurements of DNA “accessibility” or binding of transcription factor proteins near the variant; and comparative
genomics features (Cooper et al., 2005; Pollard et al., 2010),
such as whether the variant is in a region of the genome
that is conserved across primates. As more accurate measurements of genomic features are made and more individuals have their genomes sequenced, in principle, geneticists
should be able to build more accurate functionally informed
priors with more flexible models that learn from more features.
In practice, however, significant computational challenges
have prevented the development of large models. Functionally informed priors are typically phrased as priors on the
effect of each variant in a hierarchical Bayesian model of the
genetic and phenotypic data (Loh et al., 2015; Zheng et al.,
2024). Ideally, we could fit the prior using an empirical
Bayes approach to maximize the marginal likelihood (Ni
et al., 2018). Unfortunately this is numerically challenging
due to linkage disequilibrium (LD) – the presence of variants
in the genome can be strongly correlated, and accounting for
this correlation in the marginal likelihood involves inverting
and calculating the log determinant of a large matrix known

1. Introduction
To predict the risk of genetic disease and understand
its molecular causes, Genome Wide Association Studies
*
Equal contribution 1 New York University. Correspondence to:
Alan Amin <alanamin@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

