LV-XATTN: Distributed Cross-Attention for Long Visual Inputs in Multimodal
Large Language Models

Tzu-Tao Chang 1 Shivaram Venkataraman 1

Abstract

pletion (Shrivastava et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Their
strong reasoning capabilities have motivated efforts to expand beyond language inputs, giving rise to multimodal
large language models (MLLMs). These models can process and reason about other modalities, such as visual inputs,
enabling applications like video understanding (Qian et al.,
2024; Islam et al., 2024; He et al., 2024) and image processing (Guo et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023b).

Cross-attention is commonly adopted in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) for integrating visual information into the language backbone. However, in applications with large visual
inputs, such as video understanding, processing a
large number of visual tokens in cross-attention
layers leads to high memory demands and often
necessitates distributed computation across multiple GPUs. Existing distributed attention mechanisms face significant communication overheads,
making cross-attention layers a critical bottleneck
for efficient training and inference of MLLMs. To
address this, we propose LV-XAttn, a distributed,
exact cross-attention mechanism with minimal
communication overhead. We observe that in applications involving large visual inputs, the size
of the query block is typically much smaller than
that of the key-value blocks. Thus, in LV-XAttn
we keep the large key-value blocks locally on each
GPU and exchange smaller query blocks across
GPUs. We also introduce an efficient activation
recomputation technique to support longer visual
context. We theoretically analyze the communication benefits of LV-XAttn and show that it
can achieve speedups for a wide range of models.
Our evaluations with Llama 3-V, mPLUG-Owl3
and OpenFlamingo models find that LV-XAttn
achieves up to 10.62× end-to-end speedup compared to existing approaches.

A common approach to integrating visual inputs into LLMs
is through cross-attention (Alayrac et al., 2022; Laurençon
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a; Ye et al., 2024; Grattafiori
et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024), where queries derived from
the text input interact with keys and values derived from
the visual inputs. This enables effective fusion of multimodal information. In MLLMs, cross-attention layers are
inserted between language model blocks, enabling the LLM
to process intermediate representations that are integrated
with visual information.
However, the memory requirement of cross-attention layers
is a limiting factor for applications involving large visual
inputs, such as long video understanding. For example, in
Llama 3-V (Grattafiori et al., 2024), applying cross-attention
to a text sequence of length 2048 and a 20-minute video
sampled at 1 frame per second (fps) requires over 234 GB
of memory, even with a memory-efficient attention implementation (Dao, 2024). This exceeds the memory capacity
of existing accelerators, necessitating the distributed computation of the attention operation across multiple workers.
Existing distributed attention approaches can be categorized
into two classes: head-parallelism and sequence-parallelism.
Head-parallelism methods such as Deepspeed-Ulysses (Jacobs et al., 2024) and Megatron-LM (Korthikanti et al.,
2023a) partition the computation along the head dimension
of multi-head attention. Consequently, maximum degree of
parallelism is capped by the number of heads used in multihead attention. This translates to an upper bound in terms of
memory capacity, preventing them from processing longer
visual inputs which have memory demands beyond this. In
addition, the number of workers must be divisible by the
total number of heads to ensure a balanced load across workers. Otherwise, resource underutilization may occur due to
stragglers. On the other hand, sequence parallel methods

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have shown exceptional
performance in language processing tasks that involves long
context, such as long document understanding (Sun et al.,
2024; Bertsch et al., 2023) and repository-level code com1
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: TzuTao Chang <tchang85@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

