Addressing Misspecification in Simulation-based Inference
through Data-driven Calibration

Antoine Wehenkel * 1 Juan L. Gamella * 2 3 Ozan Sener 1 Jens Behrmann 1 Guillermo Sapiro 1
Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen 2 Marco Cuturi 1

Abstract

phenomena, it has also necessitated the development of new
statistical inference methods. In particular, state-of-the-art
simulation-based inference (SBI, Cranmer et al., 2020) algorithms leverage neural networks to learn surrogate models
of the likelihood (Papamakarios et al., 2019), likelihood
ratio (Hermans et al., 2020), or posterior distribution (Papamakarios & Murray, 2016), from which one can extract
confidence or credible intervals over the parameters of interest given an observation. While SBI has proven helpful
when the simulator is a faithful description of the studied phenomenon, e.g., for scientific applications (Delaunoy
et al., 2020; Brehmer, 2021; Lückmann, 2022; Linhart et al.,
2022; Hashemi et al., 2022; Tolley et al., 2023; Avecilla
et al., 2022), recent work has also highlighted the unreliability of SBI methods under model misspecification (Cannon
et al., 2022; Schmitt et al., 2023).

Driven by steady progress in deep generative
modeling, simulation-based inference (SBI) has
emerged as the workhorse for inferring the parameters of stochastic simulators. However, recent work has demonstrated that model misspecification can compromise the reliability of SBI,
preventing its adoption in important applications
where only misspecified simulators are available.
This work introduces robust posterior estimation (RoPE), a framework that overcomes model
misspecification with a small real-world calibration set of ground-truth parameter measurements.
We formalize the misspecification gap as the solution of an optimal transport (OT) problem between learned representations of real-world and
simulated observations, allowing RoPE to learn a
model of the misspecification without placing additional assumptions on its nature. RoPE demonstrates how OT and a calibration set provide a controllable balance between calibrated uncertainty
and informative inference, even under severely
misspecified simulators. Results on four synthetic
tasks and two real-world problems with groundtruth labels demonstrate that RoPE outperforms
baselines and consistently returns informative and
calibrated credible intervals.

1

Addressing Misspecification with a Calibration Set. In
this work, we target important applications of SBI in common settings where (1) the goal is to estimate a hard-tomeasure variable from indirect but readily available measurements of other variables; (2) only misspecified simulators relating these variables are available; and (3) a
few ground-truth pairings of the hard-to-measure variables
and the related variables are available in a calibration set1 .
Such a setting can arise, for example, when inferring the
properties of a patient’s cardiovascular system from noninvasive and abundant measurements of other physiological
signals (Wehenkel et al., 2023), or when developing soft
sensors to monitor industrial processes in real time, where
directly measuring the quantity of interest is costly and
time consuming, for example, through laboratory analysis,
but where related variables can be measured quickly and
inexpensively (Jiang et al., 2021; Perera et al., 2023).

Introduction

Many fields of science and engineering have shifted in recent years from modeling real-world phenomena through
a few equations to relying instead on highly complex computer simulations. While this shift has increased model
versatility and the ability to explain or replicate complex

Our Contributions. We introduce robust posterior estimation (RoPE), an algorithm that addresses model misspecification to provide accurate uncertainty quantification for the
parameters of black-box simulators. In such misspecified

*

Equal contribution 1 Apple 2 Work done while being at Apple 3 ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Antoine Wehenkel <awehenkel@apple.com>.

1

Note that our use of the term calibration set should not be
confused with its usage in the context of model mis-calibration
in well-specified SBI (Hermans et al., 2022), as we clarify in
Appendix A.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

