GenMol: A Drug Discovery Generalist with Discrete Diffusion

Seul Lee 1 Karsten Kreis 2 Srimukh Prasad Veccham 2 Meng Liu 2
Danny Reidenbach 2 Yuxing Peng 2 Saee Paliwal 2 Weili Nie∗ 2 Arash Vahdat∗ 2

Abstract
Drug discovery is a complex process that
involves multiple stages and tasks. However,
existing molecular generative models can only
tackle some of these tasks. We present Generalist Molecular generative model (GenMol),
a versatile framework that uses only a single
discrete diffusion model to handle diverse drug
discovery scenarios. GenMol generates Sequential Attachment-based Fragment Embedding
(SAFE) sequences through non-autoregressive
bidirectional parallel decoding, thereby allowing
the utilization of a molecular context that does
not rely on the specific token ordering while
having better sampling efficiency. GenMol uses
fragments as basic building blocks for molecules
and introduces fragment remasking, a strategy
that optimizes molecules by regenerating masked
fragments, enabling effective exploration of
chemical space. We further propose molecular
context guidance (MCG), a guidance method tailored for masked discrete diffusion of GenMol.
GenMol significantly outperforms the previous
GPT-based model in de novo generation and
fragment-constrained generation, and achieves
state-of-the-art performance in goal-directed hit
generation and lead optimization. These results
demonstrate that GenMol can tackle a wide range
of drug discovery tasks, providing a unified and
versatile approach for molecular design.

Figure 1: Results on drug discovery tasks. The values are quality, average quality, sum AUC top-10, and success rate for de novo
generation, fragment-constrained generation, hit generation, and
lead optimization, respectively. The “best baseline” refers to multiple best-performing task-specific models among prior works.

For example, fragment-constrained molecule generation is
a popular strategy for designing new drug candidates under the constraint of preserving a certain molecular substructure already known to exhibit a particular bioactivity (Murray & Rees, 2009). Furthermore, real-world drug
discovery pipelines are not a single stage but consist of several key stages, such as hit generation and lead optimization (Hughes et al., 2011). A drug discovery process that
leads to the finding of drug candidates that can enter clinical trials should consider all of these different scenarios.
Generative models have emerged as a promising methodology to accelerate labor-intensive drug discovery
pipelines (Olivecrona et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023), but previous molecular
generative models have a common limitation: they focus
on only one or two of the drug discovery scenarios.
They either cannot be applied to multiple tasks or require
expensive modifications including retraining of a specific
architecture for each task (Yang et al., 2020; Guo et al.,
2023). Recently, SAFE-GPT (Noutahi et al., 2024) has
been proposed to address this problem by formulating several molecular tasks as a fragment-constrained generation
task, solved by sequence completion. SAFE-GPT uses Sequential Attachment-based Fragment Embedding (SAFE)
of molecules, which represents a molecule as an unordered
sequence of Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System
(SMILES) (Weininger, 1988) fragment blocks. However,

1. Introduction
Discovering molecules with the desired chemical profile is
the core objective of drug discovery (Hughes et al., 2011).
To achieve the ultimate goal of overcoming disease, a variety of drug discovery approaches have been established.
1

KAIST. Work during an internship at NVIDIA.
NVIDIA. ∗ Equal advising. Correspondence to: Seul Lee
<seul.lee@kaist.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

