PoisonedEye: Knowledge Poisoning Attack on Retrieval-Augmented Generation
based Large Vision-Language Models

Chenyang Zhang 1 2 Xiaoyu Zhang 1 2 Jian Lou 1 3 Kai Wu 4 Zilong Wang 1 Xiaofeng Chen 1

Abstract

image creation (Rombach et al., 2022) and image inpainting
(Suvorov et al., 2022). However, the weakness of hallucination (Ji et al., 2023) and a lack of up-to-date knowledge
may limit their reliability and effectiveness in dynamic, realworld applications. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
(Lewis et al., 2020) addresses this problem by dynamically
retrieving relevant information from external knowledge
databases at inference time. This process supplies the model
with precise and latest data, thereby enhancing it’s ability
to generate more accurate and contextually appropriate responses. Recent works (Chen et al., 2022a; Yasunaga et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023b; Hao et al., 2024)
have increasingly focused on applying the RAG mechanism to LVLMs by retrieving information from multimodal
knowledge databases that contain both texts and images.
We refer to them as Vision-Language Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (VLRAG) systems in this paper.

Vision-Language Retrieval-Augmented Generation (VLRAG) systems have been widely applied to Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs)
to enhance their generation ability. However,
the reliance on external multimodal knowledge
databases renders VLRAG systems vulnerable to
malicious poisoning attacks. In this paper, we
introduce PoisonedEye, the first knowledge poisoning attack designed for VLRAG systems. Our
attack successfully manipulates the response of
the VLRAG system for the target query by injecting only one poison sample into the knowledge
database. To construct the poison sample, we
follow two key properties for the retrieval and
generation process, and identify the solution by
satisfying these properties. Besides, we also introduce a class query targeted poisoning attack,
a more generalized strategy that extends the poisoning effect to an entire class of target queries.
Extensive experiments on multiple query datasets,
retrievers, and LVLMs demonstrate that our attack is highly effective in compromising VLRAG
systems.

However, mounting external knowledge databases can introduce new security vulnerabilities. An attacker may poison
the image and text knowledge within the database to compromise the RAG system. Several studies (Zou et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2024b; Cheng et al., 2024) have explored textual
knowledge poisoning attacks on RAG systems. PoisonedRAG (Zou et al., 2024) proposed the first RAG knowledge
poisoning attack by crafting and injecting misleading contexts. TrojanRAG (Cheng et al., 2024) and AgentPoison
(Chen et al., 2024b) introduced backdoor attacks on RAG
systems by establishing a correlation between a specific trigger and the target response within the knowledge database.
However, for VLRAG systems, poisoning attacks on both
the image and text modalities have not yet been explored.

1. Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have become increasingly popular and important due to their wide range
of applications, from text generation tasks such as visual
question answering (Antol et al., 2015) and image captioning (Sharma et al., 2018), to image generation tasks such as

In this paper, we present the first knowledge poisoning attack against Vision-Language Retrieval-Augmented Generation (VLRAG) systems. This attack manipulates the
response of the VLRAG system for the target query by
injecting only one poison image-text pair into the multimodal knowledge database. We start from the existing textual RAG poisoning attack (Zou et al., 2024) and gradually
adapt it to the vision-language context. We first introduce
PoisonedEye-B, a baseline approach that achieves poisoning
attacks by crafting and injecting misleading textual contexts
without altering the images. Expanding on this, we propose

1
State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian University, Xi’an,
Shaanxi, China. 2 Key Laboratory of Data and Intelligent
System Security Ministry of Education, China. 3 School of
Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China. 4 School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China.
Correspondence
to: Xiaoyu Zhang <xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn>, Jian Lou
<louj5@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

