Learning to (Learn at Test Time): RNNs with Expressive Hidden States

Yu Sun * 1 Xinhao Li * 2 Karan Dalal * 3 Jiarui Xu 2 Arjun Vikram 1 Genghan Zhang 1 Yann Dubois 1
†
†
†
†
†
Xinlei Chen 4 Xiaolong Wang 2 Sanmi Koyejo 1 Tatsunori Hashimoto 1 Carlos Guestrin 1

Abstract

we re-evaluate these findings in Figure 1.
On the left, we observe that Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023)
– one of the most popular RNNs today – scales similarly
to a strong Transformer, showing great progress since the
LSTMs in 2020. However, on the right, we observe the
same issue with Mamba as Kaplan et al. did with LSTMs.
Tokens later in a sequence should be easier to predict on
average, since they condition on more information. This is
indeed the case for Transformer, whose average perplexity
at each token index decreases throughout its 32k context. In
contrast, the same metric plateaus for Mamba after 16k.

Self-attention performs well in long context but
has quadratic complexity. Existing RNN layers
have linear complexity, but their performance in
long context is limited by the expressive power
of their hidden states. We present a practical
framework for instantiating sequence modeling
layers with linear complexity and expressive hidden states. The key idea is to make the hidden
state a machine learning model itself, and the update rule a step of self-supervised learning. Since
the hidden state is updated by training even on
test sequences, our layers are called Test-Time
Training (TTT) layers. We consider two instantiations: TTT-Linear and TTT-MLP, whose hidden
state is a linear model and a two-layer MLP respectively. We evaluate our instantiations at the
scale of 125M to 1.3B parameters, comparing
with a strong Transformer and Mamba, a modern
RNN. Similar to Transformer, TTT-Linear and
TTT-MLP can keep reducing perplexity by conditioning on more tokens, while Mamba cannot
after 16k context. TTT-MLP still faces challenges
in memory I/O, but shows larger potential in long
context, pointing to a promising direction for future research.

This result represents an awkward reality for existing RNNs.
On one hand, the main advantage of RNNs (vs. Transformers) is their linear (vs. quadratic) complexity. This
asymptotic advantage is only realized in practice for long
context, which according to Figure 8 is after 8k. On the
other hand, once context is long enough, existing RNNs
such as Mamba struggle to actually take advantage of the
extra information being conditioned on.
The difficulty with long context is inherent to the very nature of RNN layers: Unlike self-attention, RNN layers have
to compress context into a hidden state of fixed size. As a
compression heuristic, the update rule needs to discover the
underlying structures and relationships among thousands
or potentially millions of tokens. This need is inherently
challenging. In this paper, we begin with the observation
that self-supervised learning can compress a massive training set into the weights of a model such as an LLM, which
often exhibits deep understanding about the semantic connections among its training data – exactly what we need
from a compression heuristic.

1. Introduction
This version of the paper has been abridged to fit the page
limit of ICML camera ready. Please read our arXiv version
instead: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04620.

TTT layers. Motivated by this observation, we make the
hidden state a machine learning model itself, and the update
rule a step of self-supervised learning. Since the hidden
state is updated by training even on test sequences, these
RNN layers are called Test-Time Training (TTT) layers. We
introduce two simple instantiations: TTT-Linear and TTTMLP, where the hidden state is a linear model and a twolayer MLP, respectively. TTT layers can be integrated into
any network architecture and optimized end-to-end, similar
to RNNs layers and self-attention.

In 2020, the OpenAI scaling law paper (Kaplan et. al (Kaplan et al., 2020)) showed that LSTMs (a type of RNN)
could not scale similarly to Transformers or effectively use
long context. Now, with modern RNNs and best practices,
1

*: Core contributors. †: Joint advising.
Stanford University 2 UC San Diego 3 UC Berkeley 4 Meta AI.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

