DexScale: Automating Data Scaling for Sim2Real Generalizable Robot Control

Guiliang Liu * 1 Yueci Deng * 2 Runyi Zhao 1 Huayi Zhou 1 Jian Chen 2 Jietao Chen 2 Ruiyan Xu 1
Yunxin Tai 2 Kui Jia 1 2

Abstract
A critical prerequisite for achieving generalizable
robot control is the availability of a large-scale
robot training dataset. Due to the expense of
collecting realistic robotic data, recent studies
explored simulating and recording robot skills
in virtual environments. While simulated data
can be generated at higher speeds, lower costs,
and larger scales, the applicability of such simulated data remains questionable due to the gap
between simulated and realistic environments.
To advance the Sim2Real generalization, in this
study, we present DexScale, a data engine designed to perform automatic skills simulation and
scaling for learning deployable robot manipulation policies. Specifically, DexScale ensures the
usability of simulated skills by integrating diverse
forms of realistic data into the simulated environment, preserving semantic alignment with the
target tasks. For each simulated skill in the environment, DexScale facilitates effective Sim2Real
data scaling by automating the process of domain randomization and adaptation. Tuned by the
scaled dataset, the control policy achieves zeroshot Sim2Real generalization across diverse tasks,
multiple robot embodiments, and widely studied
policy model architectures, highlighting its importance in advancing Sim2Real embodied intelligence. The project webpage at: https://edemai.github.io/dexscale.github.io/.

Project

Simulator

DexScale

Generate

Data

Finetune

Model

Deploy

Figure 1: An example of using DexScale. Given a human
video, DexScale simulates a robot skill dataset for training
deployable control policy without requiring realistic data.
making processes (Paolo et al., 2024). In recent years,
robots have emerged as a widely studied form of embodiment (Duan et al., 2022). In principle, robot control skills
can be highly versatile—generalizing across various domains and incorporating multiple forms of sensory data.
Prioritizing the availability of sensors and the impact of
real-world application, we primarily focus on advancing
visuomotor robotic learning for dexterous manipulation.
Many recent studies have proposed learning-based systems
for manipulating various object based on image sensor signals. For example, modular approaches first predict affordances, such as grasp poses (Mousavian et al., 2019; Sundermeyer et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021; Fang
et al., 2023) or keypoints (Manuelli et al., 2019; Qin et al.,
2020; Mo et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2024), for different tasks
and train a low-level policies to complete these task. On
the other hand, end-to-end approaches aim at learning a policy model that directly maps visual inputs to robot actions
methods (Levine et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018; Florence
et al., 2020; Chi et al., 2023). While these methods have
promising performance in specific scenarios, the learned
skills lack generalizability to diverse environments, making
them unsuitable for deploying in the wild.

1. Introduction
A key milestone in advancing modern AI systems is the
development of embodied intelligence, which aims to seamlessly integrate an agent’s physical body, sensory perception,
and environment into its learning, reasoning, and decision*

Equal contribution 1 School of Data Science, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 DexForce, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Kui Jia <kuijia@cuhk.edu.cn>.

With advancements in learning algorithms, large-scale
datasets, and hardware systems, large foundation models
have achieved human-level performance across a wide variety of environments and downstream tasks. Their success
inspired the construction of foundation models for robot
control such as RDT (Liu et al., 2024b), Open-VLA (Kim

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

