Online Conformal Prediction via Online Optimization

Felipe Areces * 1 Christopher Mohri * 2 Tatsunori Hashimoto 2 John Duchi 1 3

Abstract

ing a predictor that can always guarantee its accuracy is
no more than a snipe hunt. Instead, however, we might
seek an appropriate (and dynamic) level of confidence in
our predictions, even in the face of changing data processes.
Even more, we ought to develop procedures that can provide
such guarantees in arbitrary settings, so that we do not rely
on (likely invalid) modeling assumptions, but which can in
fact do the “right thing,” adapting to underlying structure
when it exists. To address these desiderata, this work adopts
and adapts online conformal prediction, providing predictive confidence sets for which, over time, a pre-specified
fraction covers the ground truth, even if data is adversarial.

We introduce a family of algorithms for online conformal prediction with coverage guarantees for both adversarial and stochastic data.
In the adversarial setting, we establish the standard guarantee: over time, a pre-specified target fraction of confidence sets cover the ground
truth. For stochastic data, we provide a guarantee at every time instead of just on average over
time: the probability that a confidence set covers
the ground truth—conditioned on past observations—converges to a pre-specified target when
the conditional quantiles of the errors are a linear
function of past data. Complementary to our theory, our experiments spanning over 15 datasets
suggest that the performance improvement of our
methods over baselines grows with the magnitude of the data’s dependence, even when baselines are tuned on the test set. We put these
findings to the test by pre-registering an experiment for electricity demand forecasting in Texas,
where our algorithms achieve over a 10% reduction in confidence set sizes, a more than a 30%
improvement in quantile and absolute losses with
respect to the observed errors, and significant outcomes on all 78 out of 78 pre-registered hypotheses. We provide documentation for the pypi package implementing our algorithms here: https:
//conformalopt.readthedocs.io/.

Current algorithms for online conformal prediction resemble bang-bang controllers from control theory, which switch
between two extreme states to achieve a desired behavior. The first algorithm to propose this approach, Gibbs &
Candès’s Adaptive Conformal Inference (ACI) 2021, constructs confidence sets using a single parameter that governs
their level of conservativeness. The update rule for this parameter is simple: on an error, increase the parameter by a
constant, and otherwise, decrease it by (another) constant,
inducing bang-bang behavior. Existing theoretical analyses for ACI suggest making these switches as aggressive
as possible to obtain the tightest coverage. Several works
have extended ACI by adaptively tuning the magnitude of
these updates (Gibbs & Candès, 2024; Zaffran et al., 2022;
Bhatnagar et al., 2023) or with more sophisticated update
rules that, that for example, incorporate other aspects from
control (Angelopoulos et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024), but
all fundamentally share the same bang-bang backbone.
This purely adversarial approach overlooks the possibility
of achieving stronger guarantees under more predictable
data. In this work, we show that directly modeling the
distribution of errors can provide both new theoretical guarantees and empirical benefits. Our key observation is that
we can develop algorithms that not only satisfy the standard
adversarial guarantees, but also achieve time-conditional
coverage guarantees for stochastic data by solving a stochastic optimization problem. These time-conditional coverage
guarantees ensure that we eventually achieve the target coverage level at all times, instead of only when averaged across
time. While we are not the first to depart from purely adversarial guarantees—past work considers the i.i.d. setting
(Angelopoulos et al., 2024)—we provide guarantees for a

1. Introduction
It would be unreasonable to presume that a predictive model
would maintain its accuracy eternally—populations change,
new scenarios arise, individuals modify behavior—so seek*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA 3 Department of
Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence
to: Felipe Areces <fareces@stanford.edu>, Christopher Mohri
<xmohri@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

