No Metric to Rule Them All:
Toward Principled Evaluations of Graph-Learning Datasets

Corinna Coupette * 1 2 Jeremy Wayland * 3 4 Emily Simons 3 4 Bastian Rieck 3 4 5

1. Introduction

Abstract
Benchmark datasets have proved pivotal to the
success of graph learning, and good benchmark
datasets are crucial to guide the development of
the field. Recent research has highlighted problems with graph-learning datasets and benchmarking practices—revealing, for example, that methods which ignore the graph structure can outperform graph-based approaches. Such findings raise
two questions: (1) What makes a good graphlearning dataset, and (2) how can we evaluate
dataset quality in graph learning? Our work addresses these questions. As the classic evaluation setup uses datasets to evaluate models, it
does not apply to dataset evaluation. Hence,
we start from first principles. Observing that
graph-learning datasets uniquely combine two
modes—graph structure and node features—, we
introduce R INGS, a flexible and extensible modeperturbation framework to assess the quality of
graph-learning datasets based on dataset ablations—i.e., quantifying differences between the
original dataset and its perturbed representations.
Within this framework, we propose two measures—performance separability and mode complementarity—as evaluation tools, each assessing the capacity of a graph dataset to benchmark
the power and efficacy of graph-learning methods from a distinct angle. We demonstrate the
utility of our framework for dataset evaluation
via extensive experiments on graph-level tasks
and derive actionable recommendations for improving the evaluation of graph-learning methods.
Our work opens new research directions in datacentric graph learning, and it constitutes a step
toward the systematic evaluation of evaluations.

Over the past decade, graph learning has established itself
as a prominent approach to making predictions from relational data, with remarkable success in areas from small
molecules (Fang et al., 2022; Stokes et al., 2020) to large
social networks (Sharma et al., 2024; Ying et al., 2018).
Despite significant progress on the theory of graph neural
networks (Morris et al., 2024), however, many empirical
intricacies of graph-learning tasks, models, and datasets
remain poorly understood. For example, recent research
has revealed that (1) purported performance gaps disappear
with proper hyperparameter tuning (Tönshoff et al., 2023),
(2) popular graph-learning datasets occupy a very peculiar
part of the space of all possible graphs (Palowitch et al.,
2022), (3) some graph-learning tasks can be solved without
using the graph structure (Errica et al., 2020), and (4) graphlearning models struggle to ignore the graph structure when
the features alone are sufficiently informative for the task
at hand (Bechler-Speicher et al., 2024). These findings suggest a need for better infrastructure to assess graph-learning
methods, supporting rigorous evaluations that paint a realistic picture of the progress made by the community.
Necessity and Challenges of Dataset Evaluation. Benchmark datasets play a key role in the evaluation of graphlearning methods, but the results cited above highlight that
not all (collections of) graphs are equally suitable for that
purpose. This motivates us to flip the script on graphlearning evaluation, asking how well graph-learning datasets
can characterize the capabilities of graph-learning methods,
rather than how well these methods can solve tasks on graphlearning datasets. Our work is guided by two questions:
Q1 What characterizes a good graph-learning dataset?
Q2 How can we evaluate dataset quality in graph learning?
Addressing these questions is not straightforward. First,
the classic evaluation setup, which compares performance
across models while holding the dataset constant, cannot be
used to evaluate datasets. Second, comparing performance
levels across datasets while holding the model constant
yields measurements that are confounded by model capabilities. Third, while performance levels indicate the difficulty
of a dataset for existing methods, these levels provide little

*
Equal contribution. 1 Aalto University, Finland 2 Max Planck
Institute for Informatics, Germany 3 Helmholtz Munich, Germany
4
TU Munich, Germany 5 University of Fribourg, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Corinna Coupette <corinna.coupette@aalto.fi>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

