Auto-reconfiguration for Latency Minimization in CPU-based DNN Serving

Ankit Bhardwaj 1 2 Amar Phanishayee 1 3 Deepak Narayanan 1 4 Ryan Stutsman 5

Abstract

There are many DNN serving systems available today, including TensorFlow Serving (Olston et al., 2017), TorchServe (TorchServe Team, 2019), and Triton (NVIDIA Corporation, 2018). These systems are designed to use both
CPUs and GPUs to execute DNN model inference. GPUs
generally provide better throughput than CPUs, but they are
often more expensive and power-hungry. They also end up
underutilized for inference workloads (Kosaian et al., 2021).
Recent CPU advances, like high core counts (56 to 64 cores
are common today (Intel, 2019; AMD, 2022)) and specialized instructions that support lower numerical precision
multiplications with higher precision accumulates (AVX512 (Intel, 2017), AMX (Intel, 2022)), improve inference
performance. Every cloud server comes equipped with such
multicore CPUs and many product groups at large companies already own large fleets of such servers that are also
used for CPU-based serving, including at Meta and Microsoft (Hazelwood et al., 2018; Soifer et al., 2019).

In this paper, we investigate how to push the performance limits of serving Deep Neural Network
(DNN) models on CPU-based servers. Specifically, we observe that while intra-operator parallelism across multiple threads effectively reduces
inference latency, it provides diminishing returns.
Our primary insight is that instead of running
a single instance of a model with all available
threads on a server, running multiple instances,
each with smaller batch sizes and fewer threads
for intra-op parallelism, can provide lower inference latency. However, the right configuration is difficult to determine manually since it
is workload-dependent (DNN model and batch
size used by the serving system) and deploymentdependent (number of CPU cores on a server). We
present Packrat, a new serving system for online
inference that given a model and batch size (B)
algorithmically picks the optimal number of instances (i), the number of threads each should be
allocated (t), and the batch sizes each should operate on (b) that minimizes latency. Packrat is built
as an extension to TorchServe and supports online reconfigurations to avoid serving downtime.
Averaged across a range of batch sizes, Packrat
improves inference latency by 1.43× to 1.83× on
a range of commonly used DNNs.

1

In this paper, assuming the use of CPU-based serving, we
push the performance limits of serving DNN models on
a single multicore CPU-based server. Serving systems
like Triton and TorchServe provide useful features like request handling, adaptive batching of inference requests, and
multi-model serving. One important technique to improve
the latency of DNN model serving is intra-operator parallelism (Shoeybi et al., 2019), where a single operator is
split and run using multiple threads. However, we observe
that increasing the number of threads results in diminishing
returns; this observation is consistent across batch sizes and
DNN models (§2.1). To sidestep the diminishing benefits
from intra-op parallelism, a user might try to create one
model instance per core and configure their workload to
split each batch across the available threads, but as we will
show quantitatively later, this does not minimize latency
either. In short, neither maximizing intra-op parallelism nor
maximizing parallelism across model instances results in
the best inference latency.

Introduction

DNN serving is an increasingly important datacenter workload. DNN serving systems are often used in online services
like image and video analytics, speech transcription, text
and code completion, chatbots, and more. In these settings,
requests arrive continuously and must be served in real time;
thus, serving systems must handle high request rates efficiently and with low response latency.
1

In this paper, we present Packrat, an optimized CPU-based
serving system for online inference that automatically determines the number of threads that need to be allocated to
model instances to minimize inference latency. Packrat is
motivated by the following key insight: instead of running
a single instance of a model with all available threads (the
default for systems like TorchServe), running multiple in-

2

Work done while authors were at Microsoft Research MIT
CSAIL 3 Meta 4 NVIDIA 5 University of Utah. Correspondence to:
Ankit Bhardwaj <ankitbwj@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

