GradPS: Resolving Futile Neurons in
Parameter Sharing Network for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Haoyuan Qin 1 2 * Zhengzhu Liu 1 2 * Chenxing Lin 1 2 Chennan Ma 1 2 Songzhu Mei 3 Siqi Shen 1 2
Cheng Wang 1 2

Abstract

2020). MARL is challenging due to issues such as nonstationary (Qiu et al., 2021), partial observability (Oliehoek
& Amato, 2016), scalability, credit assignment (Foerster
et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018), low sample efficiency,
etc. Researchers have proposed various methods to address
these issues. Many of them adopted the Centralized Training
with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) paradigm (Oliehoek
et al., 2008), where agents are trained jointly with central
information, but the agents execute their policies decentrally
with the agent’s local observation. In the CTDE paradigm,
Parameter Sharing (PS) (Rashid et al., 2018) is a widely
adopted technique in MARL to alleviate the scalability and
low sample efficiency issues.

Parameter-sharing (PS) techniques have been
widely adopted in cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL). In PS, all the agents
share a policy network with identical parameters,
which enjoys good sample efficiency. However,
PS could lead to homogeneous policies that limit
MARL performance. We tackle this problem from
the angle of gradient conflict among agents. We
find that the existence of futile neurons whose update is canceled out by gradient conflicts among
agents leads to poor learning efficiency and diversity. To address this deficiency, we propose
GradPS, a gradient-based PS method. It dynamically creates multiple clones for each futile neuron. For each clone, a group of agents with low
gradient-conflict shares the neuron’s parameters.
Our method can enjoy good sample efficiency by
sharing the gradients among agents of the same
clone neuron. Moreover, it can encourage diverse behaviors through independently updating
an exclusive clone neuron. Through extensive
experiments, we show that GradPS can learn diverse policies with promising performance. The
source code for GradPS is available in https:
//github.com/xmu-rl-3dv/GradPS.

In PS, all agents share a neural network policy determined
by the same set of parameters. PS is effective for MARL
tasks where the agent behaviors are identical or similar.
However, PS can lead to homogeneous policies, limiting the
diversity of agent behaviors and the overall capabilities of
joint policies.
Existing studies on PS can be classified into four categories:
(1) full PS approaches where all agents share the same parameters, the identity of an agent is used as input to the
policy to increase policy diversity (Rashid et al., 2018; Qiu
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020), (2) group-based PS where
agents are group (either dynamically or statically) into multiple groups based on the behaviors (e.g., trajectories), each
group shares the same set of parameters (Christianos et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2024b). (3) partial PS where the neural
network of the policy is divided into a shared part and an
individual part (Li et al., 2021), (4) mask-based PS where
the agent policy is determined by the combination of a
shared policy network and an agent-specific mask that can
be static (Kim & Sung, 2023) or dynamic (Li et al., 2024d).
Our work is a neuron-based PS approach that addresses the
problems of PS from the angle of neuron gradient conflict
among agents.

1. Introduction
Many real-world tasks can be modeled as cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) problems (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019), where multiple agents
must collaborate to achieve a common goal (Rashid et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and
Computing for Smart Cities, School of Informatics, Xiamen University (XMU), China 2 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, XMU, China 3 School of
Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China.
Correspondence to: Siqi Shen <siqishen@xmu.edu.cn>.

Neuron gradient refers to the gradient of a loss with respect to a neuron. The gradient of the neuron represents
the change in the knowledge learned by the agent. In a PS
network, agents could lead different knowledge which lead
to gradient conflict. The neuron gradient conflict indicates

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

