Contextual Bandits for Unbounded Context Distributions
Puning Zhao 1 2 Rongfei Fan 3 Shaowei Wang 4 Li Shen 1 2 Qixin Zhang 5 Zong Ke 6 Tianhang Zheng 7

Abstract

and finance (Bouneffouf et al., 2020), decision problems are
usually modeled as contextual bandits (Woodroofe, 1979),
in which the reward depends on some side information,
called contexts. At the t-th iteration, the decision maker observes the context Xt , and then pulls an arm At ∈ A based
on Xt and the previous trajectory (Xi , Ai ), i = 1, . . . , t − 1.
Many research assume linear rewards (Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2011; Bastani & Bayati, 2020; Bastani et al., 2021; Qian
et al., 2023; Langford & Zhang, 2007; Dudik et al., 2011;
Chu et al., 2011; Li et al., 2010), which is restrictive and
may not fit well into practical scenarios. Consequently, in recent years, nonparametric contextual bandits have received
significant attention, which does not make any parametric
assumption about the reward functions (Perchet & Rigollet,
2013; Guan & Jiang, 2018; Gur et al., 2022; Blanchard et al.,
2023; Suk & Kpotufe, 2023; Suk, 2024; Cai et al., 2024).

Nonparametric contextual bandit is an important model of sequential decision making problems. Under α-Tsybakov margin condition, existing
 research
 has established a regret bound of
1− α+1
d+2
for bounded supports. However,
Õ T
the optimal regret with unbounded contexts has
not been analyzed. The challenge of solving contextual bandit problems with unbounded support
is to achieve both exploration-exploitation tradeoff and bias-variance tradeoff simultaneously. In
this paper, we solve the nonparametric contextual bandit problem with unbounded contexts.
We propose two nearest neighbor methods combined with UCB exploration. The first method
uses a fixed k. Our analysis shows that this
method achieves minimax optimal regret under a
weak margin condition and relatively light-tailed
context distributions. The second method uses
adaptive k. By a proper data-driven selection
of k, this method achieves an expected regret of

Despite significant progress on nonparametric contextual
bandits, existing studies focus only on the case with bounded
contexts, and the probability density functions (pdf) of the
contexts are required to be bounded away from zero. However, many practical applications often involve unbounded
contexts, such as healthcare (Durand et al., 2018), dynamic
pricing (Misra et al., 2019) and recommender systems (Zhou
et al., 2017). In particular, the contexts may follow a heavytailed distribution (Zangerle & Bauer, 2022), which is significantly different from bounded contexts. Therefore, to
bridge the gap between theoretical studies and practical
applications of contextual bandits, an in-depth theoretical
study of unbounded contexts is crucially needed. Compared with bounded contexts, heavy-tailed context distribution requires the learning method to be adaptive to the
pdf of contexts, in order to balance the bias and variance
of the estimation of reward functions. On the other hand,
compared with existing works on nonparametric classification and regression with identically and independently
distributed (i.i.d) data, bandit problems require us to achieve
a good balance between exploration and exploitation, thus
the learning method needs to be adaptive to the suboptimality gap of reward functions. Therefore, the main challenge of solving nonparametric contextual bandit problems
with unbounded contexts is to achieve both bias-variance
tradeoff and exploration-exploitation tradeoff using a single
algorithm.

(α+1)β

Õ T 1− α+(d+2)β + T 1−β , in which β is a parameter describing the tail strength. This bound
matches the minimax lower bound up to logarithm factors, indicating that the second method
is approximately optimal.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (Robbins, 1952; Lai & Robbins, 1985)
is an important sequential decision problem that has been extensively studied (Agrawal, 1995; Auer et al., 2002; Garivier
& Cappé, 2011). In many practical applications such as recommender systems and information retrieval in healthcare
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen,
China 2 Guangming Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 4 Guangzhou University,
Guangzhou, China 5 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 6 National University of Singapore, Singapore 7 Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Li Shen
<shenli6@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we solve the nonparametric contextual ban1

