An Analysis for Reasoning Bias of Language Models with Small Initialization

Junjie Yao 1 Zhongwang Zhang 1 Zhi-Qin John Xu 2 3 4

Abstract
Transformer-based Large Language Models
(LLMs) have revolutionized Natural Language
Processing by demonstrating exceptional performance across diverse tasks. This study investigates the impact of the parameter initialization
scale on the training behavior and task preferences
of LLMs. We discover that smaller initialization
scales encourage models to favor reasoning tasks,
whereas larger initialization scales lead to a preference for memorization tasks. We validate this
reasoning bias via real datasets and meticulously
designed anchor functions. Further analysis of
initial training dynamics suggests that specific
model components, particularly the embedding
space and self-attention mechanisms, play pivotal roles in shaping these learning biases. We
provide a theoretical framework from the perspective of model training dynamics to explain these
phenomena. Additionally, experiments on realworld language tasks corroborate our theoretical
insights. This work enhances our understanding
of how initialization strategies influence LLM performance on reasoning tasks and offers valuable
guidelines for training models.

Figure 1. Comparison of training loss between PrOntoQA and
TinyStories in one next-token prediction training for this mix
dataset. The red line represents the training loss on the PrOntoQA dataset, while the blue line depicts the training loss on the
TinyStories dataset.

wide range of tasks, from text generation to complex reasoning (Wei et al., 2022a; Achiam et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024).
Reasoning, in particular, is a critical ability for LLMs. A
number of studies have focused on improving the reasoning ability of these models through data-driven approaches,
such as RHO-1 (Lin et al., 2024) and Phi-4 (Abdin et al.,
2024). However, there remains an ongoing debate as to
whether LLMs genuinely learn the underlying logical rules
or merely mimic patterns observed in the data (Marcus,
2003; Smolensky et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

An alternative approach to enhancing the reasoning ability of LLMs focuses on the model architecture and its
training process. In one such study examining the use of
Transformers to model compositional functions, it was observed that the scale of model parameter initialization significantly impacts the model’s reasoning behavior (Zhang
et al., 2024a; 2025). Specifically, smaller initialization
scales bias the model toward fitting the data by learning
primitive-level functions and compositional rules, whereas
larger initialization scales tend to encourage memorization
of input-output mappings. A qualitative rationale for this
phenomenon has been proposed: with a small initialization,
a well-documented effect known as neuron condensation
emerges during training (Xu et al., 2025; Luo et al., 2021;
Zhou et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Zhang & Xu, 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023; Zhang & Xu, 2024). This phenomenon
suggests that neurons within the same layer tend to behave

With the rapid advancement of deep learning technologies,
Large Language Models have achieved remarkable success
in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). These
models have demonstrated exceptional capabilities across a
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Institute of Natural Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, P.R. China
2
Institute of Natural Sciences, School of Mathematical Sciences, MOE-LSC, School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, P.R. China 3 Center for
LLM, Institute for Advanced Algorithms Research, Shanghai, P.R. China 4 Shanghai Seres Information Technology Co.,
Ltd, Shanghai 200040, China. Correspondence to: Zhongwang Zhang <0123zzw666@sjtu.edu.cn>, Zhi-Qin John Xu
<xuzhiqin@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

