Causality-Aware Contrastive Learning for Robust
Multivariate Time-Series Anomaly Detection

HyunGi Kim 1 Jisoo Mok 1 Dongjun Lee 2 Jaihyun Lew 2 Sungjae Kim 3 Sungroh Yoon 1 2 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Multivariate time-series anomaly detection (MTSAD) aims
to identify anomalies in time-series collected across multiple interdependent variables (Li & Jung, 2023; Choi et al.,
2021). Applications of MTSAD are far-reaching, spanning from detecting network intrusion in cyber-physical
systems (Nandanwar & Katarya, 2024) to monitoring patient vitals in healthcare systems (Clifford et al., 2017; BenMoshe et al., 2024). Since undetected anomalies can cause
serious harm in mission-critical systems, MTSAD plays
a crucial role in ensuring their operational efficiency and
security. Furthermore, as such systems continue to grow in
size and complexity, with an increasing number of variables,
understanding the intricate inter-variable relationships rises
as a critical challenge in MTSAD (Kang & Kang, 2024).

Utilizing the complex inter-variable causal relationships within multivariate time-series provides a promising avenue toward more robust
and reliable multivariate time-series anomaly detection (MTSAD) but remains an underexplored
area of research. This paper proposes CausalityAware contrastive learning for RObust multivariate Time-Series (CAROTS), a novel MTSAD pipeline that incorporates the notion of
causality into contrastive learning. CAROTS employs two data augmentors to obtain causalitypreserving and -disturbing samples that serve
as a wide range of normal variations and synthetic anomalies, respectively. With causalitypreserving and -disturbing samples as positives
and negatives, CAROTS performs contrastive
learning to train an encoder whose latent space
separates normal and abnormal samples based
on causality. Moreover, CAROTS introduces a
similarity-filtered one-class contrastive loss that
encourages the contrastive learning process to
gradually incorporate more semantically diverse
samples with common causal relationships. Extensive experiments on five real-world and two
synthetic datasets validate that the integration of
causal relationships endows CAROTS with improved MTSAD capabilities. The code is available at https://github.com/kimanki/CAROTS.

Causality offers a structured approach to capture the underlying relationships within multivariate time-series (Runge
et al., 2019). In multivariate time-series, the observed variables are governed by causal relationships that dictate how
changes in one variable affect others (Granger, 1969; Cheng
et al., 2024b). For instance, the increase in temperature directly causes the duration for which the air conditioner stays
on to be longer. Once an anomaly arises, provoking an unexpected behavior from one or more variables, these causal
relationships break down (e.g., a broken air conditioner will
remain turned off regardless of the temperature). Except in
the case of such an abnormal event, the inter-variable causal
relationships generally remain consistent, and thus, a violation of causal relationships can be used as a key indicator of
anomalies (Liu et al., 2025; Febrinanto et al., 2023).
Understanding the complex inter-variable dynamics from
the perspective of causality enables a more reliable and
robust MTSAD by allowing discernment of causalitypreserving variations of normal instances (e.g., the airconditioner staying on for longer than usual due to heatwaves) from true anomalies with broken causality. However, current unsupervised MTSAD methods, such as
reconstruction- or contrastive learning-based approaches, focus instead on superficial differences in data values or distributions and overlook inter-variable causal relationships (Dai
et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023). Failing to
account for inter-variable causal relationships can lead to

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea 3 Hyundai Motor Company, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea 4 AIIS, ASRI, and INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon
<sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

