FisherSFT: Data-Efficient Supervised Fine-Tuning of Language Models Using
Information Gain
Rohan Deb 1 Kiran Thekumparampil 2 Kousha Kalantari 2 Gaurush Hiranandani 3 Shoham Sabach 2 4
Branislav Kveton 5

Abstract

2022). The key idea in LoRA is to add low-rank matrices
to the matrices in the transformer layers and only optimize
those during fine-tuning. The computational cost of LoRA
and the quality of its approximations increase with the rank
of the low-rank matrices. Therefore, the rank is a natural
tunable parameter. The simplicity of LoRA made it popular
in practice and thousands of different adapters have been
trained (Mangrulkar et al., 2022). We propose a complementary approach that selects a subset of most informative
training examples for fine-tuning. The computational cost of
fine-tuning is linear in the size of the chosen subset. Therefore, as in LoRA, the number of chosen examples naturally
trades off the computational cost of fine-tuning for quality.

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is the most common
way of adapting large language models (LLMs) to
a new domain. In this paper, we improve the efficiency of SFT by selecting an informative subset
of training examples. Specifically, for a fixed budget of training examples, which determines the
computational cost of fine-tuning, we select those
that maximize information gain, as measured by
the Fisher information matrix of the SFT objective. We approximate it efficiently by linearization at the last layer of the LLM. Our approach
is computationally efficient, analyzable, and performs well empirically. We demonstrate this on
several problems, with both quantitative results
and LLM-as-a-judge evaluations.

The idea of selecting better training examples for SFT is not
new and has been explored extensively before. Coveragebased approaches (Phillips, 2017; Tukan et al., 2021) select
diverse examples to form coresets. Quality-based sampling
(Wenzek et al., 2019; Muenchigoff et al., 2023) weeds out
low-value or unhelpful examples. In ASK-LLM (Sachdeva
et al., 2024), a proxy LLM is prompted with potential training examples and asked if they should be used for training.
We review these approaches in detail in Appendix A. The
main difference in our work is that we choose training examples using their information value, as measured by the
Fisher information matrix of the SFT objective.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Bommasani et al., 2021)
have emerged as general purpose tools that can solve natural
language tasks in both zero-shot and few-shot settings (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). LLMs are typically
trained in three stages (Ouyang et al., 2022): pre-training
on a large corpus of diverse text, supervised fine-tuning in
the domain of interest (Wei et al., 2022), and alignment to
human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al.,
2023). The main challenge in all stages is the sheer scale of
LLMs, which increased by four orders of magnitude in just
four years: from 117 million parameters in GPT-2 (2019) to
1.76 trillion parameters in GPT-4 (2023).

Without loss of generality, we view training examples in
fine-tuning as sentences, each being a sequence of tokens.
We want to select the most informative n sentences, which
determines the computational cost of fine-tuning. The key
insight in our work is that the SFT objective is a sum of next
token log-probabilities, each represented by a multinomial
logistic regression model (Bishop, 2006) that depends on
all previous tokens. Therefore, the problem of selecting the
most informative sentences for fine-tuning is a variant of an
optimal design (Pukelsheim, 2006; Stufken & Yang, 2012)
for multinomial logistic regression, where the information
gain of a sentence depends on all tokens in it. We derive an
efficient approximation to the Hessian of the SFT objective,
which measures how informative a set of sentences is, and
then optimize its lower bound to find the most informative
sentences.

In this paper, we focus on making supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) (Wei et al., 2022) more efficient. A standard approach
in SFT is to optimize a low-rank adapter (LoRA) (Hu et al.,
1
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. The work
was done during an internship at Amazon 2 Amazon 3 Typeface
4
Technion 5 Adobe Research. Correspondence to: Rohan Deb
<rd22@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

