Position: All Current Generative Fidelity and Diversity Metrics are Flawed

Ossi Räisä 1 Boris van Breugel 2 Mihaela van der Schaar 2

Abstract

FID (Heusel et al., 2017), information divergences like total
variation distance and KL divergence, and the performance
of downstream machine learning tasks.

Any method’s development and practical application is limited by our ability to measure its reliability. The popularity of generative modeling emphasizes the importance of good synthetic data metrics. Unfortunately, previous works have found
many failure cases in current metrics, for example
lack of outlier robustness and unclear lower and
upper bounds. We propose a list of desiderata
for synthetic data metrics, and a suite of sanity
checks: carefully chosen simple experiments that
aim to detect specific and known generative modeling failure modes. Based on these desiderata
and the results of our checks, we arrive at our position: all current generative fidelity and diversity
metrics are flawed. This significantly hinders practical use of synthetic data. Our aim is to convince
the research community to spend more effort in
developing metrics, instead of models. Additionally, through analyzing how current metrics fail,
we provide practitioners with guidelines on how
these metrics should (not) be used.

However, while these metrics can distinguish good and
bad generators, they do not provide information on why a
particular generator received a poor evaluation, or what can
still be improved in a good generator. Sajjadi et al. (2018)
proposed a precision/recall metric that distinguishes two
failure modes: a generator that generates unrealistic samples
and a generator that does not cover all of the real distribution.
These metrics were first improved by Kynkäänniemi et al.
(2019) and later others, leading to several metrics, including
density/coverage (Naeem et al., 2020) and α-precision/βrecall (Alaa et al., 2022). The latter two pairs are the most
popular of these types of metrics today.
These metrics come in pairs. The first metrics of the pairs
measure how realistic synthetic samples are, so we call them
fidelity metrics. The second metrics of each pair measure
how much of the real distribution the synthetic distribution
covers, so we call them diversity metrics.
While evaluating and improving generative models has received much attention, evaluating and improving the metrics themselves has received much less. Some recent works
have found failure cases with the established fidelity and
diversity metrics (Cheema & Urner, 2023; Khayatkhoei &
Abdalmageed, 2023; Park & Kim, 2023), and proposed new
metrics that fix the discovered problems. However, each of
these works only looks at a small number of problems and
focuses on fixing those. It remains an open question whether
the fixed metrics suffer from the failure cases reported by the
other works, or if the fixes cause new problems to emerge.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen great advances in generative modeling, from generating realistic facial images (Karras et al.,
2019) to generating tabular datasets with large language
models (Borisov et al., 2022). These advances are motivated by a promise that the synthetic data generated by these
models could augment real data (Das et al., 2022), maintain
privacy of sensitive data (Liew et al., 1985; Rubin, 1993),
improve model evaluation (van Breugel et al., 2023), or
improve fairness in downstream tasks (van Breugel et al.,
2021), among some possible goals.

We aim to answer this question with a thorough evaluation
of fidelity and diversity metrics, consisting of three main
contributions:

The quality of a generative model is typically evaluated
using metrics that compare the real data with synthetic
data produced by the model. Popular metrics include

1. We propose a list of six desiderata that any synthetic
data metric should fulfill in Section 2.

1
University of Helsinki 2 University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Ossi Räisä <ossi.raisa@helsinki.fi>.

2. We distill each failure case that has been reported in the
literature into a simple sanity check, with precisely defined and automatically checked passing criteria, that
are linked to the desiderata, in Section 4. Our imple-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

