Hierarchical Graph Tokenization for Molecule-Language Alignment

Yongqiang Chen 1 2 3 Quanming Yao 4 Juzheng Zhang 5 James Cheng 3 Yatao Bian 6

Abstract

languages (Radford et al., 2019; OpenAI, 2022; Touvron
et al., 2023a; Bubeck et al., 2023). Recently, there has been
a surge of interest in extending the capabilities of LLMs
to graph-structured data (Jin et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023d;
Wei et al., 2024; Mao et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024), particularly molecular graphs (Zhao et al., 2023; Cao et al.,
2023). Inspired by the success of large vision-language
models (Zhang et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2023a), recent efforts in developing large graph-language models (LGLMs)
typically adopt a graph neural network (GNN) (Xu et al.,
2019) to tokenize molecules as a series of node embeddings (or node tokens), and then leverage an adapter such
as a Multi-layer perceptron (MLP) or a Q-former (Li et al.,
2023a) to transform the node tokens into those compatible
with LLMs (Fan et al., 2024). To bridge the gap between
the graph and language modalities, LGLMs will undergo
a molecule-language instruction tuning with the molecular graph and the corresponding captions describing the
molecules (Jin et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023d; Fan et al., 2024).

Recently, there has been a surge of interest in
extending the success of large language models (LLMs) from texts to molecules. Most existing approaches adopt a graph neural network
to represent a molecule as a series of node tokens for molecule-language alignment, which,
however, have overlooked the inherent hierarchical structures in molecules. Notably, higherorder molecular structures contain rich semantics
of functional groups, which encode crucial biochemical functionalities of the molecules. We
show that neglecting the hierarchical information in tokenization will lead to subpar moleculelanguage alignment and severe hallucination. To
address this limitation, we propose HIerarchical
GrapH Tokenization (HIGHT). HIGHT employs
a hierarchical graph tokenizer that encodes the
hierarchy of atom, motif, and molecular levels
of informative tokens to improve the molecular perception of LLMs. HIGHT also adopts an
augmented instruction tuning dataset, enriched
with the hierarchical graph information, to further enhance the molecule-language alignment.
Extensive experiments on 14 real-world benchmarks verify the effectiveness of HIGHT in reducing hallucination by 40%, and significant improvements in various molecule-language downstream tasks. The project is available at https:
//higraphllm.github.io/.

Despite recent progress, the tokenization in existing LGLMs
neglects the essential hierarchical structures inherent in
molecular graphs. In particular, in molecular graphs,
the high-order substructures, such as motifs or functional
groups, encode rich semantics of the biochemical functionalities of the molecules (Milo et al., 2002; Bohacek et al.,
1996; Sterling & Irwin, 2015). For example, the presence
of a hydroxide functional group (“-OH”) often indicates
a higher water solubility. Therefore, such substructural
cues are essential for enabling LLMs to reason about the
molecules in a chemically meaningful way. However, existing LGLMs mostly tokenize molecules solely at the atom
(node) level, and feed LLMs with only node-level tokens.
Consequently, it requires LLMs to implicitly infer the underlying substructures during the instruction tuning stage.
The absence of the critical substructures not only increases
the unnecessary burdern on the LLMs, but also leads to
misaligned representations and a higher likelihood of hallucinations in downstream tasks. To quantify the issue, we
introduce a diagnostic benchmark, called MotifHallu,
which evaluates the perception ability of LGLMs about
the existence of common functional groups. Surprisingly,
we find that existing LGLMs often produce false-positive
predictions (i.e., keep answering “Yes” for any functional
groups), highlighting a critical limitation in current graph to-

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in understanding and processing natural
Most of the works were done when Yongqiang Chen was a
PhD student at CUHK. 1 MBZUAI 2 Carnegie Mellon University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Tsinghua University
5
University of Maryland, College Park 6 Department of Computer
Science, National University of Singapore. Correspondence to:
Yatao Bian <bianyt@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

