Visual Attention Never Fades: Selective Progressive Attention ReCalibration
for Detailed Image Captioning in Multimodal Large Language Models

Mingi Jung 1 Saehyung Lee 1 Eunji Kim 1 Sungroh Yoon 1 2 3

Abstract
Detailed image captioning is essential for tasks
like data generation and aiding visually impaired
individuals. High-quality captions require a balance between precision and recall, which remains
challenging for current multimodal large language models (MLLMs). In this work, we hypothesize that this limitation stems from weakening and increasingly noisy visual attention as
responses lengthen. To address this issue, we propose SPARC (Selective Progressive Attention ReCalibration), a training-free method that enhances
the contribution of visual tokens during decoding. SPARC is founded on three key observations:
(1) increasing the influence of all visual tokens reduces recall; thus, SPARC selectively amplifies visual tokens; (2) as captions lengthen, visual attention becomes noisier, so SPARC identifies critical
visual tokens by leveraging attention differences
across time steps; (3) as visual attention gradually weakens, SPARC reinforces it to preserve its
influence. Our experiments, incorporating both
automated and human evaluations, demonstrate
that existing methods improve the precision of
MLLMs at the cost of recall. In contrast, our proposed method enhances both precision and recall with minimal computational overhead. code:
https://github.com/mingi000508/SPARC

Figure 1. Percentage change in precision, recall, and F1-score
compared to the results before applying each method.

ities (Li et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2024c; Lin et al., 2024).
These models leverage the powerful language capabilities of
Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate textual descriptions from visual inputs (Bai et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023; Abdin et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2023). This capability enables MLLMs to effectively perform a wide range of
tasks, including Visual Question Answering (VQA), multimodal reasoning, and image captioning (Chen et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2024e).
Among these tasks, detailed image captioning aims to produce comprehensive yet accurate textual descriptions that
capture both key elements and subtle nuances of an image. This capability is particularly important in applications
such as content creation (Belyaeva et al., 2023; Han et al.,
2023) or assistive technology for visually impaired individuals (Hao et al., 2024). However, a major challenge in current
approaches is hallucination—where models introduce incorrect or irrelevant details—compromising the reliability
of the generated captions and limiting their practical utility (Bai et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024d; Cui et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have recently gained traction as a transformative approach in artificial intelligence by integrating visual and linguistic modal-

Although many methods have been proposed to reduce hallucinations (Huang et al., 2024; Leng et al., 2024; Lee et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2025), we demonstrate that existing methods primarily enhance precision—the extent to which a caption accurately reflects an image—at the expense of recall—
the extent to which a caption comprehensively describes the
image—often resulting in captions that, while more precise,
omit essential details. To highlight this trade-off, we use the
CHAIR benchmark (Rohrbach et al., 2018) to assess the
effectiveness of existing hallucination mitigation methods in

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University 3 AIIS,
ASRI, INMC, and ISRC, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

