A Parametric Contextual Online Learning Theory of Brokerage

François Bachoc 1 Tommaso Cesari 2 Roberto Colomboni 3 4

Abstract

This setting is especially relevant for over-the-counter (OTC)
markets. Serving as alternatives to conventional exchanges,
OTC markets operate in a decentralized manner and are
a vital part of the global financial system.1 In contrast to
centralized exchanges, the lack of strict protocols and regulations delegates to brokers the responsibility of bridging
the gap between buyers and sellers, who may not have direct
access to one another. In addition to facilitating interactions
between parties, brokers leverage their contextual knowledge and market insights to determine appropriate pricing
for assets. By examining factors such as supply and demand,
market trends, and other asset-specific information, brokers
aim to propose prices that reflect the true market value of
the asset being traded. This price discovery process is a
crucial aspect of a broker’s role, as it helps ensure efficient
transactions by accounting for the unique circumstances surrounding each asset. Additionally, in many OTC markets,
as in our setting, traders choose to either buy or sell depending on the contingent market conditions (Sherstyuk et al.,
2020). This behavior is observed across a broad range of
asset trades, including stocks, derivatives, art, collectibles,
precious metals and minerals, energy commodities like gas
and oil, and digital currencies (cryptocurrencies).

We study the role of contextual information in
the online learning problem of brokerage between
traders. In this sequential problem, at each time
step, two traders arrive with secret valuations
about an asset they wish to trade. The learner
(a broker) suggests a trading (or brokerage) price
based on contextual data about the asset and the
market conditions. Then, the traders reveal their
willingness to buy or sell based on whether their
valuations are higher or lower than the brokerage
price. A trade occurs if one of the two traders
decides to buy and the other to sell, i.e., if the
broker’s proposed price falls between the smallest
and the largest of their two valuations. We design
algorithms for this problem and prove optimal theoretical regret guarantees under various standard
assumptions.

1. Introduction
Inspired by a recent stream of literature (Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
2021; Azar et al., 2022; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2024b; 2023;
Bolić et al., 2024; Bernasconi et al., 2024; Bachoc et al.,
2024), we approach the bilateral trade problem of brokerage
between traders through the lens of online learning. When
viewed from a regret minimization perspective, bilateral
trade has been explored over rounds of seller/buyer interactions with a broker with no prior knowledge of their private
valuations. Similarly to Bolić et al. (2024), we focus on
the case where traders are willing to either buy or sell (possibly short; see Section 1.1), depending on whether their
valuations for the asset being traded are above or below the
brokerage price.

We propose a contextual version of the online brokerage
problem, that is of significant practical interest given that the
broker often has access to meaningful information about the
asset being traded and the surrounding market conditions
before having to propose a trading price. This information
might help the broker to propose more targeted trading
prices by inferring (an approximation of) the current market
value of the corresponding asset, and ignoring it could be
extremely costly in terms of missing trading opportunities.
Although an extensive amount of work has been done on
non-contextual bilateral trade problems (including brokerage problems), the existing literature on the more realistic
contextual versions of these problems is scarce (see Section 1.3). The main reason for the slower development of
contextual results is the higher complexity of these settings
and the impossibility of simply adapting non-contextual al-

1

IMT and IUF, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France
EECS, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada 3 DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy 4 Department of CS, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. Correspondence
to: François Bachoc <francois.bachoc@math.univ-toulouse.fr>,
Tommaso Cesari <tcesari@uottawa.ca>, Roberto Colomboni
<roberto.colomboni@polimi.it>.
2

1

In the US alone, the value of assets traded in OTC markets
exceeded a remarkable 50 trillion USD in 2020, surpassing centralized markets by more than 20 trillion USD (Weill, 2020). This
growth has been steadily increasing since 2016 (www.bis.org,
2022).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

