Adaptive Estimation and Learning under Temporal Distribution Shift

Dheeraj Baby 1 Yifei Tang 1 Hieu Duy Nguyen 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 1 2 Rohit Pyati 1

Abstract

Concretely, we consider an estimation task where we
are given access to n independently drawn observations
yn , yn−1 , . . . , y1 such that E[yi ] = θi ∈ R and Var(yi )
being finite for all i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n}. Our goal is to
construct an estimate θ̂1 for the most recent ground-truth
θ1 . This estimation task is strongly related to various practical scenarios, such as estimating/predicting the latest stock
price, temperature, humidity or network traffic based on a
sequence of historically observed and correlated measurements. We remark that any algorithm for the aforementioned
problem setting can be directly used to construct estimates
for θn , . . . , θ2 as well. The reverse-indexing of time is
mainly used for notational convenience.

In this paper, we study the problem of estimation and learning under temporal distribution shift.
Consider an observation sequence of length n,
which is a noisy realization of a time-varying
groundtruth sequence. Our focus is to develop
methods to estimate the groundtruth at the final
time-step while providing sharp point-wise estimation error rates. We show that, without prior
knowledge on the level of temporal shift, a wavelet
soft-thresholding estimator provides an optimal
estimation error bound for the groundtruth. Our
proposed estimation method generalizes existing
researches Mazzetto and Upfal (2023) by establishing a connection between the sequence’s nonstationarity level and the sparsity in the wavelettransformed domain. Our theoretical findings are
validated by numerical experiments. Additionally,
we applied the estimator to derive sparsity-aware
excess risk bounds for binary classification under
distribution shift and to develop computationally
efficient training objectives. As a final contribution, we draw parallels between our results and
the classical signal processing problem of totalvariation denoising (Mammen and van de Geer,
1997; Tibshirani, 2014a), uncovering novel optimal algorithms for such task.

Note that constructing an estimator θ̂1 itself is not enough.
In many scenarios, we also need to provide statistical guarantees for such estimators, for example to calculate the risk
profile of a stock-picking strategy for a stock-price estimator.
To achieve very high estimation quality, we would like to
obtain a point-wise performance guarantee for the estimate,
i.e., a bound on |θ̂1 − θ1 | which is as small as possible. This
requirement is more rigorous in comparison to controlling
the estimation error for the sequqnce θn , . . . , θ1 in terms of
some aggregate performance metric. For example, a pointwise bound implies a control over cumulative performance
metrics like the mean squared error (MSE) or regret from
online learning (Hazan, 2016) is controlled.
A natural algorithm for estimating θ1 is to average the most
recent observations within a sliding window. However deciding on the optimal window size in a completely dataadaptive manner is non-trivial. Choosing a small window
size will lead to an estimate with small bias but large variance. A large window size will lead to variance reduction
at the expense of introducing large bias. Hence to attain
a sharp point-wise estimation error guarantee, one must
choose a window size with an optimal bias-variance tradeoff. The second challenge for this task is the dependency
on the smoothness/stationarity of the ground-truth sequence
near the timepoint 1 of interest, which directly influences
the optimal window. In practice, we often do not have prior
knowledge on the smoothness/stationarity of the groundtruth sequence. As a consequence, we also need to (potentially in an implicit way) learn the smoothness/stationarity
of the underlying ground-truth sequence and adjust the averaging window size accordingly.

1. Introduction
Standard statistical estimation problems assumes access to
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations.
However, in many practical applications the familiar i.i.d.
assumption is often not applicable. Hence it is important
to study the statistical estimation problem while relaxing
such assumptions. In this paper, we take a step in this
direction by relaxing the identical distributed assumption
on the observations.
1
Amazon 2 University of California San Diego. Correspondence
to: Dheeraj Baby <dheerajbaby@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

