CFPT: Empowering Time Series Forecasting through
Cross-Frequency Interaction and Periodic-Aware Timestamp Modeling

Feifei Kou 1 2 3 Jiahao Wang 1 2 Lei Shi 4 Yuhan Yao 1 2 Yawen Li 5 Suguo Zhu 6 Zhongbao Zhang * 1
Junping Du 1

Abstract

Low-Freq
Output Time
Series

Input Time
Series

Long-term time series forecasting has been widely
studied, yet two aspects remain insufficiently
explored: the interaction learning between different frequency components and the exploitation of periodic characteristics inherent in timestamps. To address the above issues, we propose
CFPT, a novel method that empowering time
series forecasting through Cross-Frequency Interaction (CFI) and Periodic-Aware Timestamp
Modeling (PTM). To learn cross-frequency interactions, we design the CFI branch to process signals in frequency domain and captures
their interactions through a feature fusion mechanism. Furthermore, to enhance prediction performance by leveraging timestamp periodicity,
we develop the PTM branch which transforms
timestamp sequences into 2D periodic tensors
and utilizes 2D convolution to capture both intraperiod dependencies and inter-period correlations
of time series based on timestamp patterns. Extensive experiments on multiple real-world benchmarks demonstrate that CFPT achieves state-ofthe-art performance in long-term forecasting tasks.
The code is publicly available at this repository:
https://github.com/BUPT-SN/CFPT.

consist of

High-Freq

Feature
Extration

(a) The Basic Pipeline of Time Series Forecasting Methods

No-Freq
Only LowFreq

Interaction

Unified-Freq
WeightedFreq

Feature Extraction of Other Methods

LowFreq

HighFreq

Feature Extraction of Our Method

(b) Differences of Frequency Feature Utilization between Our Method and Others

Figure 1. Comparison of frequency component utilization in time
series forecasting.

1. Introduction
Temporal information data serves as one of the most fundamental and ubiquitous data types in real-world applications
and intelligent systems (Liang et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024;
Liang et al., 2024a; Ilbert et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024b).
Within the broader domain of temporal data analysis, longterm time series forecasting has emerged as a particularly
critical task with applications spanning numerous sectors,
including energy consumption (Pinto et al., 2021), transportation (He et al., 2022), financial markets (He et al., 2023)
and so on. Consequently, this task has garnered significant
attention from researchers, leading to the development of numerous advanced methodologies (Nie et al., 2023; Yi et al.,
2023; Zeng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2024;
Luo & Wang, 2024; Xu et al., 2024a). Despite these advances, current research in long-term time series forecasting
leaves two important aspects insufficiently explored.

*Corresponding Author 1 School of Computer Science (National
Pilot Software Engineering School), Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China 2 Key Laboratory
of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
3
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Trusted Software, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China 4 State Key
Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China, Beijing 100024, China 5 School
of Economics and Management, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China 6 College of Computer
Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou
310018, China. Correspondence to: Zhongbao Zhang <zhongbaozb@bupt.edu.cn>.

First, as shown in Figure 1(a), time series data inherently
contains signals of different frequencies with distinct characteristics, where low-frequency components carry fundamental patterns and trends, high-frequency components reflect
short-term dynamics (Ye et al., 2024). The time series prediction task is mainly to predict the future time points by
taking the historical time series as input and extracting their

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

