CTB ENCH: A Library and Benchmark for Certified Training

Yuhao Mao 1 Stefan Balauca 2 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

established itself as an important research area. While initially the community focused on heuristic methods to craft
adversarial examples and defenses against them, it turned
out that such defenses are often brittle and can be evaded
by adaptive adversaries (Athalye et al., 2018; Tramèr et al.,
2020). Thus, neural network certification has emerged as a
method for providing provable guarantees on the robustness
of a given network (Gehr et al., 2018; Wong & Kolter, 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019).

Training certifiably robust neural networks is an
important but challenging task. While many
algorithms for (deterministic) certified training
have been proposed, they are often evaluated on
different training schedules, certification methods, and systematically under-tuned hyperparameters, making it difficult to compare their performance. To address this challenge, we introduce
CTB ENCH, a unified library and a high-quality
benchmark for certified training that evaluates
all algorithms under fair settings and systematically tuned hyperparameters. We show that (1)
almost all algorithms in CTB ENCH surpass the
corresponding reported performance in literature
in the magnitude of algorithmic improvements,
thus establishing new state-of-the-art, and (2) the
claimed advantage of recent algorithms drops significantly when we enhance the outdated baselines
with a fair training schedule, a fair certification
method and well-tuned hyperparameters. Based
on CTB ENCH, we provide new insights into the
current state of certified training, including (1)
certified models have less fragmented loss surface, (2) certified models share many mistakes,
(3) certified models have more sparse activations,
(4) reducing regularization cleverly is crucial for
certified training especially for large radii and (5)
certified training has the potential to improve outof-distribution generalization. We are confident
that CTB ENCH will serve as a benchmark and
testbed for future research in certified training.

Two families of neural network certification methods have
been proposed: complete methods (Katz et al., 2017; Tjeng
et al., 2019) which compute the exact bounds but are extremely computationally expensive, and convex-relaxation
based methods (Zhang et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019) which
are more scalable but provide approximate bounds. Stateof-the-art (SOTA) verifiers (Xu et al., 2021; Ferrari et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2022) combine both approaches, by using convex relaxations to speed up the solving of complete
methods via Branch-and-Bound (Bunel et al., 2020).
However, the scalability of neural network certification is
still a major challenge since the computational complexity
of SOTA verifiers grows exponentially with network size.
To tackle this issue, certified training (Mirman et al., 2018;
Gowal et al., 2018) was proposed to train neural networks
that are amenable to certification. Such methods are typically categorized into two groups: (1) training with a sound
upper bound of the robust loss (Gowal et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2021), and (2) training with an unsound surrogate loss that approximates the exact robust loss
(Müller et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2023; De Palma et al., 2024).
The latter group has been shown to be more effective.
While certified training has made significant advances, there
is currently no benchmark that can be used to fairly evaluate
the effectiveness of the different certified training methods.
Specifically, the literature often compares against previous
methods using quoted numbers due to high computational
costs, although the verifier and certification budget differ.
These unfair comparisons ultimately hinder the community
from drawing reasonable conclusions on the effectiveness
of certified training methods. In addition, existing works
systematically under-tune hyperparameters, in order to show
effectiveness against baselines, thus establishing a weaker
SOTA. Further, there is no unified codebase for these meth-

1. Introduction
As a crucial component of trustworthy artificial intelligence,
adversarial robustness (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2015), i.e., resilience to small input perturbations, has
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
INSAIT, Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski", Sofia, Bulgaria.
Correspondence to: Yuhao Mao <yuhao.mao@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

