BILBO: BILevel Bayesian Optimization

Ruth Wan Theng Chew 1 Quoc Phong Nguyen 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 3

Abstract
Bilevel optimization is characterized by a twolevel optimization structure, where the upperlevel problem is constrained by optimal lowerlevel solutions, and such structures are prevalent in real-world problems. The constraint by
optimal lower-level solutions poses significant
challenges, especially in noisy, constrained, and
derivative-free settings, as repeating lower-level
optimizations is sample inefficient and predicted
lower-level solutions may be suboptimal. We
present BILevel Bayesian Optimization (BILBO),
a novel Bayesian optimization algorithm for general bilevel problems with blackbox functions,
which optimizes both upper- and lower-level problems simultaneously, without the repeated lowerlevel optimization required by existing methods.
BILBO samples from confidence-bounds based
trusted sets, which bounds the suboptimality on
the lower level. Moreover, BILBO selects only
one function query per iteration, where the function query selection strategy incorporates the uncertainty of estimated lower-level solutions and
includes a conditional reassignment of the query
to encourage exploration of the lower-level objective. The performance of BILBO is theoretically
guaranteed with a sublinear regret bound for commonly used kernels and is empirically evaluated
on several synthetic and real-world problems.

(a) Upper-level objective

(b) Lower-level objective

Figure 1: Example of bilevel optimization with upper-level
variable x and lower-level variable z. The bilevel solution
(blue cross) is constrained by lower-level (LL) solutions
(yellow line) and differs from the non-bilevel solution (red
cross).

chical structures, enabling analysis of these interdependent
problems. A simple example of bilevel optimization is in
Figure 1. Applications of bilevel optimization range from
machine learning (e.g., hyperparameter optimization, metalearning) to economic problems (e.g., pricing strategies, toll
setting) (Beck & Schmidt, 2021). In energy management,
energy providers determine optimal pricing strategies for
electricity (upper level) while consumers optimize their electricity demands based on the pricing (lower level). Similarly,
in investment, brokers set fees on different asset classes to
maximize their revenues (upper level), while investors optimize their portfolios for expected returns and risk (lower
level). Bilevel optimization has been applied in both cases
(Shu et al., 2018; Leal et al., 2020), typically using a nested
framework with linear solvers at the lower level. This approach may limit practical effectiveness but it is due to the
inherent complexity of bilevel optimization. Even with only
linear constraints and objective functions, the set of feasible
solutions can be non-convex and non-continuous (Kleinert et al., 2021). Lower-level solutions that are ϵ-feasible
w.r.t. non-linear constraints may also lead to a solution arbitrarily far from the bilevel solution (Beck et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Many real-world problems involve hierarchical decisionmaking with two levels of optimization. Decisions made at
the upper level affect lower-level optimization, while optimal lower-level solutions constrain decisions at the upper
level. Bilevel optimization effectively models such hierar1
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 2 Amazon, Australia 3 Department of Computer Science,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Ruth Wan Theng Chew <ruthchew@nus.edu.sg>.

Classical approaches (Bard & Falk, 1982; Bard & Moore,
1990) rely on simplifying linear or convex assumptions.
More recently, meta-modeling methods employ surrogate
models, such as BLEAQ (Sinha et al., 2013) which uses

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

