Sub-Sequential Physics-Informed Learning with State Space Model

Chenhui Xu 1 Dancheng Liu 1 Yuting Hu 1 Jiajie Li 1 Ruiyang Qin 1 2 Qingxiao Zheng 1 Jinjun Xiong 1

Abstract
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) are
a kind of deep-learning-based numerical solvers
for partial differential equations (PDEs). Existing PINNs often suffer from failure modes of being unable to propagate patterns of initial conditions. We discover that these failure modes
are caused by the simplicity bias of neural networks and the mismatch between PDE’s continuity and PINN’s discrete sampling. We reveal that the State Space Model (SSM) can be
a continuous-discrete articulation allowing initial
condition propagation, and that simplicity bias
can be eliminated by aligning a sequence of moderate granularity. Accordingly, we propose PINNMamba, a novel framework that introduces subsequence modeling with SSM. Experimental results show that PINNMamba can reduce errors
by up to 86.3% compared with state-of-the-art
architecture. Our code is available at https://
github.com/miniHuiHui/PINNMamba.

(a) Ground Truth

(b) PINN

(c) PINNMamba

Figure 1. PINN gradually distorts on convection equation.

approaches like finite element methods (Reddy, 1993).
The mainstream PINNs predominantly employ multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) as their backbone architecture. However, despite the universal approximation capability of
MLPs, they do not always guarantee the accurate learning of
numerical solutions to PDEs in practice. This phenomenon
is observed as the failure modes in PINNs, in which case
PINN provides a completely wrong approximation (Krishnapriyan et al., 2021). As illustrated in Fig. 1, the failure
modes often manifest as a temporal gradual distortion. This
distortion arises because MLPs lack the necessary inductive
bias to effectively capture the temporal dependencies of a
system, ultimately hindering the accurate propagation of
physical patterns informed by the initial conditions.

1. Introduction

To introduce such an inductive bias, several sequence-tosequence approaches have been proposed (Krishnapriyan
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2022; Gao et al.,
2022). Specifically, Krishnapriyan et al. (2021) propose
training a new network at each time step and recursively
using its output as the initial condition for the next step.
This method incurs significant computational and memory
overhead while exhibiting poor generalization. Furthermore, Transformer-based approaches (Zhao et al., 2024;
Yang et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022) are proposed to address
the time-dependency issue. Yet, these methods are based
on discrete sequences, making their model produce incorrect pattern mutations in some cases due to their ignorance
of the basic principle that PINNs approximate continuous
dynamical systems. Thus, there is still an open question:

In the past few years, Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) have emerged as a novel
approach for numerically solving partial differential equations (PDEs). PINN takes a neural network uθ (x, t), whose
parameters θ are trained with physics PDE residual loss, as
the numerical solution u(x, t) of the PDE, where x and t
are spatial and temporal coordinates. The core idea behind
PINNs is to take advantage of the universal approximation
property of neural networks (Hornik et al., 1989) and automatic differentiation implemented by mainstream deep
learning frameworks, such as PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)
and Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016), so that PINNs can
achieve potentially more precise and efficient PDE solution approximation compared with traditional numerical

How can we effectively introduce sequentiality to PINNs?

1

University at Buffalo, SUNY 2 University of Notre Dame.
Correspondence to: Chenhui Xu <cxu26@buffalo.edu>, Jinjun
Xiong <jinjun@buffalo.edu>.

To answer this question, we need to understand the essential
difficulties of training PINNs. First, PINNs assume temporal continuity, whereas, during their actual training, the
spatio-temporal collocation points used to construct the PDE
residual loss are sampled discretely. We define this nature of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

