Convergence of Mean-Field Langevin Stochastic Gradient Descent-Ascent for
Distributional Minimax Optimization

Zhangyi Liu 1 Feng Liu 2 Rui Gao 3 Shuang Li 4

Abstract

generalizes minimax optimization problems in Euclidean
spaces and arises widely in many important applications,
including generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020; Arjovsky et al., 2017), distributionally robust learning (M ˛
adry et al., 2017), as well as zerosum games with mixed Nash equillibrium (Daskalakis &
Panageas, 2018).

We study convergence properties of the discretetime Mean-Field Langevin Stochastic DescentAscent (MFL-SDA) algorithm for solving distributional minimax optimization. These problems
arise in various applications, such as zero-sum
games, generative adversarial networks and distributionally robust learning. Despite the significance of MFL-SDA in these contexts, the discretetime convergence rate remains underexplored. To
address this gap, we establish a last-iterate convergence rate of O( 1ϵ log 1ϵ ) for MFL-SDA. This rate
is nearly optimal when compared to the complexity lower bound of its Euclidean counterpart. This
rate also matches the complexity of mean-field
Langevin stochastic gradient descent for distributional minimization and the outer-loop iteration
complexity of an existing double-loop algorithm
for distributional minimax problems. By leveraging an elementary analysis framework that avoids
PDE-based techniques, we overcome previous
limitations and achieve a faster convergence rate.

Solving such optimization problems over distributional
spaces is inherently challenging. Unlike in Euclidean spaces,
the convexity/concavity of the objective function does not directly guarantee the convergence of gradient-based methods.
To address this, mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD) has
emerged as a powerful theoretical framework (Mei et al.,
2018; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020; Hu et al., 2021;
Chizat, 2022; Nitanda et al., 2022a; Suzuki et al., 2024). In
this framework, an entropy-regularized distributional convex
minimization is considered:
min E(µ) − τ H(µ),
µ∈P(Θ)

where H(µ) = −Eµ [log µ] is the entropy functional. The
mean-field Langevin gradient descent method in discrete
time proceeds as follows:

1. Introduction

θk+1 = θk − η∇

In this paper, we study a distributional minimax optimization of the form

p
δE
[µk ](θk ) + 2ητ ξk ,
δµ

1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 School of Economics and Management, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Department of Information, Risk, and Operations
Management, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, USA
4
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
(Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Rui Gao
<rui.gao@mccombs.utexas.edu>.

where µk is the distribution of θk ; δE
δµ [µk ] is the first variation of E with respect to µ at µk ; and ξk is an independent
injected standard Gaussian noise. Notably, the gradient
in this context is often replaced with an unbiased stochastic gradient estimator to accommodate practical settings
such as stochastic gradient descent. By leveraging the uniform log-Sobolev inequality, corresponding to the PolyakŁojasiewicz (PL) condition (Karimi et al., 2016) in the distributional space, recent works have established exponential
(linear) convergence for MFLD in continuous time (Chizat,
2022; Nitanda et al., 2022a) sublinear convergence of the
order O( 1ϵ log 1ϵ ) in discrete time (Nitanda et al., 2022a) and
with a stochastic gradient oracle (Suzuki et al., 2024).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The MFLD framework can be extended to distributional minimax problems (1), giving rise to the Mean-Field Langevin
Descent-Ascent (MFL-DA) algorithm. For instance, under

min max E(µ, ν),

µ∈P1 ν∈P2

(1)

where P1 , P2 are sets of probability measures and E is a
convex-concave probability functional. This formulation

1

