Improved Off-policy Reinforcement Learning in Biological Sequence Design

Hyeonah Kim 1 2 Minsu Kim 1 3 Taeyoung Yun 3 Sanghyeok Choi 3 Emmanuel Bengio 4
Alex Hernández-Garcı́a 1 2 Jinkyoo Park 3

Abstract

has emerged as one of the successful paradigms for automatic biological sequence design (Angermueller et al.,
2020; Jain et al., 2022). Particularly, they employ deep neural networks as inexpensive proxy models for rapid reward
evaluation by approximating expensive oracle score functions. There are two approaches for training the policy in
this context: on-policy and off-policy.

Designing biological sequences with desired properties is challenging due to vast search spaces
and limited evaluation budgets. Although reinforcement learning methods use proxy models
for rapid reward evaluation, insufficient training
data can cause proxy misspecification on outof-distribution inputs. To address this, we propose a novel off-policy search, δ-Conservative
Search, that enhances robustness by restricting
policy exploration to reliable regions. Starting
from high-score offline sequences, we inject noise
by randomly masking tokens with probability δ,
then denoise them using our policy. We further
adapt δ based on proxy uncertainty on each data
point, aligning the level of conservativeness with
model confidence. Experimental results show that
our conservative search consistently enhances the
off-policy training, outperforming existing machine learning methods in discovering high-score
sequences across diverse tasks, including DNA,
RNA, protein, and peptide design.

DyNA PPO (Angermueller et al., 2020), a representative
on-policy RL method for biological sequence design, employs Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO; Schulman et al.,
2017) within a proxy-based active training loop. While
DyNA PPO has demonstrated effectiveness in various biological sequence design tasks, its major limitation is the
limited search flexibility inherent to on-policy methods. It
cannot effectively leverage offline data points, even like data
collected from previous rounds.
On the other hand, Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets;
Bengio et al., 2021), off-policy RL methods akin to maximum entropy policies (Tiapkin et al., 2024; Deleu et al.,
2024), offer diversity-seeking capabilities and flexible exploration strategies. Jain et al. (2022) applied GFlowNets to
biological sequence design with additional Bayesian active
learning schemes. They leveraged the off-policy nature of
GFlowNets by mixing offline datasets with on-policy data
during training. This approach provided more stable training
compared to DyNA PPO, resulting in better performance.

1. Introduction
Designing biological sequences with desired properties is
crucial in therapeutics and biotechnology (Zimmer, 2002;
Lorenz et al., 2011; Barrera et al., 2016; Sample et al., 2019;
Ogden et al., 2019). However, this task is challenging due to
the combinatorially large search space and the expensive and
black-box nature of objective functions. Recent advances
in deep learning methods for biological sequence design
have shown significant promise at overcoming these challenges (Brookes & Listgarten, 2018; Brookes et al., 2019;
Angermueller et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2022).

However, recent studies have consistently reported that
GFlowNets perform poorly in large-scale settings, such as
green fluorescent protein design (Kim et al., 2023; Surana
et al., 2024). We hypothesize that this bounded performance
stems from the insufficient quality of the proxy model in
the early rounds. Although GFlowNets can generate novel
sequences beyond given data points, the resulting out-ofdistribution inputs lead to unreliable rewards from the undertrained proxy (Trabucco et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021).
This motivates us to introduce a conservative search strategy to restrict the search space to the neighborhoods of the
data points observed during RL training when generating
sequences to query for the next round.

Among various approaches, reinforcement learning (RL)
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal
KAIST 4 Valence Labs. Correspondence to: Hyeonah Kim
<hyeonah.kim@mila.quebec>.
3

Contribution. In this paper, we propose a novel off-policy
search method called δ-Conservative Search (δ-CS), which
enables a trade-off between sequence novelty and robustness

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

