Learning Likelihood-Free Reference Priors

Nicholas Bishop * 1 Daniel Jarne Ornia * 1 Joel Dyer * 1 Anisoara Calinescu 1 Michael Wooldridge 1

Abstract

et al., 2021) to economics (Wiese et al., 2024; Dyer et al.,
2024a) and robotics (Todorov et al., 2012), these models can
be used to explore intricate dynamics, test hypotheses, and
make predictions about real-world phenomena. However,
these models often lack an analytically tractable likelihood
function for the outputs they produce. This intractability
prevents the direct application of classical statistical inference methods. For this reason, a set of simulation-based
inference (SBI) techniques has emerged, including Approximate Bayesian Computation (Beaumont, 2019) and modern
methods based on density and density ratio estimation (see,
e.g., Thomas et al., 2016; Papamakarios & Murray, 2016;
Hermans et al., 2020; Greenberg et al., 2019). These methods approximate common statistical inference procedures
using only the ability to simulate from the simulator, rather
than the ability to evaluate the model’s likelihood function.

Simulation modeling offers a flexible approach
to constructing high-fidelity synthetic representations of complex real-world systems. However, the increased complexity of such models
introduces additional complications, for example
when carrying out statistical inference procedures.
This has motivated a large and growing literature on likelihood-free or simulation-based inference methods, which approximate (e.g., Bayesian)
inference without assuming access to the simulator’s intractable likelihood function. A hitherto neglected problem in the simulation-based
Bayesian inference literature is the challenge of
constructing minimally informative reference priors for complex simulation models. Such priors
maximise an expected Kullback-Leibler distance
from the prior to the posterior, thereby influencing
posterior inferences minimally and enabling an
“objective” approach to Bayesian inference that
does not necessitate the incorporation of strong
subjective prior beliefs. In this paper, we propose
and test a selection of likelihood-free methods for
learning reference priors for simulation models,
using variational approximations to these priors
and a variety of mutual information estimators.
Our experiments demonstrate that good approximations to reference priors for simulation models
are in this way attainable, providing a first step
towards the development of likelihood-free objective Bayesian inference procedures.

Given a simulator with implicit density pθ , a prior distribution π over model parameters θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rd , and observed iid
data x1:n := (x1 , . . . , xn ), xi ∈ X , the goal of simulationbased Bayesian inference methods, is to approximate the
posterior distribution given by Bayes’s theorem:
πx1:n (θ) ∝ pθ (x1:n )π(θ).

(1)

The prior, π, is intended to encapsulate pre-existing knowledge or beliefs about the plausible parameter values, while
πx1:n encapsulates the updated beliefs about plausible values for θ. However, in many practical scenarios, strong prior
information regarding likely values for the model parameters may be unavailable or unreliable. Even when prior
beliefs exist and can be readily expressed in the form of a
prior distribution, they may not be confidently held, or the
modeller might fear that they are unduly influencing the results of their Bayesian analyses by incorporating strong prior
beliefs into π. The modeller may therefore wish to carry out
Bayesian inference in a way that minimises the influence
of their own prior beliefs on the resulting inferences, and
determine what posterior beliefs would arise when minimal
prior information is encoded into the inference procedure.

1. Introduction
Simulation models have played a crucial role across diverse
scientific disciplines, offering a powerful framework for
understanding complex systems. From epidemiology (Kerr
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Nicholas Bishop <nicholas.bishop@cs.ox.ac.uk>,
Daniel Jarne Ornia <daniel.jarneornia@cs.ox.ac.uk>, Joel Dyer
<joel.dyer@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Such considerations have motivated the development of
objective Bayesian methods, which offer a principled approach to constructing priors that are minimally informative
and, correspondingly, posteriors that are maximally datadriven. This has often been solved through reference priors
(Bernardo, 1979; Berger & Yang, 1994; Bernardo, 1997;

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

