On the Local Complexity of Linear Regions in Deep ReLU Networks

Niket Patel 1 Guido Montúfar 1 2 3
The network function Nθ : Rn0 → RnL parameterized by
θ = (Wi , βi )i is then also be a CPWL function. For any
fixed choice of the parameter θ, the input domain Rn0 is
partitioned into linear regions where the function is linear.
These partitions of the input space have been used extensively to study diverse topics such as the expressive power,
decision boundaries in classification, gradients and parameter initialization, and generalization (e.g., Montúfar et al.,
2014; Raghu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018; Balestriero
& Baraniuk, 2018; Grigsby & Lindsey, 2022; Brandenburg
et al., 2024; Telgarsky, 2016). In this work we aim to advance a theoretical framework towards better understanding
the local distribution of linear regions near the data distribution and how it relates to other relevant aspects of learning
such as robustness and representation learning.

Abstract
We define the local complexity of a neural network with continuous piecewise linear activations
as a measure of the density of linear regions over
an input data distribution. We show theoretically
that ReLU networks that learn low-dimensional
feature representations have a lower local complexity. This allows us to connect recent empirical
observations on feature learning at the level of the
weight matrices with concrete properties of the
learned functions. In particular, we show that
the local complexity serves as an upper bound on
the total variation of the function over the input
data distribution and thus that feature learning
can be related to adversarial robustness. Lastly,
we consider how optimization drives ReLU networks towards solutions with lower local complexity. Overall, this work contributes a theoretical
framework towards relating geometric properties
of ReLU networks to different aspects of learning
such as feature learning and representation cost.

1.1. Motivation
In the kernel regime, neural networks with piecewise linear
activations are observed to follow lazy training (Chizat et al.,
2019) and bias towards smooth interpolants which do not
significantly change the structure of linear regions during
training (see, e.g., Williams et al., 2019; Jin & Montúfar,
2023). On the other hand, for networks in the active regime,
which are not well approximated by linearized models, one
observes significant movement of the linear regions and
in some cases a bias towards interpolants that have only a
small number of linear regions (e.g., Maennel et al., 2018;
Williams et al., 2019; Shevchenko et al., 2022). Characterizing the dynamics of linear regions at a theoretical level
remains a significant outstanding challenge, even for shallow networks. Recent empirical studies have demonstrated
interesting dynamics of the linear regions near the training
data points. In particular, Humayun et al. (2024b) have
shown that in the terminal phase of training, the number
of linear regions near the data drops significantly, and this
drop corresponds to an increase in the model’s adversarial
robustness. We replicate similar experiments in Figure 3.
In this work, we aim to develop theory to explain some of
the empirical results of Humayun et al. (2024b). Grokking
describes a sudden improvement in generalization error or
robustness after prolonged training, typically occurring once
the training loss is near zero. It is linked to representation
learning, suggesting that late generalization arises when a
network develops the appropriate representations (Liu et al.,

1. Introduction
Despite the numerous achievements of deep learning, many
of the mechanisms by which deep neural networks learn
and generalize remain unclear. An “Occam’s Razor” style
heuristic is that we want our neural network to parameterize
a simple solution after training, but it can be challenging to
establish a useful metric of the complexity of a deep neural
network (Hu et al., 2021). We may gain more insights in the
case where we use piece-wise linear activation functions,
such as ReLU, LeakyReLU, or Maxout. If ϕ is a continuous
piecewise linear (CPWL) activation function and Ai (x) =
Wi x − βi is a parameterized affine linear function, i =
1, . . . , L, we consider a network of the following form:
Nθ (x) = AL ◦ ϕ ◦ AL−1 · · · ϕ ◦ A1 (x),

x ∈ Rn0 . (1)

1
Department of Mathematics, UCLA, USA 2 Department of
Statistics & Data Science, UCLA, USA 3 MPI MiS, Germany.
Correspondence to: Niket Patel <niketpatel@g.ucla.edu>, Guido
Montúfar <montufar@math.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

