“Who experiences large model decay and why?”
A Hierarchical Framework for Diagnosing Heterogeneous Performance Drift

Harvineet Singh 1 Fan Xia 1 Alexej Gossmann 2 Andrew Chuang 1 Julian C. Hong 1 Jean Feng 1

Abstract

performance degradation while others may experience very
negligible differences, if at all (Yang et al., 2023). Understanding the subgroups where shifts are most pronounced
and providing subgroup-specific explanations is critical
from the perspectives of algorithmic fairness (Mitchell et al.,
2021) and backwards compatibility (Srivastava et al., 2020).
Subgroup-level explanations can also help model developers
design targeted corrective actions that only modify the algorithm’s behavior in the most affected subgroups and limit
any other unintended effects (“Don’t fix what ain’t broke”)
(Globus-Harris et al., 2022; Suriyakumar et al., 2023).

Machine learning (ML) models frequently experience performance degradation when deployed in
new contexts. Such degradation is rarely uniform:
some subgroups may suffer large performance decay while others may not. Understanding where
and how large differences in performance arise
is critical for designing targeted corrective actions that mitigate decay for the most affected subgroups while minimizing any unintended effects.
Current approaches do not provide such detailed
insight, as they either (i) explain how average
performance shifts arise or (ii) identify adversely
affected subgroups without insight into how this
occurred. To this end, we introduce a Subgroupscanning Hierarchical Inference Framework for
performance drifT (SHIFT). SHIFT first asks “Is
there any subgroup with unacceptably large performance decay due to covariate/outcome shifts?”
(Where?) and, if so, dives deeper to ask “Can we
explain this using more detailed variable(subset)specific shifts?” (How?). In real-world experiments, we find that SHIFT identifies interpretable
subgroups affected by performance decay, and
suggests targeted actions that effectively mitigate
the decay.1

For instance, suppose an ML algorithm for predicting unplanned readmission achieves overall accuracy of 85%
in hospital A and 83% in hospital B. While the change
in overall accuracy may not be clinically significant, the
change within some subgroup may be sufficiently large to
be deemed harmful. If so, it is natural to ask how this heterogeneity in performance decay arose: was it due to a change
in how certain diseases are recorded, which medications
are prescribed for certain patients, or something else altogether? If we know the affected subgroup and why, we can
specifically address the root cause, such as by updating data
pre-processing and/or the algorithm within the subgroup.
As such, our goal is to simultaneously understand where
an ML algorithm performs substantially worse and how
it arose. Numerous methods have been developed to find
subgroups where an ML algorithm performs poorly (d’Eon
et al., 2022; Eyuboglu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Subbaswamy et al., 2024), which can in principle be extended
to identify subgroups with large model decay. Answering
“how” is more tricky. We can obtain an approximate highlevel answer by decomposing the average performance drop
within an identified subgroup into the contribution from a
shift in the marginal distribution of the input features X
(covariate shift) versus a shift in the conditional distribution
of the target Y |X (outcome shift) (Quinonero-Candela et al.,
2009; Cai et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
ML algorithms are known to degrade in performance when
applied in different contexts, which has led to extensive
work on explaining how differences in an ML algorithm’s
average performance arise (Cai et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023). However, performance differences are rarely uniform in practice: some subgroups may experience severe
1
University of California, San Francisco, USA 2 Independent researcher. Correspondence to: Jean Feng <jean.feng@ucsf.edu>.

However, this is only a partial solution. For one, it misses
situations where the subgroup of individuals experiencing
severe covariate shifts is not the same as the one experiencing severe outcome shifts, and each subgroup may require
different corrective actions. More importantly, we often

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code is available at http://github.com/jjfeng/
shift.

1

