Highly Compressed Tokenizer Can Generate Without Training

Lukas Lao Beyer 1 Tianhong Li 2 Xinlei Chen 3 Sertac Karaman 1 Kaiming He 2
seed

Abstract

optimization −−−−−−−−−→

(a)

Commonly used image tokenizers produce a 2D
grid of spatially arranged tokens. In contrast, socalled 1D image tokenizers represent images as
highly compressed one-dimensional sequences of
as few as 32 discrete tokens. We find that the
high degree of compression achieved by a 1D tokenizer with vector quantization enables image
editing and generative capabilities through heuristic manipulation of tokens, demonstrating that
even very crude manipulations — such as copying and replacing tokens between latent representations of images — enable fine-grained image
editing by transferring appearance and semantic
attributes. Motivated by the expressivity of the 1D
tokenizer’s latent space, we construct an image
generation pipeline leveraging gradient-based testtime optimization of tokens with plug-and-play
loss functions such as reconstruction or CLIP similarity. Our approach is demonstrated for inpainting and text-guided image editing use cases, and
can generate diverse and realistic samples without requiring training of any generative model.
Code is available at https://github.com/
lukaslaobeyer/token-opt.

(b)

z0 … z31

seed

objective
maximize

TiTok
encoder

32 discrete
tokens

TiTok
decoder

Figure 1. Without further training, a pretrained tokenizer can
perform generative tasks such as (a) text-guided editing and
(b) inpainting. Because the highly compressed latent space of 1D
tokenizers enables generative capabilities via direct token manipulation, we generate using test-time optimization of tokens with (a)
CLIP similarity or (b) reconstruction objectives, without training
any dedicated generative model.

While the generative models used in such an image generation pipeline have received much attention, recently introduced 1D tokenizers highlight that highly compressed latent
spaces provide significant leverage in improving generation
performance. For example, the TiTok 1D tokenizer can
achieve an order of magnitude runtime reduction without
compromising sample quality by representing an image in
as few as 32 discrete tokens (Yu et al., 2024b).

1. Introduction

We argue that scaling image tokenizers to higher compression ratios requires powerful decoders that may themselves
be viewed as generative models. As a thought experiment,
consider a tokenizer that encodes an image into just a single
discrete token from a finite codebook. Then, the decoder for
such a “tokenizer” is faced with a generative modeling task,
if its output is to be successful in capturing the data distribution. Supposing we had a decoder for this single-token
tokenizer at hand, using it as a generative model would be
straightforward: an image could be generated by sampling
a random token from the codebook and decoding it. Given
the very high compression offered by 1D tokenizers, we
wish to find out to what extent these tokenizers can indeed
be viewed as generative models.

A standard modern image generation pipeline consists of a
tokenizer — an autoencoder which embeds an image into
a compact latent space — as well as a generative model
operating on this latent space. Commonly, this generative
model leverages some form of iterative refinement such
as diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022; Peebles & Xie, 2023),
autoregression (Esser et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021;
Razavi et al., 2019), masked modeling (Chang et al., 2022),
or a combination of those approaches (Li et al., 2024b; Zhou
et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2024).
1
MIT LIDS 2 MIT CSAIL 3 Meta FAIR. Correspondence to:
Lukas Lao Beyer <llb@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate that simple latent space manipulations of tokens can result in im1

