InfoCons: Identifying Interpretable Critical Concepts
in Point Clouds via Information Theory

Feifei Li 1 Mi Zhang 1 Zhaoxiang Wang 1 Min Yang 1

Abstract

Explanation

PC input X

Interpretability of point cloud (PC) models becomes imperative given their deployment in
safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous vehicles. We focus on attributing PC model outputs to
interpretable critical concepts, defined as meaningful subsets of the input point cloud. To enable human-understandable diagnostics of model
failures, an ideal critical subset should be faithful (preserving points that causally influence predictions) and conceptually coherent (forming semantically meaningful structures that align with
human perception). We propose InfoCons, an
explanation framework that applies informationtheoretic principles to decompose the point cloud
into 3D concepts, enabling the examination of
their causal effect on model predictions with learnable priors. We evaluate InfoCons on synthetic
datasets for classification, comparing it qualitatively and quantitatively with four baselines. We
further demonstrate its scalability and flexibility
on two real-world datasets and in two applications
that utilize critical scores of PC.

Application

InfoCons
Model Prediction Y

Adversarial Attacks
“flowers”
“pot”

Misclassification

👀 Discriminative Concept

Non-discriminative

Data Augmentation
(Mix-up)

Figure 1. Attributing PC model outputs to a group of interpretable
critical concepts using InfoCons. The derived concepts, which
conform to a specific semantically meaningful structure (i.e., conceptual cohesion), can reflect their influence on the model outputs
faithfully. The critical score map can also be integrated into multiple applications. Better viewed in color.

safety-critical scenarios like autonomous vehicles (Geiger
et al., 2012). Interpretability has become a crucial issue
in assessing the reliability of model decisions, and understanding complex, high-dimensional deep neural networks
has been a long-standing challenge. However, despite substantial recent progress in the domains of 2D images and
language (Deng et al., 2024; Rai et al., 2024), research in the
field of 3D data remains lacking. Challenges in developing
explanation methods for point clouds arise from the significant domain gap between point clouds and other modalities,
making direct application of 2D methods less effective (Wu
et al., 2015; Tan, 2023). Furthermore, the absence of wellestablished architectures and diverse modules complicates
the development of a faithful and broadly effective explanation method for various point cloud models.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are unordered sets of points representing the
3D world. Point cloud (PC) models directly take the point
cloud as input and perform various downstream tasks such
as classification, segmentation and object detection (Chang
et al., 2015; Armeni et al., 2016). The advancements in
deep learning-based PC models (Qi et al., 2017a;b; Wang
et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2024) have significantly improved their performance on
3D understanding tasks, paving the way for applications in

Previous study of point cloud explanation methods aim to
extract a point cloud subset critical for model decisions,
collectively referred to as Critical Subset Theory (Qi et al.,
2017a; Zheng et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021; Levi & Gilboa,
2023). These methods differ in how they define the importance of points. For instance, the maxpool-based Critical Points (CP) (Qi et al., 2017a) identify points indexed
through a maxpooling layer applied to features as critical,
suggesting that stronger responses indicate greater importance. Meanwhile, the gradient-based point cloud saliency
map (PCSAM) (Zheng et al., 2019) utilizes the gradients
of the CE loss w.r.t. spherical coordinates to rank salient

1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China. Correspondence to: Mi Zhang <mi zhang@fudan.edu.cn>, Min Yang
<m yang@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

