SENSEI: Semantic Exploration Guided by Foundation Models
to Learn Versatile World Models
Cansu Sancaktar * 1 2 Christian Gumbsch * 1 3 4 Andrii Zadaianchuk 1 5 Pavel Kolev 1 Georg Martius 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Exploration is a cornerstone of reinforcement
learning (RL). Intrinsic motivation attempts to
decouple exploration from external, task-based
rewards. However, established approaches to intrinsic motivation that follow general principles
such as information gain, often only uncover lowlevel interactions. In contrast, children’s play suggests that they engage in meaningful high-level
behavior by imitating or interacting with their
caregivers. Recent work has focused on using
foundation models to inject these semantic biases
into exploration. However, these methods often
rely on unrealistic assumptions, such as languageembedded environments or access to high-level
actions. We propose SEmaNtically Sensible ExploratIon (S ENSEI), a framework to equip modelbased RL agents with an intrinsic motivation for
semantically meaningful behavior. S ENSEI distills a reward signal of interestingness from Vision
Language Model (VLM) annotations, enabling
an agent to predict these rewards through a world
model. Using model-based RL, S ENSEI trains an
exploration policy that jointly maximizes semantic rewards and uncertainty. We show that in both
robotic and video game-like simulations S ENSEI
discovers a variety of meaningful behaviors from
image observations and low-level actions. S EN SEI provides a general tool for learning from foundation model feedback, a crucial research direction, as VLMs become more powerful.1

Achieving intrinsically-motivated learning in artificial
agents has been a long-standing dream, making it possible
to decouple agents’ learning from an experimenter manually
crafting and setting up tasks. Thus, the goal in intrinsicallymotivated reinforcement learning (RL) is for agents to explore their environment efficiently and autonomously, constituting a free play phase akin to children’s curious play.
Various intrinsic reward definitions have been proposed in
the literature, such as aiming for state space coverage (Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019), novelty or retrospective surprise (Pathak et al., 2017; Schmidhuber, 1991), and information gain of a world model (Pathak
et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020; Sancaktar et al., 2022). However, when an agent starts learning from scratch, there is one
fundamental problem: just because something is novel does
not necessarily mean that it contains useful or generalizable
information for any sensible task (Dubey & Griffiths, 2017).
Imagine a robot facing a desk with several objects. The
robot could explore by trying to move through the entire
manipulable space or hitting the desk at various speeds. In
contrast, human common sense would primarily focus on
interacting with the objects or drawer of the desk since potential task distributions likely revolve around those entities.
Agents exploring their environment with intrinsic motivations suffer from a chicken-or-egg problem: how do you
know something is interesting before you have tried it and
experienced interesting consequences? This is a bottleneck
for the types of behavior that an agent can unlock during
free play. We argue that incorporating human priors into
exploration could alleviate this roadblock. Similar points
have been raised for children’s play. During the first years
of life, children are surrounded by their caregivers who ideally encourage and reinforce them while they explore their
environment. Philosopher and psychologist Karl Groos has
stipulated that there is “a strong drive in children to observe
the activities of their elders and incorporate those activities
into their play" (Gray, 2017; Groos & Baldwin, 1901).

*

Equal contribution 1 Autonomous Learning, University of
Tübingen 2 Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 Neuro-Cognitive Modeling, University of
Tübingen 4 Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience, TU Dresden
5
VISLab, University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Cansu
Sancaktar <cansu.sancaktar@tue.mpg.de>, Christian Gumbsch
<chris@gumbsch.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Project
website
with
videos
and
code:
https://sites.google.com/view/sensei-paper

A potential solution in the age of Large Language Models (LLMs), is to utilize language as a cultural-transmitter
to inject “human notions of interestingness" (Zhang et al.,

1

