BOOD: Boundary-based Out-Of-Distribution Data Generation

Qilin Liao 1 Shuo Yang 2 * Bo Zhao 3 Ping Luo 1 Hengshuang Zhao 1 *

Abstract

Distribution (OOD) detection, which flags outliers during
training, is a non-trivial solution for helping models form
a boundary around the ID (in-distribution) data (Du et al.,
2023). Recent works have shown that training neural networks with auxiliary outlier datasets is promising for helping the model to form a decision boundary between ID
and OOD data (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020;
Katz-Samuels et al., 2022; Ming et al., 2022). However, the
process of manually preparing OOD data for model training
incurs substantial costs, both in terms of human resources
investment and time consumption. Additionally, it’s impossible to collect data distributed outside the data distribution
boundary, which can not be captured in the real world as
shown in Figure 1.

Harnessing the power of diffusion models to synthesize auxiliary training data based on latent
space features has proven effective in enhancing out-of-distribution (OOD) detection performance. However, extracting effective features
outside the in-distribution (ID) boundary in latent
space remains challenging due to the difficulty of
identifying decision boundaries between classes.
This paper proposes a novel framework called
Boundary-based Out-Of-Distribution data generation (BOOD), which synthesizes high-quality
OOD features and generates human-compatible
outlier images using diffusion models. BOOD
first learns a text-conditioned latent feature space
from the ID dataset, selects ID features closest
to the decision boundary, and perturbs them to
cross the decision boundary to form OOD features.
These synthetic OOD features are then decoded
into images in pixel space by a diffusion model.
Compared to previous works, BOOD provides
a more training efficient strategy for synthesizing informative OOD features, facilitating clearer
distinctions between ID and OOD data. Extensive experimental results on common benchmarks
demonstrate that BOOD surpasses the state-ofthe-art method significantly, achieving a 29.64%
decrease in average FPR95 (40.31% vs. 10.67%)
and a 7.27% improvement in average AUROC
(90.15% vs. 97.42%) on the C IFAR -100 dataset.

To address this problem, recent works have demonstrated
pipelines regarding automating OOD data generation, which
significantly decreases the labor intensity during creating
auxiliary datasets (Du et al., 2022; Tao et al., 2023a; Du
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024). As a representative of them,
DreamOOD (Du et al., 2023) models the training data distribution and samples visual embeddings from low-likelihood
regions as OOD auxiliary data in a text-conditioned latent
space, then decoding them into images through a diffusion
model. However, due to the lack of an explicit relationship
between the low-likelihood regions and the decision boundaries between classes, the DreamOOD (Du et al., 2023)
can not guarantee the generated images always lie on the
decision boundaries, which have demonstrated efficacy in
enhancing the robustness of the ID classifier and refining
its decision boundaries (Ming et al., 2022). Chen et al.
(2020) proposes OOD detection frameworks targeting the
OOD boundary by searching for a similarity threshold between class center features and encoded input features. Pei
et al. (2022) harnesses GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) to
train a boundary-aware discriminator and an OOD generator for distinguishing ID and OOD data. However, these
two methods still lack the ability to find an explicit distribution boundary between ID and OOD area, and generate
image-level OOD dataset.

1. Introduction
In the field of open-world learning, machine learning models will encounter various inputs from unseen classes, thus
be confused and make untrustworthy predictions. Out-Of1

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
Department of Computer Science, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China 3 School of AI, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Shuo Yang
<shuoyang@hit.edu.cn>, Hengshuang Zhao <hszhao@cs.hku.hk>.
2

In this paper, we introduce a new framework, BOOD
(Boundary-based Out-Of-Distribution data generation),
which explicitly enables us to generate images located
around decision boundaries between classes, thus providing
high-quality and informative features for OOD detection.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

