Feynman-Kac Correctors in Diffusion:
Annealing, Guidance, and Product of Experts

Marta Skreta * 1 2 Tara Akhound-Sadegh * 3 4 Viktor Ohanesian * 5 Roberto Bondesan 5 Alán Aspuru-Guzik 1 2
Arnaud Doucet 6 Rob Brekelmans 2 Alexander Tong † 7 4 8 Kirill Neklyudov † 7 4 9

Abstract
While score-based generative models are the
model of choice across diverse domains, there are
limited tools available for controlling inferencetime behavior in a principled manner, e.g. for
composing multiple pretrained models. Existing classifier-free guidance methods use a simple heuristic to mix conditional and unconditional scores to approximately sample from conditional distributions. However, such methods
do not approximate the intermediate distributions, necessitating additional ‘corrector’ steps.
In this work, we provide an efficient and principled method for sampling from a sequence of
annealed, geometric-averaged, or product distributions derived from pretrained score-based models. We derive a weighted simulation scheme
which we call F EYNMAN -K AC C ORRECTORS
(FKCs) based on the celebrated Feynman-Kac
formula by carefully accounting for terms in the
appropriate partial differential equations (PDEs).
To simulate these PDEs, we propose Sequential
Monte Carlo (SMC) resampling algorithms that
leverage inference-time scaling to improve sampling quality. We empirically demonstrate the utility of our methods by proposing amortized sampling via inference-time temperature annealing,
improving multi-objective molecule generation
using pretrained models, and improving classifierfree guidance for text-to-image generation. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
martaskrt/fkc-diffusion.

Figure 1. F EYNMAN -K AC C ORRECTOR Inference for annealed
pt,β (x) ∝ qt (x)β=10 and product pt (x) ∝ qt1 (x)qt2 (x) densities.

1. Introduction
Score-based generative models, also known as diffusion
models, have emerged as the model of choice across diverse
generative tasks such as image generation, natural language,
and protein simulation (Saharia et al., 2022; Sahoo et al.,
2024; Abramson et al., 2024). These models leverage the
ability to estimate scores of the sequence of noise-corrupted
distributions and then use the learned scores to reverse the
corruption process enabling high-quality generation. Thus,
diffusion models aim to produce new samples from the
same distribution as the training data.
However, the classical paradigm of generative modeling
as the problem of reproducing the training data distribution
becomes less relevant for many applications including drug
discovery and text-to-image generation. In practice, generative models demonstrate the best performance when tailored
to specific needs at inference time. For instance, linear
combinations of scores allow for concept composition (Liu
et al., 2022) or for increasing image-prompt consistency
as in classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2021).
However, by modifying the scores, one loses control over
the marginal distributions of the generated samples. Various
approaches from the Monte Carlo sampling literature have
been adapted to ‘correct’ samples along a trajectory to more

*
Equal contribution ,† Equal senior-authorship 1 University of
Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 McGill University 4 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 5 Imperial College London 6 Google DeepMind 7 Université
de Montréal 8 Current AT affiliation: Duke University 9 Institut
Courtois. Correspondence to: AT <ayt14@duke.edu>, KN
<k.necludov@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

