Ad Hoc Teamwork via Offline Goal-Based Decision Transformers
Xinzhi Zhang 1 Hohei Chan 1 Deheng Ye 2 Yi Cai 1 Mengchen Zhao 1

Abstract

Previous research on AHT primarily focuses on online reinforcement learning (RL) methods (Barrett & Stone, 2015;
Durugkar et al., 2020; Mirsky et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2020),
which typically require the access to the environment involving various pre-trained teammates. However, these
approaches face significant challenges in practice. First, the
teammates’ joint policy space could be extremely large, and
it is impossible to simulate all combinations of teammates’
policies during training. Existing works (Gu et al., 2021)
usually train the ego agent’s policy against a subset of teammates’ policies, which greatly reduces the generalization
ability of the learned policy. Second, environmental simulators are often unavailable or expensive, especially for
real-world environments, without which the online RL approaches cannot be applied. Fortunately, in many cases, offline data collection provides a safer and more cost-effective
alternative. For instance, numerous traffic data is recorded
by cameras and road sensors every day. This motivates us
to study the problem of AHT in an offline setting.

The ability of agents to collaborate with previously unknown teammates on the fly, known as
ad hoc teamwork (AHT), is crucial in many realworld applications. Existing approaches to AHT
require online interactions with the environment
and some carefully designed teammates. However, these prerequisites can be infeasible in practice. In this work, we extend the AHT problem
to the offline setting, where the policy of the ego
agent is directly learned from a multi-agent interaction dataset. We propose a hierarchical sequence modeling framework called TAGET that
addresses critical challenges in the offline setting,
including limited data, partial observability and
online adaptation. The core idea of TAGET is to
dynamically predict teammate-aware rewards-togo and sub-goals, so that the ego agent can adapt
to the changes of teammates’ behaviors in real
time. Extensive experimental results show that
TAGET significantly outperforms existing solutions to AHT in the offline setting.

However, addressing AHT problems in the offline setting
remains challenging: (1) Offline RL heavily relies on the precollected datasets, which can hardly cover diverse teammate
behaviors and environmental dynamics, leading to a poor
generalization of the learned policy; (2) In partially observable environments, incomplete information makes it more
challenging to accurate teammates modeling. This issue is
aggravated in the offline setting because we cannot compensate for missing information through active exploration; (3)
Existing sequence modeling methods for decision-making
(e.g., Decision Transformer (Chen et al., 2021)) primarily
rely on the return-guided action generation. However, a simple return signal fails to capture enough information about
the frequently changing teammates’ intentions and policies
in the setting of AHT.

1. Introduction
Ad hoc teamwork (AHT) refers to enabling autonomous
agents to collaborate with unknown teammates without prior
coordination (Stone et al., 2010). This capability is crucial
in dynamic and uncertain environments where agents must
quickly form teams, adapt to new teammates and achieve
common goals efficiently (Barrett et al., 2017). For instance,
rescue robots should form an ad hoc team in real time to
survey affected areas, locate survivors, and deliver supplies.
Each robot must adapt to the changes in teammates’ policies
caused by some unpredictable events. Another typical application of AHT is autonomous driving, where each car must
collaborate with random cars nearby to accomplish tasks
such as cross-passing and overtaking (Teng et al., 2023).

To address the issues mentioned above, we introduce a novel
framework called TAGET, which stands for TeammateAware Goal driven hiErarchical Decision Transformers.
Specifically, TAGET adopts a hierarchical framework consisting of a high-level module for teammate-aware sub-goal
prediction and a low-level module for action generation.
The key innovations of TAGET are as follows. (1) We adopt
a trajectory mirroring strategy to improve data efficiency,
where each agent plays as the ego agent in turn, so that one
piece of multi-agent trajectory can be used multiple times

1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China 2 Tencent, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Mengchen Zhao <zzmc@scut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

