Generalization Performance of Ensemble Clustering: From Theory to Algorithm

Xu Zhang 1 Haoye Qiu 1 Weixuan Liang 2 Hui Liu 3 Junhui Hou 4 Yuheng Jia 1 3 5

Abstract

1. Introduction

Ensemble clustering has demonstrated great success in practice; however, its theoretical foundations remain underexplored. This paper examines
the generalization performance of ensemble clustering, focusing on generalization error, excess
risk and consistency. We derive a convergence
rate of generalization
q error bound and excess risk

Ensemble clustering has attracted great attention in recent
years due to its high accuracy and robustness compared to
single clustering algorithm. It integrates multiple clustering
results to obtain a consensus one instead of the access to the
original features of the data, making it broadly applicable
across various scenarios (Strehl & Ghosh, 2002). Many
scholars have made considerable efforts in this area. For
example, Fred and Jain (Fred & Jain, 2005) utilized a voting
mechanism to generate an n×n similarity matrix to describe
the relationships between sample pairs (n is the number of
samples), and applied hierarchical clustering to derive the
final clustering results. Huang (Huang et al., 2018) realized
that the importance of clusters in ensemble pool varies and
assigned different weights to various clusters by estimating
their uncertainty. Recently, Jia (Jia et al., 2024) utilized the
high-confidence relationships to propagate similarity and
designed a self-enhancement framework for the similarity
matrix. More researches on ensemble clustering can be
found in (Topchy et al., 2005; Jia et al., 2019; Yi et al.,
2012; Jia et al., 2021; Zhang, 2022; Zhou et al., 2024; Xu
et al., 2024; Li & Jia, 2025; Peng et al., 2023).

n
√1
bound both of O( log
m + n ), with n and m being the numbers of samples and base clusterings.
Based on this, we prove that when m and n approach infinity and m is significantly larger than
log n, i.e., m, n → ∞, m ≫ log n, ensemble
clustering is consistent. Furthermore, recognizing
that n and m are finite in practice, the generalization error cannot be reduced to zero. Thus, by
assigning varying weights to finite clusterings, we
minimize the error between the empirical average
clusterings and their expectation. From this, we
theoretically demonstrate that to achieve better
clustering performance, we should minimize the
deviation (bias) of base clustering from its expectation and maximize the differences (diversity)
among various base clusterings. Additionally, we
derive that maximizing diversity is nearly equivalent to a robust (min-max) optimization model.
Finally, we instantiate our theory to develop a new
ensemble clustering algorithm. Compared with
SOTA methods, our approach achieves average
improvements of 6.0%, 7.3%, and 6.0% on 10
datasets w.r.t. NMI, ARI, and Purity. The code is
available at https://github.com/xuz2019/GPEC.

Despite significant advances in practice, the theoretical analysis of ensemble clustering remains far from satisfactory.
Theoretical analysis of an algorithm helps us understand
its generalization performance such as generalization error,
excess risk and consistency. Generalization error represents
the expected loss of an algorithm across the entire data
distribution. Excess risk refers to the difference between
the expected loss of a model and the expected loss of the
optimal model. For consistency, it means that whether a
learning algorithm can uncover the true underlying structure of the data as the amount of training data increases.
Most previous studies (Pollard, 1981; Bachem et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2023) focus on the generalization performance
of a single clustering algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, only one paper (Liu et al., 2017) has established a
generalization error bound in the field of ensemble clustering while the excess risk and consistency are neglected.
It demonstrates, from the perspective of weighted kernel
k-means, that the generalization
error bound of ensemble
√
clustering is O(1/ n). However, this work fails to consider that each base clustering should be treated as a random
variable, which makes this study fundamentally no different

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 College of Computer Science and
Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China 3 School of Computing Information Sciences, Saint
Francis University, Hong Kong, China 4 Department of Computer
Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 5 Key
Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Yuheng Jia
<yhjia@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

