On the Robustness of Reward Models for Language Model Alignment

Jiwoo Hong 1 Noah Lee 1 Eunki Kim 1 Guijin Son 2 Woojin Chung 1
Aman Gupta 3 Shao Tang 3 James Thorne 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reward models (RMs) are crucial components in reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF), being proxies
for human preference for aligning large language models
(LLMs) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2020; Casper
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a). RMs map text sequences to
a scalar score, and are incorporated into the RLHF pipeline
by directly using the scores (Ziegler et al., 2020; Ahmadian et al., 2024), or labeling pairwise preferences (Rafailov
et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024).

The Bradley-Terry (BT) model is widely practiced in reward modeling for reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF). Despite its
effectiveness, reward models (RMs) trained with
BT model loss are prone to over-optimization,
losing generalizability to unseen input distributions. In this paper, we study the cause of
over-optimization in RM training and its downstream effects on the RLHF procedure, accentuating the importance of distributional robustness of RMs in unseen data. First, we show that
the excessive dispersion of hidden state norms
is the main source of over-optimization. Then,
we propose batch-wise sum-to-zero regularization (BSR) to enforce zero-centered reward sum
per batch, constraining the rewards with extreme
magnitudes. We assess the impact of BSR in
improving robustness in RMs through four scenarios of over-optimization, where BSR consistently manifests better robustness. Subsequently,
we compare the plain BT model and BSR on
RLHF training and empirically show that robust
RMs better align the policy to the gold preference
model. Finally, we apply BSR to high-quality
data and models, which surpasses state-of-theart RMs in the 8B scale by adding more than
5% in complex preference prediction tasks. By
conducting RLOO training with 8B RMs, AlpacaEval 2.0 reduces generation length by 40%
while adding a 7% increase in win rate, further
highlighting that robustness in RMs induces robustness in RLHF training. We release the code,
data, and models: https://github.com/
LinkedIn-XFACT/RM-Robustness.

The Bradley-Terry (BT) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952)
formulation is widely adopted to train RMs using a tuple of a prompt and two corresponding responses with
a pre-annotated preference relation (e.g., chosen and rejected), maximizing the margin of rewards between the
responses. Recent works proposed additive approaches to
the BT model to further adjust it to the neural language
model context (Yuan et al., 2024; Coste et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2024b). However, these do not adjust the learning
objective of the BT model at a fundamental level.
Reward model over-optimization, where RMs overfit to the
train set and eventually losing the alignment capability to the
true preference distribution, is a typical limitation of neural
RMs (Gao et al., 2023; Coste et al., 2024). Efforts to curate
high-quality pairwise preference datasets has contributed to
enhancing RMs (Yuan et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a; Cui
et al., 2025), assessed through pairwise preference benchmarks (Kim et al., 2024; Lambert et al., 2025; Liu et al.,
2025b). However, using LLMs either as preference data
generators or annotators often induces inherent biases like
verbosity bias and self-enhancement biases (Saito et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2024a) and obstructs
understanding of underlying RM over-optimization.
In this paper, we show that reward modeling with the BT
model induces excessive hidden state norm dispersion, leading to the over-optimization problem. We propose batchwise sum-to-zero regularization (BSR) as a straightforward
solution to control the dispersion by penalizing abnormal
reward outliers, eventually reducing the dispersion in hidden
state norms. We categorize four generalization scenarios for
RMs with respect to prompt and response space, allowing

1
KAIST AI 2 OneLineAI 3 LinkedIn Corporation. Correspondence to: Jiwoo Hong <jiwoo hong@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

