Position: Probabilistic Modelling is Sufficient for Causal Inference

Bruno Mlodozeniec 1 2 David S. Krueger 3 Richard E. Turner 1 4

Abstract

2019a), Andrew Gelman states: “I find it baffling that Pearl
and his colleagues keep taking statistical problems and, to
my mind, complicating them by wrapping them in a causal
structure” (Gelman, 2019).

Causal inference is a key research area in machine learning, yet confusion reigns over the tools
needed to tackle it. There are prevalent claims
in the machine learning literature that you need
a bespoke causal framework or notation to answer causal questions. In this paper, we want to
make it clear that you can answer any causal inference question within the realm of probabilistic
modelling and inference, without causal-specific
tools or notation. Through concrete examples, we
demonstrate how causal questions can be tackled by writing down the probability of everything.
Lastly, we reinterpret causal tools as emerging
from standard probabilistic modelling and inference, elucidating their necessity and utility.

Such apparent allegations of insufficiency of standard statistical tools — such as probabilistic modelling or Bayesian
Networks — are perpetuated in the machine learning literature. Claims that causal questions “[cannot] be answered
with statistical tools alone, but require methods from causality” (Pawlowski et al., 2020) are prevalent (see Appendix D).
Although often intended as a forewarning of the dangers of
naïvely applying probabilistic tools to solve causal problems
— which we demonstrate in Section 2.1 — these comments
leave many confused and sceptical of the role of probabilistic modelling in solving causal problems.
In this paper we show that the standard tools of probabilistic modelling are sufficient for causal inference. In
particular, we show that one just needs to follow the ‘one’
overarching rule advocated by David MacKay:

1. Introduction
Causal inference questions play a key role in many areas
of machine learning (Kaddour et al., 2022), such as policy (Athey & Imbens, 2017), healthcare (Sanchez et al.,
2022), or fairness (Kusner et al., 2017). Despite the growing
emphasis on these problems within the machine learning
research community, there is still an apparent lack of clarity regarding the tools and frameworks necessary to tackle
them. Concretely, there is a seeming prevalent belief that
one cannot answer causal questions without adopting tools
from outside machine learning and probability.

“Always write down the probability of everything.”
— Steve Gull (MacKay, 2003, p. 61)
We argue that the resulting approach is clear, unifying,
and general for answering causal inference questions.
Heeding Pearl (2019b)’s call for concrete examples, we will
demonstrate the probabilistic approach on simple examples
of causal inference problems – in turn, interventional (Section 2) and counterfactual (Section 3). For each, we will
illustrate how one can solve it by ‘writing down the probability of everything’. There are convenient classes of models
(e.g. Structural Causal Models (Peters et al., 2017)), useful
notational shorthands (e.g. the do-operator), and a machinery developed around them (e.g. the do-calculus (Pearl,
2009)) to tackle causal questions, which we will introduce
as “syntactic sugar” in the probabilistic framework.

This lack of clarity is epitomised by the disagreement between Judea Pearl and Andrew Gelman — foundational
researchers in the area of causality and statistical inference
who appear to hold contradictory views on the technical
foundations of their field. Whereas Pearl holds that “there
is no way to answer causal questions without snapping out
of statistical vocabulary” (Hartnett, 2018) and that “we
need to enrich our language with a do-operator” (Pearl,

We contend that the entire debate hinges on a simple semantic confusion: the term “statistical” is often used too narrowly to refer only to methods for modelling correlations or
associations among the observed variables. This restricted
definition is the basis for claims that statistics or probability
are insufficient for causality (Appendix D). In Appendix Q,
however, we argue this terminological choice is not only
confusing, but also historically and substantively inaccurate.

1

University of Cambridge 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent
Systems, Tübingen 3 MILA 4 The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Bruno Mlodozeniec <bkm28@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

