SToFM: a Multi-scale Foundation Model for Spatial Transcriptomics

Suyuan Zhao 1 2 Yizhen Luo 1 2 3 Ganbo Yang 2 Yan Zhong 4 Hao Zhou 1 Zaiqing Nie † 1 3

Abstract
Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) technologies provide biologists with rich insights into single-cell
biology by preserving spatial context of cells.
Building foundational models for ST can significantly enhance the analysis of vast and complex
data sources, unlocking new perspectives on the
intricacies of biological tissues. However, modeling ST data is inherently challenging due to the
need to extract multi-scale information from tissue slices containing vast numbers of cells. This
process requires integrating macro-scale tissue
morphology, micro-scale cellular microenvironment, and gene-scale gene expression profile. To
address this challenge, we propose SToFM, a
multi-scale Spatial Transcriptomics Foundation
Model. SToFM first performs multi-scale information extraction on each ST slice, to construct a set of ST sub-slices that aggregate macro, micro- and gene-scale information. Then an
SE(2) Transformer is used to obtain high-quality
cell representations from the sub-slices. Additionally, we construct SToCorpus-88M, the largest
high-resolution spatial transcriptomics corpus for
pretraining. SToFM achieves outstanding performance on a variety of downstream tasks, such
as tissue region semantic segmentation and cell
type annotation, demonstrating its comprehensive
understanding of ST data through capturing and
integrating multi-scale information.

(a) Macro Scale:
Tissue Morphology

Intercellular information flow

(b) Micro Scale:
Cell-cell Interaction

Expression
Levels

(c) Gene Scale:
Gene Expression
Profile

Figure 1: ST data contain biological information from multiple
scales. (a). An example of a visualized ST slice of a mouse
brain. (b). A microscopic sub-slice of the brain slice. (c). Gene
expression profile of a single cell in the brain slice.

cells, providing a digital representation of cells (Ziegenhain
et al., 2017). Machine learning approaches have achieved
great success in analyzing scRNA-seq data and enhancing
the understanding of complex biological systems (Szałata
et al., 2024). However, scRNA-seq technology disassociates cells from their tissue contexts, and therefore overlooks
tissue-level information such as tissue morphology and intercellular relationships. This limitation compromises the
application scope of scRNA-seq data in real-world studies
involving cells. (Williams et al., 2022; Du et al., 2023).
Fortunately, Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) technology has
opened up new possibilities to measure gene expression in
cells without losing spatial arrangements of tissues. Specifically, ST data are obtained in the form of tissue slices and
can be computationally described as a 2D point cloud containing tens of thousands of points. Each of these points
represents a cell or a sequencing spot1 containing up to
approximately 20,000 gene expression values. Such rich
information in ST data offers biologists a unique perspective
on single-cell biology (Du et al., 2023; Marx, 2021). Effec-

1. Introduction
In single-cell transcriptomics, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data reflects the gene expression levels in
†
Corresponding author 1 Institute for AI Industry Research
(AIR), Tsinghua University 2 Department of Computer Science
and Tecnology, Tsinghua University 3 PharMolix Inc. 4 School
of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University. Correspondence
to: Suyuan Zhao <sxdtzsy@gmail.com>, Zaiqing Nie <zaiqing@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

1
For simplicity, we refer to both cells and sequencing spots as
“cells” in the remaining paper since we only use high-resolution ST
data close to single-cell resolution. See Appendix D.1 for further
explanations.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

