Calibrated Value-Aware Model Learning with Probabilistic Environment Models

Claas Voelcker 1 2 Anastasiia Pedan 3 1 2 Arash Ahmadian 4 Romina Abachi 5 Igor Gilitschenski 1 2
Amir-massoud Farahmand 6 7 1

Abstract

errors which propagate to value function learning (Schneider, 1997; Kearns & Singh, 2002; Talvitie, 2017; Lambert
et al., 2020). In such cases, deciding what aspects of the
environment to model is crucial.

The idea of value-aware model learning, that models should produce accurate value estimates, has
gained prominence in model-based reinforcement
learning. The MuZero loss, which penalizes a
model’s value function prediction compared to
the ground-truth value function, has been utilized
in several prominent empirical works in the literature. However, theoretical investigation into its
strengths and weaknesses is limited. In this paper,
we analyze the family of value-aware model learning losses, which includes the popular MuZero
loss. We show that these losses, as normally
used, are uncalibrated surrogate losses, which
means that they do not always recover the correct model and value function. Building on this
insight, we propose corrections to solve this issue. Furthermore, we investigate the interplay
between the loss calibration, latent model architectures, and auxiliary losses that are commonly employed when training MuZero-style agents. We
show that while deterministic models can be sufficient to predict accurate values, learning calibrated stochastic models is still advantageous.

The paradigm of value-aware model learning
(VAML) (Farahmand et al., 2017) and valueequivalence (Grimm et al., 2020; 2021) addresses
this by training models that lead to accurate value estimation. Prominent value-aware model learning approaches are
MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) and IterVAML (Farahmand, 2018). The MuZero loss has been shown to perform
well in discrete (Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2021)
and continuous control tasks (Hansen et al., 2022; 2024),
but has received little theoretical investigation. On the other
hand, IterVAML is a theoretically motivated algorithm
but not commonly used in empirical work. We show
that MuZero and IterVAML can be unified in a family
of losses, which we term (m, b)-Value-Aware Model
Losses ((m, b)-VAML). The name stresses the two core
hyperparameters: the model rollout steps, m, and steps
used to estimate the bootstrapped value function target, b.

1. Introduction

The (m, b)-VAML losses are used as surrogate losses in
place of other value- or model learning losses. Therefore, it
is important to ask whether they are calibrated (Steinwart
& Christmann, 2008). A calibrated loss does not lead to
suboptimal minima when the function class includes optimal
functions for the original target loss.

In model-based reinforcement learning, an agent collects information in an environment and uses it to learn a model of
the world. This model is used to improve value estimation
and policy learning (Sutton, 1990; Deisenroth & Rasmussen,
2011; Hafner et al., 2020; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). However, as environment complexity increases, learning a model
becomes more and more challenging. This leads to model

Research question: This paper has two parts, each with a
theoretical and empirical section. We answer two questions
about the (m, b)-VAML family: (a) What variants of the
(m, b)-VAML losses are well-calibrated to recover correct
models and value functions? (b) Do we observe problems
with uncalibrated losses when using standard architectures,
especially deterministic latent-space models?

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Igor Sikorsky Kyiv
Polytechnic Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine 4 Cohere, Toronto, Canada
5
Ubisoft, Montreal, Canada 6 Polytechnique Montreal, Canada
7
MILA, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: Claas Voelcker
<cvoelcker@cs.toronto.edu>.

Contributions: As our main theoretical contribution, we
mathematically analyze the family of (m, b)-VAML algorithms. We prove that all sampled-based loss variants from
this family are uncalibrated when used with a stochastic
environment model. Minimizing the losses with regard to
data samples will result in value functions and models with
lower variance than the correct ground-truth functions, even

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

