MixMin: Finding Data Mixtures via Convex Minimization

Anvith Thudi 1 2 Evianne Rovers 3 4 Yangjun Ruan 1 2 Tristan Thrush 5 Chris J. Maddison 1 2

Abstract

Raffel et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023). These models are
known to generalize to data-poor downstream tasks, a core
motivation behind scaling training data. However, as we
increase the amount and diversity of data sources we can
train on, a core challenge becomes choosing how to weigh
these sources when training. The effectiveness of a model
pre-trained on surrogate data is known to be directly related
to how similar the surrogate (or “pretraining”) data is to
the downstream task (target distribution) (Ben-David et al.,
2010; Isik et al., 2024; Jain et al., 2024; Pouget et al., 2024).

Modern machine learning pipelines are increasingly combining and mixing data from diverse
and disparate sources, e.g., pre-training large language models. Yet, finding the optimal data mixture is a challenging and open problem. We formalize this data mixing problem as a bi-level objective: the best mixture is the one that would
lead to the best model for a downstream objective. Unfortunately, this objective is generally intractable. In this paper, we make the observation
that the bi-level data mixing objective becomes
convex as our model class becomes larger. We
develop and study a gradient-based approach for
optimizing this convex objective, which we call
MixMin, and test it on language modeling and
chemistry tasks. MixMin was the only method
that uniformly improved the data mixture in all
our experiments. With MixMin, we improved the
data mixture using less than 0.2% additional compute for a pythia-410M model trained on 8.2B
tokens, resulting between 1-5% relative improvement to negative log likelihood on PIQA, ARC
Easy, SciQ, and OpenWebMath. Crucially, we
found that MixMin mixtures for smaller models improved training of larger models, suggesting that MixMin mixtures may be scale-invariant.
When mixing bioassay data to train an XGBoost
model, we saw improvements to average precision
scores of 0.03 − 0.15.

Formally, finding the best mixture of data sources to train on
for a downstream loss poses a bi-level optimization which
is hard to optimize. We must find the mixture whose risk
minimizer optimizes the downstream loss. This generally
only admits expensive zero-order approaches, such as grid
search (Dubey et al., 2024; Blakeney et al., 2024). Past
work has considered learning to simulate the loss oracle for
unseen mixtures (Liu et al., 2024), or leveraging a large pool
of existing models (Thrush et al., 2024). Other approaches
consider solving data mixing objectives agnostic to a downstream loss, but are known to not consistently improve the
baseline of training on all the data with their natural proportions (when evaluated on diverse downstream losses) (Xie
et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Fan et al.,
2023; Held et al., 2025).
In this paper we show that the bi-level optimization for
data mixing reduces to a convex minimization as the model
classes become larger, which we can solve cheaply with
gradient based methods. A key insight is that by restricting
the loss functions to cross-entropy (CE) or mean-squared
error (MSE), we gain additional structure which simplifies
the data mixing objective. Practically, we show we can find
the best mixture by first training a (cheap) proxy model for
each source, learning the best mixture of their outputs for
the target dataset (convex minimization), and then using this
weighting to remix the data, see Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in ML has come from training on vast
web-scale data (Dubey et al., 2024; Touvron et al., 2023;
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Department
of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 4 Structural
Genomics Consortium, Toronto, Canada 5 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University, Palo alto, USA. Correspondence to:
Anvith Thudi <anvith.thudi@mail.utoronto.ca>.

First, we note that when our models are relatively close to
Bayes optimal (the best possible functions), data mixing is
equivalent to learning a linear model over the predictions
of a fixed set of models (a convex objective). Learning this
linear model requires comparatively little data to training
modern large models, and is relatively cheap to optimize.
Our reduction is specific to CE or MSE, where we leverage

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

