Towards Better-than-2 Approximation for Constrained Correlation Clustering

Andreas Kalavas * 1 2 Evangelos Kipouridis * 1 Nithin Varma * 3

Abstract

et al., 2009; Chakrabarti et al., 2008), clustering ensembles (Bonchi et al., 2013), community detection (Chen et al.,
2012; Veldt et al., 2018), disambiguation tasks (Kalashnikov
et al., 2008), duplicate detection (Arasu et al., 2009) and
image segmentation (Kim et al., 2011; Yarkony et al., 2012).

In the Correlation Clustering problem, we are
given an undirected graph and are tasked with
computing a clustering (partition of the nodes)
that minimizes the sum of the number of edges
across different clusters and the number of nonedges within clusters. In the constrained version
of this problem, the goal is to compute a clustering
that satisfies additional hard constraints mandating certain pairs to be in the same cluster and certain pairs to be in different clusters. Constrained
Correlation Clustering is APX-Hard, and the best
known approximation factor is 3 (van Zuylen et al.
[SODA ’07]). In this work, we show that in order
to obtain a better-than-2 approximation, solving
the (exponentially large) Constrained Cluster LP
would be sufficient1 .

Given a complete unweighted undirected graph (V, E + ⊎
E − ), whose edges are labeled either “plus” or “minus”,
the Correlation Clustering problem is to output a partition
(clustering) C = {C1 , . . . , Ck } of the vertex set V . The sets
Ci of C are called clusters. The objective is to minimize the
sum of the number of plus edges across different clusters
and the number of minus edges within clusters.
One can view the edges in the input graph as modeling
pairwise relationships between entities corresponding to the
nodes. Specifically, a plus edge denotes the preference of its
endpoints to be clustered together and a minus edge denotes
their preference to be separated. The cost of a clustering is
then the number of preferences violated by the clustering
and the goal of Correlation Clustering translates to finding
a clustering that satisfies the preferences of the maximum
number of pairs.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning task and
has many applications in machine learning and data mining.
The high-level goal is to partition a set of elements into
clusters such that similar elements are in the same cluster
and dissimilar elements are in different clusters. Over the
years, several definitions of clustering have been considered,
each with a different objective.

The real-world applications that motivate clustering as above
often necessitate incorporating additional hard constraints
that result from prior knowledge. In such a semi-supervised
setting, it is imperative to study the more general problem
of constrained clustering. There are several variants of constrained clustering including, but not limited to constrained
k-means (Wagstaff et al., 2001), spectral clustering with
constraints (Wang & Davidson, 2010), constrained ranking and clustering (van Zuylen & Williamson, 2009), and
constrained fuzzy clustering (Pham, 2002). Constrained
clustering is particularly valuable as it improves the quality
of clusters, aligns outcomes with domain-specific knowledge, and reduces sensitivity to noisy data.

Correlation Clustering, proposed by Bansal, Blum, and
Chawla (Bansal et al., 2004), is one such clustering formulation, which was widely studied since its introduction.
The appeal of Correlation Clustering stems from its simple and natural definition and from the absence of requirement to specify the number of clusters as part of the input.
The problem has found success in many applications including, but not limited to, automated labeling (Agrawal

In this work, we study Constrained Correlation Clustering,
a variant of Correlation Clustering capturing the idea of critical pairs of nodes, which was first studied by van Zuylen
and Williamson (van Zuylen & Williamson, 2009). Con-

*

Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Informatics & Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Archimedes, Athena Research Center, Athens, Greece 3 University
of Cologne, Germany. Correspondence to: Andreas Kalavas
<mathm24008@math.aegean.gr>.

1

The peer-reviewed version of this article claimed an efficient
algorithm for solving the Constrained Cluster LP. An error in the
proof, that the authors discovered after the review process, led
them to revise the results to be conditional on the existence of a
valid LP solution.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

