FEAT-KD: Learning Concise Representations for Single and Multi-Target
Regression via TabNet Knowledge Distillation

Kei Sen Fong 1 Mehul Motani 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The representation of data is an important factor for the predictive performance of machine learning (ML) algorithms
(Bengio et al., 2013) and is a key reason why deep learningbased approaches, which possess large representational capacity are among the top-performing algorithms in many
applications (Hinton, 2023). In practice, certain application
areas, such as healthcare, demand more than just predictive
performance – the explainability of the learned representation becomes a precondition for assessing an ML algorithm’s suitability for the problem (Di Martino & Delmastro,
2023). This is why low-complexity ML algorithms are still
commonly used in various fields where it is important to
understand and explain a model’s predictions (Habehh &
Gohel, 2021). While some researchers have attempted to
create post-hoc explanations to black-box models, these are
often not sufficient, and pale in comparison to white-box
models with concise representations that provide intrinsic
explainability (La Cava et al., 2023; Bordt et al., 2022). In
these applications, intrinsic explainability is superior because it provides immediate, transparent insights, fostering
accountability in high-stakes domain. This is unlike posthoc explainability which typically relies on approximations
that may misrepresent a model’s true decision process. Additionally, intrinsically explainable models are not limited
in their ability to leverage post-hoc techniques as well.

In this work, we propose a novel approach
that combines the strengths of FEAT and TabNet through knowledge distillation (KD), which
we term FEAT-KD. FEAT is an intrinsically
interpretable machine learning (ML) algorithm
that constructs a weighted linear combination of
concisely-represented features discovered via genetic programming optimization, which can often
be inefficient. FEAT-KD leverages TabNet’s deeplearning-based optimization and feature selection
mechanisms instead. FEAT-KD finds a weighted
linear combination of concisely-represented, symbolic features that are derived from piece-wise distillation of a trained TabNet model. We analyze
FEAT-KD on regression tasks from two perspectives: (i) compared to TabNet, FEAT-KD significantly reduces model complexity while retaining
competitive predictive performance, effectively
converting a black-box deep learning model into
a more interpretable white-box representation, (ii)
compared to FEAT, our method consistently outperforms in prediction accuracy, produces more
compact models, and reduces the complexity of
learned symbolic expressions. In addition, we
demonstrate that FEAT-KD easily supports multitarget regression, in which the shared features
contribute to the interpretability of the system.
Our results suggest that FEAT-KD is a promising
direction for interpretable ML, bridging the gap
between deep learning’s predictive power and the
intrinsic transparency of symbolic models.

FEAT (Feature Engineering Automation Tool) is an ML
algorithm that provides a unique white-box model structure
with concise representations that provides intrinsic explainability (La Cava et al., 2019). FEAT finds a weighted linear
combination of concisely-represented features that are discovered via genetic programming. To illustrate, consider
ŷ(x) = 0.3(x1 × x2 ) + 0.5(x3 ÷ x4 2 ), where ŷ(x) is the
output and xi are the features. Here, the two conciselyrepresented features are x1 × x2 and x3 ÷ x4 2 , which has
a similar structure to popular indicators, such as the body
mass index, mass ÷ height2 (Keys et al., 1972). FEAT possesses similar interpretability that linear regression models
have, in terms of decomposing the output predictions into independent contributions from features, but allows for more
complex features to better fit the dataset. The performance
gain more than compensates for the slight decrease in inter-

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. 2 N.1 Institute for Health,
Institute for Digital Medicine (WisDM), Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Kei Sen Fong <fongkeisen@u.nus.edu>, Mehul Motani
<motani@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

