The Limits of Tractable Marginalization

Oliver Broadrick * 1 Sanyam Agarwal * 2 Guy Van den Broeck # 1 Markus Bläser # 2

Abstract

their latent space; autoregressive and discrete diffusion models are trained to predict (conditional) marginal probabilities
(Kingma et al., 2019; Bishop & Bishop, 2023). In the case
of boolean valued functions, marginalization corresponds
to the well known task of model counting, with applications from formal verification to cryptography (Gomes et al.,
2021; Arteta et al., 2016).

Marginalization – summing a function over all
assignments to a subset of its inputs – is a fundamental computational problem with applications
from probabilistic inference to formal verification. Despite its computational hardness in general, there exist many classes of functions (e.g.,
probabilistic models) for which marginalization
remains tractable, and they can be commonly expressed by polynomial size arithmetic circuits
computing multilinear polynomials. This raises
the question, can all functions with polynomial
time marginalization algorithms be succinctly expressed by such circuits? We give a negative answer, exhibiting simple functions with tractable
marginalization yet no efficient representation by
known models, assuming FP ̸= #P (an assumption implied by P ̸= NP). To this end, we identify
a hierarchy of complexity classes corresponding
to stronger forms of marginalization, all of which
are efficiently computable on the known circuit
models. We conclude with a completeness result,
showing that whenever there is an efficient real
RAM performing virtual evidence marginalization for a function, then there are small circuits
for that function’s multilinear representation.

Unfortunately, marginalization is a notoriously hard problem in general. As models become increasingly expressiveefficient, able to succinctly express larger classes of distributions, they often sacrifice the tractability of marginalization
(Cooper, 1990; Roth, 1996). However, there is a vast body
of work aimed at identifying classes of functions for which
efficient marginalization remains tractable, including well
known probabilistic models like hidden Markov models,
determinantal point processes, and probabilistic circuits in
general, as well as logical representation languages like dDNNF (Rabiner & Juang, 1986; Kulesza et al., 2012; Choi
et al., 2020; Darwiche, 2001). Moreover, a recent line of
work has shown how known models with tractable marginalization can be commonly viewed as arithmetic circuits computing multilinear polynomials, resulting in a unified model
that we formalize as uniform finally multilinear arithmetic
circuits (UFMACs) (Zhang et al., 2020; 2021; Agarwal &
Bläser, 2024; Broadrick et al., 2024b).
The fact that known functions with tractable marginalization can be expressed by polynomial size UFMACs begs
the question. Do all probability distributions over binary
random variables with tractable marginalization have polynomial size (uniform) finally multilinear arithmetic circuits?
A positive answer to this question would show that the
long line of work on tractable models has successfully arrived at a maximally expressive-efficient modeling language
for tractable marginalization. We give a negative answer,
suggesting the possibility of yet more expressive-efficient
tractable models.

1. Introduction
Marginalization is a fundamental computational problem.
In machine learning for example, many architectures are
designed around an instance of marginalization. In Bayesian
learning (e.g., Bayesian neural networks), model parameters
are marginalized to obtain a posterior distribution; variational autoencoders approximate a marginalization over
*,#
1
Equal contribution.
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, United States
2
Department of Computer Science, Saarland University,
Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Oliver Broadrick
<odbroadrick@gmail.com>, Sanyam Agarwal <agarwal@cs.unisaarland.de>.

To rigorously answer this question, we define the tractability
of marginalization for a function in terms of its polynomial
time computability. Then, we observe that functions with
UFMACs are actually tractable for more powerful forms
of marginalization than standard variable marginalization.
Specifically, we show that UFMACs support tractable summation over inputs of a given Hamming weight (Section 4)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

