Representations Shape Weak-to-Strong Generalization:
Theoretical Insights and Empirical Predictions

Yihao Xue 1 Jiping Li 2 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

Abstract
weak
model’s
error

Weak-to-Strong Generalization (W2SG), where a
weak model supervises a stronger one, serves as
an important analogy for understanding how humans might guide superhuman intelligence in the
future. Promising empirical results revealed that
a strong model can surpass its weak supervisor.
While recent work has offered theoretical insights
into this phenomenon, a clear understanding of
the interactions between weak and strong models
that drive W2SG remains elusive. We investigate
W2SG through a theoretical lens and show that it
can be characterized using kernels derived from
the principal components of weak and strong models’ internal representations. These kernels can
be used to define a space that, at a high level, captures what the weak model is unable to learn but
is learnable by the strong model. The projection
of labels onto this space quantifies how much the
strong model falls short of its full potential due to
weak supervision. This characterization also provides insights into how certain errors in weak supervision can be corrected by the strong model, regardless of overfitting. Our theory has significant
practical implications, providing a representationbased metric that predicts W2SG performance
trends without requiring labels, as shown in experiments on molecular predictions with transformers and 5 NLP tasks involving 52 LLMs.

weak model

strong model

span of
principal
kernel

span of
principal
kernel

remaining
space

remaining
space

PredGap
b/w W2S and
strong ceiling

Figure 1: An illustration of our main result (Thm. 3.8). The path
connecting the two highlighted regions represents the overlap b/w
the complement of a scaled span of the weak model’s principal kernel and the scaled span of the strong model’s principal kernel, determining the contribution of the weak model’s errors to PredGap.

et al. (2023) propose an analogy that can be empirically
explored today: can a weak model effectively supervise a
stronger one? This framework, known as Weak-to-Strong
Generalization (W2SG), involves leveraging a weak model,
finetuned on a specific task, to supervise the finetuning
of a stronger model. In this analogy, the finetuning task
represents concepts tied to human values or skills, the
finetuned weak model represents humans—limited in capability but aligned with human values, and the strong model
represents superhuman intelligence–powerful but initially
unaligned. Promising results from (Burns et al., 2023) show
that the strong model can significantly outperform its weak
supervisor. For instance, a GPT-4 model supervised by a
fine-tuned GPT-2-level model achieves nearly 20% better
performance than the weak supervisor on NLP tasks.
At first glance, this phenomenon seems counterintuitive. After all, the strong model is explicitly trained to fit the weak
supervision. Yet, it goes beyond mere imitation and generalizes better. It is important to understand which intrinsic
properties of the weak and strong models enable W2SG.

1. Introduction
As AI systems become increasingly capable of performing
complex tasks beyond human comprehension, humans will
inevitably serve as “weak supervisors” in aligning advanced
AI. To investigate this fundamental problem, Burns

Efforts have been made toward a theoretical understanding
of W2SG. Charikar et al. (2024) demonstrates that the
disagreement between finetuned weak and strong models
correlates with performance gains in W2SG. However, their
analysis assumes high-quality representations in the strong
model and does not address the role of the weak model’s
representations. The analysis of (Lang et al., 2024; Shin
et al., 2024) assumes a generalized version of an adversarially robust strong model, where W2SG arises solely from
underfitting weak supervision. This framework excludes im-

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles 2 Department of Mathematics, University of
California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Yihao Xue <yihaoxue@g.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

