Best of Both Worlds: Advantages of Hybrid Graph Sequence Models

Ali Behrouz 1 Ali Parviz 2 3 Mahdi Karami 1 Clayton Sanford 1 Bryan Perozzi 1 Vahab Mirrokni 1

Abstract

the complexities of graph-structured data more effectively.
Graph Transformers have demonstrated compelling results,
particularly by leading in tasks like molecular property prediction (Ying et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2020; Masters et al.,
2023). Their advantage over traditional MPNNs is often attributed to tendency of MPNNs to focus on local structures,
making them less effective at capturing global or long-range
relationships due to issues like over-smoothing (Li et al.,
2018), over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2020; Di Giovanni
et al., 2023; Dwivedi et al., 2022a), and restricted expressive
power (Barceló et al., 2020). In contrast, GTs (Rampášek
et al., 2022) can learn and capture the pairwise dependencies
of nodes, and aggregate global information across the graph,
reducing the local structural bias.

Modern sequence models (e.g., Transformers and
linear RNNs) emerged as dominant backbones
of recent deep learning frameworks, mainly due
to their efficiency, representational power, and/or
ability to capture long-range dependencies. Recently, adopting these sequence models for graphstructured data has gained popularity as the alternative to Message Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs). There is, however, a lack of a common
foundation about what constitutes a good graph
sequence model, and a mathematical description
of the benefits and deficiencies in adopting different sequence models for learning on graphs.
To this end, we introduce the Graph Sequence
Model (GSM), a unifying framework for applying sequence models to graph data. The GSM
framework allows us to understand, evaluate, and
compare the power of different sequence model
backbones in graph tasks. Building on this insight,
we propose GSM++, a fast hybrid model that hierarchically tokenizes the graph using Hierarchical Affinity Clustering (HAC) and then encodes
these sequences via a hybrid architecture. The
theoretical and experimental findings confirm the
effectiveness of GSM++.

Despite the expressive power of traditional Transformerbased architectures, they face scalability issues in longcontext tasks, mainly due to their quadratic computational
complexity. Various strategies have been proposed to mitigate quadratice complexity of Transformers (Tay et al.,
2022), including sparsifying the dense attention matrix (Zaheer et al., 2020; Beltagy et al., 2020a; Roy et al., 2020;
Kitaev et al., 2020), low-rank approximations of the attention matrix (Wang et al., 2020), and kernel-based attention
mechanisms (Choromanski et al., 2020b; Kacham et al.,
2024). While these methods enhance computational efficiency, they often come at the expense of reduced expressiveness (Mehta et al., 2022). In recent years, attention-free
sequence models have emerged as a promising alternative to
Transformers for sequence modeling. Leveraging parallelizable recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Peng et al., 2023;
Behrouz et al., 2024; 2025a;b) and long convolutions (Poli
et al., 2023; Karami & Ghodsi, 2024), offer sub-quadratic,
hardware-efficient sequence mixing operators that can capture long-range dependencies with strong generalization to
sequences of varying lengths.

1. Introduction
Message-passing graph neural networks (MPNNs) have
been the leading approach for processing graph data (Kipf
& Welling, 2016; Gilmer et al., 2017a; Chami et al., 2020;
Morris et al., 2020). However, with the increasing popularity of Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017)
and their success in natural language processing and computer vision, recent research has shifted towards developing
graph Transformers (GTs), which are designed to handle

Given the promising potential of the sub-quadratic sequence
models, there is growing interest in extending them to the
graph domain as an alternative to graph Transformers (Ding
et al., 2023; Behrouz & Hashemi, 2024; Huang et al., 2024).
However, a significant technical challenge arises from the
inherent differences between graphs and other structured
data, such as text, which is naturally causal. Graphs exhibit
a complex topology and lack a natural, linear node ordering.
Attempting to impose a naive tokenization strategy, such as

1
Google Research, USA 2 Mila – Quebec AI Institute
New Jersey Institute of Technology, NJ, USA. Correspondence
to: Ali Behrouz <alibehrouz@google.com>, Ali Parviz <aliparviz@mila.quebec>, Bryan Perozzi <bperozzi@acm.org>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

