PARQ: Piecewise-Affine Regularized Quantization

Lisa Jin 1 Jianhao Ma 2 Zechun Liu 3 Andrey Gromov 1 Aaron Defazio 1 Lin Xiao 1

Abstract

for transformer-based models, which are more difficult to
quantize (Bai et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022) compared to
convolutional architectures (Martinez et al., 2019; Qin et al.,
2020). On the other hand, QAT integrates quantization into
pre-training and/or fine-tuning processes and can produce
low-bit (including binary) models with mild performance
degradation (e.g. Fan et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022).

We develop a novel optimization method for
quantization-aware training (QAT). Specifically,
we show that convex, piecewise-affine regularization (PAR) can effectively induce the model
parameters to cluster towards discrete, quantized
values. We minimize PAR-regularized loss functions using an aggregate proximal stochastic gradient method (AProx) and show that it enjoys
last-iterate convergence. Our approach provides
an interpretation of the straight-through estimator (STE), a widely used heuristic for QAT, as
the asymptotic form of PARQ. We present numerical experiments to demonstrate that PARQ
obtains competitive performance on convolutionand transformer-based vision tasks.

A key ingredient of QAT is the so-called straight-through
estimator (STE), which was proposed as a heuristic (Bengio et al., 2013; Courbariaux et al., 2015) and has been
extremely successful in practice (e.g., Rastegari et al., 2016;
Hubara et al., 2018; Esser et al., 2019). Many efforts have
been made to demystify the effectiveness of STE, especially
through the lens of optimization algorithms (e.g., Li et al.,
2017; Yin et al., 2018; 2019; Bai et al., 2019; Ajanthan et al.,
2021; Dockhorn et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2023). However, significant gaps remain between theory and practice.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we develop a principled method for QAT based
on convex regularization and interpret STE as the asymptotic
form of an aggregate proximal stochastic gradient method.
The convex regularization framework admits stronger convergence guarantees than previous work and allows us to
prove the last-iterate convergence of the method.

Modern deep learning models exhibit exceptional vision
and language processing capabilities, but often come with
excessive sizes and demands on memory and computing.
Quantization is an effective approach for model compression, which can significantly reduce their memory footprint,
computing cost, as well as the latency for inference (e.g.,
Han et al., 2016; Sze et al., 2017). There are two main
classes of quantization methods: post-training quantization
(PTQ) and quantization-aware training (QAT). Both are
widely adopted and receive extensive research; see the recent survey papers by Gholami et al. (2022) and Fournarakis
et al. (2022) and references therein.

1.1. The Straight-Through Estimator (STE)
We consider training a machine learning model with parameters w ∈ Rd and let f (w, z) denote the loss of the
model on a training example z. Our goal is to minimize the
population loss f (w) = Ez [f (w, z)] where z follows some
unknown probability distribution. Here, we focus on the
classical stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method. During
each iteration of SGD, we draw a random training example
(or mini-batch) z t and update the model parameter as

PTQ converts the weights of a pre-trained model directly to
lower precision without repeating the training pipeline; thus
it has less overhead and is relatively easy to apply (Nagel
et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2020; Chee et al., 2024). However,
it is limited mainly to 4 or more bit regimes and can suffer
steep performance drops with fewer bits (Yao et al., 2022;
Dettmers & Zettlemoyer, 2023). This is especially the case

wt+1 = wt − ηt ∇f (wt , z t ),

(1)

where ∇f (·, z t ) denotes the stochastic gradient with respect
to the first argument (here being wt ) and ηt is the step size.
QAT methods modify SGD by adding a quantization step.
In particular, the BinaryConnect method (Courbariaux et al.,
2015) can be written as

1

Meta FAIR, United States. 2 Dept. of Industrial and Operational
Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United
States. 3 Meta Reality Labs, United States. Correspondence to:
Lisa Jin <lvj@meta.com>, Lin Xiao <linx@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

ut+1 = ut − ηt ∇f (Q(ut ), z t ),

(2)

where Q(·) is the coordinate-wise projection onto the set
1

