Compute Optimal Inference and Provable Amortisation Gap
in Sparse Autoencoders

Charles O’Neill 1 Alim Gumran 2 David Klindt 3

Abstract

sis” (Elhage et al., 2022), which posits that neural networks
represent interpretable features in a linear manner using
non-orthogonal directions in their latent spaces. Building
on this idea, researchers have shown that individual features
can be recovered from these superposed representations
using sparse autoencoders (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023). These models learn sparse and overcomplete representations of neural activations, with the resulting
sparse codes often proving to be more interpretable than
the original dense representations (Cunningham et al., 2023;
Elhage et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2024).

A recent line of work has shown promise in using sparse autoencoders (SAEs) to uncover interpretable features in neural network representations. However, the simple linear-nonlinear encoding mechanism in SAEs limits their ability to
perform accurate sparse inference. Using compressed sensing theory, we prove that an SAE encoder is inherently insufficient for accurate sparse
inference, even in solvable cases. We then decouple encoding and decoding processes to empirically explore conditions where more sophisticated sparse inference methods outperform traditional SAE encoders. Our results reveal substantial performance gains with minimal compute
increases in correct inference of sparse codes. We
demonstrate this generalises to SAEs applied to
large language models, where more expressive
encoders achieve greater interpretability. This
work opens new avenues for understanding neural network representations and analysing large
language model activations.

The mathematical foundation of SAEs aligns closely with
that of sparse coding. Both approaches assume that a large
number of sparse codes are linearly projected into a lowerdimensional space, forming the neural representation. However, while sparse coding typically involves solving an optimisation problem for each input, SAEs learn an efficient
encoding function through gradient descent, potentially sacrificing optimal sparsity for computational efficiency. This
trade-off introduces what statistical inference literature calls
the “amortisation gap” – the disparity between the best
sparse code predicted by an SAE encoder and the optimal
sparse codes that an unconstrained sparse inference algorithm might produce (Marino et al., 2018).

1. Introduction

In this paper, we explore this amortisation gap and investigate whether more sophisticated sparse inference methods can outperform traditional SAE encoders. Our key
contribution is decoupling the encoding and decoding processes, allowing for a comparison of various sparse encoding strategies. We evaluate four types of encoding methods
on synthetic datasets with known ground-truth features. We
evaluate these methods on two dimensions: alignment with
true underlying sparse features and inference of the correct
sparse codes, while accounting for computational costs during both training and inference. To demonstrate real-world
applicability, we also train models on GPT-2 activations
(Radford et al., 2019), showing that more complex methods
such as MLPs can yield more interpretable features than
SAEs in large language models.

Understanding the inner workings of neural networks has
become a critical task since these models are increasingly
employed in high-stakes decision-making scenarios (Fan
et al., 2021; Shahroudnejad, 2021; Räuker et al., 2023). As
the complexity and scale of neural networks continue to
grow, so does the importance of developing robust methods
for interpreting their internal representations. This paper
compares sparse autoencoders (SAEs) and sparse coding
techniques, aiming to advance our ability to extract interpretable features from neural network activations.
Recent work has investigated the “superposition hypothe1

Australian National University 2 Nazarbayev University 3 Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory. Correspondence to: Charles O’Neill
<charles.oneill@anu.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

