Towards Robustness and Explainability of Automatic Algorithm Selection

Xingyu Wu 1 Jibin Wu 1 2 Yu Zhou 1 Liang Feng 3 Kay Chen Tan 1

Abstract

struggles to perform well across all scenarios (Tornede et al.,
2023; Pio et al., 2024). The goal of automated algorithm
selection is to identify the most suitable algorithm for each
specific problem instance, thereby enhancing performance
in terms of accuracy (Ruhkopf et al., 2023) and time efficiency (Kostovska et al., 2023). Early methods focused on
identifying suitable meta-features to characterize problems,
such as statistical characteristics (Hutter et al., 2014) and
probing features (Nudelman et al., 2004). These approaches
employed machine learning techniques to meta-learn which
algorithm performs best for a given problem instance (Abdulrahman et al., 2018). More recent studies have also
recognized the importance of algorithm meta-features, such
as hyperparameters (Tornede et al., 2020) and code-related
features (Pulatov et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024). Details of
existing techniques are provided in Appendix A.1.

Algorithm selection aims to identify the optimal
performing algorithm before execution. Existing techniques typically focus on the observed
correlations between algorithm performance and
meta-features. However, little research has explored the underlying mechanisms of algorithm
selection, specifically what characteristics an algorithm must possess to effectively tackle problems
with certain feature values. This gap not only
limits the explainability but also makes existing
models vulnerable to data bias and distribution
shift. This paper introduces directed acyclic graph
(DAG) to describe this mechanism, proposing a
novel modeling paradigm that aligns more closely
with the fundamental logic of algorithm selection.
By leveraging DAG to characterize the algorithm
feature distribution conditioned on problem features, our approach enhances robustness against
marginal distribution changes and allows for finergrained predictions through the reconstruction of
optimal algorithm features, with the final decision relying on differences between reconstructed
and rejected algorithm features. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that, the learned graph and the proposed counterfactual calculations offer our approach with both model-level and instance-level
explainability.

However, regardless of whether algorithm features are included in the meta-features, existing methods predominantly
construct empirical models based on observed correlations
between algorithm performance and meta-features (Kerschke et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2008). These approaches overlook the underlying mechanism that drives the algorithm
selection task, i.e.: What characteristics an algorithm
needs to solve a problem with specific feature values. By
exploring this mechanism, we can align more closely with
the foundational logic of algorithm selection, moving beyond mere predictions of the optimal algorithm or algorithm
performance based on meta-features. This granular modeling approach not only facilitates a more effective utilization
of algorithm features but also allows for deeper insights into
model decisions at the feature level, rather than solely from
the perspective of performance comparison.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of information technology, a multitude of algorithms has emerged across various fields, making automated algorithm selection increasingly vital. This
necessity arises from the fact that a single algorithm often

Moreover, the core of this mechanism lies in modeling the
conditional distribution of algorithm features based on problem features, rather than relying on the marginal distribution
of meta-features for optimal algorithm prediction. This shift
can address a significant challenge in current techniques:
their vulnerability to changes in marginal distribution. This
issue is prevalent in all models during deployment, as the
marginal distribution in algorithm selection is inherently
dynamic (Van Rijn et al., 2014; 2018). As illustrated in Figure 1(a), ongoing technological advancements continuously
create new application domains and candidate algorithms,
leading to fluctuating strengths and weaknesses among them.

1
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China 3 College of Computer Science,
Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. Correspondence to:
Jibin Wu <jibin.wu@polyu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

