LAU R E L: Learned Augmented Residual Layer

Gaurav Menghani 1 Ravi Kumar 1 Sanjiv Kumar 2

Abstract

size, peak memory consumption, etc. dictate if it can be
experimented with and/or deployed in real-world settings.
A large and slow model can be impractical to train and
use, making it unsuitable for applications that require fast
responses, no matter how well it performs on benchmarks.

One of the core pillars of efficient deep learning methods are architectural improvements, such
as residual/skip connections, which have led to
significantly better model convergence and quality. Since their introduction, residual connections
have become ubiquitous not only in convolutional
neural networks but also in transformer-based architectures, the backbone of LLMs.

LLMs such as Gemini 1.5 Flash (Gemini-Team et al., 2024),
DeepSeek V3 (DeepSeek-A.I. et al., 2024) have been explicitly designed with these efficiencies in mind and consistently
outperform much larger models that preceded them. Consequently, improving the Pareto-frontier of model quality and
model footprint, via efficient learning methods has been an
area of active research in the past few years. Areas of interests span from algorithmic techniques (Menghani, 2023)
and efficient hardware (Sze et al., 2017) to best practices
around model efficiency (Dehghani et al., 2022).

In this paper, we introduce the Learned Augmented Residual Layer (LAU R E L)—a novel generalization of the canonical residual connection—
designed to serve as an in-situ replacement while
outperforming it in both model quality and footprint metrics. Our experiments show that LAU R E L can enhance quality for both vision and language models while adding fewer parameters and
incurring less latency and memory overhead than
naively increasing parameter count.

One of the core pillars of efficient deep learning methods
are architectural improvements such as the residual/skip
connection, which had led to significantly better model convergence and quality (He et al.). The residual connection
has become ubiquitous not only in convolutional neural networks but also in transformer-based architectures (Vaswani
et al., 2017), which are the backbone of today’s LLMs.

For example, on the ImageNet-1K task, LAU R E L achieves the same model quality improvements as naively adding an extra layer while using 2.6× fewer parameters. Similarly, when pretraining 1B and 4B parameter LLMs, LAU R E L
improves performance on a variety of challenging
downstream evaluation tasks by 2.54% to 20.05%,
while adding only 0.012% and 0.1% additional
parameters, respectively.

In this paper we introduce learned augmented residual layer,
LAU R E L, which generalizes the canonical residual connection. Recall that deep-learning models with residual connections have a ‘block’ structure, with many blocks chained
together between the input and final output; these could be
convolution/identity blocks within a ResNet, a transformer
block in a transformer encoder/decoder, etc. Within a block,
a typical residual connection is given by:

1. Introduction
xi+1 = f (xi ) + xi .

Model efficiency is of critical importance in the age of
extremely large language and vision models. Even if a given
model has impressive quality, its footprint metrics such
as train-time compute, inference latency, resident memory

(1)

Here, f (·) can be any non-linear function such as attention,
MLP, multiple non-linear layers, etc., xi is the input to the
said non-linear function, and xi+1 is the combined output
of the non-linear function and the residual component (Figure 1). For simplicity, we ignore pre-processing functions
such as layer norm, which can be folded into f (·).

1

Google
Research,
Mountain
View,
CA.
gmenghani@google.com, ravi.k53@gmail.com
2
Google Research, New York, NY. sanjivk@google.com.
Correspondence
to:
Gaurav
Menghani
<gmenghani@google.com>.

2. Learned Augmented Residual Layer

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this section we describe the main idea behind LAU R E L.
In its most general form, we reformulate the residual con1

