Random Registers for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning

Shuai Yi 1 2 Yixiong ZouB 1 Yuhua LiB 1 Ruixuan LiB 1

Abstract
Cross-domain few-shot learning (CDFSL) aims to
transfer knowledge from a data-sufficient source
domain to data-scarce target domains. Although
Vision Transformer (ViT) has shown superior capability in many vision tasks, its transferability
against huge domain gaps in CDFSL is still underexplored. In this paper, we find an intriguing
phenomenon: during the source-domain training, prompt tuning, as a common way to train
ViT, could be harmful for the generalization of
ViT in target domains, but setting them to random noises (i.e., random registers) could consistently improve target-domain performance. We
then delve into this phenomenon for an interpretation. We find that learnable prompts capture
domain information during the training on the
source dataset, which views irrelevant visual patterns as vital cues for recognition. This can be
viewed as a kind of overfitting and increases the
sharpness of the loss landscapes. In contrast, random registers are essentially a novel way of perturbing attention for the sharpness-aware minimization, which helps the model find a flattened
minimum in loss landscapes, increasing the transferability. Based on this phenomenon and interpretation, we further propose a simple but effective approach for CDFSL to enhance the perturbation on attention maps by adding random registers
on the semantic regions of image tokens, improving the effectiveness and efficiency of random
registers. Extensive experiments on four benchmarks validate our rationale and state-of-the-art
performance. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/shuaiyi308/REAP.

Figure 1. (a) Vision Transformer (ViT) takes the CLS token, image
tokens, and learnable prompts as input for both the source-domain
training and the target-domain testing. (b) We replace the learnable
prompts with random noises (i.e., random prompts) on the source
domain, which are then dropped on the target-domain phase. (c)
We find an intriguing phenomenon: unlike other tasks, prompts
learned on the source domain harm the target-domain performance,
while random prompts (both deep and shallow types) improve it.

1. Introduction
Large models achieve great success in many tasks due to
their power in learning from large-scale datasets (Zou et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023b), with large vision models majorly
taking the VIT-based architectures (Zhang et al., 2022a;
Noori et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2024b). However, the generalization of ViT under the extreme cross-domain data-scarce
scenarios still needs to be explored since collecting sufficient data for every domain does not always hold in the
real world (Tseng et al., 2020; Naseer et al., 2021). To this
end, Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) has been
proposed to transfer general knowledge from the source

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Yixiong Zou
<yixiongz@hust.edu.cn>, Yuhua Li <idcliyuhua@hust.edu.cn>,
Ruixuan Li <rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

