AlphaVerus: Bootstrapping Formally Verified Code Generation through
Self-Improving Translation and Treefinement

Pranjal Aggarwal 1 Bryan Parno 1 Sean Welleck 1

Abstract

ing from fixing bugs in software repositories to solving
Olympiad-level algorithmic problems (Jimenez et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2022). Despite these successes, multiple studies have identified disturbing mistakes in LLM-produced
code, including subtle bugs and serious security vulnerabilities (Hendler, 2023; Pearce et al., 2021; Jesse et al., 2023;
Zhong & Wang, 2024; Perry et al., 2023; Elgedawy et al.,
2024). Ultimately, these mistakes stem from a fundamental
property of LLMs: language models can generate any string
of code, without regard to correctness. As a result, automatically checking the correctness of LLM-generated code is
one of the grand challenges facing the research community.

Automated code generation with large language
models has gained significant traction, but there
remains no guarantee of the correctness of generated code. We aim to use formal verification
to provide mathematical guarantees that the generated code is correct. However, generating formally verified code with LLMs is hindered by the
scarcity of training data and the complexity of
formal proofs. To tackle this challenge, we introduce AlphaVerus, a self-improving framework that bootstraps formally verified code generation by iteratively translating programs from
a higher-resource language and leveraging feedback from a verifier. AlphaVerus operates in
three phases: exploration of candidate translations, Treefinement—a novel tree search algorithm for program refinement using verifier feedback, and filtering misaligned specifications and
programs to prevent reward hacking. Through
this iterative process, AlphaVerus enables the
LLaMA-3.1-70B model to generate verified
code without human intervention or model finetuning. AlphaVerus shows an ability to generate formally verified solutions for HumanEval
and MBPP, laying the groundwork for truly trustworthy code-generation agents.1

The generated code must be correct for all possible inputs
it may receive. However, today’s code generation methods
select or filter generations with imperfect proxies of correctness, such as runtime testing or human inspection. Achieving perfect test coverage is typically infeasible (Li et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2023), and incomplete coverage leads to an
unreliable signal that can be exploited by a model (Pan et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2023; Denison et al., 2024). Relying on human review is equally problematic since it scales poorly and
humans can struggle to tell whether LLM-generated code is
correct (Perry et al., 2023). In turn, the difficulty of trusting
generated code reduces the potential productivity gains from
using LLMs and can lead to unexpected vulnerabilities or
unreliable signals for improving models.
In contrast, generating code in a verification-aware programming language such as Dafny (Leino, 2010), F∗ (Swamy
et al., 2016), or Verus (Lattuada et al., 2023; 2024) offers
a promising approach to addressing these challenges by
providing mathematical guarantees that a program obeys a
specification for all possible inputs. In this paradigm, code is
paired with a specification and proof written in a specialized
language, and a mechanical verifier checks whether the code
meets the specification. This could dramatically improve the
trustworthiness of the generated code: if the verifier passes,
the LLM’s generated program is mathematically guaranteed
to meet the specification. However, writing formal specifications and proofs introduces additional layers of complexity.
Furthermore, although LLMs have demonstrated success in
automated theorem proving in mathematical domains (Lu
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), their capability to generate

1. Introduction
There has been an enormous effort to train code-generating
large language models (LLMs) (Chen et al., 2021; Austin
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Rozière et al., 2024; Team, 2024),
leading to LLM-powered agents that can perform tasks rang1

Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Pranjal Aggarwal <pranjala@cmu.edu>, Bryan Parno <parno@cmu.edu>,
Sean Welleck <wellecks@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://alphaverus.github.
io

1

