GIVE: Structured Reasoning of Large Language Models
with Knowledge-Graph-Inspired Veracity Extrapolation

Jiashu He 1 Mingyu Derek Ma 2 Jinxuan Fan 3 Dan Roth 1 Wei Wang 2 Alejandro Ribeiro 1

Abstract

commodating knowledge graphs (KG) ranging
from 135 to more than 840k nodes. (6) The
reasoning process involved in GIVE is fully interpretable. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Jason-Tree/GIVE

Existing approaches based on context prompting
or reinforcement learning (RL) to improve the
reasoning capacities of large language models
(LLMs) depend on the LLMs’ internal knowledge to produce reliable Chain-Of-Thought (CoT).
However, no matter the size of LLMs, certain
problems cannot be resolved in a single forward
pass. Meanwhile, agent-based reasoning systems
require access to a comprehensive nonparametric knowledge base, which is often costly or not
feasible for use in scientific and niche domains.
We present Graph Inspired Veracity Extrapolation
(GIVE), a novel reasoning method that merges
parametric and non-parametric memories to improve accurate reasoning with minimal external
input. GIVE guides the LLM agent to select
the most pertinent expert data (observe), engage
in query-specific associative thinking (reflect),
and then synthesize this information to produce
the final output (speak). Extensive experiments
demonstrated the following benefits of our framework: (1) GIVE increases the performance of
LLMs across various sizes. (2) In some scenarios, GIVE allows smaller LLMs to surpass
larger, more sophisticated ones in scientific tasks
(GPT3.5T + GIVE > GPT4). (3) GIVE is effective on scientific and open-domain assessments.
(4) GIVE is a training-free method that enables
LLMs to tackle new problems that extend beyond
their training data (up to 43.5% → 88.2% accuracy improvement). (5) GIVE allows LLM
agents to reason using both restricted (very small)
and noisy (very large) knowledge sources, ac-

1. Introduction
Context-based methods (Wei et al., 2023; Brown et al.,
2020) to enhance the reasoning ability of large language
models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al.,
2022; OpenAI et al., 2024b; Grattafiori et al., 2024; OpenAI
et al., 2024a) incorporate examples with logic chains in the
prompt, allowing the model to generate analogous logical
sequences for the given query. Recent investigations (Zelikman et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Shao et al.,
2024) highlighted the substantial promise of reinforcement
learning (RL) in improving the generation of high-quality
logic. These methods operate on the premise that the parametric memory of LLM is sufficient to execute accurate
reasoning. They demonstrate satisfactory performance in
reasoning-complex tasks that do not require novel knowledge, such as mathematical and common sense. However,
they fail to achieve comparable enhancements in scientific
tasks due to the insufficiency of pre-trained knowledge (Cai
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Dorfner et al., 2024; Dong
et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2023). This type of information
is rare in web data; in fact, regardless of the number of
parameters, LLMs face unsolvable challenges using a single
forward pass (Dziri et al., 2024). Incorporating external
knowledge becomes necessary to enable the model to adapt
to tasks beyond the training set.
Recent studies have highlighted the significant potential of
incorporating structured knowledge bases (KGs) into LLM
inference processes to enhance knowledge provision. Advanced retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) frameworks
(Liang et al., 2024; Panda et al., 2024) identify precise KG
from documents to aid accurate information retrieval for
specific queries; research efforts are also proposed to promote iterative exploration (Sun et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024;
Xu et al., 2024) and improved modeling of interconnections
within knowledge bases to improve coherence (Mavromatis
& Karypis, 2024; Edge et al., 2024).

1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, United States 2 Department of
Computer Science, University Of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, United States 3 Department of Statistics, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, United States. Correspondence to:
Jiashu He <jiashuhe@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

