Hierarchical Equivariant Policy via Frame Transfer

Haibo Zhao* 1 Dian Wang*

1

Yizhe Zhu 1 Xupeng Zhu 1 Owen Howell 1 2 Linfeng Zhao 1 Yaoyao Qian 1
Robin Walters 1 Robert Platt 1

{zhao.haib,wang.dian,zhu.xup,howell.o,zhao.linf,qian.ya,r.walters,r.platt}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in hierarchical policy learning
highlight the advantages of decomposing systems into high-level and low-level agents, enabling efficient long-horizon reasoning and precise fine-grained control. However, the interface
between these hierarchy levels remains underexplored, and existing hierarchical methods often
ignore domain symmetry, resulting in the need
for extensive demonstrations to achieve robust
performance. To address these issues, we propose Hierarchical Equivariant Policy (HEP), a
novel hierarchical policy framework. We propose a frame transfer interface for hierarchical
policy learning, which uses the high-level agent’s
output as a coordinate frame for the low-level
agent, providing a strong inductive bias while
retaining flexibility. Additionally, we integrate
domain symmetries into both levels and theoretically demonstrate the system’s overall equivariance. HEP achieves state-of-the-art performance
in complex robotic manipulation tasks, demonstrating significant improvements in both simulation and real-world settings. (Code and videos are
available at project page.)

Figure 1. Hierarchical Equivariant Policy (HEP) is composed
of a high-level agent that predicts a coarse translation, a low-level
agent that predicts the fine-grained trajectory, and a novel Frame
Transfer interface that transfers the coordinate frame of the lowlevel to the predicted keypose frame from the high-level.

mapping raw sensory inputs to low-level actions such as
end-effector trajectories. While these methods exhibit stateof-the-art performance when large amounts of training data
are available, they struggle in scenarios with only limited
data, due to the large function space required to parameterize complex end-to-end mappings.

1. Introduction

A promising alternative strategy is to employ a hierarchical
structural prior that decomposes the policy into different levels, e.g., a high-level agent responsible for identifying a goal
pose and a low-level agent for trajectory refinement. Hierarchical methods can reduce the complexity of the policy
function space by delegating long-horizon reasoning to the
high-level module and fine-grained control to the low-level
module, enabling efficient learning and execution. Despite
their promise, one underexplored question in hierarchical
policy learning is what is the right interface between different levels. For example, in robotic manipulation, existing
hierarchical methods (Ma et al., 2024; Xian et al., 2023)
often impose rigid constraints on the interface between the
high-level and low-level agents, where the high-level action
is used as the last pose in the low-level trajectory. This
constraint limits flexibility and often requires both levels to

Learning-based approaches have emerged as a powerful
paradigm for developing control policies in sequential
decision-making tasks, such as robotic manipulation. By
leveraging data-driven methods, policy learning provides
a scalable framework for addressing tasks with complex
dynamics and high-dimensional observation spaces. Recent
advancements in end-to-end policy learning (Zhao et al.,
2023; Chi et al., 2023) have shown promising results in
*

Equal contribution 1 Northeastern University 2 Robotics
and Ai Institute.
Correspondence to:
Dian Wang
<wang.dian@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

