Field Matching: an Electrostatic Paradigm to Generate and Transfer Data

Alexander Kolesov * 1 2 Stepan I. Manukhov * 1 3 Vladimir V. Palyulin 1 Alexander Korotin 1 2

Abstract
We propose Electrostatic Field Matching (EFM),
a novel method that is suitable for both generative modeling and distribution transfer tasks. Our
approach is inspired by the physics of an electrical capacitor. We place source and target distributions on the capacitor plates and assign them
positive and negative charges, respectively. Then
we learn the electrostatic field of the capacitor
using a neural network approximator. To map the
distributions to each other, we start at one plate
of the capacitor and move the samples along the
learned electrostatic field lines until they reach
the other plate. We theoretically justify that this
approach provably yields the distribution transfer.
In practice, we demonstrate the performance of
our EFM in toy and image data experiments. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
justkolesov/FieldMatching

Figure 1. Our Electrostatic field matching (EFM) method. Two
data distributions P(x+ ) and Q(x− ), x± ∈ RD are placed in the
space RD+1 in the planes z = 0 and z = L, respectively. The distribution P(x+ ) is assigned a positive charge, and the distribution
Q(x− ) – a negative charge. These charges create an electric field
x = (x, z) ∈ RD+1 . The lines of the field begin at
E(e
x), where e
positive charges and end at negative charges. Movement along the
electric field lines provably (see our Theorem 3.1) transforms the
distribution P(x+ ) into the distribution Q(x− ).

1. Introduction
The basic task of generative modeling is to learn a transformation between two distributions accessible by i.i.d. samples. The typical scenarios considered are noise-to-data
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) and data-to-data (Zhu et al.,
2017). These are usually referred to as the unconditional
data generation and data translation, respectively.

Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020, DM) is a popular class of generative models which is
inspired by the nonequilibrium thermodynamics. The diffusion models consist of forward and backward stochastic
processes (Song et al., 2021). The forward process corrupts the data via injection of Gaussian noise; the backward
process reverses the forward process and recovers the data.

Physics is often at the heart of the principles of generative
modeling. One of the first attempts to link generative models and physics was made in Energy-Based models (LeCun
& Huang, 2005, EBM). They parameterize data distributions using the Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution density and
generate data through simulation of Langevin dynamics (Du
& Mordatch, 2019; Song & Kingma, 2021).

Poisson Flow Generative Models (Xu et al., 2022; 2023,
PFGM) use ideas from the electrostatic theory for the data
generation process, recovering an electric field between a
hyperplane of the data and a hemisphere of large radius.

*

Equal contribution 1 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute,
Moscow, Russia 3 Lomonosov Moscow State University, Faculty of
Physics, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Alexander Kolesov
<a.kolesov@skoltech.ru>.

Both DM and PFGM use physical principles to corrupt data,
simplifying the data distribution to a tractable one. As a
result, they are only used directly for noise-to-data tasks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Recently, modifications of DM have appeared that can learn
diffusion in a data-to-data scenario. Diffusion Bridge Match1

