Fully Heteroscedastic Count Regression with Deep Double Poisson Networks

Spencer Young * 1 Porter Jenkins * 2 Longchao Da 3 Jeffrey Dotson 4 Hua Wei 3

Abstract

detecting out-of-distribution data (Amini et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2020; Kang et al., 2023), active learning (Settles,
2009; Ziatdinov, 2024), reinforcement learning (Yu et al.,
2020; Jenkins et al., 2022), and real-world decision-making
under uncertainty (Abdar et al., 2021). While uncertainty
quantification applied to regression on continuous outputs is
well-studied, training neural networks to make probabilistic
predictions over discrete counts has traditionally received
less attention, despite multiple relevant applications. In recent years, neural networks have been trained to predict the
size of crowds (Zhang et al., 2016; Lian et al., 2019; Zou
et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020; Zhang & Chan, 2020; Lin
& Chan, 2023), the number of cars in a parking lot (Hsieh
et al., 2017), traffic flow (Lv et al., 2014; Li et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2021), agricultural yields (You et al., 2017), inventory
of product on shelves (Jenkins et al., 2023), and bacteria in
microscopic images (Marsden et al., 2018).

Neural networks capable of accurate, inputconditional uncertainty representation are essential for real-world AI systems. Deep ensembles of
Gaussian networks have proven highly effective
for continuous regression due to their ability to
flexibly represent aleatoric uncertainty via unrestricted heteroscedastic variance, which in turn
enables accurate epistemic uncertainty estimation.
However, no analogous approach exists for count
regression, despite many important applications.
To address this gap, we propose the Deep Double
Poisson Network (DDPN), a novel neural discrete
count regression model that outputs the parameters of the Double Poisson distribution, enabling
arbitrarily high or low predictive aleatoric uncertainty for count data and improving epistemic uncertainty estimation when ensembled. We formalize and prove that DDPN exhibits robust regression properties similar to heteroscedastic Gaussian models via learnable loss attenuation, and introduce a simple loss modification to control this
behavior. Experiments on diverse datasets demonstrate that DDPN outperforms current baselines
in accuracy, calibration, and out-of-distribution
detection, establishing a new state-of-the-art in
deep count regression.

Uncertainty is often decomposed into two quantities: epistemic, which refers to uncertainty due to misidentification of
model parameters, and aleatoric, which is uncertainty due
to observation noise (Der Kiureghian & Ditlevsen, 2009).
In regression tasks, a popular and effective approach for
capturing epistemic uncertainty is to use deep ensembles
(DEs) (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) where a set of M
neural networks are independently trained from different
initializations and combined to make predictions. Aleatoric
uncertainty, meanwhile, is accounted for in each individual member, which outputs a distinct predictive distribution
over the target. Aleatoric uncertainty can be categorized
as homoscedastic, where the predictive uncertainty is constant for all inputs, and heteroscedastic, where predictive
uncertainty varies as a function of the input. Existing work
on DEs for regression trains each member of the ensemble
to predict the mean and variance of a Gaussian distribuh
iT
(i)
2 (i)
tion, µm , σm
= fΘm (xi ). Each of the M individual
distributions are then combined into a single prediction.

1. Introduction
The pursuit of neural networks capable of learning accurate and reliable uncertainty representations has gained significant traction in recent years (Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017; Kendall & Gal, 2017; Gawlikowski et al., 2023; Dheur
& Taieb, 2023). Input-dependent uncertainty is useful for
*
Equal contribution 1 Delicious AI 2 Brigham Young University, Department of Computer Science 3 Arizona State University,
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence 4 Ohio State
University, Department of Marketing. Correspondence to: Spencer
Young <spencer.young@deliciousai.com>, Porter Jenkins <pjenkins@cs.byu.edu>.

Full heteroscedasticity from unrestricted predictive variance
is critical for DEs to produce calibrated output distributions. The total variance of an ensemble prediction can be
(i)
2 (i)
described as Var[yi |xi ] = Em [σm
] + Varm [µm ], which
is equal to the average aleatoric uncertainty of the members, plus the variance of the predicted means (Appendix
C.6). If each member of the ensemble is not fully het-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

