RepLoRA: Reparameterizing Low-Rank Adaptation via the Perspective of
Mixture of Experts

Tuan Truong * 1 Chau Nguyen * 1 2 Huy Nguyen * 3 Minh Le 1 Trung Le 4 Nhat Ho 3

Abstract

Pretrained
Weights

Low-rank Adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as a
powerful method for fine-tuning large-scale foundation models. Despite its popularity, the theoretical understanding of LoRA has remained limited.
This paper presents a theoretical analysis of LoRA
by examining its connection to the Mixture of Experts models. Under this framework, we show
that simple reparameterizations of the LoRA matrices can notably accelerate the low-rank matrix
estimation process. In particular, we prove that
reparameterization can reduce the data needed
to achieve a desired estimation error from an exponential to a polynomial scale. Motivated by
this insight, we propose Reparameterized LowRank Adaptation (RepLoRA), which incorporates
lightweight MLPs to reparameterize the LoRA
matrices. Extensive experiments across multiple
domains demonstrate that RepLoRA consistently
outperforms vanilla LoRA. Notably, with limited
data, RepLoRA surpasses LoRA by a margin of
up to 40.0% and achieves LoRA’s performance
with only 30.0% of the training data, highlighting
both the theoretical and empirical robustness of
our PEFT method.

Frozen
Trainable

Pretrained
Weights

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed method RepLoRA, which
reparameterizes the low-rank matrices as the output of a
lightweight MLP, whose inputs are two diagonal matrices.

models for specific downstream tasks can be prohibitively
expensive. To address this challenge, several parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods (Houlsby et al., 2019;
Lester et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2022) have emerged, facilitating effective adaptation of large pre-trained models by
adjusting a minimal set of parameters while keeping most
of the backbone frozen. Among these methods, Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) stands out for its simplicity and effectiveness and has been successfully applied
across diverse domains (Li et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2023;
Taori et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a). Despite its successes,
theoretical understanding of LoRA has remained limited,
hindering our ability to optimize its performance further.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth in data availability and computational
resources, large-scale models trained on extensive datasets
have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities,
enabling successful applications across language, vision,
and multi-modal tasks (Dosovitskiy, 2021; Radford et al.,
2021; Touvron et al., 2023). However, fully fine-tuning such

Building on the recent finding (Le et al., 2024) about the connection between attention mechanism (Vaswani, 2017) and
the mixture of experts (MoE) (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan
& Jacobs, 1994) models, we present a rigorous theoretical
study demonstrating how LoRA can be interpreted within
this new framework. Leveraging this perspective, we show
that a straightforward reparameterization technique (Li &
Liang, 2021; Le et al., 2025), which represents low-rank
matrices as the output of an MLP, can theoretically enhance
the performance of LoRA. Specifically, our analysis reveals that this reparameterization can reduce the data needed
to achieve a desired estimation error from an exponential

*

Equal contribution 1 Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm Vietnam Company Limited 2 Work was completed while an employee
at Qualcomm 3 The University of Texas at Austin, USA 4 Monash
University, Australia. Correspondence to: Tuan Truong <tuantruo@qti.qualcomm.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

