Learning with Exact Invariances in Polynomial Time

Ashkan Soleymani * 1 Behrooz Tahmasebi * 2 Stefanie Jegelka 3 2 Patrick Jaillet 1

Abstract

under the symmetries inherent in the data. This framework
is broadly applicable across various domains in the natural
sciences and physics, including atomistic systems (Grisafi
et al., 2018), molecular wavefunctions and electronic densities (Unke et al., 2021), interatomic potentials (Batzner
et al., 2022), and beyond (Batzner et al., 2023). While many
applications involve Euclidean symmetries (Smidt, 2021),
the scope of such methods extends well beyond them to
other geometries (Bronstein et al., 2017).

We study the statistical-computational trade-offs
for learning with exact invariances (or symmetries) using kernel regression. Traditional methods, such as data augmentation, group averaging,
canonicalization, and frame-averaging, either fail
to provide a polynomial-time solution or are not
applicable in the kernel setting. However, with
oracle access to the geometric properties of the
input space, we propose a polynomial-time algorithm that learns a classifier with exact invariances. Moreover, our approach achieves the same
excess population risk (or generalization error)
as the original kernel regression problem. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first polynomialtime algorithm to achieve exact (as opposed to
approximate) invariances in this setting. In developing our approach, we also resolve a question
recently posed by Dı́az et al. (2025) on efficient
computation of invariant bases and kernels with
respect to finite groups, even when the group size
is prohibitively large. Our proof leverages tools
from differential geometry, spectral theory, and
optimization. A key result in our development
is a new reformulation of the problem of learning under invariances as optimizing an infinite
number of linearly constrained convex quadratic
programs, which may be of independent interest.

Learning with invariances has a longstanding history in machine learning (Hinton, 1987; Kondor, 2008). In recent
years, there has been significant interest in the development
and analysis of learning methods that account for various
types of invariances. This surge in interest is strongly motivated by many models showing considerable success in
practice. Empirical evidence suggests the existence of algorithms that can effectively learn under invariances while exhibiting strong generalization and computational efficiency.
However, from a theoretical perspective, much of the focus has been on the expressive power of models, generalization bounds, and sample complexity. There remains
a relative lack of understanding regarding the statisticalcomputational trade-offs in learning under invariances, even
in foundational settings such as kernel regression.
Symmetries can be incorporated into learning in multiple
ways. An immediate solution for learning with invariances
seems to be data augmentation over the elements of the
group. Moreover, some approaches to learning with invariances rely on group averaging, a technique that involves
summing over group elements. However, the typically large
size of the group can make both of these approaches computationally prohibitive, even super-exponential in the dimension of input data. Alternative approaches, such as
canonicalization and frame averaging, also suffer from issues like discontinuities and scalability challenges (Dym
et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
While humans can readily observe symmetries or invariances in systems, it is generally challenging for machines
to detect and exploit these properties from data. The objective of machine learning with invariances is to develop
approaches that enable models to be trained and utilized

This paper seeks to address the following question:

*

Equal contribution 1 MIT EECS and MIT LIDS 2 MIT
EECS and MIT CSAIL 3 School of CIT, MCML, and MDSI,
Technical University of Munich (TUM). Correspondence to:
Ashkan Soleymani <ashkanso@mit.edu>, Behrooz Tahmasebi
<bzt@mit.edu>.

Can we obtain an invariant estimator for learning
with invariances that achieves both strong generalization and computational efficiency?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The first contribution of this work is a detailed study of
1

