Multi-View Graph Clustering via Node-Guided Contrastive Encoding

Yazhou Ren 1 2 JunLong Ke 1 Zichen Wen 1 Tianyi Wu 1 Yang Yang 1 Xiaorong Pu 1 2 Lifang He 3

Abstract

distinction between the data associated with the ego node
and that of its edges, which delineate relationships with
neighboring nodes (Tang et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2022). However, some methods overly emphasize edge and neighborhood data, often neglecting the
intrinsic information of the ego node. This imbalance has
led to suboptimal performance on certain datasets, sometimes even underperforming compared to Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) (Tang et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022). On
the other hand, some approaches rely heavily on the ego
node’s attributes to maintain model performance after multiple layers of processing in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
While this preserves some robustness, it limits the ability
to leverage contextual information from neighboring nodes,
leading to subpar results on specific datasets (Chen et al.,
2022).

Multi-view clustering has gained significant attention for integrating multi-view information in
multimedia applications. With the growing complexity of graph data, multi-view graph clustering
(MVGC) has become increasingly important. Existing methods primarily use Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to encode structural and feature information, but applying GNNs within contrastive
learning poses specific challenges, such as integrating graph data with node features and handling both homophilic and heterophilic graphs.
To address these challenges, this paper introduces
Node-Guided Contrastive Encoding (NGCE), a
novel MVGC approach that leverages node features to guide embedding generation. NGCE enhances compatibility with GNN filtering, effectively integrates homophilic and heterophilic information, and strengthens contrastive learning
across views. Extensive experiments demonstrate
its robust performance on six homophilic and heterophilic multi-view benchmark datasets.

In the realm of graph contrastive learning for multi-view
graph clustering (MVGC), capturing node differences and
diversity within graphs plays a crucial role in designing
effective contrastive learning methodologies (Hassani &
Khasahmadi, 2020). Traditional approaches have largely relied on the homophily assumption (McPherson et al., 2001),
but more recent studies have begun to explore the effectiveness of these methods in the context of heterophilic graphs.
For example, COMPLETER (Contrastive Prediction for Incomplete Multi-view Clustering) (Lin et al., 2021) has been
introduced for heterophilic graphs. It integrates reconstruction, cross-view contrastive learning, and cross-view dual
prediction to simultaneously achieve data recovery and consistency learning for incomplete multi-view data. (Hassani
& Khasahmadi, 2020) proposes contrastive multi-view representation learning on graphs (MVGRL) by performing representation learning by contrasting two diffusion matrices
transformed from the adjacency matrix. HGRL (Chen et al.,
2022) leverages the preservation of original node features
and the capturing of non-local neighbors to enhance node
representations on heterophilic graphs. GREET (Liu et al.,
2023) distinguishes between homophilic and heterophilic
edges, employing low-pass and high-pass filters to seize the
corresponding information. Building upon generation methods, DSSL (Xiao et al., 2022) decouples diverse patterns in
local neighborhood distribution to capture both homophilic
and heterophilic information. NWR-GAE (Tang et al.,
2022) underscores the significance of topological structure

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) is an important unsupervised
learning task in the machine learning community (Li et al.,
2014; Xu et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2020; Chao et al., 2024; Guo
& Ye, 2019; Zhang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2019; Wu et al.,
2020). It is designed to integrate diverse and complementary information across multiple views for clustering(Ke
et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2024a; Wu et al.,
2024; Ren et al., 2024b). Recent advances in unsupervised
learning for graph data have increasingly emphasized the
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University. Correspondence to: Junlong Ke
<junlong.ke@outlook.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

