UncertainSAM: Fast and Efficient
Uncertainty Quantification of the Segment Anything Model

Timo Kaiser 1 Thomas Norrenbrock 1 Bodo Rosenhahn 1

Abstract

Input

The introduction of the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) has paved the way for numerous semantic segmentation applications. For several tasks,
quantifying the uncertainty of SAM is of particular interest. However, the ambiguous nature of
the class-agnostic foundation model SAM challenges current uncertainty quantification (UQ) approaches. This paper presents a theoretically motivated uncertainty quantification model based on
a Bayesian entropy formulation jointly respecting aleatoric, epistemic, and the newly introduced
task uncertainty. We use this formulation to train
USAM, a lightweight post-hoc UQ method. Our
model traces the root of uncertainty back to underparameterised models, insufficient prompts or
image ambiguities. Our proposed deterministic USAM demonstrates superior predictive capabilities on the SA-V, MOSE, ADE20k, DAVIS,
and COCO datasets, offering a computationally
cheap and easy-to-use UQ alternative that can
support user-prompting, enhance semi-supervised
pipelines, or balance the tradeoff between accuracy and cost efficiency.

Tiny Model

Large Model

IoU:
∆∗Θ :

80.2%
7.5%

IoU:

89.9%

Figure 1. Large and Tiny SAM with our epistemic UQ on the
DAVIS dataset. The Large model predicts an accurate mask while
the Tiny model fails in the area of the tail. Our USAM MLP ∆∗θ
estimates a potential epistemic gap of 7.5% intersection over union
(IoU) directly from the Tiny model, helping the user to balance the
trade-off between efficiency and accuracy.

model training. Similarly, the adoption of deep learning
in critical domains such as medical diagnosis (Wang et al.,
2019) or autonomous driving (Yan et al., 2024a; Gottwald
et al., 2024) intensified research in uncertainty quantification
(UQ) to make systems more reliable and safe. Moreover,
UQ helps to improve model training (Kaiser et al., 2022),
supervisability (Vujasinović et al., 2024), and in other applications (Paul et al., 2024; Kaiser et al., 2024; Wehrbein
et al., 2025; Kruse & Rosenhahn, 2025). UQ is therefore
also moving into focus with regard to SAM (Zhang et al.,
2023b; Jiang et al., 2024). Like other segmentation methods,
SAM exhibits uncertainty caused by various factors. For
example, Figure 1 illustrates the prediction of SAM using
tiny and large backbones. While the tiny model is more
cost-efficient, it fails to segment the details on the fishtail.
Knowing about potential accuracy gaps (i.e. uncertainty)
based on under-parameterization can help determine if a
switch to a larger model is worthwhile. Existing applications rely on SAM’s inherent confidence score or apply standard approaches like test-time augmentation (Deng et al.,
2023) which are resource-intensive and poorly suited because SAM is subject to a unique kind of uncertainty. In addition to model (epistemic) and data uncertainty (aleatoric),
the task is undefined, i.e. the object to segment is unknown
a priori, and the user defines the prior with a prompt. Thus,

1. Introduction
In the last years, significant effort and resources have been
spent into the development of foundation models. One
well-established model is the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023) that segments arbitrary objects
in images based on multi-modal prompts. SAM enables
researchers and engineers to rapidly develop new applications (Zhang et al., 2023a) such as interactive segmentation (Wu & Xu, 2024) or satellite imagery (Ren et al.,
2024) without the need for expensive data annotation or
1

Institute for Information Processing / L3S - Leibniz University Hannover, Germany. Correspondence to: Timo Kaiser
<kaiser@tnt.uni-hannover.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

