Dynamical Modeling of Behaviorally Relevant Spatiotemporal Patterns in
Neural Imaging Data

Mohammad Hosseini 1 Maryam M. Shanechi 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recent advances in neuroimaging techniques, such as widefield calcium and functional ultrasound imaging, have provided unprecedented access to high-dimensional neural data
that can measure the brain at larger spatial scales than traditional electrophysiological modalities (Macé et al., 2011;
Musall et al., 2019; Benisty et al., 2022). These imaging techniques are increasingly central to modern neuroscience, offering complementary insights to electrophysiological recordings by enabling the study of large-scale
network dynamics, distributed neural representations, and
functional connectivity, which is critical for understanding cognition and complex behavior (Cardin et al., 2020;
Mace et al., 2018). Widefield calcium imaging utilizes fluorescent indicators to monitor calcium influx in neurons,
capturing mesoscale neural activity across a large expanse
of the cortical surface with relatively high temporal resolution compared to other neural imaging modalities (Musall
et al., 2019; Ren & Komiyama, 2021; Nietz et al., 2023).
Functional ultrasound, on the other hand, detects changes
in cerebral blood volume, which are correlated with both
single-neuron activity and local field potentials, offering
wider spatial coverage and a less invasive approach compared to electrophysiological implants, with great potential
for brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) (Nunez-Elizalde et al.,
2022; Griggs et al., 2024; Rabut et al., 2024).

High-dimensional imaging of neural activity, such
as widefield calcium and functional ultrasound
imaging, provide a rich source of information for
understanding the relationship between brain activity and behavior. Accurately modeling neural
dynamics in these modalities is crucial for understanding this relationship but is hindered by the
high-dimensionality, complex spatiotemporal dependencies, and prevalent behaviorally irrelevant
dynamics in these modalities. Existing dynamical
models often employ preprocessing steps to obtain low-dimensional representations from neural
image modalities. However, this process can discard behaviorally relevant information and miss
spatiotemporal structure. We propose SBIND,
a novel data-driven deep learning framework to
model spatiotemporal dependencies in neural images and disentangle their behaviorally relevant
dynamics from other neural dynamics. We validate SBIND on widefield imaging datasets, and
show its extension to functional ultrasound imaging, a recent modality whose dynamical modeling
has largely remained unexplored. We find that our
model effectively identifies both local and longrange spatial dependencies across the brain while
also dissociating behaviorally relevant neural dynamics. Doing so, SBIND outperforms existing
models in neural-behavioral prediction. Overall,
SBIND provides a versatile tool for investigating
the neural mechanisms underlying behavior using
imaging modalities.

Despite the rich spatial and temporal information that these
imaging modalities can provide as well as their potential
application in BCIs, fully capturing their complex spatiotemporal dynamics and their link to observed behavior has remained elusive due to several challenges (Dinsdale et al.,
2022). Specifically, these modalities are high-dimensional
and have spatiotemporal patterns that are complex and include both local and global dependencies. Furthermore,
these patterns also contain prevalent behavior-irrelevant
components. Hence, developing new methods that address
the distinct challenges of neural imaging data to accurately
model such datasets is crucial to both investigate brainbehavior links and enable their use as new modalities in
BCIs (Norman et al., 2021; Griggs et al., 2024).

1
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California (USC), Los Angeles,
CA, USA 2 Computer Science, Viterbi School of Engineering, USC,
Los Angeles, CA, USA 3 Biomedical Engineering, Viterbi School
of Engineering, USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Maryam M. Shanechi <shanechi@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To analyze these high-dimensional neural imaging datasets,
existing work often employ an initial dimensionality re1

