Learnware Specification via Dual Alignment

Wei Chen 1 2 Jun-Xiang Mao 1 2 3 Xiaozheng Wang 3 Min-Ling Zhang 1 2

Abstract

source investment, and specialized development expertise.
These factors pose substantial challenges for non-experts
building high-performance models from scratch, while it is
ideal if their tasks could be tackled by reusing existing welltrained models. However, issues such as data privacy, model
inflexibility, and catastrophic forgetting further complicate
the reuse and adaptation of models for users.

The learnware paradigm aims to establish a learnware dock system that contains numerous leanwares, each consisting of a well-trained model
and a specification, enabling users to reuse highperforming models for their tasks instead of training from scratch. The specification, as a unique
characterization of the model’s specialties, dominates the effectiveness of model reuse. Existing
specification methods mainly employ distribution
alignment to generate specifications. However,
this approach overlooks the model’s discriminative performance, hindering an adequate specialty
characterization. In this paper, we claim that it
is beneficial to incorporate such discriminative
performance for high-quality specification generation. Accordingly, a novel specification approach named DALI, i.e., Learnware Specification via Dual ALIgnment, is proposed. In DALI,
the characterization of the model’s discriminative
performance is modeled as discriminative alignment, which is considered along with distribution
alignment in the specification generation process.
Theoretical and empirical analyses clearly demonstrate that the proposed approach is capable of facilitating model reuse in the learnware paradigm
with high-quality specification generation.

1

The learnware paradigm (Zhou, 2016) provides a systematic
approach that allows users to build new machine learning
solutions by leveraging existing well-established models
instead of developing models from scratch. A learnware
is a well-trained machine learning model equipped with a
small-scale specification that describes its capabilities and
specialties. This specification, serving as the unique identifier for both the learnware and its associated model, enables
the model to be effectively reused by new users without
requiring access to the original training data. In the submitting stage, developers worldwide can voluntarily submit
their trained models to a learnware dock system (Tan et al.,
2024c), and the system helps developers generate specifications corresponding to their models. In the deploying
stage, when a user needs to address a specific task, instead
of starting from scratch, she can submit her requirement
to the learnware dock system. The system identifies and
recommends useful learnwares, allowing the user to achieve
better performance than training a model from scratch using
their own data. Recently, to advance research on the learnware paradigm, the learnware dock system, Beimingwu, has
been developed and released (Tan et al., 2024c).

Introduction

Obviously, the design of the specifications is pivotal in the
learnware paradigm (Zhou & Tan, 2024). Well-crafted specifications that adequately characterize models’ specialties
can greatly improve the accuracy of learnware identification
and the effectiveness of model reuse. Existing specification methods primarily rely on distribution alignment, i.e.,
ensuring that the specification’s distribution is similar to
that of the model’s training data. Although this approach
partially describes the model’s applicable scope from the
perspective of its training data, it overlooks the model’s
inherent discriminative ability, resulting in an inadequate
characterization of the model’s specialties.

Currently, the machine learning paradigm of step-by-step
model construction from scratch, tailored to specific tasks,
has achieved remarkable success. However, this success is
heavily dependent on several key factors: a large volume
of high-quality labeled data, significant computational re1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Lab. of Computer Network
and Information Integration (Southeast University), MOE, China
3
Information Technology and Data Management Department of
China Mobile Communications Group Zhejiang Co., Ltd. Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.

In light of the above observations, we postulate that more
adequate characterization of the model’s specialties can be

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

