Cross-Modal Alignment via Variational Copula Modelling

Feng Wu * 1 Tsai Hor Chan * 1 Fuying Wang 1 Guosheng Yin 1 Lequan Yu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning aims to aggregate information from
multiple modalities to generate meaningful representations
for downstream tasks. It has been widely explored in the
context of vision-language models (Fu et al., 2023; El Banani et al., 2023), audio-visual applications (Chen et al.,
2023; Mo & Tian, 2023; Huang et al., 2023), image-video
models (Girdhar et al., 2023; Gan et al., 2023) and healthcare applications (Wu et al., 2024a; Hayat et al., 2022). For
example, multimodal learning has been applied to various
healthcare tasks such as clinical prediction tasks (Zhang
et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024a), report generation (Song
et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2023), and clinical trial site selection (Theodorou et al., 2024). The existing fusion strategies
can be divided into early, joint, or late fusion (Huang et al.,
2020), where the joint fusion paradigm is the most popular strategy and its core idea is to model the interactions
between the representations of the input modalities (Hayat
et al., 2022). The resulting fused embedding encodes the
structural interaction between the modalities, enabling accurate prediction for each modality.

Various data modalities are common in real-world
applications (e.g., electronic health records, medical images and clinical notes in healthcare). It
is essential to develop multimodal learning methods to aggregate various information from multiple modalities. The main challenge is how to
appropriately align and fuse the representations
of different modalities into a joint distribution.
Existing methods mainly rely on concatenation
or the Kronecker product, oversimplifying the
interaction structure between modalities and indicating a need to model more complex interactions. Additionally, the joint distribution of latent
representations with higher-order interactions is
underexplored. Copula is a powerful statistical
structure for modelling the interactions among
variables, as it naturally bridges the joint distribution and marginal distributions of multiple variables. We propose a novel copula-driven multimodal learning framework, which focuses on
learning the joint distribution of various modalities to capture the complex interactions among
them. The key idea is to interpret the copula
model as a tool to align the marginal distributions of the modalities efficiently. By assuming
a Gaussian mixture distribution for each modality and a copula model on the joint distribution, our model can generate accurate representations for missing modalities. Extensive experiments on public MIMIC datasets demonstrate
the superior performance of our model over other
competitors. The code is available at https:
//github.com/HKU-MedAI/CMCM.

However, due to the heterogeneity of different modalities
(e.g., electronic health records: EHRs, medical images, medical reports), properly aligning their distributions remains
a challenge. The existing alignment strategies mainly rely
on concatenation or Kronecker products which oversimplify the interactions among different modalities. A recent
work (Salzmann et al., 2022) emphasizes simple probabilistic assumptions on the marginals and neglects to explore
statistical assumptions about the joint distributions of the
modalities. This approach may result in biased fused representations, limiting the performance of downstream tasks
and the generalizability and robustness of the resulting multimodal models. Therefore, there is still a need for an approach that can more appropriately align the distributions of
modalities and model the potentially complex interactions
among them.
Copula models have shown great success in modelling the
interactions of variables as they construct a bridge between
the joint distribution and their marginals (Cherubini, 2004).
However, copula models are less explored in deep learning
field as most existing approaches heavily rely on samplingbased methods (e.g., MCMC (Silva & Gramacy, 2009)),

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing and Data Science,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to:
Lequan Yu <lqyu@hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

