NBDI: A Simple and Effective Termination Condition for
Skill Extraction from Task-Agnostic Demonstrations

Myunsoo Kim * 1 Hayeong Lee * 1 Seong-Woong Shim 1 JunHo Seo 1 Byung-Jun Lee 1 2

Abstract

the agent has to make, thereby alleviating the challenges
that RL faces in long-horizon, sparse reward tasks.

Intelligent agents are able to make decisions based
on different levels of granularity and duration. Recent advances in skill learning enabled the agent
to solve complex, long-horizon tasks by effectively guiding the agent in choosing appropriate
skills. However, the practice of using fixed-length
skills can easily result in skipping valuable decision points, which ultimately limits the potential for further exploration and faster policy learning. In this work, we propose to learn a simple
and effective termination condition that identifies decision points through a state-action novelty
module that leverages agent experience data. Our
approach, Novelty-based Decision Point Identification (NBDI), outperforms previous baselines in
complex, long-horizon tasks, and remains effective even in the presence of significant variations
in the environment configurations of downstream
tasks, highlighting the importance of decision
point identification in skill learning.

Due to the advantages of temporal abstraction, there has
been active research on developing hierarchical RL algorithms, which structure the agent’s policy into a hierarchy of
two policies: a high-level policy and a low level policy. The
option framework (Sutton, 1998) was proposed to achieve
temporal abstraction by learning options, which are highlevel actions that contain inner low level policy, initiation
set and termination conditions. Termination conditions are
used to figure out when to switch from one option to another,
enabling the agent to flexibly respond to changes in environment or task requirements. While the option framework
can achieve temporal abstraction without any loss of performance when the options are optimally learned, it is usually
computationally challenging to optimize for the ideal set of
options within complex domains.
In this case, the skill discovery framework, which aims
to discover meaningful skills (fixed-length executions of
low-level policy) from the dataset through unsupervised
learning techniques, has been used as an alternative. Recently, notable progress has been made in skill-based deep
RL models, showing promising results in complex environments and robot manipulations (Pertsch et al., 2021a;
Hakhamaneshi et al., 2021; Park et al., 2023). However,
the use of fixed-length skills and the absence of appropriate
termination conditions often restrict them from making decisions at critical decision points (e.g., crossroads), which
can result in significant loss in performance. While there
have been some studies incorporating the option framework
into deep RL as is, the algorithmic complexity and unstable performance in large environments limit its widespread
adoption (Kulkarni et al., 2016; Hutsebaut-Buysse et al.,
2022).

1. Introduction
The ability to make decisions based on different levels of
granularity and duration is one of the key attributes of intelligence. In reinforcement learning (RL), temporal abstraction
refers to the concept of an agent reasoning over a long
horizon, planning, and taking high-level actions. Each highlevel action corresponds to a sequence of primitive actions,
or low-level actions. For example, in order to accomplish a
task with a robot arm, it would be easier to utilize high-level
actions such as grasping and lifting, instead of controlling
every single joint of a robot arm. Temporal abstraction simplifies complex tasks by reducing the number of decisions

In this paper, we present NBDI (Novelty-based Decision
Point Identification)1 , a simple state-action novelty-based
decision point identification method that allows the agent to
learn terminated skills from task-agnostic demonstrations.
In this context, the term task-agnostic refers to the collection of trajectories from a diverse set of tasks, excluding the

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Artificial Intelligence,
Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Gauss Labs Inc.,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Byung-Jun Lee
<byungjunlee@korea.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Code: https://github.com/ku-dmlab/NBDI

