Return Capping: Sample-Efficient CVaR Policy Gradient Optimisation

Harry Mead 1 Clarissa Costen 1 Bruno Lacerda 1 Nick Hawes 1

Abstract

some applications, it presents a number of issues. Primarily,
it results in very poor sample efficiency, especially when
α is low, as a large proportion of sampled trajectories are
discarded. Figure 1(a) illustrates how existing CVaR PG
methods are inefficient in terms of trajectory usage. In addition, since it is the highest return samples that are discarded,
the policy is unable to learn from the best performing trajectories, which can present further issues for policy training.
In order to mitigate these issues, we propose Return Capping. Rather than discarding trajectories, we propose that all
trajectories are used in training, but the return of those above
a certain threshold is truncated. We prove in Section 4 that
if this threshold, or cap, is set correctly, optimising CVaR
under Return Capping is equivalent to optimising CVaR
without the cap. Since Return Capping allows all trajectories to be used, sample efficiency is greatly improved, and
learning performance improvements from high-performing
trajectories is possible. Our main contributions are:

When optimising for conditional value at risk
(CVaR) using policy gradients (PG), current methods rely on discarding a large proportion of trajectories, resulting in poor sample efficiency. We
propose a reformulation of the CVaR optimisation
problem by capping the total return of trajectories used in training, rather than simply discarding them, and show that this is equivalent to the
original problem if the cap is set appropriately.
We show, with empirical results in an number of
environments, that this reformulation of the problem results in consistently improved performance
compared to baselines. We have made all our
code available here: https://github.com/
HarryMJMead/cvar-return-capping.

1. Introduction

• Proposing the Return Capping reformulation of the
CVaR optimisation objective, with proof that the two
are equivalent if the cap is set correctly.

In applications that are safety critical, or where catastrophic
failure is a possibility, it can be beneficial to minimise the
worst case outcomes of decisions, rather than simply performing well on average. Risk-averse reinforcement learning (RL) addresses this problem by maximising the performance of a policy using a risk metric as the objective, rather
than expected value. We focus here on conditional value at
risk (CVaR). CVaR represents an intuitive, coherent (Artzner
et al., 1999) risk metric that assesses the expected value of
the worst α proportion of runs. Note that in this work we
focus on static CVaR, where static CVaR refers to the CVaR
of full episode returns, due its ease of interpretability for
setting a level of risk aversion.

• Presenting a method for approximating this target cap.
• Performing empirical evaluations of this method in
established risk-aware benchmarks, where Return Capping has better performance than state-of-the-art baselines.
We also introduce a new CVaR policy gradient baseline
based on PPO, which we show performs better than standard
baselines in some environments.

A common approach to maximising CVaR in RL is to use
policy gradient (PG) methods (Tamar et al., 2015). In the
case of CVaR, PG methods sample a set of trajectories, then
discard all but the bottom α-proportion based on total returns, and then aim to maximise the expected return of this
remaining subset of trajectories. Whilst this is sufficient for

2. Related Work
Training for risk-averse behaviour has been explored in
many existing works. Direct reward shaping has been used
to explicitly discourage risky behaviours (Wu et al., 2023).
Work in robust adversarial RL (Pinto et al., 2017; Pan et al.,
2019) involves simultaneously training both the primary
agent and an adversary that perturbs environment dynamics
in order to train more robust policies. However, in both of
these approaches, it is challenging to quantify the level of
risk-aversion that results from either the adversary or reward
shaping.

1
University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Harry Mead
<hmead@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

