Distributed Event-Based Learning via ADMM

Guener Dilsad ER 1 Sebastian Trimpe 2 Michael Muehlebach 1

Abstract

the burden off central processors and improves data privacy
by avoiding a centralized training and storage of data.

We consider a distributed learning problem, where
agents minimize a global objective function by
exchanging information over a network. Our approach has two distinct features: (i) It substantially reduces communication by triggering communication only when necessary, and (ii) it is agnostic to the data-distribution among the different
agents. We therefore guarantee convergence even
if the local data-distributions of the agents are
arbitrarily distinct. We analyze the convergence
rate of the algorithm both in convex and nonconvex settings and derive accelerated convergence
rates for the convex case. We also characterize
the effect of communication failures and demonstrate that our algorithm is robust to these. The
article concludes by presenting numerical results
from distributed learning tasks on the MNIST and
CIFAR-10 datasets. The experiments underline
communication savings of 35% or more due to
the event-based communication strategy, show resilience towards heterogeneous data-distributions,
and highlight that our approach outperforms common baselines such as FedAvg, FedProx, SCAFFOLD and FedADMM.

Distributed learning is particularly challenging when the
data is not independent and identically distributed (noni.i.d.) across the different agents. This situation often hinders the convergence to a globally optimal model. The
non-i.i.d. nature leads to disparities in local datasets, preventing the local models from generalizing across the entire
dataset, leading to a fundamental dilemma between minimizing local and global objective functions (Acar et al.,
2021). In addition, a second key challenge arises from the
communication between agents, which is required to ensure convergence to the global solution and may lead to a
substantial overhead. This communication overhead results
in a waste of energy (Li et al., 2020b), and is prone to delays and communication channel failures. As a result, both,
non-i.i.d. datasets and communication overhead, constitute
major bottlenecks for enabling large-scale learning systems.
We provide an effective solution to both challenges. Inspired by the sent-on-delta concept (Miskowicz, 2006), we
reduce the communication load by introducing an eventbased communication strategy, such that each agent (or
computational node) communicates only if necessary. Our
communication rule enforces local constraints that collectively guarantee bounded overall error, a paradigm related to
safe zone design strategies in distributed computing (Garofalakis & Samoladas, 2017). Our approach is also rooted
in event-based estimation, where communication is triggered by significant state changes. We further base our
approach on the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM). Our method is therefore robust against
ill-conditioning and agnostic towards a disparity of the local
data-distributions among the agents (these can be skewed
in arbitrary ways). The approach further enables an explicit
trade-off between communication load on the network and
solution accuracy via a small set of hyperparameters that
have a clear interpretation. We explicitly quantify the influence of these hyperparameters on the solution accuracy and
analyze the effect of communication failures. The article
concludes by highlighting the effectiveness of our algorithm
in training neural networks, and solving LASSO problems
in a distributed and communication-efficient manner.

1. Introduction
Distributed learning refers to the minimization of a global
objective function over a network of agents, where each
agent has only access to a local cost function and can communicate with some or all agents in the network. Distributed
learning systems provide a solution for handling the growing amount of data being generated everywhere on earth, by
utilizing the computational power of individual devices in a
network rather than relying on a central entity. This takes
1

Learning and Dynamical Systems Group, Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems, 72076 Tübingen, Germany 2 Institute for
Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, 52068 Aachen, Germany. Correspondence to: Guener Dilsad
ER <gder@tue.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our theoretical analysis builds on a recent trend in the opti-

1

