FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness
Jake Robertson 1 2 Noah Hollmann 3 4 Samuel Müller 5 2 Noor Awad 2 Frank Hutter 4 1 2

Abstract

aware ML community, critiques highlight the contextual limitations and lack of transferability of current statistical fairness measures to practical legislative frameworks (Weerts
et al., 2023). In response, the field of causal fairness has
emerged, providing a transparent and human-in-the-loop
causal framework for assessing and mitigating algorithmic
bias with a strong analogy to existing anti-discrimination
legal doctrines (Plecko & Bareinboim, 2024).

Machine learning (ML) systems are utilized in
critical sectors, such as healthcare, law enforcement, and finance. However, these systems are
often trained on historical data that contains demographic biases, leading to ML decisions that perpetuate or exacerbate existing social inequalities.
Causal fairness provides a transparent, human-inthe-loop framework to mitigate algorithmic discrimination, aligning closely with legal doctrines
of direct and indirect discrimination. However,
current causal fairness frameworks hold a key limitation in that they assume prior knowledge of the
correct causal model, restricting their applicability in complex fairness scenarios where causal
models are unknown or difficult to identify. To
bridge this gap, we propose FairPFN, a tabular
foundation model pre-trained on synthetic causal
fairness data to identify and mitigate the causal
effects of protected attributes in its predictions.
FairPFN’s key contribution is that it requires no
knowledge of the causal model and still demonstrates strong performance in identifying and removing protected causal effects across a diverse
set of hand-crafted and real-world scenarios relative to robust baseline methods. FairPFN paves
the way for promising future research, making
causal fairness more accessible to a wider variety
of complex fairness problems.

A recent review comparing outcome-based and causal fairness approaches (Castelnovo et al., 2022) argues that the
non-identifiability of causal models from observational data
(Pearl, 2009) limits the usage of current causal fairness
frameworks in practical applications. In practice, users
must provide full or partial information about the underlying causal model, a challenging task given the complexity
of systemic inequalities. Furthermore, an incorrectly presumed causal graph, such as one falsely assuming a variable
is independent of a protected attribute, can invalidate causal
fairness metrics (Ma et al., 2023; Binkytė-Sadauskienė et al.,
2022), resulting in fairwashing and fostering a false sense
of security and trust.
This paper takes a bold new perspective on achieving causal
fairness. Our key contribution is FairPFN, a tabular foundation model for causal fairness, pre-trained on synthetic
causal fairness data to learn to identify and remove the
causal effects of protected attributes in tabular classification settings. When used on a new dataset, FairPFN does
not rely on a user-specified causal model or graph, instead
solely relying on the causally-generated data it has seen
during pre-training. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that FairPFN effectively and consistently mitigates the causal impact of protected attributes across various
hand-crafted and real-world scenarios, yielding causally fair
predictions without user-specified causal information. We
summarize our various contributions:

1. Introduction
Algorithmic discrimination is among the most pressing AIrelated risks of our time, manifesting when machine learning
(ML) systems produce outcomes that disproportionately disadvantage historically marginalized groups (Angwin et al.,
2016). Despite significant advancements by the fairness*

1

1. PFNs for Causal Fairness We propose a paradigm
shift for algorithmic fairness, in which a transformer is
pre-trained on synthetic causal fairness data.

2

Equal contribution ELLIS Institute Tübingen University
of Freiburg 3 Charité University Medicine Berlin 4 Prior Labs
5
Meta. Correspondence to: Jake Robertson <robertsj@cs.unifrieburg.de>.

2. Causal Fairness Prior: We introduce a synthetic
causal data prior which offers a comprehensive representation for fairness datasets, modeling protected
attributes as binary exogenous causes.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

