Enhancing Foundation Models with Federated Domain Knowledge Infusion

Jiaqi Wang 1 Jingtao Li 2 Weiming Zhuang 2 Chen Chen 2 Lingjuan Lyu 2 Fenglong Ma 1

Abstract

ployed in a wide range of vision tasks, including image
classification, especially for zero-shot inference, thanks to
their large number of parameters and the extensive training data. However, these models still face challenges when
confronted with input data significantly different from their
training data. Therefore, fine-tuning becomes essential. Traditional fine-tuning strategies are typically conducted in a
centralized manner. However, this approach is often impractical, particularly for sensitive data like medical information, which is often distributed among clients and cannot be
shared. This distributed scenario significantly complicates
the fine-tuning process for CLIP.

Vision foundation models (FMs) like CLIP have
exhibited exceptional capabilities in visual and
linguistic understanding, particularly in zero-shot
inference tasks. However, these models struggle with data that significantly deviates from
their training samples, necessitating fine-tuning,
which is often infeasible in centralized settings
due to data privacy concerns. Federated learning (FL) combined with parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) offers a potential solution, yet existing methods face issues with domain-specific
characteristics and out-of-domain generalization.
We propose a cross-silo Federated Adapter Generalization (FedAG), a novel federated fine-tuning
approach that leverages multiple fine-grained
adapters to capture domain-specific knowledge
while enhancing out-of-domain generalization.
Our method uses quality-aware in-domain mutual
learning and attention-regularized cross-domain
learning to integrate domain-specific insights
effectively. Experiments of the CLIP model
on three domain-shifting datasets, ImageCLEFDA, Office-Home, and DomainNet, demonstrate
the superior performance of FedAG in both indomain and out-of-domain scenarios. We envision this work as a milestone for generalizing
CLIP to handle the challenge of out-of-domain
knowledge under federated learning setting. The
source code can be found at https://github.
com/JackqqWang/fedag.

Recent studies addressed this challenge by combining federated learning (FL) with fine-tuning techniques, a technique
known as federated fine-tuning. Existing approaches (Xiao
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b; Marchisio et al., 2023;
Chua et al., 2023; Khalid et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a)
typically fine-tune these models without utilizing the entire model. Instead, they often employ layer-drop techniques (Sajjad et al., 2023) to compress a full model into a
sub-model. The sub-model and an emulator are distributed
to clients. Clients then update this compressed sub-model
with their private data with the help of the emulator iteratively. The resulting sub-model is eventually incorporated into the full model to complete fine-tuning. However,
these compression techniques fail to maintain alignment
between the fine-tuned compressed layers and the remaining ones, leading to performance degradation. Federated
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques, such as
FedCLIP (Lu et al., 2023) and FedPETuning (Zhang et al.,
2023), have emerged to address the aforementioned problem. These approaches involve deploying the foundation
model with an additional adapter on each client, which is
then collaboratively trained like FedAvg (McMahan et al.,
2017). The aggregated adapter is subsequently integrated
into the foundation model to achieve fine-tuning. However,
they have several issues:

1. Introduction
CLIP (Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training) (Radford
et al., 2021) and its variants (Li et al., 2023), have demonstrated superior capabilities in understanding visual concepts and their linguistic descriptions. They have been em1

Indistinguishable in domain-specific characteristics. In
real-world applications, the data collected by clients may
exhibit different characteristics even for the same task. For
instance, the stylistic realism of an image can vary across
different forms of visual art, such as painting, photography, and digital art, leading to unique artistic expressions.
However, existing models typically employ a single adapter

2

The Pennsylvania State University Sony AI. Correspondence
to: Lingjuan Lyu <Lingjuan.lv@sony.com>, Fenglong Ma <fenglong@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

