One Wave To Explain Them All: A Unifying Perspective On Feature Attribution

Gabriel Kasmi 1 2 Amandine Brunetto 1 Thomas Fel 3 Jayneel Parekh 4

Abstract

This opacity motivated the rise of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) techniques to provide humanunderstandable explanations of model decisions. While
XAI has been predominantly applied in image classification,
it is also extending into other fields, such as audio and volumes classification (Parekh, 2023; Paissan et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2019). Currently, the most popular
XAI methods are feature attribution methods (Shrikumar
et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017;
Fel et al., 2021; Novello et al., 2022; Muzellec et al., 2024)
which consist in generating saliency maps, i.e., heatmaps
highlighting the important pixels on the input image (Zeiler
& Fergus, 2014b). The same principle has been expanded
for audio and volumes, where most feature attributions are
computed on 2D projections of the input modality. However,
the pixel domain does not inherently capture the structural
properties of signals. So far, existing works have overlooked
the question of the domain in which feature attribution is
computed. However, signal processing theory states that
meaningful features often exist at multiple scales and are
better represented in transformed domains that account for
spatial and frequency information. This underlines the need
for an alternative representations that preserves these properties to provide more faithful explanations.

Feature attribution methods aim to improve the
transparency of deep neural networks by identifying the input features that influence a model’s decision. Pixel-based heatmaps have become the standard for attributing features to high-dimensional
inputs, such as images, audio representations, and
volumes. While intuitive and convenient, these
pixel-based attributions fail to capture the underlying structure of the data. Moreover, the choice
of domain for computing attributions has often
been overlooked. This work demonstrates that the
wavelet domain allows for informative and meaningful attributions. It handles any input dimension
and offers a unified approach to feature attribution.
Our method, the Wavelet Attribution Method
(WAM), leverages the spatial and scale-localized
properties of wavelet coefficients to provide explanations that capture both the where and what
of a model’s decision-making process. We show
that WAM quantitatively matches or outperforms
existing gradient-based methods across multiple
modalities, including audio, images, and volumes.
Additionally, we discuss how WAM bridges attribution with broader aspects of model robustness and transparency. Project page: https:
//gabrielkasmi.github.io/wam/.

Wavelets offer a hierarchical decomposition that retains
both spatial and frequency information, unlike pixel-based
methods that lose structural context. This makes wavelets a
stronger foundation for interpreting model decisions across
diverse modalities (or signals), as wavelets are inherently
low-level features defined across various signal dimensions. This work introduces the Wavelet Attribution Method
(WAM), which leverages wavelet coefficients as the basis
features for computing attributions. Therefore, WAM provides a unification of the feature attribution domain on components (wavelet coefficients) that are interpretable as lowlevel features of the input signal. We expand popular feature
attribution methods, namely SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al.,
2017) and Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017),
within the wavelet domain, thus providing a generalization of feature attribution to any square-integrable modality.
WAM preserves the original structure of the data without
converting it into a 2D representation.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are increasingly being deployed in
various applications. However, their opacity poses a significant challenge, especially in safety-critical domains, where
understanding the decision-making process is crucial, for
instance, in tumor detection (Pooch et al., 2020) or obstacle
identification (Sun et al., 2022).
1

Mines Paris - PSL University, Paris, France 2 RTE France,
Paris La Défense, France 3 Kempner Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United-States 4 ISIR, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Gabriel Kasmi
<gabriel.kasmi[at]minesparis.psl.eu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Figure 1 illustrates our approach, which computes the gradient of a classification model with respect to the wavelet co1

