SPEX: Scaling Feature Interaction Explanations for LLMs

Justin Singh Kang * 1 Landon Butler * 1 Abhineet Agarwal * 2 Yigit Efe Erginbas 1 Ramtin Pedarsani 3
Bin Yu 1 2 Kannan Ramchandran 1
among features1 . Interactions are critical for complex tasks
like protein design, drug discovery, or medical diagnosis,
which require examining combinations of hundreds of features. As LLMs are increasingly used in such high-stakes
applications, they require trustworthy explanations to aid
in responsible decision-making. Moreover, LLM explanations enable debugging and can drive development through
improved understanding (Zhang et al., 2023a).

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized machine learning due to their ability to capture complex interactions between input features.
Popular post-hoc explanation methods like SHAP
provide marginal feature attributions, while their
extensions to interaction importances only scale to
small input lengths (≈ 20). We propose Spectral Explainer (SPEX), a model-agnostic interaction attribution algorithm that efficiently scales to large input
lengths (≈ 1000). SPEX exploits underlying natural sparsity among interactions—common in realworld data—and applies a sparse Fourier transform
using a channel decoding algorithm to efficiently
identify important interactions. We perform experiments across three difficult long-context datasets
that require LLMs to utilize interactions between
inputs to complete the task. For large inputs, SPEX
outperforms marginal attribution methods by up to
20% in terms of faithfully reconstructing LLM outputs. Further, SPEX successfully identifies key features and interactions that strongly influence model
output. For one of our datasets, HotpotQA, SPEX
provides interactions that align with human annotations. Finally, we use our model-agnostic approach
to generate explanations to demonstrate abstract reasoning in closed-source LLMs (GPT-4o mini) and
compositional reasoning in vision-language models.

Current post-hoc explainability approaches for LLMs fall
into two categories: (i) methods like Shapley values (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) and LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) compute
marginal feature attribution but do not consider interactions.
As a running example, consider a sentiment analysis task
(see Fig. 1(a)) where the LLM classifies a review containing
the sentence “Her acting never fails to impress”. Marginal attribution methods miss this interaction, and instead attribute
positive sentiment to “never” and “fails” (see Fig. 1(a)). (ii)
Interaction indices such as Faith-Shap (Tsai et al., 2023)
attribute interactions up to a given order d. That is, for n
input features, they compute attributions by considering all
O(nd ) interactions. This becomes infeasible for small n
and d. This motivates the central question of this paper:
Can we perform interaction attribution at scale for a large
input space n with reasonable computational complexity?
We answer this question affirmatively with Spectral Explainer (SPEX) by leveraging information-theoretic tools
to efficiently identify important interactions at LLM scale.
The scale of SPEX is enabled by the observation that LLM
outputs are often driven by a small number of sparse interactions between inputs (Tsui & Aghazadeh, 2024; Ren
et al., 2024a). See Fig. 1 for examples of sparsity in various tasks. SPEX discovers important interactions by using
a sparse Fourier transform to construct a surrogate explanation function. This sparse Fourier transform searches
for interactions via a channel decoding algorithm, thereby
avoiding the exhaustive search used in existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) perform remarkably well
across many domains by modeling complex interactions
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, UC Berkeley 2 Department of Statistics,
UC Berkeley 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UC Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Justin Singh Kang
<justin kang@berkeley.edu>.

Our experiments show we can identify a small set of interactions that effectively and concisely reconstruct LLM
outputs with n ≈ 1000. This scale is far beyond what

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
LLM features refer to inputs at any granularity, e.g, tokens,
sentences in a prompt or image patches in vision-language models.

1

