Selective Preference Aggregation

Shreyas Kadekodi 1 * Hayden McTavish 2 * Berk Ustun 1

Abstract

Standard methods for preference aggregation represent collective preferences as a ranking – i.e., a total order over n
items where we can infer the collective preference between
items by comparing their positions. Rankings reflect an
approximate summary of collective preferences because it
is impossible to define a coherent order when individuals
disagree. This impossibility – which is enshrined in foundational results such as Condorcet’s Paradox [21] and Arrow’s
Impossibility Theorem [8] – has cast preference aggregation
as an exercise in arbitration.

Many applications in machine learning and decision making rely on procedures to aggregate
human preferences. In such tasks, individuals express ordinal preferences over a set of items by
voting, ratings, or comparing them. We then aggregate these data into a ranking that reveals their
collective preferences. Standard methods for preference aggregation are designed to return rankings
that arbitrate conflicting preferences between individuals. In this work, we introduce a paradigm
for selective aggregation where we abstain from
comparison rather than arbitrate dissent. We summarize collective preferences as a selective ranking – i.e., a partial order that reflects all collective
preferences where at least 100 · (1 − τ )% of individuals agree. We develop algorithms to build
selective rankings that achieve all possible tradeoffs between comparability and disagreement, and
derive formal guarantees on their recovery and
robustness. We conduct an extensive set of experiments on real-world datasets to benchmark
our approach and demonstrate its functionality.
Our results show how selective rankings can promote transparency and robustness by revealing
disagreement and abstaining from arbitration.

1

Over the past few decades, we have developed countless
algorithms from this perspective [see 4, 73] to reap benefits
from collective intelligence in new use cases:
•

Support Group Decisions – e.g., to fund grant proposals
or hire employees [16, 74].

•

Qualitative Benchmarks – e.g., to rank colleges [20], products [17], or language models [58].

•

Model Alignment – e.g., to fit or fine-tune models whose
predictions align with the preferences of their users [61,
22].

In many of these use cases, we do not need a total order.
When we aggregate preferences to fund grant proposals,
for example, rankings can lead to worse decisions as we
arbitrarily select the top 3 items. When we aggregate preferences to rank colleges, a total order can strongly influence
where students apply and how institutions invest [see e.g.,
41, 27, 65, 66]. When we aggregate preferences to predict
helpfulness [25], a total order can lead us to build models
that are aligned with the preferences of a slim majority [61].

Introduction

Many of our most important systems rely on procedures
where we elicit and aggregate human preferences.In such
systems, we ask a group of individuals to express their
preferences over a set of items through votes, ratings, or
pairwise comparisons. We then use these data to order items
in a way that represents their collective preferences as a
group. Over the past century, we have applied this pattern to
reap transformative benefits from collective intelligence in
elections [21], online search [26], and model alignment [22].

In this work, we propose to address these challenges through
selective aggregation. In this paradigm, we express collective preferences as a tiered ranking – i.e., a partial order
where we are only allowed to compare items in different
tiers. We view tiers as a simple solution to avoid the impossibility of arbitration: given a pair of items where individuals
express conflicting preferences, we can place them in the
same tier to abstain from comparison. We capitalize on this
structure to develop a new representation for collective preferences that can reveal disagreement, and new algorithms
that can allow us to control it.

*
Equal contribution 1 UCSD 2 Duke University. Correspondence
to: Berk Ustun <berk@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

