Fusing Reward and Dueling Feedback in Stochastic Bandits

Xuchuang Wang 1 Qirun Zeng 2 Jinhang Zuo 3 Xutong Liu 4 Mohammad Hajiesmaili 1 John C.S. Lui 5
Adam Wierman 6

Abstract

Rafailov et al., 2024), the human annotators are asked to
compare the quality of two LLM-generated sentences, rather
than scoring them using absolute values. Given LLMs’ popularity, designing algorithms that can effectively leverage
relative feedback has become a critical research topic in
the online learning community, e.g., reinforcement learning
with human feedback (RLHF) (Wang et al., 2023a; Xiong
et al., 2024), bandits with human preferences (Ji et al., 2023),
dueling bandits (Yan et al., 2022; Saha & Gaillard, 2022),
etc. This line of work complements the traditional online
learning algorithms that rely on absolute feedback, e.g., reward in bandits and reinforcement learning (Lai & Robbins,
1985; Szepesvári, 2022). We refer to Appendix A for a
detailed discussion on related works.

This paper investigates the fusion of absolute (reward) and relative (dueling) feedback in stochastic
bandits, where both feedback types are gathered
in each decision round. We derive a regret lower
bound, demonstrating that an efficient algorithm
may incur only the smaller among the reward
and dueling-based regret for each individual arm.
We propose two fusion approaches: (1) a simple
elimination fusion algorithm that leverages both
feedback types to explore all arms and unifies
collected information by sharing a common candidate arm set, and (2) a decomposition fusion
algorithm that selects the more effective feedback
to explore the corresponding arms and randomly
assigns one feedback type for exploration and the
other for exploitation in each round. The elimination fusion experiences a suboptimal multiplicative term of the number of arms in regret due to
the intrinsic suboptimality of dueling elimination.
In contrast, the decomposition fusion achieves regret matching the lower bound up to a constant
under a common assumption. Extensive experiments confirm the efficacy of our algorithms and
theoretical results.

Most of the prior literature has mainly focused on algorithms
that leverage either relative or absolute feedback alone. In
many real-world applications, however, these two types of
feedback coexist. For example, in LLM training, the human
annotators may provide both absolute scores and relative
comparisons (Ouyang et al., 2022). Another example is in
recommendation systems, where the user feedback can be
both absolute ratings and pairwise comparisons (choose one
among two recommendations) (Zhang et al., 2020). Despite
its practical relevance, there is no prior literature where the
underlying algorithms simultaneously utilize (dubbed as
fuse) the absolute and relative feedback.
In this paper, we investigate how to fuse the absolute and
relative feedback under the framework of the stochastic
multi-armed bandit (MAB) (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020),
which is a fundamental problem in online learning. To align
with the terminology in bandit literature, we refer to the
absolute feedback as reward and the relative feedback as
dueling feedback. We consider a MAB with K ∈ N+ arms,
where each arm k is associated with a reward distribution
with an unknown mean, and each arm pair (k1 , k2 ) is associated with an unknown dueling probability, representing
the probability that arm k1 is preferred over arm k2 in a
comparison. In each round t, the learner selects a tuple
of arms {kt , (k1,t , k2,t )}, where the reward feedback is the
observed reward drawn from the reward distribution of arm
kt , and the dueling feedback is the observed winning arm
from the comparison between arms k1,t and k2,t .

1. Introduction
Relative feedback is a type of feedback that provides information about the relative quality of two or more items (i.e.,
which is better) rather than their absolute quality. The power
of relative feedback has been widely recognized in various
fields. For example, in the human alignment stage of the
large language model (LLM) training (Ouyang et al., 2022;
1
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 2 University of
Science and Technology of China 3 City University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong 4 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 5 The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 6 California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA. Correspondence to: Xutong Liu
<xutongl@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

