Differential Privacy Guarantees of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Algorithms

Andrea Bertazzi 1 Tim Johnston 2 Gareth O. Roberts 3 Alain Durmus 1

Abstract

are required to produce approximate samples from the posterior, and for this reason their DP guarantees have also
been the object of extensive research (Heikkilä et al., 2019;
Yıldırım & Ermics, 2019; Li et al., 2019; Chourasia et al.,
2021; Altschuler & Talwar, 2022; Zhang & Zhang, 2023).

This paper aims to provide differential privacy
(DP) guarantees for Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithms. In a first part, we establish
DP guarantees on samples output by MCMC algorithms as well as Monte Carlo estimators associated with these methods under assumptions on the
convergence properties of the underlying Markov
chain. In particular, our results highlight the critical condition of ensuring the target distribution is
differentially private itself. In a second part, we
specialise our analysis to the unadjusted Langevin
algorithm and stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics and establish guarantees on their (Rényi)
DP. To this end, we develop a novel methodology
based on Girsanov’s theorem combined with a perturbation trick to obtain bounds for an unbounded
domain and in a non-convex setting. We establish: (i) uniform in n privacy guarantees when the
state of the chain after n iterations is released, (ii)
bounds on the privacy of the entire chain trajectory. These findings provide concrete guidelines
for privacy-preserving MCMC.

Several works obtain DP of the one-step transitions of the
MCMC algorithm by injecting extra noise in various ways,
e.g. in the acceptance-rejection step of Metropolis-Hastingstype algorithms (Heikkilä et al., 2019; Yıldırım & Ermics,
2019), or leveraging the additional randomness already
introduced by subsampling strategies (Wang et al., 2015;
Bierkens & Duncan, 2022), optionally together with clipping of the gradient that drives the moves of the chain (Song
et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016). Many iterations of the
MCMC chain are required to approach the posterior distribution, and the typical strategy to obtain guarantees on the
DP of the algorithm after some number n of iterations is
to use composition bounds (Abadi et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2019; Bassily et al., 2014; Ganesh et al., 2023). However,
the privacy implied using composition bounds for Markov
chains naturally decays with the number of steps (Kairouz
et al., 2015) and as a consequence the injected noise must
scale with the number of iterations in order to obtain uniform privacy bounds for the final draw. Many other works
using different techniques to prove uniform-in-time privacy
bounds for the final draw from a Markov chain have bad
dependence on the radius of the state space or the stepsize,
see (Altschuler & Talwar, 2022; Asoodeh & Diaz, 2023).
These limitations were overcome in Chourasia et al. (2021),
in which uniform-in-time bounds on the (Rényi) DP of gradient descent-type algorithms was obtained, however under
a strong convexity assumption.

1. Introduction
The framework of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork, 2006;
Dwork et al., 2006) has become the standard approach for
designing statistical and machine learning algorithms with
quantitative guarantees on the information that their output
reveals about the data. In particular, the DP guarantees of
Bayesian statistical methods have already been investigated
in various works, typically focusing on the DP analysis of
samples drawn from the posterior distribution associated
with the data and problem at hand (Wang et al., 2015; Dimitrakakis et al., 2017; Geumlek et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2025).
In practice, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms

Contributions of this work In this paper we study the
differential privacy of MCMC algorithms. The paper is
divided in two parts.
In the first part (Section 3) we consider general MCMC algorithms and establish clear connections between the DP guarantees of the posterior distribution and of a corresponding
MCMC algorithm. Assuming DP of the posterior, Propositions 3.2 and 3.10 show (ε, δ)-DP for the MCMC algorithm
when we either release the n-th state of the chain or a (noisy)
Monte Carlo estimator. These result show that, under suitable assumptions, the MCMC algorithm inherits the “good"

1

École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
France 2 Université Paris Dauphine - PSL, France 3 University
of Warwick, UK. Correspondence to: Andrea Bertazzi <andrea.bertazzi@polytechnique.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

