ETTA: Elucidating the Design Space of Text-to-Audio Models

Sang-gil Lee * 1 Zhifeng Kong * 1 Arushi Goel 1 Sungwon Kim 1 Rafael Valle 1 Bryan Catanzaro 1

Abstract

research community has attempted to understand this design
space and the contribution of each factor, drawing conclusions between experiments is challenging. Our goal in this
work is not to explore novel model designs or methodologies. Instead, we aim to provide a holistic understanding
of existing paradigms for building TTA models, to identify
important aspects that allow for improving results, and to
assess scalability with respect to data and model size.

Recent years have seen significant progress in
Text-To-Audio (TTA) synthesis, enabling users
to enrich their creative workflows with synthetic
audio generated from natural language prompts.
Despite this progress, the effects of data, model architecture, training objective functions, and sampling strategies on target benchmarks are not well
understood. With the purpose of providing a holistic understanding of the design space of TTA models, we set up a large-scale empirical experiment
focused on diffusion and flow matching models.
Our contributions include: 1) AF-Synthetic, a
large dataset of high quality synthetic captions
obtained from an audio understanding model; 2)
a systematic comparison of different architectural,
training, and inference design choices for TTA
models; 3) an analysis of sampling methods and
their Pareto curves with respect to generation quality and inference speed. We leverage the knowledge obtained from this extensive analysis to propose our best model dubbed Elucidated Text-ToAudio (ETTA). When evaluated on AudioCaps
and MusicCaps, ETTA provides improvements
over the baselines trained on publicly available
data, while being competitive with models trained
on proprietary data. Finally, we show ETTA’s improved ability to generate creative audio following
complex and imaginative captions – a task that is
more challenging than current benchmarks1 .

In this paper, we aim to elucidate the design space of TTA
model with respect to training data, model architecture and
implementation, model capacity, training objective, and
sampling methods during inference. In a controlled scenario
and with a vast sweep over factors, we offer insights on the
contribution of each factor. In addition to elucidating the design space of TTA models, our best configuration produces
a model – namely Elucidated Text-to-Audio (ETTA) – that
significantly improves over open-sourced baselines on both
AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) and MusicCaps (Agostinelli
et al., 2023) benchmarks with a single model.
Recent research has shown that scaling dataset size, combined with a careful data filtering strategy, can yield sizable
improvements on benchmarks in other domains (Radford
et al., 2019; Betker et al., 2023). Comparatively, the datasets
used in TTA are generally much smaller, and their captions of varying quality, thus posing a challenge to scaling
datasets (Liu et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2023c). In order to
circumvent these challenges, we introduce a large-scale and
high-quality dataset of synthetic captions, and show that it is
possible to leverage synthetic captions to obtain significant
improvements.
While Transformers (Vaswani, 2017) have become the de
facto architecture choice in many domains, sometimes their
efficiency and stability, specially in larger models, are
severely impaired by implementation details related to numerical precision and weight initialization. 2 We improve on
several implementation details of the Diffusion Transformer
(DiT) (Peebles & Xie, 2023) in the area of TTA generation, and provide insights on which details are important for
improving benchmark scores.

1. Introduction
The design space of text-to-audio (TTA) models is complex, including a myriad of correlated factors. While our
*
1
Equal contribution
NVIDIA. Correspondence to:
Sang-gil Lee <sanggill@nvidia.com>, Zhifeng Kong
<zkong@nvidia.com>, Rafael Valle <rafaelvalle@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Demo:
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/
adlr/ETTA/, Code: https://github.com/NVIDIA/
elucidated-text-to-audio

In tandem, current trends have shown the benefits of scaling
2

E.g., see https://unsloth.ai/blog/gemma-bugs
for the importance of implementation details.

1

