ADDQ: Adaptive Distributional Double Q-Learning

Leif Döring

1

Benedikt Wille 1 Maximilian Birr 1 Mihail Bı̂rsan 2 Martin Slowik

Abstract

1

soft actor-critic (SAC) of (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Motivated
by statistical approaches to the estimation of the expectation of maxima of random variables the concept of double
Q-learning (DQL) was introduced in (van Hasselt, 2010).
Instead of using one set of random variables two independent sets are used. One is used to detect the maximal index,
the other to evaluate the random variable corresponding to
the maximal index. For Q-learning this translates to keeping
track of two copies of the Q-matrix that are alternated in
order to detect the best action and evaluate the corresponding Q-value. DQL and its actor-critic variants reduce the
overestimation (see for instance Figure 2 in (Fujimoto et al.,
2018)) and sometimes even underestimate Q-values. This,
for example, can be seen in a simple chain MDP (Example
6.7 in (Sutton & Barto, 2018) and also (Lan et al., 2020) for
the underestimation effect in the same example). (Fujimoto
et al., 2018) argue that overestimation should be addressed
particularly in state-action regions with high uncertainty.
Indirectly, this is taken into account by ensemble methods
such as Maxmin QL (Lan et al., 2020). These methods use
ensembles of more than two Q-estimators. Different ensemble estimators take the minimum, full ensemble averages
(Anschel et al., 2017), or random ensemble averages (Chen
et al., 2021). A related line of research uses uncertaintybased RL, also with the goal of reducing overestimation, see
for instance (Wu et al., 2021), (Ghasemipour et al., 2022).

Bias problems in the estimation of Q-values are
a well-known obstacle that slows down convergence of Q-learning and actor-critic methods.
One of the reasons of the success of modern RL
algorithms is partially a direct or indirect overestimation reduction mechanism. We propose an easy
to implement method built on top of distributional
reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms to deal
with the overestimation in a locally adaptive way.
Our framework is simple to implement, existing
distributional algorithms can be improved with
a few lines of code. We provide theoretical evidence and use double Q-learning to show how to
include locally adaptive overestimation control in
existing algorithms. Experiments are provided for
tabular, Atari, and MuJoCo environments.

1. Introduction
A fundamental building block of many modern reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms is Watkins’ Q-learning (QL)
(Watkins & Dayan, 1992). In each round the agent observes
a new reward signal and updates the currently estimated
state-action function by combining the new reward signal
with the best currently estimated action in the next step.
Unfortunately, the update rule involves a maximum and
maxima suffer both from overestimation bias and function
approximation uncertainty. Thus, estimated Q values are
initially way too large. Although convergence of Q-learning
and its variants for tabular cases can be proved rigorously,
the convergence can often be seen only after millions of
iterations. In the context of Q-learning we refer to the seminal paper (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993). The overestimation
effect is harmful not only for simple QL and variants with
function approximation such as DQN (Mnih et al., 2015),
but also for critic estimation in actor-critic methods such as

There is no rule whether QL, DQL, or any ensemble variant
works well for a given environment. Algorithms sometimes
perform well and sometimes fail. This article proposes a
novel approach. We propose to take QL and (at least) one
other method and try to control if the QL update should
be replaced or mixed with another underestimating method.
The control must be locally adaptive, and the need to manage
the bias depends on the local uncertainty (aleatoric and
epistemic randomness, function approximation). For an
approach similar in spirit to ours, see (Dorka et al., 2021).
• We show theoretically how distributional RL helps the
agent identify the need for overestimation control.

1

Institute of Mathematics, University of Mannheim, Germany 2 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie
Universität Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Leif Döring
<doering@uni-mannheim.de>.

• As a test case, we combine QL and DQL using a local
weighting that we call ADDQ.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• Convergence of ADDQ is proved, experiments are performed on tabular, Atari, and MuJoCo environments.
1

