Windows Agent Arena: Evaluating Multi-Modal OS Agents at Scale

Rogerio Bonatti 1 Dan Zhao 1 Francesco Bonacci 1 Dillon Dupont 1 Sara Abdali 1 Yinheng Li 1 Yadong Lu 1
Justin Wagle 1 Kazuhito Koishida 1 Arthur Bucker 2 Lawrence Jang 2 Zack Hui 3

Abstract

broadest sense, an agent is “anything that can be viewed
as perceiving...through sensors and acting upon that environment through actuators” (Russell & Norvig, 2016). As
our daily tasks increasingly move into the digital realm, the
development of computer agents that can perceive, plan,
and act in these virtual environments holds great potential
to enhance human productivity and software accessibility.

Large language models (LLMs) show potential as
computer agents, enhancing productivity and software accessibility in multi-modal tasks. However,
measuring agent performance in sufficiently realistic and complex environments becomes increasingly challenging as: (i) most benchmarks are limited to specific modalities/domains (e.g., text-only,
web navigation, Q&A) and (ii) full benchmark
evaluations are slow (on order of magnitude of
multiple hours/days) given the multi-step sequential nature of tasks. To address these challenges,
we introduce W INDOWS AGENT A RENA: a general environment focusing exclusively on the Windows operating system (OS) where agents can operate freely within a real OS to use the same applications and tools available to human users when
performing tasks. We create 150+ diverse tasks
across representative domains that require agentic
abilities in planning, screen understanding, and
tool usage. Our benchmark is scalable and can
be seamlessly parallelized for a full benchmark
evaluation in as little as 20 minutes. Our work not
only speeds up the development and evaluation cycle of multi-modal agents, but also highlights and
analyzes existing shortfalls in the agentic abilities
of several multimodal LLMs as agents within the
Windows computing environment—with the best
achieving only a 19.5% success rate compared to
a human success rate of 74.5%.

Large multi-modal models like GPT-4V (Achiam et al.,
2023), GPT-4o, and Gemini (Team et al., 2023) now serve
as the main backbone of agents tested in benchmarks focusing on domains such as web navigation (Deng et al., 2023)
mobile screens (Rawles et al., 2024b), and software development (Jimenez et al., 2023). We often perform complex
cross-domain tasks while switching between programs, contexts, and graphical or command line interfaces. To address
the gap between task complexity and simulator realism, OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024) and AndroidWorld (Rawles et al.,
2024a) embody and envelop a real computing OS into the
testing domain in attempts to align the observation/action
spaces to better match the human computing experience.
However, as benchmarks evolve to better capture the complexity of realistic workflows, their growth in size (number
of tasks) and task complexity will require an ever-increasing
amount of time and computing resources to run and evaluate similarly large foundation model agents. This presents
issues in terms of both efficiency and accessibility, limiting
the pace of progress in research and experimentation.
Moveover, many works like OSWorld focus on Linux OS
and other OS—even as the most common computer OS
among everyday users and enterprises (with 73% market
share1 ). In spite of its prevalence, Windows’ closed-source
proprietary nature can limit access for researchers who
rely on open-source environments—which, in turn, limits
progress in developing/testing agents capable of performing
tasks in one of the most commonly used computing platforms in the world. In this work, we introduce W INDOWS
AGENT A RENA—a benchmark suite building upon upon the
OSWorld framework with the goal of advancing the research
and testing of multi-modal agents, developed specifically
for Windows OS ecosystem.

1. Introduction
The concept of an agent is not new to the field of artificial
intelligence, with its definition and taxonomy being subject to debate for decades (Minsky, 1988; Shoham, 1993;
Franklin & Graesser, 1996; Jennings et al., 1998). In the
1
Microsoft 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Columbia University.
Correspondence to: Dan Zhao <dz1158@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
https://gs.statcounter.com/os-marketshare/desktop/worldwide

1

