Fluctuations of the Largest Eigenvalues of Transformed Spiked Wigner Matrices

Aro Lee 1 Ji Oon Lee 1

Abstract

with first layer weights. Additionally, these models have
practical applications in machine learning algorithms, such
as an ensemble method for Q-learning in reinforcement
learning (Lee et al., 2023a).

We consider a spiked random matrix model obtained by applying a function entrywise to a
signal-plus-noise symmetric data matrix. We
prove that the largest eigenvalue of this model,
which we call a transformed spiked Wigner matrix, exhibits Baik–Ben Arous–Péché (BBP) type
phase transition. We show that the law of the
fluctuation converges to the Gaussian distribution
when the effective signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is
above the critical number, and to the GOE Tracy–
Widom distribution when the effective SNR is
below the critical number. We provide precise
formulas for the limiting distributions and also
concentration estimates for the largest eigenvalues, both in the supercritical and the subcritical
regimes.

One of the most natural models for signal plus-noise data is
a spiked Wigner matrix, which is of the form
√
M = W + λxxT ,
(1)
where the noise W is an N ×N symmetric (real) Wigner matrix, x ∈ RN is the spike, and λ ∈ R is the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). (See Definitions 2.1 and 2.2.) Spiked Wigner
matrices appear naturally in inference problems where the
data is obtained from pairwise measurements. Notable examples of such problems include the community detection
from the stochastic block model and synchronization over
Z/2.
It is well-known that the largest eigenvalue of M exhibits a
phase transition, known as the BBP transition named after
the seminal work by Baik, Ben Arous, and Péché (Baik et al.,
2005), depending on the parameter λ.√If λ > 1, then the
largest eigenvalue of M converges to λ + √1λ , separated
from the other eigenvalues of M . On the other hand, if
λ < 1, the largest eigenvalue converges to 2, which is the
spectral edge of the pure noise model.

1. Introduction
First introduced in the early 1900s, the principal component analysis (PCA) has been widely used as a fundamental
method for analyzing multivariate data across a wide range
of scientific fields including genetics, economics, and various other disciplines. One notable application of PCA is
detecting and recovering a signal from matrix-type data that
includes inevitable noise, commonly referred to as signalplus-noise data.

In this paper, we consider an entrywise transformation of
the spiked Wigner matrix in (1), defined by
√
fij = N − 12 f ( N Mij )
M

When the signal is a low-rank matrix, the signal-plus-noise
data can be modeled by spiked random matrix models,
which play a crucial role in analyzing for many machine
learning problems. For instance, in the study of the feature
learning in a two-layer neural network, a rank-1 perturbation
of the initial weight matrix can approximate the updated
weight after one gradient step (Ba et al., 2022). This idea is
further developed by (Cui et al., 2024; Dandi et al., 2025),
where the spiked Random Features model was considered

(2)

for a function f . (Note that a typical size of the entries
of a Wigner matrix is of order N −1/2 .) Such an entrywise
transformation was considered in (Lesieur et al., 2015; Perry
et al., 2018) to improve PCA by effectively increasing the
SNR. Heuristically, the entries of the transformed spiked
Wigner matrix in (2) can be approximated using the Taylor
expansion by
√
√
√
1
1
N − 2 f ( N Mij ) = N − 2 f ( N Wij + λN xi xj )
√
f ( N Wij ) √ ′ √
√
≈
+ λf ( N Wij )xi xj
(3)
N
√
√
f ( N Wij ) √
√
≈
+ λE[f ′ ( N Wij )]xi xj .
N

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence to: Aro Lee <sditar444@kaist.ac.kr>, Ji
Oon Lee <jioon.lee@kaist.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

