Score-of-Mixture Training: One-Step Generative Model Training Made Simple
via Score Estimation of Mixture Distributions
Tejas Jayashankar∗ 1 J. Jon Ryu∗ 1 Gregory Wornell 1

Abstract

2021; Salimans & Ho, 2022; Meng et al., 2023; Berthelot
et al., 2023) focused on training a student model with a lower
sampling budget by condensing multiple teacher denoising
steps into one. The most recent works on distillation improve performance further by leveraging a pretrained model
for distribution matching via minimization of the reverse KL
divergence (Luo et al., 2024a; Yin et al., 2024b;a; Salimans
et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). While attractive, distillation
approaches necessitate a pretrained diffusion model which
adds a significant overhead on the required compute.

We propose Score-of-Mixture Training (SMT),
a novel framework for training one-step generative models by minimizing a class of divergences
called the α-skew Jensen–Shannon divergence.
At its core, SMT estimates the score of mixture
distributions between real and fake samples across
multiple noise levels. Similar to consistency models, our approach supports both training from
scratch (SMT) and distillation using a pretrained
diffusion model, which we call Score-of-Mixture
Distillation (SMD). It is simple to implement, requires minimal hyperparameter tuning, and ensures stable training. Experiments on CIFAR-10
and ImageNet 64×64 show that SMT/SMD are
competitive with and can even outperform existing methods.

As yet another alternative, consistency models (Song et al.,
2023; Song & Dhariwal, 2024b) and their variants (Kim
et al., 2024) have been proposed for training few-step generative models from scratch by simulating the trajectories of
the induced probability flow ODE (Song et al., 2020) of a
diffusion process. While consistency models have demonstrated promising results in both distillation and training
from scratch, training is sensitive to the choice of noise
schedule and distance measure (Geng et al., 2025).

1. Introduction

In this paper, we tackle the problem of training high-quality
one-step generative models more directly, i.e., without simulating an iterative reverse diffusion process for sampling
or leveraging a pretrained diffusion model during training.
Starting from first principles of statistical divergence minimization, we show that a high-quality one-step generative
model can be trained from scratch in a stable manner, via
the multi-noise-level denoising score matching (DSM) technique (Vincent, 2011) used in diffusion models. We emphasize that we do not require a simulation of the reverse
diffusion process in our framework.

Fast and efficient sampling is a key characteristic sought
after in modern generative samplers. For many years, generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) set the benchmark for high-quality one-step generative sampling. However, due to the inherent training instabilities associated with discriminator training, attention has
recently shifted toward diffusion-based generative models
(Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al.,
2022b). These models trade-off sampling efficiency for
more stable training and significantly improved downstream
sample quality through iterative sampling.

The proposed framework achieves the best of several worlds:
(1) a new, simple statistical divergence minimization framework without probability paths of ODE (like GAN), (2)
stable training using denoising score matching (like diffusion models), (3) training from scratch without a pretrained
diffusion model (like consistency models), and (4) near
state-of-the-art one-step image generative performance (like
GAN and consistency models). We also demonstrate that the
proposed method can be extended to distill from a pretrained
diffusion model, and can achieve performance similar to
state-of-the-art methods for the same. See Table 1 for the
overview of comparison.

More recently, the diffusion distillation approach has been
studied as an appealing option to significantly reduce the
number of sampling steps. Early work (Luhman & Luhman,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Tejas Jayanshankar <tejasj@mit.edu>, J. Jon Ryu
<jongha.ryu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

