Navigating Semantic Drift in Task-Agnostic Class-Incremental Learning

Fangwen Wu 1 Lechao Cheng 2 Shengeng Tang 2 Xiaofeng Zhu 1 Chaowei Fang 3
Dingwen Zhang 4 Meng Wang 2

Class c C t 1 in Task t-1

Abstract
Class-incremental learning (CIL) seeks to enable
a model to sequentially learn new classes while
retaining knowledge of previously learned ones.
Balancing flexibility and stability remains a significant challenge, particularly when the task ID
is unknown. To address this, our study reveals
that the gap in feature distribution between novel
and existing tasks is primarily driven by differences in mean and covariance moments. Building
on this insight, we propose a novel semantic drift
calibration method that incorporates mean shift
compensation and covariance calibration. Specifically, we calculate each class’s mean by averaging
its sample embeddings and estimate task shifts using weighted embedding changes based on their
proximity to the previous mean, effectively capturing mean shifts for all learned classes with
each new task. We also apply Mahalanobis distance constraint for covariance calibration, aligning class-specific embedding covariances between
old and current networks to mitigate the covariance shift. Additionally, we integrate a featurelevel self-distillation approach to enhance generalization. Comprehensive experiments on commonly used datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach. The source code is available at
https://github.com/fwu11/MACIL.git.

Mean Shift Compensation

Drift
Class c C t 1 in Task t
(a) Semantic Drift

Covariance Calibration
(b) Calibration

Figure 1. As new tasks are learned, the categories from previously
tasks in the latest updated model continuously experience shifts in
their means and variances, referred to as (a) Semantic Drift. In
this paper, we calibrate such semantic drift by applying explicit
mean shift compensation and implicit variance constraints (b).

et al., 2017). The primary goal of continual learning (Cheng
et al., 2024a;b; Zhang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024a;b) is
to facilitate knowledge accumulation and transfer, allowing
models to adapt quickly to new, unseen tasks while maintaining robust performance on previously learned tasks (Parisi
et al., 2019). This capability has broad applications in fields
such as computer vision, robotics, and natural language
processing.
In recent years, the issue of model plasticity has become less
prominent in deep learning-based approaches, primarily due
to two factors: (1) the increasing capacity of deep models
allows them to effectively over-fit new data, and (2) largescale pre-training on extensive datasets equips models with
powerful feature extraction capabilities (He et al., 2019).
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning based on pretrained models
has further enhanced model plasticity, as highlighted in
numerous recent studies (Houlsby et al., 2019; Lester et al.,
2021; Hu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Continual Learning, also referred to as lifelong learning,
aims to enable machine learning models to sequentially
learn multiple tasks over their life-cycle without requiring
retraining or access to data from previous tasks (Rebuffi

Despite these advancements, existing methods—such as
regularization (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), memory replay
(Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017), and knowledge distillation
(Li & Hoiem, 2017)—while improving stability to some
extent, introduce additional costs. For example, (1) memory
replay methods require storing and retraining on old task
data, increasing storage and computational demands. (2)
knowledge distillation involves additional computational
overhead during the distillation process, complicating and
slowing down training. These additional costs hinder the

1
Zhejiang Lab 2 Hefei University of Technology 3 Xidian University 4 Northwestern Polytechnical University. Correspondence
to: Lechao Cheng <chenglc@hfut.edu.cn>, Dingwen Zhang
<zhangdingwen2006yyy@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

