Subgoal-Guided Policy Heuristic Search with Learned Subgoals

Jake Tuero 1 2 Michael Buro 1 Levi H. S. Lelis 1 2

Abstract

2018; Orseau & Lelis, 2021), which use a learned policy
to guide the search, i.e., a probability distribution over the
set of actions available to the agent. Orseau et al. (2018)
showed that a benefit of using policy tree search methods
over traditional heuristic search methods is that they provide
an upper bound on the number of node expansions required
to find a solution that depends on the quality of the policy,
and Orseau & Lelis (2021) showed that a policy can be
learned while minimizing such an upper bound.

Policy tree search is a family of tree search algorithms that use a policy to guide the search. These
algorithms provide guarantees on the number of
expansions required to solve a given problem that
are based on the quality of the policy. While these
algorithms have shown promising results, the process in which they are trained requires complete
solution trajectories to train the policy. Search
trajectories are obtained during a trial-and-error
search process. When the training problem instances are hard, learning can be prohibitively
costly, especially when starting from a randomly
initialized policy. As a result, search samples are
wasted in failed attempts to solve these hard instances. This paper introduces a novel method
for learning subgoal-based policies for policy tree
search algorithms. The subgoals and policies conditioned on subgoals are learned from the trees
that the search expands while attempting to solve
problems, including the search trees of failed attempts. We empirically show that our policy formulation and training method improve the sample
efficiency of learning a policy and heuristic function in this online setting.

Policy-Guided Heuristic Search (PHS*) (Orseau & Lelis,
2021) is a policy-guided search algorithm that combines a
learned policy and a heuristic function. While there have
been previous approaches to combining a policy and heuristic/value function, such as the PUCT-based search algorithms (Rosin, 2011; Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006) like AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017) and MuZero (Schrittwieser et al.,
2020) in adversarial search domains like Go and Chess,
Orseau & Lelis (2021) show that PHS* is better suited for
the single-agent search problems we consider in this work.
Policy tree search methods, including PHS*, are usually
trained online using the Bootstrap search-and-learn process
(Arfaee et al., 2011). The Bootstrap process initially uses
randomly initialized neural models encoding the heuristic
and the policy to iteratively solve a subset of the problems.
If the search cannot solve problems within a search budget,
the resulting trees are discarded; if at least one problem is
solved, the models are optimized on the solution trajectories
found. A problem with this approach is that much of the
search effort is wasted on failed attempts, especially in the
early iterations of learning, with untrained neural models.

1. Introduction and Overview
This work focuses on solving single-agent deterministic
search problems, using minimal domain knowledge. In
particular, we are interested in “needle-in-haystack” problems, where finding any solution can be challenging. Many
important problems can be represented as a deterministic
single-agent search problem, such as robotic navigation
(Tan et al., 2021) and network routing (Liu & Ramakrishnan, 2001). A recent line of research to address this class
of problems is policy tree search algorithms (Orseau et al.,

A key innovation of our approach is that we use these failed
search attempts to learn subgoals, which can shorten the
planning horizon and ease the learning process. These failed
attempts allow us to learn policies that navigate between
subgoals. Using subgoals to break down the search horizon
into smaller pieces has shown success in complex domains,
as demonstrated in kSubS (Czechowski et al., 2021), AdaSubS (Zawalski et al., 2022), and HIPS (Kujanpää et al.,
2023). An issue with some of these approaches is that they
lack completeness, i.e., they might fail to return a solution
even if one exists. HIPS-ε (Kujanpää et al., 2024) is a variant of HIPS that is complete. However, HIPS-ε, as well as
kSubS, AdaSubS, and HIPS, require precomputed datasets

1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), Edmonton, Canada. Correspondence to: Jake Tuero
<tuero@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

