Disentangling and Integrating Relational and Sensory
Information in Transformer Architectures
Awni Altabaa 1 John Lafferty 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
A central goal of machine learning research is to develop
a universal architecture capable of learning and reasoning
across a wide range of tasks and data modalities. Theoretical frameworks for understanding human and animal
intelligence seek to explain intelligent behavior through a
small set of fundamental principles [1]. However, in machine intelligence, there is a tension between the objective
of developing a general architecture and the need to incorporate inductive biases that are beneficial for specific tasks [2,
3]. When faced with finite training data and numerous
solutions to empirical risk minimization, inductive biases
steer the learning algorithm towards solutions with desirable
properties, enhancing data efficiency and generalization. A
core scientific challenge of machine learning is to identify a
complete and broadly applicable set of inductive biases that
promote robust, flexible, and data-efficient learning across a
diverse set of problems.

Relational reasoning is a central component of
generally intelligent systems, enabling robust and
data-efficient inductive generalization. Recent
empirical evidence shows that many existing neural architectures, including Transformers, struggle
with tasks requiring relational reasoning. In this
work, we distinguish between two types of information: sensory information about the properties
of individual objects, and relational information
about the relationships between objects. While
neural attention provides a powerful mechanism
for controlling the flow of sensory information between objects, the Transformer lacks an explicit
computational mechanism for routing and processing relational information. To address this
limitation, we propose an architectural extension
of the Transformer framework that we call the
Dual Attention Transformer (DAT), featuring two
distinct attention mechanisms: sensory attention
for directing the flow of sensory information, and
a novel relational attention mechanism for directing the flow of relational information. We empirically evaluate DAT on a diverse set of tasks
ranging from synthetic relational benchmarks to
complex real-world tasks such as language modeling and visual processing. Our results demonstrate that integrating explicit relational computational mechanisms into the Transformer architecture leads to significant performance gains in
terms of data efficiency and parameter efficiency.

Relational reasoning is a central component of generally
intelligent systems and is believed to underlie human abilities for abstraction and systematic generalization [4–7]. The
power of relational reasoning lies in its capacity to generate
inferences and generalizations in systematic and novel ways,
even across instances which are superficially very different
but have similarities on an abstract structural level. This
grants humans a capacity for out-of-distribution generalization, data efficiency, and continual learning, which modern
machine learning is yet to match [8–10]. Replicating this
ability in machine intelligence can ultimately lead to universal inductive generalization from a finite set of observations
to an infinite set of novel instances [11].
The ability of artificial intelligence systems to perform relational reasoning has long been an area of active study across
various approaches to AI. In symbolic modeling frameworks, the relationships between symbols are explicitly defined in the language of logic and mathematics [12–14].
However, such approaches often require hand-crafted representations and suffer from the symbol grounding problem,
limiting their ability to generalize to variations in the task or
input outside a certain domain. By contrast, deep learning
approaches build data-dependent representations that are, in
principle, capable of generalizing across diverse conditions.

1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale
University 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Wu Tsai Institute, Yale University.
Correspondence to:
Awni Altabaa <awni.altabaa@yale.edu>, John Lafferty
<john.lafferty@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

