Safely Learning Optimal Auctions:
A Testable Learning Framework for Mechanism Design

Vikram Kher 1 Manolis Zampetakis 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Data science is a field with celebrated applications across
many scientific disciplines. Many important statements and
algorithms in data science require distributional assumptions
on the data that is being analyzed. In physical sciences, a
common distributional assumption is the Gaussianity of the
underlying data, whereas in social sciences and economics
more heavy-tailed distributions arise (Clementi & Gallegati, 2005). An instantiation of this phenomenon appears in
learning theory as well, where strong computational impossibility results for agnostic learning prevent general learning
guarantees and to bypass these lower bounds it is common
to assume that the marginals are uniform or Gaussian (Kalai
et al., 2008; Diakonikolas et al., 2021). A natural question
to ask in all these settings is the following: How can we
infer which statements or algorithms can be applied in a
given dataset? A straightforward way to tackle this question
would be to design a testing algorithm that can help us distinguish which of the distributional assumptions are satisfied
by the given dataset. Unfortunately, directly verifying these
assumptions is often computationally intractable (Goldreich,
2017). This brings us back to a dilemma for a given dataset:
should we use methods that have stronger guarantees but
require stronger distributional assumptions? Or, should we
use methods that have weaker guarantees but are applicable
in settings with fewer assumptions?

When can the distributional assumptions of theorems and learning algorithms be trusted? Inspired
by this question, Rubinfeld & Vasilyan (2023)
initiated the study of testable learning. In this
schema we always learn one of the following two
things: either we have achieved the desired accuracy regardless of whether the distributional
assumptions are satisfied, or the input distribution
does not satisfy the original distributional assumptions. Motivated by the challenge of relying on
strong distributional assumptions in many theorems in mechanism design, we develop a testable
learning framework for mechanism design. Traditional models in mechanism design assume that
value distributions satisfy some notion of regularity. Unfortunately, testing regularity is not
possible in the original testable learning framework as we show. To bypass this impossibility,
we propose a regularized version of the testable
learning framework. Under this framework, we
always learn one of the following two things: either we achieve high revenue compared to the
best possible revenue of any regular distribution
close to the input distribution, or the input distribution does not satisfy regularity. We then use
this framework to provide: 1) a tester-learner pair
for revenue-optimal mechanisms, 2) a tester for
whether the fundamental Bulow-Klemperer Theorem (Bulow & Klemperer, 1996) is applicable
to a given dataset, and 3) a tester to confirm the
existence of an anonymous reserve price that results in the anonymous price auction securing a
constant fraction of the optimal revenue.

Motivated by this dilemma, the recent breakthrough work
of Rubinfeld & Vasilyan (2023) introduced the framework
of testable learning wherein a learning algorithm is paired
with a tester which satisfies the following properties: (1) if
the tester accepts, then we can be confident that the learning
algorithm is applicable to our dataset, whereas (2) if the
tester rejects, then we know that the distributional assumptions are not satisfied. This allows us to bypass the lower
bounds of testing distributional assumptions because in the
case that the tester accepts we cannot make any conclusions
about the distributional assumptions; we only know that the
learning algorithm succeeds. Rubinfeld & Vasilyan (2023)
develops a computationally efficient tester-learner pair for
agnostically learning half-spaces over Gaussians and the
uniform hypercube. Many works have since followed that
successfully apply this testable learning framework to a va-

1

Department of Computer Science, Yale University,
Connecticut, USA. Correspondence to:
Vikram Kher
<vikram.kher@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

