Scalable Generation of Spatial Transcriptomics from Histology Images via
Whole-Slide Flow Matching

Tinglin Huang 1 Tianyu Liu 1 Mehrtash Babadi 2 Wengong Jin 2 3 Rex Ying 1

Abstract

is the prediction of biomarkers in digital pathology, often
visualized in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)–stained wholeslide images (WSIs), by analyzing the gene expression levels in relation to the tissue morphology (Levy-Jurgenson
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). However, the conventional
ST methods (Moffitt et al., 2018; Eng et al., 2019; Ståhl
et al., 2016) suffer from low throughput and need of specialized equipment, limiting their application compared to
standard histology imaging.

Spatial transcriptomics (ST) has emerged as a
powerful technology for bridging histology imaging with gene expression profiling. However, its
application has been limited by low throughput
and the need for specialized experimental facilities. Prior works sought to predict ST from wholeslide histology images to accelerate this process,
but they suffer from two major limitations. First,
they do not explicitly model cell-cell interaction
as they factorize the joint distribution of wholeslide ST data and predict the gene expression of
each spot independently. Second, their encoders
struggle with memory constraints due to the large
number of spots (often exceeding 10,000) in typical ST datasets. Herein, we propose STFlow, a
flow matching generative model that considers
cell-cell interaction by modeling the joint distribution of gene expression of an entire slide. It also
employs an efficient slide-level encoder with local spatial attention, enabling whole-slide processing without excessive memory overhead. On the
recently curated HEST-1k and STImage-1K4M
benchmarks, STFlow substantially outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines and achieves over 18%
relative improvements over the pathology foundation models.

To address this, recent works resort to deep learning to predict spatially-resolved gene expression from H&E images.
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), a histology image is segmented
into small spots, with the objective of predicting the gene
expression with the spot image and the coordinate. This line
of research has achieved promising results using an image
foundation model to encode local spot-level features (Chen
et al., 2024b; He et al., 2020; Ciga et al., 2022; He et al.,
2016), but they neglect the utilization of spatial dependencies between spots. To bridge this gap, some studies introduce an additional slide-level encoder to incorporate global
spatial context (Xu et al., 2024; Chung et al., 2024; Pang
et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2021) with an vision transformer.
Despite their initial success, these methods are limited by
(1) high computational complexity: the exhaustive attention
mechanism among all spots leads to significant computational overhead, making it impractical for standard gigapixel
slides, which contain tens of thousands of spots (Campanella
et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021); (2) weak utilization of spatial
dependencies: these methods typically encode coordinates
as positional embeddings, making them sensitive to numerical noise and variations in coordinate scales caused by batch
effects. (3) overlooking cell-cell interaction, i.e., certain
genes regulating the expression of genes in other cells (Figure 1(b)) (Li et al., 2022; Biancalani et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Compared to the early days of bulk RNA sequencing, recent
advancements in spatial transcriptomics (ST) technology offer a novel approach to molecular profiling within the spatial
context of tissues, providing insights into cellular interactions and the microenvironment (Ståhl et al., 2016; Xiao &
Yu, 2021). One of the promising clinical applications of ST

In light of this, we propose STFlow1 , a flow matching-based
model that reformulates the original regression task as a
generative modeling problem. Instead of performing onestep regression, we model the joint distribution over the
whole-slide gene expression through an iterative refinement

1

Yale University. 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard.
Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Tinglin Huang
<tinglin.huang@yale.edu>.
3

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Implementation can be found at https://github.com/
Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/STFlow

1

