Generative Intervention Models for Causal Perturbation Modeling

Nora Schneider 1 2 Lars Lorch 2 Niki Kilbertus 1 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 4 2 5 Andreas Krause 2

Abstract

generalization to unseen instances requires an inductive
bias (Ibragimov & Has’minskii, 1981). Perturbation effects
are commonly predicted with either unstructured black-box
models that predict the distribution shifts resulting from
perturbations end-to-end or structured mechanistic models
that characterize shifts as changes to an underlying causal
data-generating process.

We consider the problem of predicting perturbation effects via causal models. In many applications, it is a priori unknown which mechanisms
of a system are modified by an external perturbation, even though the features of the perturbation are available. For example, in genomics,
some properties of a drug may be known, but not
their causal effects on the regulatory pathways of
cells. We propose a generative intervention model
(GIM) that learns to map these perturbation features to distributions over atomic interventions
in a jointly-estimated causal model. Contrary to
prior approaches, this enables us to predict the
distribution shifts of unseen perturbation features
while gaining insights about their mechanistic effects in the underlying data-generating process.
On synthetic data and scRNA-seq drug perturbation data, GIMs achieve robust out-of-distribution
predictions on par with unstructured approaches,
while effectively inferring the underlying perturbation mechanisms, often better than other causal
inference methods.

Unstructured approaches commonly treat the task of predicting perturbation effects as a statistical learning problem,
given the perturbed samples and the features of the perturbation (e.g., Hetzel et al., 2022; Lotfollahi et al., 2023; Bunne
et al., 2023). For instance, when predicting drug effects, they
use features like dosage levels or molecular footprints as
covariates to directly predict the perturbation response. This
is practical because it allows making predictions for new
perturbation features. However, these approaches do not explicitly model the underlying data-generating mechanisms
and how they change under a perturbation (Schölkopf, 2022).
As a consequence, unstructured models are challenging to
interpret, difficult to use in experiment design, and impractical to use for perturbations with different feature spaces.
By contrast, mechanistic models characterize distribution
shifts as interventions on a structured or causal model of the
system (e.g., Pearl, 2009; Parascandolo et al., 2018; Gonzalez et al., 2024; Roohani et al., 2024). This perspective
provides explanations for the predicted shifts as it explicitly infers the data-generating mechanisms and how they
change under an intervention. Crucially, a causal model
generalizes to new perturbations on the system—assuming
we know the atomic interventions on the system components induced by a given perturbation. This assumption
underlies most mechanistic approaches today and constrains
them to settings where the perturbation targets are known
(e.g., Maathuis et al., 2010) or, if unknown, inferred without considering the perturbation features (e.g., Mooij et al.,
2020). By not leveraging the features of a perturbation as
covariates, causal models currently cannot make predictions
for novel, non-atomic perturbations.

1. Introduction
Decision-making and experiment design in the sciences
require predicting how systems respond to perturbations.
Since testing all perturbations in a design space is often
intractable, expensive, or unethical, scientists need datadriven approaches for predicting the effects of unseen perturbations. For example, predicting how cells react to novel
molecules can facilitate drug design in the vast space of
candidate molecules (Sadybekov & Katritch, 2023; TejadaLapuerta et al., 2025). As in all learning tasks, however,
1
Technical University of Munich and Helmholtz Munich, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany 4 MPI
for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 5 ELLIS Institute
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Nora Schneider
<nora.schneider@helmholtz-munich.de>.

In this work, we propose a causal modeling approach for
predicting the effects of general perturbations, whose features may not directly reveal how the perturbation modifies
the causal generative process. To achieve this, we train a
generative intervention model (GIM) that maps the pertur-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

