Revisiting Neural Networks for Few-Shot Learning: A Zero-Cost NAS
Perspective

Haidong Kang 1

Abstract

The best directions:
The less costs (search/train/memory)
the better, and the higher accuracy
and generalization the better.

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has recently
outperformed hand-designed networks in various artificial intelligence areas. However, previous works only target a pre-defined task. For
a new task in few-shot learning (FSL) scenarios,
the architecture is either searched from scratch,
which is neither efficient nor flexible, or borrowed architecture from the ones obtained on
other tasks, which may lead to sub-optimal. Can
we select the best neural architectures without
involving any training and eliminate a significant portion of the search cost for new tasks in
FSL? In this work, we provide an affirmative answer by proposing a novel information bottleneck
(IB) theory-driven Few-shot Neural Architecture
Search (dubbed, IBFS) framework to address this
issue. We first derive that the global convergence
of Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) can
be guaranteed by only considering the first-order
loss landscape. Moreover, motivated by the observation that IB provides a unified view toward
understanding machine learning models, we propose a novel Zero-Cost method tailored for FSL
to rank and select architectures based on their expressivity obtained by IB mechanisms. Extensive
experiments show that IBFS achieves state-of-theart performance in FSL without training, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of our IBFS.

IBFS
AutoMeta
MAML
Vanilla NAS

Costs (search/train Generalization
/memory)

Accuracy

Figure 1. IBFS vs. Peer competitors in terms of costs, accuracy,
and generalization.

raises an important concern about whether the frameworks
of the DNNs are ideal for those tasks. Naturally, NAS (Liu
et al., 2019b; Zoph et al., 2018) is a straightforward solution
for exploring frameworks for those tasks (i.e., FSL) due
to its automated search manner, which can automatically
search high-performance architectures for the aforementioned tasks.
Problem statement. Though promising, conventional NAS
has two fundamental limitations. First, conventional NAS
methods only focus on a single task. As shown in Fig. 2a,
vanilla NAS only targets a predefined target, for a new task,
the architecture is either searched from scratch, which is
time-consuming, or borrowed from the ones obtained on
other tasks, which may lead to sub-optimal. Second, as
depicted in Fig. 2b, despite adaption NAS (Kim et al., 2018;
Lian et al., 2020; Elsken et al., 2020) based on meta-learning
can enhance the generalization of searched architecture on
unseen tasks, however, it is extremely time-consuming, requiring over 100 GPU days (Kim et al., 2018) for searching.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable
performance on various challenging real-world tasks, i.e.,
image recognition (He et al., 2016), and few-shot learning (Finn et al., 2017; Sun & Gao, 2024). However, this
1

College of Software,
Northeastern University,
Shenyang, China. Correspondence to: Haidong Kang <hdkang@stumail.neu.edu.cn>.

Our goal. In this paper, we aim to address the above two
fundamental limitations by revisiting neural networks tailored for FSL from a zero-shot NAS perspective. As shown
in Fig. 1, our IBFS achieves better performance in terms of

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

