Scalable Private Partition Selection via Adaptive Weighting

Justin Y. Chen 1 Vincent Cohen-Addad 2 Alessandro Epasto 2 Morteza Zadimoghaddam 3

Abstract

Consider the example of a system releasing information
on the queries asked to a search engine over a period of
time (Korolova et al., 2009; Bavadekar et al., 2021). Such
a system can provide valuable insights to researchers and
the public (for instance on health concerns Bavadekar et al.
(2021)) but care is needed in ensuring that the queries output
do not leak private and sensitive user information.

In the differentially private partition selection
problem (a.k.a. private set union, private key
discovery), users hold subsets of items from an
unbounded universe. The goal is to output as
many items as possible from the union of the
users’ sets while maintaining user-level differential privacy. Solutions to this problem are a core
building block for many privacy-preserving ML
applications including vocabulary extraction in
a private corpus, computing statistics over categorical data and learning embeddings over userprovided items. We propose an algorithm for this
problem, MaxAdaptiveDegree (MAD), which
adaptively reroutes weight from items with weight
far above the threshold needed for privacy to items
with smaller weight, thereby increasing the probability that less frequent items are output. Our algorithm can be efficiently implemented in massively
parallel computation systems allowing scalability
to very large datasets. We prove that our algorithm stochastically dominates the standard parallel algorithm for this problem. We also develop
a two-round version of our algorithm, MAD2R,
where results of the computation in the first round
are used to bias the weighting in the second round
to maximize the number of items output. In experiments, our algorithms provide the best results
among parallel algorithms and scale to datasets
with hundreds of billions of items, up to three
orders of magnitude larger than those analyzed by
prior sequential algorithms.

In this paper, we focus on the problem of private partition
selection (Desfontaines et al., 2022; Gopi et al., 2020) which
models the challenge of extracting as much data as possible
from such a dataset while respecting user privacy. More
formally, the setting of the problem (which is also known as
private set union or private key discovery) is that each user
has a private subset of items (e.g., the queries issued by the
user) from an unknown and unbounded universe of items
(e.g., all strings). The goal is to output as many of the items
in the users’ sets as possible (i.e., the queries issues by the
users), while providing a strong notion of privacy—Userlevel Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork & Roth, 2014).
Private partition selection models many challenges beyond
the example above, including the problem of extracting the
vocabulary (words, tokens or n-gram) present in a private
corpus (Zhang et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2021). This task
is a fundamental prerequisite for many privacy-preserving
natural language processing algorithms (Wilson et al., 2019;
Gopi et al., 2020), including for training language models for sentence completion and response generation for
emails (Kim et al., 2021). Similarly, learning embedding
models over categorical data often requires to identify the
categories present in a private dataset (Ghazi et al., 2023;
2024). Partition selection underpins many other applications including analyzing private streams (Cardoso &
Rogers, 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), learning sparse histograms (Boneh et al., 2021), answering SQL queries (Desfontaines et al., 2022) and sparsifying the gradients in the
DP SGD method (Ghazi et al., 2023). Unsurprisingly given
these applications, private partition selection algorithms
(Korolova et al., 2009) are a core building block of many
standard differentially private libraries e.g., PyDP (PyDP,
2024), Google’s DP Libraries (Google, 2024; Amin et al.,
2022), and OpenMined DP Library (OpenMined, 2024).

1. Introduction
The availability of large amounts of user data has been one
of the driving factors for the widespread adoption and rapid
development of modern machine learning and data analytics.
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
Google Research, New York, NY, USA 3 Google Research, Zurich,
Switzerland. Correspondence to: Justin Chen <justc@mit.edu>.
2

Real-world datasets for these applications can be massive, potentially containing hundreds of billions of data

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

