Measuring Representational Shifts in Continual Learning:
A Linear Transformation Perspective

Joonkyu Kim 1 Yejin Kim 2 Jy-yong Sohn 2

Abstract

the human learning process; an individual continually acquires new skills and knowledge throughout their lifetime.
However, unlike humans, who can retain and recall a good
amount of memories from the past, the trained models experience a significant decline in performance on the previous
tasks as they adapt to the new ones. This phenomenon,
known as catastrophic forgetting, is described as the model
losing knowledge of the previous tasks and is typically evaluated by measuring the drop in accuracy on the previous
tasks (McClelland et al., 1995; McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).

In continual learning scenarios, catastrophic forgetting of previously learned tasks is a critical
issue, making it essential to effectively measure
such forgetting. Recently, there has been growing
interest in focusing on representation forgetting,
the forgetting measured at the hidden layer. In
this paper, we provide the first theoretical analysis
of representation forgetting and use this analysis to better understand the behavior of continual learning. First, we introduce a new metric
called representation discrepancy, which measures the difference between representation spaces
constructed by two snapshots of a model trained
through continual learning. We demonstrate that
our proposed metric serves as an effective surrogate for the representation forgetting while remaining analytically tractable. Second, through
mathematical analysis of our metric, we derive
several key findings about the dynamics of representation forgetting: the forgetting occurs more
rapidly to a higher degree as the layer index increases, while increasing the width of the network
slows down the forgetting process. Third, we support our theoretical findings through experiments
on real image datasets, including Split-CIFAR100
and ImageNet1K.

Internally, the representations of the model, that is, the hidden activations, undergo a drastic shift during continual
learning as well (Caccia et al., 2021). This calls for a separate term that indicates the loss of knowledge for previous
tasks in terms of the hidden representations. In this paper,
we will use the term representation forgetting of task t to
refer to the degradation in a model’s ability to produce highquality features for task t. Note that we are not the first to
use the term representation forgetting, as it has been used in
the literature to indicate representational shifts during the
continual learning process in general (Davari et al., 2022;
Luo et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022; Murata et al., 2020).
Understanding the behavior of the representation forgetting,
which is measured at the level of the intermediate layers, is
equally important to that of the observed forgetting (forgetting measured through the model’s final output), because
(1) there are situations such as in unsupervised continual
learning (Rao et al., 2019; Fini et al., 2022) where our interest is in the inner representations of the model rather than
the model’s output, and (2) understanding the representation forgetting itself can lead to better understanding of the
observed forgetting.

1. Introduction
Continual learning, referred to as lifelong learning, involves
training models on a sequence of tasks with the aim of
achieving good performance for all tasks (Chen & Liu,
2018; Hadsell et al., 2020; Kudithipudi et al., 2022). This
framework is particularly compelling as it closely mimics

Although there have been several empirical results on the
representation forgetting under continual learning (Caccia
et al., 2021; Davari et al., 2022; Hess et al., 2023; Luo et al.,
2023), no clear justification was provided in terms of theory. Our work addresses this gap by offering one of the
first theoretical analyses of the representation forgetting. To
achieve this, we introduce a novel metric, representation
discrepancy, which quantifies the minimum alignment error
of two representation spaces under a linear transformation.
We show that this metric not only effectively measures rep-

1
Department of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Yonsei
University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Jy-yong Sohn <jysohn1108@yonsei.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

