Griffin: Towards a Graph-Centric Relational Database Foundation Model

Yanbo Wang 1 † Xiyuan Wang 1 Quan Gan 2 Minjie Wang 2 Qibin Yang 1 † David Wipf 2 Muhan Zhang 1

Abstract

An RDB foundation model is defined as a predictive model
that works across diverse RDBs with varying sizes, schemas,
and domains. Integrating RDBs into the foundation model
paradigm presents challenges, including structural complexity, lack of processing pipelines, and unique computational
patterns that differ from single-table data. While traditional
machine learning and deep learning methods could handle single-table data pretty well (Chen & Guestrin, 2016;
Ke et al., 2017; Prokhorenkova et al., 2018; Huang et al.,
2020; Arik & Pfister, 2021; Gorishniy et al., 2021), they fail
to address RDB-specific complexities. On the other hand,
flattening relational data into a single table often results
in significant information loss (Cvitkovic, 2020; Chepurko
et al., 2020). Recently, graph-based methods using Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kanter & Veeramachaneni, 2015;
Cvitkovic, 2020; Bai et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a; Wang
et al., 2024; Robinson et al., 2024) attempt to capture these
relationships but are limited to task-specific models rather
than proposing a universal RDB foundation model.

We introduce Griffin, the first foundation model
attemptation designed specifically for Relational
Databases (RDBs). Unlike previous smaller models focused on single RDB tasks, Griffin unifies
the data encoder and task decoder to handle diverse tasks. Additionally, we enhance the architecture by incorporating a cross-attention module and a novel aggregator. Griffin utilizes pretraining on both single-table and RDB datasets,
employing advanced encoders for categorical, numerical, and metadata features, along with innovative components such as cross-attention modules and enhanced message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) to capture the complexities of
relational data. Evaluated on large-scale, heterogeneous, and temporal graphs extracted from
RDBs across various domains (spanning over 150
million nodes), Griffin demonstrates superior or
comparable performance to individually trained
models, excels in low-data scenarios, and shows
strong transferability with similarity and diversity
in pretraining across new datasets and tasks, highlighting its potential as a universally applicable
foundation model for RDBs. Code available at
github.com/yanxwb/Griffin.

In this work, we introduce Griffin, a Graph-centric
RelatIonal database FoundatIoN model attemptation, which
integrates pretraining on both single-table and RDB datasets.
Griffin is designed for broad generalization across diverse
tasks and demonstrates superior performance over taskspecific GNN approaches through several key innovations.
The first challenge is how to handle different task types
(classification and regression) and different RDBs with disparate input feature spaces (categorical, numerical, textual,
etc. of diverse semantic meanings). Griffin unifies input
data encoders and task decoders. Unlike earlier methods
that apply a single embedding layer to all categorical features and directly input raw numerical values, Griffin uses
a pretrained text encoder for categorical inputs and a pretrained float encoder for numerical ones. It also incorporates
RDB metadata, including table names, column names, and
edge types, to distinguish tasks and capture the structure
that connects them. In contrast to prior work that uses separate prediction heads for each task, Griffin applies a shared
float decoder (pretrained jointly with the float encoder) for
all regression tasks, and a unified classification head that
integrates the text embeddings of target categories. This
allows Griffin to manage classification tasks with varying
numbers of categories and regression tasks with different
ranges using a consistent architecture.

1. Introduction
Foundation models have revolutionized domains such as
natural language (Brown, 2020; Touvron et al., 2023),
vision (Wang et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2021), tabular
data (Zhang et al., 2023b; Yang et al., 2024), and graphs (Liu
et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024), offering scalable and generalized frameworks for diverse tasks. However, foundation
models for RDBs—where tables are interconnected through
complex relationships—remain underexplored, despite the
practical importance and widespread use of RDBs.
†

Work done during internship at Amazon. 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. 2 Amazon Web Services.
Correspondence to: Muhan Zhang <muhan@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

