On Measuring Long-Range Interactions in Graph Neural Networks

Jacob Bamberger * 1 Benjamin Gutteridge * 1 Scott le Roux * 1 Michael Bronstein 1 2 Xiaowen Dong 1

Abstract

However, MPNNs struggle to capture long-range dependencies, where interactions between distant nodes are critical. These difficulties stem from various well-documented
pathologies, such as the difficulty building deep GNNs often
attributed to over-smoothing and vanishing gradients (Nt &
Maehara, 2019; Oono & Suzuki, 2019; Li et al., 2019), or
the inability to propagate information through graph bottlenecks attributed to over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2020).
These limitations hinder the ability of MPNNs to model
tasks that depend on global or long-range interactions.

Long-range graph tasks — those dependent on
interactions between ‘distant’ nodes — are an
open problem in graph neural network research.
Real-world benchmark tasks, especially the Long
Range Graph Benchmark, have become popular
for validating the long-range capability of proposed architectures. However, this is an empirical
approach that lacks both robustness and theoretical underpinning; a more principled characterization of the long-range problem is required. To
bridge this gap, we formalize long-range interactions in graph tasks, introduce a range measure
for operators on graphs, and validate it with synthetic experiments. We then leverage our measure
to examine commonly used tasks and architectures, and discuss to what extent they are, in fact,
long-range. We believe our work advances efforts
to define and address the long-range problem on
graphs, and that our range measure will aid evaluation of new datasets and architectures.

Various strategies have been proposed to address these issues, but a common theme is the effective reduction of distance on a graph — either via explicit static rewiring (Topping et al., 2021; Gasteiger et al., 2019; Barbero et al., 2023),
or rewiring of the computational graph via architectural components such as virtual/latent nodes (Gilmer et al., 2017;
Southern et al., 2024), fully connected or multi-hop message
passing layers (Alon & Yahav, 2020; Abu-El-Haija et al.,
2019; Gutteridge et al., 2023), and global attention (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2021; Rampášek et al., 2022). For
many of these methods, the argument that they improve performance on long-range tasks is based solely on empirical
performance on synthetic and real-world benchmarks.
However, most synthetic long-range tasks (Bodnar et al.,
2021; Rampášek & Wolf, 2021) are simplistic and depend
on long-range interactions only, such that a simple rewiring
converts them into short-range tasks. Few synthetic tasks
acknowledge that graph-structured data and graph tasks are,
by design, locally biased: solutions should capture longrange interactions, but should usually prioritize local ones.

1. Introduction
Graphs have emerged as a rich data modality, capable of
modeling pairwise relationships between entities in diverse
applications. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become
the dominant paradigm for learning from such data, with
message passing neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al.,
2020) standing out as the most widely used framework.
MPNNs operate by iteratively updating a node’s representation based on information aggregated from its local neighborhood. This local message-passing mechanism has been
highly effective in a wide range of tasks, such as social networks (Monti et al., 2019), computational chemistry (Gilmer
et al., 2017) and recommendation systems (Fan et al., 2019).

Real-world benchmarks face similar problems. While some
recent works have introduced and motivated long-range
tasks more systematically (Liang et al., 2025), the Long
Range Graph Benchmark (LRGB) (Dwivedi et al., 2022)
remains ubiquitous. LRGB establishes task long-rangedness
via graph size/diameter and domain-specific intuition. These
are necessary, but not sufficient conditions for qualifying
a task as long-range. Furthermore, LRGB’s sensitivity to
hyperparameter tuning has recently come under scrutiny
(Tönshoff et al., 2023), raising doubts about the extent to
which its tasks are truly long-range. These issues stem from
a lack of theoretical characterization of the long-range issue,
which hampers efforts in measuring and addressing it.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 AITHYRA. Correspondence to: Jacob Bamberger <jacob.bamberger@cs.ox.ac.uk>,
Benjamin Gutteridge <beng@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Scott le Roux
<sleroux@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

