Benchmarking Quantum Reinforcement Learning

Abstract

Model
small Classical
small Quantum
large Classical

Benchmarking and establishing proper statistical
validation metrics for reinforcement learning (RL)
remain ongoing challenges, where no consensus
has been established yet. The emergence of quantum computing and its potential applications in
quantum reinforcement learning (QRL) further
complicate benchmarking efforts. To enable valid
performance comparisons and to streamline current research in this area, we propose a novel
benchmarking methodology, which is based on a
statistical estimator for sample complexity and a
definition of statistical outperformance. Furthermore, considering QRL, our methodology casts
doubt on some previous claims regarding its superiority. We conducted experiments on a novel
benchmarking environment with flexible levels of
complexity. While we still identify possible advantages, our findings are more nuanced overall.
We discuss the potential limitations of these results and explore their implications for empirical
research on quantum advantage in QRL.

200k
150k
100k
50k

0.35
rel
ati

0.25
ve
err
or 0.15
ε

sample complexity Ŝ

Nico Meyer * 1 2 Christian Ufrecht * 1 George Yammine 1 Georgios Kontes 1 Christopher Mutschler 1
Daniel D. Scherer 1

0.8
yδ
ilit
ab

0.6
b
pro

0.4
old
esh
r
h
t

Figure 1. Comparison of empirical sample complexities Ŝ of double deep Q-learning and a quantum version of the algorithm (lower
is better). Sample complexity is the number of environment-agent
interactions to surpass a performance threshold 1−ε with probability δ. The figure shows the result for the BeamManagement6G
environment introduced in this work. In order of decreasing sample complexity: a small classical neural network with 2 hidden
layers of width 16, i.e., 387 parameters; a small quantum circuit
with 4 layers on 14 qubits, i.e., 437 variational parameters, integrated between fully connected classical layers with additional 101
parameters; a large classical neural network with 2 hidden layers
of width 64, i.e., 4611 parameters; The hybrid quantum model
consistently outperforms the similar-sized classical network, and
is also competitive with the 10-fold larger classical model.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful algorithmic primitive increasingly applied across multiple domains (Arulkumaran et al., 2017; François-Lavet et al., 2018). Quantum
reinforcement learning (QRL) (Meyer et al., 2022) is a collection of RL algorithms developed for quantum computers,
an emergent paradigm of computing that exploits the laws
of quantum mechanics (Nielsen & Chuang, 2010). While
some QRL algorithms with provable advantage over traditional (classical) algorithms have been proposed (Wang
et al., 2021; Cherrat et al., 2023; Dunjko et al., 2016), these

algorithms are currently far out of reach for any existing
quantum computing hardware. Hence, most of the work has
focused on hybrid algorithms in which the deep neural network of a traditional RL algorithm – either approximating
the policy, the value function, or both – is replaced by a variational quantum circuit (VQC) (Bharti et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2020). However, they (while being less hardwareintensive) are heuristic in nature. Hence, there is no proof of
intrinsic advantage of the quantum version of the algorithm.

*

Equal contribution 1 Fraunhofer IIS, Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS, Nürnberg, Germany 2 Pattern
Recognition Lab, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität ErlangenNürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. Correspondence to: Nico Meyer
<nico.meyer@iis.fraunhofer.de>.

In the search for heuristic quantum advantage in QRL, we
encounter issues similar to classical RL: sensitivity to hyper-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

