Fast and Provable Algorithms for Sparse PCA with Improved Sample
Complexity

Jian-Feng Cai 1 Zhuozhi Xian 1 Jiaxi Ying 1

Abstract

et al., 2006; Shen & Huang, 2008), which offers a robust
alternative to traditional PCA.

We explore the single-spiked covariance model
within the context of sparse principal component
analysis (PCA), which aims to recover a
sparse unit vector from noisy samples. From
an information-theoretic perspective, O(k log p)
observations are sufficient to recover a k-sparse
p-dimensional vector v. However, existing
polynomial-time methods require at least O(k 2 )
samples for successful recovery, highlighting a
significant gap in sample efficiency. To bridge
this gap, we introduce a novel thresholding-based
algorithm that requires only Ω(k log p) samples,
provided the signal strength λ = Ω(∥v∥−1
∞ ). We
also propose a two-stage nonconvex algorithm
that further enhances estimation performance.
This approach integrates our thresholding algorithm with truncated power iteration, achieving
the minimax optimal rate of statistical error
under the desired sample complexity. Numerical
experiments validate the superior performance of
our algorithms in terms of estimation accuracy
and computational efficiency.

In this paper, we investigate the single-spiked covariance
model (Johnstone, 2001), which involves recovering a
sparse vector v from n noisy samples:
√
xi = λgi v + ξi , i = 1, . . . , n,
(1)
where xi ∈ Rp denotes the i-th observation and v ∈ Rp
is the unknown vector to be estimated, characterized by
∥v∥0 ≤ k and ∥v∥2 = 1. The coefficients gi are sampled
independently from a standard normal distribution N (0, 1),
and the noise vectors ξi are likewise independently drawn
from a multivariate normal distribution N (0, I), with each
gi and ξi being mutually independent. The parameter λ > 0
quantifies the strength of the signal.
From an information-theoretic perspective, it has been
shown that n = Ω(k log p) samples are sufficient to estimate
a k-sparse p-dimensional vector v up to a constant error (Vu
& Lei, 2013; Berthet & Rigollet, 2013). However, achieving
such an estimate are nonpolynomial-time algorithms such
as exhaustive search. In contrast, all known polynomialtime algorithms, including diagonal thresholding (Johnstone
& Lu, 2009), covariance thresholding (Krauthgamer
et al., 2015; Deshpande & Montanari, 2016), and convex
relaxation techniques (d’Aspremont et al., 2004; Amini
& Wainwright, 2009; Ma & Wigderson, 2015), need at
least Ω(k 2 ) observations to estimate v. Moreover, the
known lower bounds for these methods are considered
tight (Krauthgamer et al., 2015; Ma & Wigderson, 2015;
Deshpande & Montanari, 2016; Gao et al., 2017) when the
signal strength λ is treated as a constant.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a cornerstone
technique for dimension reduction, data preprocessing, clustering and feature extraction. However, in high–dimensional
regimes, its dependence on all variables often leads to
overfitting and poor interpretability, obscuring the truly
important features (Johnstone & Lu, 2009). By introducing
sparsity into principal components, sparse PCA can mitigate
issues of overfitting and loss of interpretability that often
arise in high-dimensional settings, particularly when the
number of variables surpasses the number of samples (Zou

Thus, for k = Ω(log p), there exists a notable gap between
the number of samples needed from an information-theoretic
perspective, Ω(k log p), and the number required by existing
polynomial-time algorithms, Ω(k 2 ). Moreover, reductions
from the planted-clique conjecture imply that, without
further assumptions, no polynomial-time algorithm can
attain the information-theoretic rate (Berthet & Rigollet,
2013; Krauthgamer et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Gao
et al., 2017; Brennan et al., 2018). This motivates the key
question of our work:

1

Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Jiaxi Ying
<jx.ying@connect.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

