ATA: Adaptive Task Allocation for Efficient Resource Management
in Distributed Machine Learning

Artavazd Maranjyan 1 El Mehdi Saad 1 Peter Richtárik 1 Francesco Orabona 1

Abstract

• In order to perform a single iteration of the algorithm,
a certain number (B) of tasks needs to be performed.

Asynchronous methods are fundamental for parallelizing computations in distributed machine
learning. They aim to accelerate training by fully
utilizing all available resources. However, their
greedy approach can lead to inefficiencies using
more computation than required, especially when
computation times vary across devices. If the
computation times were known in advance, training could be fast and resource-efficient by assigning more tasks to faster workers. The challenge
lies in achieving this optimal allocation without
prior knowledge of the computation time distributions. In this paper, we propose ATA (Adaptive
Task Allocation), a method that adapts to heterogeneous and random distributions of worker
computation times. Through rigorous theoretical
analysis, we show that ATA identifies the optimal
task allocation and performs comparably to methods with prior knowledge of computation times.
Experimental results further demonstrate that ATA
is resource-efficient, significantly reducing costs
compared to the greedy approach, which can be
arbitrarily expensive depending on the number of
workers.

• Each task can be computed by any worker, and the
tasks are not temporally related. That is, they can be
computed in any order, in parallel, and so on.
• Whenever a worker is asked to perform a single task,
the task will take a certain amount of time, modeled
as a nonnegative random variable drawn from an unknown distribution specific to that worker. The stochastic assumption makes sense because in real systems
computation times are not fixed and can vary with each
iteration (Dean & Barroso, 2013; Chen et al., 2016a;
Dutta et al., 2018; Maranjyan et al., 2025a).
• Each worker can only work on a single task at a time.
That is, a worker processes all tasks it has to perform
sequentially. Different workers work in parallel.
A natural goal in this setup is to make sure all tasks are
completed as fast as possible (in expectation), which minimizes the (expected) time it takes for a single iteration of the
algorithm to be performed provided that the task completion
time is the dominant time factor of the iteration. Provided
we are willing to waste resources, there is a simple solution
to this problem, a Greedy Task Allocation (GTA) strategy,
which follows this principle: Make sure all workers are
always busy working on some task, and stop once B tasks
have been completed. In GTA, we initially ask all n workers
to start working on a task, and as soon as some worker is
done with a task, we ask it to start completing another task.
This process is repeated until B tasks have been completed.

1. Introduction
In this work, we address a very general yet fundamental and
important problem arising in various contexts and fields. In
particular, there are n workers/nodes/devices collaborating
to run some iterative algorithm which has the following
structure:

While GTA minimizes the completion time, it can be immensely wasteful in terms of the total worker utilization
time needed to collect all B tasks. Indeed, consider the
scenario with n = 1000 workers and B = 10 tasks. In this
case, GTA will lead to at least n − B = 990 unnecessary
tasks being run in each iteration! This is highly undesirable
in situations where the workers are utilized across multiple
other jobs besides running the iterative algorithm mentioned
above.

1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
Correspondence
to: Artavazd Maranjyan <arto.maranjyan@gmail.com>, El
Mehdi Saad <mehdi.saad@kaust.edu.sa>, Peter Richtárik
<peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa>,
Francesco
Orabona
<francesco@orabona.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The goal of our work is to design new task allocation strategies, with rigorous theoretical support, that would attempt
1

