No-Regret is not enough! Bandits with General Constraints through Adaptive
Regret Minimization

Martino Bernasconi 1 Matteo Castiglioni 2 Andrea Celli 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

We consider a problem in which a decision maker tries
to maximize their cumulative reward over a time horizon
T , subject to a set of m long-term constraints. At each
round t, the learner chooses xt ∈ X and, subsequently,
observes a reward ft (xt ) ∈ [0, 1] and m constraint functions
gt (xt ) ∈ [−1, 1]m . Then, the problem becomes that of
finding a sequence of decisions which guarantees a reward
close to that of the best fixed decision
PT in hindsight, while
satisfying long-term constraints t=1 gt (xt ) ≤ 0 up to
small sublinear violations. This framework subsumes the
bandits with knapsacks (BwK) problem, where there are
only resource-consumption constraints (Badanidiyuru et al.,
2018; Agrawal & Devanur, 2019; Immorlica et al., 2022).

In the bandits with knapsacks framework
(BwK) the learner has m resource-consumption
(i.e., packing) constraints. We focus on the generalization of BwK in which the learner has a set
of general long-term constraints. The goal of the
learner is to maximize their cumulative reward,
while at the same time achieving small cumulative
constraints violations. In this scenario, there exist simple instances where conventional methods
for BwK fail to yield sublinear violations of constraints. We show that it is possible to circumvent
this issue by requiring the primal and dual algorithm to be weakly adaptive. Indeed, even without
any information on the Slater’s parameter ρ characterizing the problem, the interaction between
weakly adaptive primal and dual regret minimizers leads to a “self-bounding” behavior of dual
variables. In particular, their norm remains suitably upper bounded across the entire time horizon
even without explicit projection steps. By exploiting this property, we provide best-of-both-worlds
guarantees for stochastic and adversarial inputs.
In the first case, we show that the algorithm guarantees sublinear regret. In the latter case, we
establish a tight competitive ratio of ρ/(1 + ρ).
In both settings, constraints violations are guaranteed to be sublinear in time. Finally, this results
allow us to obtain new result for the problem of
contextual bandits with linear constraints, providing the first no-α-regret guarantees for adversarial
contexts.

Inputs (ft , gt ) may be either stochastic or adversarial. The
goal is designing algorithms providing guarantees for both
input models, without prior knowledge of the specific environment they will encounter. Achieving this goal involves addressing two crucial challenges which prevent a
direct application of primal-dual approaches based on the
LagrangeBwK framework in Immorlica et al. (2022).
1.1. Technical Challenges
In order to obtain meaningful regret guarantees, primaldual frameworks based on LagrangeBwK need to control
the magnitude of dual variables. This is necessary as dual
variables appear in the loss function of the primal algorithm, and, therefore, influence the no-regret guarantees
provided by the primal algorithm. In the context of knapsack constraints, this is usually achieved by exploiting the
existence of a strictly feasible solution with Slater’s parameter ρ, consisting of a void action which yields zero reward
and resource consumption. For instance, the frameworks of
(Balseiro et al., 2022; Castiglioni et al., 2022a) guarantee
boundedness of dual multipliers through an explicit projection step on the interval [0, 1/ρ]. However, in settings with
general constraints beyond resource consumption, it is often
unreasonable to assume that the learner knows the Slater’s
parameter ρ a priori. The problem of operating without
knowledge of ρ has been already addressed in the stochastic
setting (Agrawal & Devanur, 2014; 2019; Yu et al., 2017;
Wei et al., 2020; Castiglioni et al., 2022b). For instance, a

1

Bocconi University, Milan, Italy 2 Politecnico di Milano,
Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Martino Bernasconi <martino.bernasconi@unibocconi.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

