Position: Formal Mathematical Reasoning—A New Frontier in AI

Kaiyu Yang 1 Gabriel Poesia 2 Jingxuan He 3 Wenda Li 4 Kristin Lauter 1 Swarat Chaudhuri 5 Dawn Song 3

Abstract

markable success on benchmarks such as GSM8K (Cobbe
et al., 2021) and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021). However,
the success has been mostly limited to high school math,
raising a key question: How far can we go by scaling up the
informal approach? Will it solve research-level mathematics
problems?

AI for Mathematics (AI4Math) is intellectually intriguing and is crucial for AI-driven system design
and verification. Extensive efforts on AI4Math
have mirrored techniques in NLP, in particular,
training large language models on carefully curated math datasets in text form. As a complementary yet less explored avenue, formal mathematical reasoning is grounded in formal systems
such as proof assistants, which can verify the
correctness of reasoning and provide automatic
feedback. This position paper advocates formal
mathematical reasoning as an indispensable component in future AI for math, formal verification,
and verifiable generation. We summarize existing
progress, discuss open challenges, and envision
critical milestones to measure future success.1

The informal approach faces challenges in dealing with
advanced mathematics. First, high-quality training data is
inherently scarce in advanced mathematics. Second, solutions to advanced problems are not limited to numbers
but may include chains of intricate reasoning steps, such
as proofs. LLMs are notorious for hallucinating seemingly
valid reasoning steps, making it challenging to verify the correctness of model output or collect useful learning feedback.
These challenges cannot be resolved by merely scaling up
training. Researchers are exploring alternatives, such as
scaling up inference (OpenAI, 2024), learning to reason
via reinforcement learning (Guo et al., 2025), and neural
verifiers (Cobbe et al., 2021). While these techniques have
shown promise, we argue that neural networks alone are
insufficient (Sec. 6). A critical yet underexplored piece of
the puzzle is formal mathematical reasoning. Combining
formal reasoning with LLMs can significantly advance
AI4Math, unlocking its applications in AI-driven formal
verification and verifiable generation.

1. Introduction
Mathematical reasoning has been important for AI from its
early days (Newell & Simon, 1956) to the era of modern
large language models (LLMs). It serves as a proxy for
reasoning and planning tasks and plays a fundamental role
in quantitative disciplines. AI4Math has the potential to
revolutionize AI for science, engineering, and beyond.

We consider formal mathematical reasoning broadly as
mathematical reasoning grounded in formal systems, including but not limited to higher-order logic (Nipkow et al.,
2002), dependent type theory (Barras et al., 1997), and computer programs annotated with formal specifications (Leino,
2010). Formal systems provide environments that can verify the model’s reasoning and provide automatic feedback.
The feedback can mitigate data scarcity; also, such systems
enable rigorous test-time checks that resist hallucination. In
contrast, informal mathematics refers to math commonly
found in textbooks and research papers. It interleaves natural language with symbols (e.g., LATEX), but these symbols
do not have a self-contained semantics, instead relying on
informal text to convey significant parts of their meaning.

Substantial research in AI4Math has focused on math LLMs.
A common approach is to continue pretraining LLMs on
mathematical data from the Web and finetune on curated
math problems with detailed solutions. We call this the
“informal” approach to distinguish it from the formal approach that will be introduced later. Math LLMs have a
simple recipe, but the secret sauce is data curation. Carefully curated training data plus inference-time techniques,
such as chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022), have led to re1

Meta FAIR 2 Stanford University 3 UC Berkeley 4 University
of Edinburgh 5 UT Austin. Correspondence to: Kaiyu Yang
<kaiyuy@meta.com>, Dawn Song <dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu>.

AlphaProof (Google DeepMind, 2024) and AlphaGeometry (Trinh et al., 2024) are two successful examples of this
idea, leading to unprecedented performance in the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO). They build on a

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
An extended version of this paper is available at https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2412.16075

1

