Logarithmic Regret for Online KL-Regularized Reinforcement Learning

Heyang Zhao * 1 Chenlu Ye * 2 Wei Xiong 2 Quanquan Gu 1 Tong Zhang 2

Abstract

large language models (LLMs), which is commonly referred
to as the Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022). The RLHF
learning paradigm has been used to make a powerful chatbot
by aligning the LLMs with human preference, making the
model generation helpful, honest, and harmless (Bai et al.,
2022). Notable examples include the OpenAI’s Chat-GPT
(OpenAI, 2023), Anthropic’s Claude (Bai et al., 2022), and
Google’s Gemini (Team et al., 2023). More recently, the KLregularized RL framework has also been applied to enhance
multi-turn reasoning capabilities, resulting in powerful reasoning models such as GPT4-o1 and DeepSeek-R1.

Recent advances in Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) have shown that KLregularization plays a pivotal role in improving the efficiency of RL fine-tuning for large
language models (LLMs). Despite its empirical advantage, the theoretical difference between
KL-regularized RL and standard RL remains
largely under-explored. While there is a recent
line of work on the theoretical analysis of KLregularized objective in decision making (Xiong
et al., 2024a; Xie et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024),
these analyses either reduce to the traditional
RL setting or rely on strong coverage assumptions. In this paper, we propose an optimismbased KL-regularized online contextual bandit algorithm, and provide a novel analysis of its regret.
By carefully leveraging the benign optimization
landscape induced by the KL-regularization and
the optimistic reward estimation, our algorithm
achieves an O η log(NR T ) · dR logarithmic regret bound, where η, NR , T, dR denote the KLregularization parameter, the cardinality of the
reward function class, number of rounds, and the
complexity of the reward function class. Furthermore, we extend our algorithm and analysis to
reinforcement learning by developing a novel decomposition over transition steps and also obtain
a similar logarithmic regret bound.

However, the RLHF process also faces challenges. It often
causes a decline in certain abilities acquired during pretraining and supervised fine-tuning (SFT), a phenomenon
commonly known as “alignment tax” (Askell et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2023). For instance, contrastive learning without
regularization, as observed in Meng et al. (2024), can degrade performance on standard reasoning benchmarks like
MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al.,
2021). Additionally, unregularized RL training presents significant challenges on computational efficiency and training
stability (Casper et al., 2023). To address these issues, practitioners often optimize a KL-regularized objective (defined
formally in Section 4) to balance reward optimization and
mitigate alignment tax.
Moreover, these KL-regularized frameworks often demonstrate superior sample efficiency compared to standard
deep RL tasks. For example, models with 52B parameters
(Claude (Bai et al., 2022)) and 671B parameters (DeepSeekR1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025)) achieve substantial policy
improvement with only tens of thousands of samples or thousands of training steps. Similar observations apply to direct
preference alignment algorithms (Rafailov et al., 2023; Tunstall et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024), which
develop state-of-the-art open-source chatbots using fewer
than 100K samples. These results highlight the superior
sample efficiency of KL-regularized RL, surpassing traditional deep RL applications (Silver et al., 2016) and their
analyses in the RL theory literature.

1. Introduction
We study the KL-regularized contextual bandit (Langford
& Zhang, 2007; Xiong et al., 2024a) and Markov decision
processes (MDPs) (Sutton, 2018) in this paper. These two
frameworks have received significant attention due to their
tremendous successes in the post-training stage of modern
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801,
USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>,
Tong Zhang <tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.

However, despite the empirical success, a fundamental connection between KL regularization and learning efficiency
has not been established so far theoretically. While some

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

