FourierMamba: Fourier Learning Integration
with State Space Models for Image Deraining

Dong Li * 1 Yidi Liu * 1 Xueyang Fu 1 Jie Huang 1 Senyan Xu 1 Qi Zhu 1 Zheng-Jun Zha 1

Abstract

orders of frequencies in axis, we can directly use
Mamba to perform frequency correlation and improve the channel information representation. Extensive experiments reveal that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively
and quantitatively.

Image deraining aims to remove rain streaks from
rainy images and restore clear backgrounds. Currently, some research that employs the Fourier
transform has proved to be effective for image deraining, due to it acting as an effective frequency
prior for capturing rain streaks. However, despite
there exists dependency of low frequency and
high frequency in images, these Fourier-based
methods rarely exploit the correlation of different
frequencies for conjuncting their learning procedures, limiting the full utilization of frequency
information for image deraining. Alternatively,
the recently emerged Mamba technique depicts its
effectiveness and efficiency for modeling correlation in various domains (e.g., spatial, temporal),
and we argue that introducing Mamba into its
unexplored Fourier spaces to correlate different
frequencies would help improve image deraining.
This motivates us to propose a new framework
termed FourierMamba, which performs image
deraining with Mamba in the Fourier space. Owing to the unique arrangement of frequency orders in Fourier space, the core of FourierMamba
lies in the scanning encoding of different frequencies, where the low-high frequency order
formats exhibit differently in the spatial dimension (unarranged in axis) and channel dimension
(arranged in axis). Therefore, we design FourierMamba that correlates Fourier space information
in the spatial and channel dimensions with distinct
designs. Specifically, in the spatial dimension
Fourier space, we introduce the zigzag coding to
scan the frequencies to rearrange the orders from
low to high frequencies, thereby orderly correlating the connections between frequencies; in the
channel dimension Fourier space with arranged

1. Introduction
Images taken in rainy conditions exhibit significant degradation in detail and contrast due to rain in the air, leading
to unpleasant visual results and the loss of frequency information. This issue can severely impact the performance
of outdoor computer vision systems, such as autonomous
driving and video surveillance (Wang et al., 2022a). To mitigate the effects of rain, many image deraining methods (Fu
et al., 2011; Xiao et al., 2022) have emerged in recent years,
aiming to remove rain streaks and restore clear backgrounds
in images.
The advent of deep learning has spurred this field forward,
with several learning-based deraining methods achieving
remarkable success (Fu et al., 2017b; Yang et al., 2017;
Zhang & Patel, 2018). Among them, some studies utilize
the Fourier transform for deraining in the frequency domain (Zhou et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2022), proving effective.
The key insights inspiring the use of the Fourier transform
for image deraining are twofold: 1) The Fourier transform
can separate image degradation and content components
to some extent, serving as a prior for image deraining, as
shown in Figure 1; 2) The Fourier domain possesses global
properties, where each pixel in Fourier space is involved
with all spatial pixels. Thus, it makes sense to explore the
task of rain removal using the Fourier transform. However,
despite the existence of low frequency and high frequency
dependencies in images, previous Fourier-based methods
rarely utilize the correlation of different frequencies to combine their learning process. As shown in Figure 1, the
commonly used 1 × 1 convolutions cannot correlate different frequencies, limiting the full utilization of frequency
information in the image. Therefore, we seek to exploit the
beneficial properties of the Fourier transform while exploring correlating different frequencies.

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence to: Zheng-Jun Zha
<zhazj@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

