Tuning LLM Judge Design Decisions for 1/1000 of the Cost

David Salinas 1 2 Omar Swelam 1 Frank Hutter 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2023), but also to select instruction-tuning recipes
(Grattafiori et al., 2024; Lambert et al., 2024). While they
can reduce cost significantly compared to human evals,
LLM judges have limitations as they may rely on superficial style aspects, such as the length of a response (Dubois
et al., 2024) or the order of their input (Zheng et al., 2023).

Evaluating Large Language Models (LLMs) often requires costly human annotations. To address this, LLM-based judges have been proposed,
which compare the outputs of two LLMs enabling
the ranking of models without human intervention. While several approaches have been proposed, many confounding factors are present between different papers. For instance the model,
the prompt and other hyperparameters are typically changed at the same time making appleto-apple comparisons challenging. In this paper, we propose to systematically analyze and
tune the hyperparameters of LLM judges. To alleviate the high cost of evaluating a judge, we
propose to leverage multi-objective multi-fidelity
which allows to find judges that trade accuracy
for cost and also significantly reduce the cost of
the search. Our method identifies judges that
not only outperform existing benchmarks in accuracy and cost-efficiency but also utilize openweight models, ensuring greater accessibility and
reproducibility. The code to reproduce our experiments is available at this repository https:
//github.com/geoalgo/judgetuning.

While some of these issues can be easily fixed, several
aspects limit the improvement of LLM judges. The first
is that evaluating a LLM judge configuration is expensive.
For instance, evaluating one model in Alpaca-Eval (Li et al.,
2023) costs ∼24$ (Ni et al., 2024), and evaluating a judge
multiplies this by the large number of model evaluations it
has to do in order to compute the correlation with human
ratings. Given this, many confounding factors are typically
present between different judges approaches. For instance,
between Alpaca-Eval (Li et al., 2023) and Arena-Hard (Li
et al., 2024), the judge model, the prompt, the score-type
and the set of instructions were changed. This makes it hard
to learn which contributions are important.
In this work, we propose to analyze and tune systematically
the hyperparameters of an LLM judge, including the LLM
model used, the prompt, the inference parameters (such as
the temperature) as well as the parsing mechanism used to
extract the judge preference. We first analyze the impact of
scaling the LLM judge model or the number of instructions
on the judge performance. This highlights that scaling is
insufficient to reach good performance and also helps us to
identify a cheaper way to evaluate judges than evaluating
Spearman correlation with Chatbot Arena with a grid of
model annotations. We then show how to systematically
tune the hyperparameters of a judge using a multi-objective
(to account for accuracy and cost) and multi-fidelity approach which saves tuning cost by stopping early poor configurations. Finally, we show that the configurations found
outperform previous state-of-the-art judges on a range of
real-world test datasets.

1. Introduction
Instruction tuned models are difficult to evaluate as they
provide free-form text given arbitrary instructions that may
include summarization (Zhang et al., 2024), code writing
(Ni et al., 2023) or translation (Elshin et al., 2024). While
humans can annotate the quality of the outputs of an LLM
given instructions, this quickly becomes expensive and also
delays the evaluation and development of instruction-tuned
models (Li et al., 2023).

Our key contributions are the following:

As an alternative, LLM judges have been proposed to provide an indicative ranking for instruction-tuned models (Li

• We study scaling laws of judges showing how much
model size and number of instructions alone impact
key metrics used to evaluate judges

1

University of Freiburg 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen. Correspondence to: David Salinas <david.salinas.pro@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We propose a way to tune judges hyperparameters at
reasonable tuning cost
1

