DiTAR: Diffusion Transformer Autoregressive Modeling for Speech Generation

Dongya Jia 1 Zhuo Chen 1 Jiawei Chen 1 Chenpeng Du 1 Jian Wu 1 Jian Cong 1 Xiaobin Zhuang 1
Chumin Li 1 Zhen Wei 1 Yuping Wang 1 Yuxuan Wang 1

Abstract

it is not as straightforward for other modalities, such as images, video, and audio. Due to bitrate limitations, discrete
representation often fails to reconstruct complex modalities with high fidelity. In comparison, continuous tokens
can better reconstruct the original information(Fan et al.,
2024; Rombach et al., 2022). To alleviate this challenge, a
two-stage strategy is commonly applied for autoregressive
multi-media generation, where a lossy discrete token is first
generated by an LM, followed by a token-based diffusion
for detail enrichment. However, such a cascaded design
suffers from error accumulation and limits the scalability of
the language model. Therefore, autoregressive modeling of
continuous representations is meaningful.

Several recent studies have attempted to autoregressively generate continuous speech representations without discrete speech tokens by combining diffusion and autoregressive models, yet
they often face challenges with excessive computational loads or suboptimal outcomes. In this
work, we propose Diffusion Transformer Autoregressive Modeling (DiTAR), a patch-based autoregressive framework combining a language model
with a diffusion transformer. This approach significantly enhances the efficacy of autoregressive
models for continuous tokens and reduces computational demands. DiTAR utilizes a divide-andconquer strategy for patch generation, where the
language model processes aggregated patch embeddings, and the diffusion transformer subsequently generates the next patch based on the
output of the language model. For inference, we
propose defining temperature as the time point
of introducing noise during the reverse diffusion ODE to balance diversity and determinism.
We also show in the extensive scaling analysis
that DiTAR has superb scalability. In zero-shot
speech generation, DiTAR achieves state-of-theart performance in robustness, speaker similarity,
and naturalness. Audio samples are presented in
https://spicyresearch.github.io/ditar.

The diffusion model has been proven effective at modeling
continuous representations(Peebles & Xie, 2023; Rombach
et al., 2022; Anastassiou et al., 2024), and integrating it
with autoregressive models is a major research trend. (Li
et al., 2024a; Fan et al., 2024) proposes incorporating a
diffusion head into a language model for image generation,
pioneering a new approach. However, the performance
significantly falls short when a causal-attention language
model forms the backbone. Another approach, such as
ARDiT(Liu et al., 2024b) or Transfusion(Zhou et al., 2024),
repurposes the language model’s parameters for diffusion,
leading to substantial computational demands. This raises
the question of whether we can autoregressively predict
continuous tokens while ensuring high-quality generation
and maintaining reasonable computational demands.
To tackle this challenge, we introduce the Diffusion Transformer AutoRegressive (DiTAR) modeling, a framework
that seamlessly combines transformer diffusion with a language model. We attribute the subpar performance of a
language model with a diffusion head to the unidirectional
dependency imposed by causal attention, which conflicts
with the close inter-frame correlations characteristic of continuous tokens. In DiTAR, we propose a divide-and-conquer
strategy that breaks continuous tokens into multiple patches.
A language model is responsible for inter-patch prediction,
while a diffusion transformer handles intra-patch prediction. Specifically, a diffusion transformer with bidirectional
attention (DiT), noted for its state-of-the-art performance
across various generative fields(Liu et al., 2024a; Peebles &
Xie, 2023; Anastassiou et al., 2024), is employed to predict

1. Introduction
Recently, the autoregressive language model (LM) has
demonstrated strong generative capabilities and scaling
properties(Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2024; Team et al., 2023), where discrete tokenization
is commonly used. While discretization is natural for text,
1

ByteDance Seed.
Correspondence to:
Jia
<jiadongya@bytedance.com>,
Zhuo
<zhuo.chen1@bytedance.com>.

Dongya
Chen

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

