EnIGMA: Interactive Tools Substantially Assist LM Agents in Finding Security
Vulnerabilities
Talor Abramovich 1 Meet Udeshi 2 Minghao Shao 2 Kilian Lieret 3 Haoran Xi 2 Kimberly Milner 2
Sofija Jancheska 2 John Yang 4 Carlos E. Jimenez 3 Farshad Khorrami 2 Prashanth Krishnamurthy 2
Brendan Dolan-Gavitt 2 Muhammad Shafique 5 Karthik Narasimhan 3 Ramesh Karri 2 Ofir Press 3

Abstract

of these systems, existing vulnerabilities must be rapidly detected and patched. With the increasing global connectivity
of software via the internet, the attack surface also widens,
making it difficult for manual cybersecurity analysis techniques to keep pace with this rapid expansion. These factors
have necessitated the development of autonomous exploitation tools that can quickly detect software system vulnerabilities and generate patches to fix them. Cybersecurity competitions, such as the DARPA Cyber-Grand-Challenge (2016)
and the DARPA AIxCC (2024), have been designed to motivate the industry to develop such autonomous exploitation
tools.

Although language model (LM) agents have
demonstrated increased performance in multiple
domains, including coding and web-browsing,
their success in cybersecurity has been limited. We present EnIGMA, an LM agent for
autonomously solving Capture The Flag (CTF)
challenges. We introduce new tools and interfaces to improve the agent’s ability to find and
exploit security vulnerabilities, focusing on interactive terminal programs. These novel Interactive
Agent Tools enable LM agents, for the first time,
to run interactive utilities, such as a debugger
and a server connection tool, which are essential
for solving these challenges. Empirical analysis
on 390 CTF challenges across four benchmarks
demonstrate that these new tools and interfaces
substantially improve our agent’s performance,
achieving state-of-the-art results on NYU CTF,
Intercode-CTF, and CyBench. Finally, we analyze
data leakage, developing new methods to quantify
it and identifying a new phenomenon we term
soliloquizing, where the model self-generates hallucinated observations without interacting with
the environment.1

While language models (LMs) are popularly used to help
programmers write short code segments (Chen et al., 2021;
Lu et al., 2021; Dakhel et al., 2023), LM-based agents have
been introduced to autonomously program, solve bugs and
develop new features (Yang et al., 2023a; 2024; Wang et al.,
2024a; Wu et al., 2024). An LM agent is a system that works
towards a specified goal through repeated LM interaction
within an environment, such as an operating system.
In cybersecurity, LMs have been employed to develop both
defensive and offensive applications (Motlagh et al., 2024).
For defense, research leverages LMs to enhance threat detection (Qiang et al., 2022; Maniriho et al., 2022), automate
incident response (Nilă et al., 2020), and mitigate vulnerabilities (Chakraborty et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Hin et al.,
2022). For offense, they are used for penetration testing
(Deng et al., 2024b), exploiting security flaws, and crafting
advanced attacks (Charan et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Advancements in cybersecurity require continuous security
analysis of new software systems. To increase the robustness
1

An important evaluation setting for LMs in offensive information security is Capture The Flag (CTF) challenges.
CTFs are traditionally used to challenge human participants
to solve a series of security puzzles or exploit vulnerabilities
in simulated computer systems to obtain special strings
(“flags”) that have been hidden within the environment.
These challenges test expertise in various cybersecurity
skills, and are typically divided into six categories based on
these, including cryptography (crypto) which involves decrypting ciphertexts, reverse engineering (rev), exploiting
web vulnerabilities (web), analyzing data such as network

2

Tel Aviv University NYU Tandon School of Engineering 3 Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University
4
Stanford University 5 New York University Abu Dhabi. Correspondence to: Talor Abramovich <talora1@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code and development dataset are available at https:
//github.com/SWE-agent/SWE-agent/tree/v0.7
and https://github.com/NYU-LLM-CTF/NYU_CTF_
Bench/tree/main/development respectively.

1

