Guardians of Image Quality: Benchmarking Defenses Against Adversarial
Attacks on Image Quality Metrics

Aleksandr Gushchin 1 2 3 Khaled Abud 2 3 Georgii Bychkov 1 2 3 Ekaterina Shumitskaya 1 2 3
Anna Chistyakova 1 3 Sergey Lavrushkin 1 2 Bader Rasheed 4 Kirill Malyshev 3 Dmitriy S. Vatolin 1 2 3
Anastasia Antsiferova 1 2 4

Abstract

of such vulnerabilities of IQA models (Antsiferova et al.,
2024; Meftah et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Ghildyal &
Liu, 2023). Adversarial attacks on IQA metrics are perturbations that mislead the metric’s score, making quality
assessment invalid. Such attacks can manipulate image
search results, as search engines (e.g., Microsoft’s Bing)
rely on IQA metrics to rank results (Bing, 2013). Furthermore, since IQA metrics serve in public benchmarks and
comparisons (Huang et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024, etc.) to evaluate image/video processing and compression algorithms,
competitors can exploit the vulnerabilities of the metric to
artificially inflate the quality of their algorithm. Several
works showed that optimizing image restoration for modern
vulnerable IQA metrics can reduce actual image quality
(Ding et al., 2021) or generate visual artifacts (Kashkarov
et al., 2024). For these reasons, it becomes necessary to
study and design methods to improve the robustness of IQA
models.

Modern neural-network-based Image Quality Assessment (IQA) metrics are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which can be exploited to manipulate search engine rankings, benchmark results,
and content quality assessments, raising concerns
about the reliability of IQA metrics in critical
applications. This paper presents the first comprehensive study of IQA defense mechanisms in
response to adversarial attacks on these metrics
to pave the way for safer use of IQA metrics. We
systematically evaluated 30 defense strategies, including purification, training-based, and certified
methods — and applied 14 adversarial attacks
in adaptive and non-adaptive settings to compare
these defenses on 9 no-reference IQA metrics.
Our proposed benchmark aims to guide the development of IQA defense methods and is open
to submissions; the latest results and code are
at https://msu-video-group.github.io/adversarialdefenses-for-iqa/.

Although researchers have proposed various defense methods to enhance the robustness of neural networks in different
applications, few defenses have been developed explicitly
for IQA metrics, and there are currently no comprehensive
benchmarks for this task. Defending IQA metrics poses
unique challenges compared to object classification: defenses must restore the original IQA scores and their correlation with subjective evaluations while preserving the
perceptual quality of attacked images.

1. Introduction
Image quality assessment (IQA) metrics are essential to develop and evaluate image and video processing algorithms.
Modern IQA metrics based on neural networks are highly
correlated with subjective assessments. However, neural
networks are proven to be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations(Kurakin et al., 2018), which have led to exploration

This paper introduces the first benchmark that systematically evaluates defenses against adversarial attacks on IQA
metrics. The evaluation scheme is presented in Figure 1.
Our contributions include a novel methodology for measuring and comparing defenses for the IQA tasks, addressing
a critical gap in the field, comprehensive experiments, an
extensive subjective study with 60,000+ responses, an indepth analysis of the results, and an online leaderboard. We
also publish a novel dataset of adversarial images, which
can be used for adversarial training, evaluating non-adaptive
defenses, and training methods for attack detection. Our
methodology is the first to systematize defenses for IQA
metrics, analyzing 30 defense algorithms (both empirical

1

ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia 2 MSU Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Moscow, Russia 3 Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Moscow, Russia 4 Innopolis University, Innopolis, Russia.
Correspondence to: Aleksandr Gushchin
<alexander.gushchin@graphics.cs.msu.ru>, Anastasia Antsiferova <aantsiferova@graphics.cs.msu.ru>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

