Uniform Mean Estimation for Heavy-Tailed Distributions via Median-of-Means

Mikael Møller Høgsgaard * 1 Andrea Paudice * 1

Abstract

& Yudin, 1983; Jerrum et al., 1986; Alon et al., 1996). Its
popularity is largely due to its simplicity and efficiency. Indeed, its computation only requires splitting the sample into
κ batches, computing the sample mean in each batch, and
then returning the median of these sample means, with an
overall runtime that is quasi-linear in the number of observations. Notice that the user is only required to specify the
number of batches, which should be of order log(1/δ) for
optimal performance.

The Median of Means (MoM) is a mean estimator that has gained popularity in the context of
heavy-tailed data. In this work, we analyze its
performance in the task of simultaneously estimating the mean of each function in a class F
when the data distribution possesses only the first
p moments for p ∈ (1, 2]. We prove a new sample
complexity bound using a novel symmetrization
technique that may be of independent interest. Additionally, we present applications of our result
to k-means clustering with unbounded inputs and
linear regression with general losses, improving
upon existing works.

In this work, we analyze the performance of the MoM estimator in solving the following significant generalization of
the mean estimation task, a problem typically referred to as
uniform convergence. Given a set of real-valued functions
F over a domain X , and a distribution D supported over
X , we consider the problem of estimating, simultaneously
for each f ∈ F, the mean µ(f ) = E[f (X)] from an i.i.d.
sample X ∼ Dn generated from D. In particular, our goal
is to estimate the sample complexity of the MoM estimator,
i.e., the smallest sample size n∗ = n(ε, δ, F) that suffices to
guarantee that for all ε, δ ∈ (0, 1) and n ≥ n∗ , the following
holds:
!

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating the mean of a random variable
from a finite sample of its i.i.d. copies is fundamental in
statistics and machine learning. When the random variable
has exponentially decaying tails, the sample mean exhibits
optimal or near-optimal performance. In particular, for
ε, δ ∈ (0, 1), it is known that POLYLOG(1/δ)/ε2 samples
suffice to obtain an ε-close estimate with probability at least
1 − δ. Recent studies have shown that heavier-tailed distributions, possessing only the first p moments for p ∈ (1, 2],
are better suited to model several important cases, including but not limited to, large attention and language models
(Zhang et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020; Gurbuzbalaban et al.,
2021; Gurbuzbalaban & Hu, 2021), certain applications in
econometrics (Bradley & Taqqu, 2003) and network science
(Barabási, 2016), and some classes of extremal processes
(Nair et al., 2022). Under this model, the sample mean
suffers from sub-optimal performance with a polynomial dependence on 1/δ (Catoni, 2012). Median-of-Means (MoM)
is a mean estimator that provides optimal performance guarantees even under heavy-tailed distributions (Nemirovskij

P

X∼D n

sup | M O M(f, X) − µ(f )| ≤ ε

≥ 1 − δ.

(1)

f ∈F

Uniform convergence has fundamental applications in machine learning. First, given an estimator θ satisfying (1),
one can learn F by minimizing θ(f, X) over F. Notice that
if θ is the sample mean, this corresponds to the standard
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) paradigm. Second,
such an estimator can be used to estimate the risk of any
function in F using the same data as for training. This is
particularly useful when a test set cannot be set aside, or
only an approximate solution to the empirical problem can
be computed. Third, as the sample complexity of θ features
a dependence on some complexity measure of F, it can be
used to perform model selection, i.e., to select a class of
functions for the learning problem at hand before having a
look at the data.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Aarhus
University, Denmark. Correspondence to: Mikael Møller
Høgsgaard <hogsgaard@cs.au.dk>, Andrea Paudice <apaudice@cs.au.dk>.

Contributions. We provide the following contributions.
• We show that, upon F admitting a suitable
distribution-dependent approximation of size
ND (ε, (vp /εp )1/(p−1) ), where vp is a uniform upper

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

