Robust Conformal Outlier Detection under Contaminated Reference Data
Meshi Bashari 1 Matteo Sesia 2 3 Yaniv Romano 1 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and Motivation
This paper studies the problem of outlier detection: given a
reference dataset (e.g., a collection of legitimate financial
transactions) and an unlabeled test point (a new transaction),
our goal is to determine whether the test point is an outlier
(a fraudulent transaction) by assessing its deviation from the
reference data distribution. Naturally, we aim to maximize
the detection of outliers by harnessing the capabilities of
complex machine learning (ML) models. However, these
models typically lack type-I error rate control, potentially resulting in unreliable detections. In our running example, the
type-I error is the probability of falsely flagging a legitimate
transaction as fraudulent. As such, uncontrolled error rates
can lead to costly unnecessary investigations of legitimate
transactions and negatively impact customer experience.

Conformal prediction is a flexible framework for
calibrating machine learning predictions, providing distribution-free statistical guarantees. In outlier detection, this calibration relies on a reference
set of labeled inlier data to control the type-I error rate. However, obtaining a perfectly labeled
inlier reference set is often unrealistic, and a more
practical scenario involves access to a contaminated reference set containing a small fraction of
outliers. This paper analyzes the impact of such
contamination on the validity of conformal methods. We prove that under realistic, non-adversarial
settings, calibration on contaminated data yields
conservative type-I error control, shedding light
on the inherent robustness of conformal methods.
This conservativeness, however, typically results
in a loss of power. To alleviate this limitation,
we propose a novel, active data-cleaning framework that leverages a limited labeling budget and
an outlier detection model to selectively annotate
data points in the contaminated reference set that
are suspected as outliers. By removing only the
annotated outliers in this “suspicious” subset, we
can effectively enhance power while mitigating
the risk of inflating the type-I error rate, as supported by our theoretical analysis. Experiments
on real datasets validate the conservative behavior of conformal methods under contamination
and show that the proposed data-cleaning strategy
improves power without sacrificing validity.

The broad need for reliable ML systems has sparked a surge
of interest in conformal prediction—a versatile framework
that can provide statistical guarantees for any “black-box”
predictive model (Vovk et al., 2005). This framework formulates the outlier detection task as a statistical test, where
the null hypothesis is that the new data point is not an outlier (Laxhammar & Falkman, 2015; Bates et al., 2023). To
derive a decision rule guaranteeing type-I error control, conformal inference relies on a reference (calibration) set of
inlier data points. These points are assumed to be sampled
i.i.d. from an unknown distribution, independent of the data
used to train the outlier detection model.
In practice, however, it is often difficult to obtain a perfectly
clean reference dataset that contains no outliers (Park et al.,
2021; Zhao et al., 2019; Chalapathy & Chawla, 2019; Jiang
et al., 2022). In our example, a more realistic scenario would
assume instead access to a slightly contaminated reference
set, mostly legitimate transactions with a few unnoticed
outliers (Zhao et al., 2019). But this setting poses new
challenges for conformal prediction methods, potentially
invalidating the error control guarantees or, as we shall see,
often reducing the power to detect true outliers at test time.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
IIT, Haifa, Israel 2 Department of Data Sciences and Operations,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA 4 Department of Computer
Science, Technion IIT, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Meshi
Bashari <meshi.b@campus.technion.ac.il>.

1.2. Outline and Contributions
While type-I error control in conformal inference theoretically requires perfectly clean reference data, in practice

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

