Learning Fused State Representations for Control from Multi-View Observations

Zeyu Wang * 1 Yao-Hui Li * 1 Xin Li † 1 2 Hongyu Zang 3 Romain Laroche 4 Riashat Islam 5

Abstract

necked by high data collection costs and increased computational complexity. MVRL has recently emerged as a promising alternative, leveraging 2D observations from multiple
perspective cameras to enhance spatial perception while
reducing computational demands (Li et al., 2019). Despite
these advantages, MVRL still struggles with two common
challenges: i) the difficulty in learning and fusing compact representation from redundant and high-dimensional
multi-view observations, and ii) the problem of dealing with
missing or interfering views in real-world scenarios.

Multi-View Reinforcement Learning (MVRL)
seeks to provide agents with multi-view observations, enabling them to perceive environment
with greater effectiveness and precision. Recent
advancements in MVRL focus on extracting latent representations from multiview observations
and leveraging them in control tasks. However, it
is not straightforward to learn compact and taskrelevant representations, particularly in the presence of redundancy, distracting information, or
missing views. In this paper, we propose Multiview Fusion State for Control (MFSC), firstly
incorporating bisimulation metric learning into
MVRL to learn task-relevant representations. Furthermore, we propose a multiview-based mask
and latent reconstruction auxiliary task that exploits shared information across views and improves MFSC’s robustness in missing views by
introducing a mask token. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms existing approaches in MVRL tasks. Even
in more realistic scenarios with interference or
missing views, MFSC consistently maintains high
performance. The project code is available at
https://github.com/zpwdev/MFSC.

Chen et al. (2021) averages keypoint estimations from different camera views to obtain a single world coordinate prediction. Hwang et al. (2023) learns distinct representations
for each view using a VAE-based architecture and derives
the final fused representation for MVRL via a weighted fusion mechanism. Jangir et al. (2022) introduces the use of a
cross-view attention mechanism, offering a more flexible approach for representation fusion. However, these multi-view
representation learning methods lack explicit mechanisms
to focus on task-relevant features, often incorporating irrelevant information into the final representation. Recent works
on bisimulation metric learning (Castro et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2021; Zang et al., 2022) capture task-relevant representations by measuring behavioral similarities between
states based on their rewards and transition distributions,
and appear to be a promising solution to mitigate this issue.
In this work, we integrate the self-attention mechanism with
bisimulation metric, offering a powerful approach to multiview representation learning and fusion. Inspired by BERT
(Devlin, 2018) and ViT (Dosovitskiy, 2020), a learnable fusion [state] embedding for MVRL tasks is introduced to
avoid biases from fixed views, and dynamically capture the
optimal fusion of multi-view information. By aligning the
fusion of multi-view representations based on the similarity
of task-relevant information, we enable robust multi-view
integration and efficient control. However, bisimulation
metric learning heavily depends on rewards to fuse state
representations, which may cause it to overlook fine-grained
information or interactions unique to each view not directly
reflected in the reward signal. Secondly, bisimulation assumes complete and high-quality observations, making it
vulnerable to scenarios where observations are incomplete,
as it lacks mechanisms to compensate for missing views.

1. Introduction
In robotic manipulation tasks, acquiring accurate 3D scene
information, including understanding target position, orientation, occlusions, and stacking relationships among objects
in complex environments, is crucial for effective grasping
and interaction with objects (Ze et al., 2023; Akinola et al.,
2020). However, directly using 3D inputs is often bottle*
Equal contribution, order is determined by a random drawing.
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 2 Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of
Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China 3 Meituan, Beijing,
China 4 Wayve, London, UK 5 Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montreal,
Canada. † Correspondence to: Xin Li <xinli@bit.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

