Shifting Time: Time-series Forecasting with Khatri-Rao Neural Operators

Srinath Dama 1 Kevin Course 1 Prasanth B. Nair 1

data

Abstract

forecast

We present an operator-theoretic framework for
temporal and spatio-temporal forecasting based
on learning a continuous time-shift operator. Our
operator learning paradigm offers a continuous
relaxation of the discrete lag factor used in traditional autoregressive models, enabling the history
of a system up to a given time to be mapped to its
future values. We parametrize the time-shift operator using Khatri-Rao neural operators (KRNOs),
a novel architecture based on non-stationary integral transforms with nearly linear computational
scaling. Our framework naturally handles irregularly sampled observations and enables forecasting at super-resolution in both space and time.
Extensive numerical studies across diverse temporal and spatio-temporal benchmarks demonstrate
that our approach achieves state-of-the-art or competitive performance with leading methods.

time
Figure 1. The top row shows low-resolution test data. In the bottom
row we plot a high-resolution forecast. By parametrizing the timeshift operator with a Khatri-Rao neural operator we can forecast in
super-resolution in both space and time.

models in natural language processing tasks (Vaswani et al.,
2017) and computer vision applications (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020), this class of models is gaining popularity in timeseries forecasting (Chen et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022; 2024; Gruver et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). In the world of
spatio-temporal forecasting, Gaussian processes (Hamelijnck et al., 2021), deep operator networks (DeepONets) (Lu
et al., 2021), and neural operators (Li et al., 2020b;c;d) have
emerged as cornerstones of the literature.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is a fundamental problem in machine learning and statistics with applications to a broad
spectrum of problems encountered in all branches of science, engineering, and finance (Roberts et al., 2013; Milani
et al., 2017; Siami-Namini & Namin, 2018). At a high-level,
time-series problems are concerned with forecasting the future values of quantities of interest given past observations
of the same or correlated quantities.

A major challenge with all autoregressive-style models is
that observations are required to be provided at a constant
frequency at both training and inference time. This requirement introduces a number of challenges in practice. First,
when observations are not provided at regular intervals, it
is common practice to create a hierarchy of approximations
that can negatively impact performance for reasons unrelated to the capacity of the model. Second, in an online
setting, this requirement necessitates creating a pipeline for
imputing any missing data points (due to sensor error or
system latency) before predictions can be made. While neural ordinary differential equations based methods (Chen
et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019) have shown tremendous
promise for learning from irregularly spaced observations,
they are challenging to scale and train for large-scale temporal and spatio-temporal datasets.

The majority of methods for time-series forecasting largely
fall into the categories of autoregressive moving average
models and their variants (Box & Jenkins, 1976; Girard,
2004), and deep autoregressive models with memory (Elman, 1990; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Salinas et al.,
2020). With the tremendous success of transformer-based
1

Institute for Aerospace Studies, University of
Toronto, ON, Canada.
Correspondence to:
Srinath
Dama <srinath.dama@mail.utoronto.ca>,
Kevin Course
<kevin.course@mail.utoronto.ca>, Prasanth B. Nair <prasanth.nair@utoronto.ca>.

In the present work, we propose casting time-series forecasting problems as a supervised learning problem of the continuous time-shift operator. In contrast to standard autoregressive models based on discrete-time (or discrete space-time)
representation of the dynamics, the continuous time-shift

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

