Improving Flow Matching by Aligning Flow Divergence

Yuhao Huang 1 2 Taos Transue 1 2 Shih-Hsin Wang 1 2 William Feldman 1 Hong Zhang 3 Bao Wang 1 2

Abstract

FM circumvents computationally expensive sample simulations to estimate gradients or densities. The celebrated
diffusion models (DMs) with variance preserving (VP) or
variance exploding (VE) stochastic differential equations
(SDEs) (Song et al., 2020) can be viewed as special cases
of FGMs with diffusion paths (c.f. Section 2). Furthermore,
FM excels in generative modeling on non-Euclidean spaces,
broadening its scientific applications (Baker et al., 2024;
Chen & Lipman, 2024; Jing et al., 2023; Bose et al., 2024;
Yim et al., 2024; Stark et al., 2024).

Conditional flow matching (CFM) stands out as
an efficient, simulation-free approach for training
flow-based generative models, achieving remarkable performance for data generation. However,
CFM is insufficient to ensure accuracy in learning
probability paths. In this paper, we introduce a
new partial differential equation characterization
for the error between the learned and exact probability paths, along with its solution. We show that
the total variation gap between the two probability
paths is bounded above by a combination of the
CFM loss and an associated divergence loss. This
theoretical insight leads to the design of a new
objective function that simultaneously matches
the flow and its divergence. Our new approach
improves the performance of the flow-based generative model by a noticeable margin without sacrificing generation efficiency. We showcase the
advantages of this enhanced training approach
over CFM on several important benchmark tasks,
including generative modeling for dynamical systems, DNA sequences, and videos. Code is available at Utah-Math-Data-Science.

At the core of FM is the idea of regressing a vector field
that interpolates between the prior noise distribution q(x) –
typically the standard Gaussian – and the data distribution
p(x). Specifically, we aim to regress the vector field ut (x)
that guides the probability flow pt (x) interpolating between
an easy-to-sample noise distribution and the data distribution, i.e., p0 = q and p1 ≈ p. The relationship between ut
and pt is formalized by the following continuity equation
(Villani et al., 2009):
∂pt (x)
+ ∇ · (pt (x)ut (x)) = 0.
∂t
FM approximates ut using a neural network-parameterized
vector field vt (x, θ), seeking to minimize the FM loss:
h
2i
(1)
LFM (θ) := Et,pt (x) vt (x, θ) − ut (x) ,

1. Introduction

where t ∼ U [0, 1] follows a uniform distribution over the
unit time interval [0, 1].

Flow matching (FM) – leveraging a neural network to learn
a predefined vector field mapping between noise and data
samples – has emerged as an efficient simulation-free training approach for flow-based generative models (FGMs),
achieving remarkable stability, computational efficiency,
and flexibility for generative modeling (Lipman et al., 2023;
Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Compared to the classical likelihood-based approaches for training FGMs, e.g., (Chen et al., 2018; Grathwohl et al., 2018),

However, equation (1) is intractable as ut (x) is unavailable. To address this, an alternative simulation-free method,
known as conditional flow matching (CFM) (Lipman et al.,
2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023), is employed. In
CFM, vt (x, θ) is trained by regressing against a predefined
conditional vector field on a per-sample basis, ensuring
both computational efficiency and accuracy. Concretely,
for any data sample x1 ∼ p(x), we can define a conditional probability path pt (x|x1 ) for t ∈ [0, 1] satisfying
p0 (x|x1 ) = q(x) and p1 (x|x1 ) ≈ δ(x − x1 ), and define
the associated conditional vector field ut (x|x1 ); see Section 2 for a review on several common designs of conditional
probability paths. Once the conditional probability paths
are defined, the marginal probability path pt (x) is given by:
Z
pt (x) := pt (x|x1 )p(x1 )dx1 .

1

Department of Mathematics, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA 2 Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA 3 Mathematics and Computer Science
Division, 240 Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA.
Correspondence to: Bao Wang <wangbaonj@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

