How to Evaluate and Mitigate IP Infringement in Visual Generative AI?

Zhenting Wang 1 Chen Chen 2 Vikash Sehwag 2 Minzhou Pan 3 Lingjuan Lyu 2

Abstract

models, such as latent diffusion, have demonstrated a remarkable ability to generate photorealistic images that are
nearly indistinguishable from real photographs. This trend
has captured the attention of major technology companies,
who have developed and released products like DALL-E
3 (Betker et al., 2023), developed by OpenAI, alongside
the most recent Sora (OpenAI, c), Stable Diffusion XL
(Podell et al., 2024) and Stable Video Diffusion (Blattmann
et al., 2023) by Stability AI, Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022)
and Gemini (Team et al., 2023) by Google. As these
powerful visual generative AI models are integrated into
business platforms and made more accessible, they have
the potential to reach billions of users worldwide. This
widespread accessibility is poised to revolutionize various
industries, from digital art and media production to advertising and beyond, by enabling the creation of highly realistic and diverse visual content with unprecedented ease and
efficiency. According to recent statistics (Pho, 2024; ais,
2023), there are more than 18 billion AI-generated images
created within a year, and this number is growing rapidly.

The popularity of visual generative AI models like DALL-E 3, Stable Diffusion XL, Stable Video Diffusion, and Sora has been increasing. Through extensive evaluation, we discovered that the state-of-the-art visual generative
models can generate content that bears a striking resemblance to characters protected by intellectual property rights held by major entertainment companies (such as Sony, Marvel, and
Nintendo), which raises potential legal concerns.
This happens when the input prompt contains
the character’s name or even just descriptive details about their characteristics. To mitigate such
IP infringement problems, we also propose a
defense method against it. In detail, we develop a revised generation paradigm that can
identify potentially infringing generated content
and prevent IP infringement by utilizing guidance techniques during the diffusion process. It
has the capability to recognize generated content that may be infringing on intellectual property rights, and mitigate such infringement by
employing guidance methods throughout the diffusion process without retrain or fine-tune the
pretrained models. Experiments on well-known
character IPs like Spider-Man, Iron Man, and
Superman demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed defense method. Our data and code
can be found at https://github.com/
ZhentingWang/GAI_IP_Infringement.

As visual generative artificial intelligence systems become
more widely adopted and advanced, the issues and concerns surrounding their potential for intellectual property
(IP) infringement are emerging as increasingly critical topics that require close examination (Wang et al., 2024c;
Chen et al., 2023; Andersen et al., 2023). For instance, we
find that the contents produced by these AI models, such
as images and videos, can inadvertently include characters
that bear a striking resemblance to IP-protected characters
owned by other companies. In Figure 1 and Figure 2, we
demonstrate examples of the IP infringement of the generated content of the state-of-the-art visual generative AI
models, i.e., DALL-E 3 and Midjourney. As can be clearly
seen, all models generate images which are highly similar to the character “Spider-Man” when using the prompt
“Generate an image of the Spider-Man”. Furthermore, the
model can even generate the “Spider-Man” images without directly mentioning the character’s name in the prompt.
This is particularly problematic when the visual generation
involves well-known characters belonging to large companies in the movie, gaming, and entertainment industries,
such as Sony, Marvel, and Nintendo. The increasing sophistication of these visual generative AI systems might
raise complex legal and ethical questions around the bound-

1. Introduction
Recently, the rapid development of AI-generated content
(AIGC) has been further amplified by advancements in
visual generative models (Betker et al., 2023; OpenAI,
c; Podell et al., 2024; Blattmann et al., 2023). These
1
Rutgers University 2 Sony AI 3 Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Lingjuan Lyu <Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

