Contract Design Under Approximate Best Responses

Francesco Bacchiocchi 1 Jiarui Gan 2 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Marchesi 1 Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract

Nowadays, principal-agent problems find application in a
terrific number of real-world settings, such as, e.g., crowdsourcing (Ho et al., 2014), online labor platforms (Kaynar
& Siddiq, 2023), blockchain (Cong & He, 2019), delegation
of machine learning tasks (Cai et al., 2015), and pay-forperformance healthcare (Bastani et al., 2016; 2019). Moreover, algorithmic contract design is playing a crucial role
in today’s world, which increasingly relies on AI agents
to perform complex tasks (see, e.g., (Hadfield-Menell &
Hadfield, 2019; Saig et al., 2024)).

Principal-agent problems model scenarios where
a principal incentivizes an agent to take costly, unobservable actions through the provision of payments. Such problems are ubiquitous in several
real-world applications, ranging from blockchain
to the delegation of machine learning tasks. In
this paper, we initiate the study of hidden-action
principal-agent problems under approximate best
responses, in which the agent may select any action that is not too much suboptimal given the
principal’s payment scheme (a.k.a. contract). Our
main result is a polynomial-time algorithm to
compute an optimal contract under approximate
best responses. This positive result is perhaps
surprising, since, in Stackelberg games, computing an optimal commitment under approximate
best responses is computationally intractable. We
also investigate the learnability of contracts under approximate best responses, by providing a
no-regret learning algorithm for a natural application scenario where the principal has no prior
knowledge about the environment.

Previous works on algorithmic contract design assume that
the agent always plays a best-response action to the principal’s contract. However, if the agent actually responds (even
slightly) suboptimally to the principal, then the principal’s
utility may substantially deteriorate. This may be the case
in most of the real-world applications of interest, for several
different reasons. For instance, the principal may not perfectly know agent’s features and account for the wrong best
response, the agent may not be powerful enough to compute
an (exact) best-response action, or they may inaccurately
interpret the principal’s contract.
In this paper, we initiate the study of hidden-action principalagent problems under approximate agent’s best responses.
Specifically, we consider settings in which the agent may
take actions that are up to δ ∈ (0, 1) suboptimal under the
principal’s contract. We do not make any assumption on the
specific δ-best response selected by the agent, but we allow
them to take any of such actions. Thus, we take a worst-case
approach and consider the problem of designing contracts
under the assumption that the agent selects the worst δ-best
response for the principal. Contracts designed in such a way
are said to be robust, as they guard the principal against any
possible (conceivable) suboptimal behavior of the agent.

1. Introduction
In hidden-action principal-agent problems, a principal tries
to steer the behavior of a self-interested agent toward favorable outcomes. The agent has to take a costly action that
stochastically determines an outcome resulting in a reward
for the principal. The main challenge is that the agent’s
action is hidden to the principal, who can only observe the
realized outcome. Thus, the principal influences the agent’s
behavior by committing to a contract, which is an outcomedependent payment scheme whose aim is to induce the agent
to take a high-cost action leading to high principal’s rewards.
The principal’s goal is to design an optimal contract, namely
one maximizing their utility, i.e., rewards minus payments.

1.1. Results and Techniques
In this paper, we provide an extensive treatment of the computational and learnability aspects of the design of robust
contracts. The results presented in the paper are organized
into three main parts as summarized below.

1
Politecnico di Milano 2 University of Oxford. Correspondence
to: Francesco Bacchiocchi <francesco.bacchiocchi@polimi.it>.

The Price of Robustness In the first part of the paper, as
a preliminary analysis, we provide a characterization of the
maximum utility that the principal can achieve by means of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

