S TACEY: Promoting Stochastic Steepest Descent via Accelerated
ℓp -Smooth Nonconvex Optimization

Xinyu Luo * 1 Cedar Site Bai * 1 Bolian Li * 1 Petros Drineas 1 Ruqi Zhang 1 Brian Bullins 1

Abstract

more recent methods like signSGD (Bernstein et al., 2018)
and Lion (Chen et al., 2023) focus on using the sign of the
(stochastic) gradient.

While popular optimization methods such as
SGD, AdamW, and Lion depend on steepest descent updates in either ℓ2 or ℓ∞ norms, there remains a critical gap in handling the non-Euclidean
structure observed in modern deep networks training. In this work, we address this need by introducing a new accelerated ℓp steepest descent algorithm, called S TACEY, which uses interpolated
primal-dual iterate sequences to effectively navigate non-Euclidean smooth optimization tasks.
In addition to providing novel theoretical guarantees for the foundations of our algorithm, we
empirically compare our approach against these
popular methods on tasks including image classification and language model (LLM) pretraining,
demonstrating both faster convergence and higher
final accuracy. We further evaluate different values of p across various models and datasets, underscoring the importance and efficiency of nonEuclidean approaches over standard Euclidean
methods. Code can be found at https://
github.com/xinyuluo8561/Stacey.

Although these algorithms have shown impressive empirical
performance (sometimes exceeding that of standard adaptive methods), their theoretical analyses typically rely on
Euclidean (i.e., ℓ2 ) or ℓ∞ -based assumptions. Specifically,
crucial to guarantees of finding ϵ-approximate stationary
points (Carmon et al., 2017; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Jin et al.,
2017) are two related choices: (i) the norm used to define
stationarity, and (ii) the corresponding notion of smoothness.
Classical analyses in deep learning often adopt Euclidean
smoothness (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013), while signSGD relies
on ℓ∞ -based assumptions (Bernstein et al., 2018; Balles
et al., 2020).
Yet, there is mounting evidence—both theoretical and empirical—suggesting that a more flexible ℓp perspective can capture the geometric structure of complex deep network objectives far better than either p = 2 or p = ∞ alone (Adolphs
et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2021; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2020a; Papyan, 2018). For instance,
depending on the shape of the loss surface and the distribution of gradients across coordinates, certain ℓp norms
with 2 < p < ∞ may lead to faster descent or improved
generalization. This leaves open a significant gap: How
can we develop and analyze optimizers in alternative nonEuclidean regimes, namely those with general ℓp norms
where p ∈ (2, ∞)?

1. Introduction
Stochastic first-order methods have proven essential for efficiently training modern deep learning models. Beyond the
basic stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm (Robbins
& Monro, 1951) and its momentum-based variants (Nesterov, 1983; Polyak, 1964), a variety of adaptive methods
have been developed, such as AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011a),
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), and AdamW (Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2019), which incorporate second-moment gradient
information to provide per-coordinate scaling. Meanwhile,

To address this question, we propose a novel approach
that we term S TACEY (Stochastic Steepest Descent with
Acceleration). Our development builds on insights from
both ℓp -steepest descent and non-Euclidean acceleration
techniques (Allen-Zhu & Orecchia, 2017; Diakonikolas &
Guzmán, 2024; Nemirovskii & Nesterov, 1985; Nesterov,
2005), combining primal-dual (Diakonikolas & Orecchia,
2019) iterates with an interpolation scheme designed specifically for ℓp -based smoothness. While the notion of acceleration is well understood in the classical (Euclidean)
setting (Nesterov, 1983), extending it to arbitrary ℓp norms
introduces a fundamental trade-off: although we may attain improved geometry dependence (and thus potentially
faster practical convergence in certain regimes), the theoret-

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, Indiana, USA. Correspondence to: Xinyu Luo
<luo466@purdue.edu>, Cedar Site Bai <bai123@purdue.edu>,
Bolian Li <li4468@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

