Conformal Prediction as Bayesian Quadrature

Jake C. Snell 1 Thomas L. Griffiths 1 2

Abstract

which aim to provide guarantees for model performance in a
distribution-free way. However, these techniques are based
on ideas from frequentist statistics, making it difficult to
incorporate prior knowledge that might be available about
specific models. For example, in a particular setting we
might have access to some information about the distribution
of the data that is likely to be encountered, and can construct
tighter guarantees on the performance of models by making
use of this information. Moreover, they focus on controlling
the expected loss averaged over many unobserved datasets
rather than focusing on the actual set of observations.

As machine learning-based prediction systems are
increasingly used in high-stakes situations, it is
important to understand how such predictive models will perform upon deployment. Distributionfree uncertainty quantification techniques such as
conformal prediction provide guarantees about
the loss black-box models will incur even when
the details of the models are hidden. However,
such methods are based on frequentist probability,
which unduly limits their applicability. We revisit
the central aspects of conformal prediction from
a Bayesian perspective and thereby illuminate the
shortcomings of frequentist guarantees. We propose a practical alternative based on Bayesian
quadrature that provides interpretable guarantees
and offers a richer representation of the likely
range of losses to be observed at test time.

In this paper, we show how methods for guaranteeing model
performance can be understood and extended by viewing
them from a Bayesian perspective. We develop a framework
in which we explicitly model uncertainty in the quantile
values associated with particular observations, providing a
nonparametric tool for characterizing possible distributions
where the model might be deployed that is appropriately
constrained by observed data. This framework allows us to
draw upon methods from the fields of statistical prediction
analysis (Aitchison & Dunsmore, 1975) and probabilistic
numerics (Cockayne et al., 2019; Hennig et al., 2022) to
develop guarantees that are interpretable and make adaptive
use of available information.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems based on deep learning are increasingly used in high-stakes settings, such as medical
diagnosis or financial applications. These settings impose
unique constraints on the performance of these systems: we
want them to produce good outcomes in the aggregate, but
also do so fairly and with a guarantee of a low probability of
harm. However, predictive models based on deep learning
can be difficult to interpret, and commercial models increasingly tend to offer little information about the techniques
used in training. This creates a new challenge: How can we
flexibly and reliably quantify the suitability of a model for
deployment without making too many assumptions about
how the model was trained or in which settings it will be
used?

We show that two popular uncertainty quantification methods, split conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Papadopoulos et al., 2002) and conformal risk control (Angelopoulos et al., 2024), can both be recovered as special cases of our framework. Our approach gives a more
complete characterization of the performance of these approaches, as we are able to determine the full distribution
of possible outcomes rather than a single point estimate.
Since our approach is grounded in Bayesian probability, we
can easily incorporate knowledge relevant to evaluating the
performance of these models when it is present, such as
monotonicity or distributional assumptions, while defaulting to existing methods when absent. Our results show
that Bayesian probability, while it is often discarded due to
the apparent need to specify prior distributions, is actually
well-suited for distribution-free uncertainty quantification.

Recent research on quantifying uncertainty has employed
methods based on conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005),
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
Department of Psychology, Princeton University. Correspondence
to: Jake C. Snell <jsnell@princeton.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

