KEA: Keeping Exploration Alive
by Proactively Coordinating Exploration Strategies

Shih-Min Yang 1 Martin Magnusson 1 Johannes A. Stork 1 Todor Stoyanov 1

Abstract

limit task generalization. To reduce reliance on handcrafted
dense rewards, early works have focused on sparse reward
settings, where feedback is rare. However, this makes exploration difficult, and basic strategies like stochastic sampling (Tokic, 2010; Bridle, 1989) or additive noise (Silver
et al., 2014) often fail. In this context, Soft Actor-Critic
(SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Christodoulou, 2019) has
shown significant success in continuous control tasks (Zhou
et al., 2023; Zhou & Held, 2023; Yang et al., 2022) by optimizing exploration and exploitation via stochastic policies
and entropy regularization. However, even SAC struggles
with inefficient exploration under sparse rewards.

Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) has achieved notable success in continuous control tasks but struggles in
sparse reward settings, where infrequent rewards
make efficient exploration challenging. While
novelty-based exploration methods address this
issue by encouraging the agent to explore novel
states, they are not trivial to apply to SAC. In particular, managing the interaction between noveltybased exploration and SAC’s stochastic policy
can lead to inefficient exploration and redundant
sample collection. In this paper, we propose KEA
(Keeping Exploration Alive) which tackles the
inefficiencies in balancing exploration strategies
when combining SAC with novelty-based exploration. KEA integrates a novelty-augmented SAC
with a standard SAC agent, proactively coordinated via a switching mechanism. This coordination allows the agent to maintain stochasticity in
high-novelty regions, enhancing exploration efficiency and reducing repeated sample collection.
We first analyze this potential issue in a 2D navigation task, and then evaluate KEA on the DeepSea
hard-exploration benchmark as well as sparse reward control tasks from the DeepMind Control
Suite. Compared to state-of-the-art novelty-based
exploration baselines, our experiments show that
KEA significantly improves learning efficiency
and robustness in sparse reward setups.

Reward shaping (Ng et al., 1999; Hu et al., 2020; Ladosz
et al., 2022) has been used to improve exploration, but it
risks misaligning the agent’s behavior from the true task objective (Irpan, 2018; Popov et al., 2017). Solving sparse reward tasks is essential for objective alignment. One promising solution to sparse rewards is to augment (extrinsic)
rewards with intrinsic signals that encourage exploration.
Curiosity-based methods (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al.,
2019) use prediction errors from learned dynamics models, while novelty-based methods (Burda et al., 2018; Badia
et al., 2020) compute intrinsic rewards based on the novelty
of visited states. However, while unvisited states may offer
high intrinsic rewards in principle, the agent has no prior experience to estimate their novelty. As a result, novelty-based
methods tend to reinforce revisiting previously known states
that have already been assigned high intrinsic rewards, lacking a mechanism to actively target truly unvisited states. To
improve exploration, NovelD (Zhang et al., 2021) combines
novelty differences with episodic counting-based bonuses
to focus exploration on the boundary between visited and
unvisited regions. This increases the likelihood of entering
previously unvisited regions by chance.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of deep reinforcement learning (RL) in
continuous control tasks, such as robotic manipulation, these
methods often rely on manually designed dense rewards
(Zhou et al., 2023; Zhou & Held, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2024), which require task-specific expertise and

While novelty-based methods have been shown to improve
exploration when coupled with an on-policy RL method
such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), applying them to
sample-efficient off-policy methods presents additional challenges. For example, Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) drives exploration via stochastic policy sampling with entropy regularization. When combined with novelty-based methods, this
can lead to unintended interactions between exploration

1
Department of AASS, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
Correspondence to: Shih-Min Yang <shih-min.yang@oru.se>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

