Trajectory Inference with Smooth Schrödinger Bridges

Wanli Hong * 1 2 Yuliang Shi * 3 Jonathan Niles-Weed 1 4

Abstract

Lavenant et al., 2024) builds on Schrödinger’s remarkable
thought experiment (Schrödinger, 1931; Schrödinger, 1932),
formulating trajectory inference as a Kullback–Leibler minimization problem. Suppose that a set of particles is observed
at times t0 , . . . , tK ∈ [0, 1] and that the particles’ arrangement at time tk is represented by a probability measure µk ,
for all k ∈ [K]. The multi-marginal Schrödinger bridge
corresponding to these observations is the solution of

Motivated by applications in trajectory inference and particle tracking, we introduce Smooth
Schrödinger Bridges. Our proposal generalizes
prior work by allowing the reference process in
the multi-marginal Schrödinger Bridge problem
to be a smooth Gaussian process, leading to more
regular and interpretable trajectories in applications. Though naı̈vely smoothing the reference
process leads to a computationally intractable
problem, we identify a class of processes (including the Matérn processes) for which the resulting
Smooth Schrödinger Bridge problem can be lifted
to a simpler problem on phase space, which can be
solved in polynomial time. We develop a practical
approximation of this algorithm that outperforms
existing methods on numerous simulated and real
single-cell RNAseq datasets.

min D(P |R) s.t. Pk = µk , ∀k ∈ [K],

P ∈P(Ω)

(1)

where D is the Kullback–Leibler divergence, Pk denotes
the time marginal of P at time tk , and R is the law of a reference process, typically Brownian motion. (See Appendix A
for a complete list of notation.) This formulation has an elegant quasi-Bayesian interpretation: the Schrödinger bridge
matches the observed marginal distributions while keeping
particle trajectories as faithful as possible to the prior R.
While extensively studied both theoretically and methodologically, this classical Schrödinger Bridge (SB) approach
has a critical limitation: its trajectories inherit the roughness
of Brownian paths, leading to noisier estimators and less interpretable posterior paths; see Figure 1, left side. Moreover,
when the experimenter aims to track the positions of individual particles in a system evolving over time, inference
with the Brownian motion prior fails to “borrow strength”
from adjacent time points, resulting in less accurate results;
see Figure 2, left side.

1. Introduction
The trajectory inference problem—reconstructing the paths
of particles from snapshots of their evolution—is fundamental to modern data science, with applications in singlecell biology (Huguet et al., 2022a; Saelens et al., 2019;
Schiebinger et al., 2019; Sha et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2020),
fluid dynamics (Brunton et al., 2020; Ouellette et al., 2006),
and astronomical object tracking (Kubica et al., 2007; Liounis et al., 2020). Given observations of a collection of
indistinguishable particles at discrete times, the statistician
aims to infer the continuous trajectories that generated this
data.

The literature on trajectory inference contains various proposals for encouraging smooth paths, inspired by spline
algorithms on Rd or the dynamics of physical systems. (A
full comparison with prior work appears in Appendix B.)
However, from the perspective of Schrödinger’s original
formulation, these modifications sacrifice the clear statistical interpretation of (1). We develop a new approach:
a smooth version of the Schrödinger Bridge problem in
which the Brownian motion is replaced by a smooth Gaussian process. This proposal has an appealing statistical
grounding: like Gaussian process regression (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2006), it provides a flexible and principled way
to perform non-parametric estimation while incorporating
prior smoothness assumptions. As Figures 1 and 2, right
side, show, the resulting estimates significantly outperform
the vanilla Schrödinger Bridge, producing better estimates
with smoother paths.

A leading approach (Chen et al., 2019; Chizat et al., 2022;
*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, United States 2 Shanghai Frontiers Science
Center of Artificial Intelligence and Deep Learning New York University Shanghai Shanghai, China 3 Department of Mathematics,
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 4 Courant
Institute of Mathematical Science, New York University, New
York, United States. Correspondence to: Jonathan Niles-Weed
<jnw@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

