Learning Initial Basis Selection for Linear Programming via Duality-Inspired
Tripartite Graph Representation and Comprehensive Supervision

Anqi Lu 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

tions represented by basic solutions rather than numerical approximations. With contributions from numerous
researchers, the simplex method has maintained high performance on large-scale problems and remains a fundamental
approach for solving LP problems. The revised simplex
method (Dantzig & Orchard-Hays, 1954) made it practical with limited numerical accuracy on computing units.
(Lemke, 1954) demonstrated the importance of the dual simplex method, while (Forrest & Goldfarb, 1992) developed a
computationally efficient steepest edge pricing rule. (Harris, 1973) introduced the two-stage ratio test, which uses
feasibility tolerances to find better pivot elements. (Suhl
& Suhl, 1990) presented an efficient LU factorization implementation, and (Forrest & Tomlin, 1972) improved the
updating basis method. Anti-degeneracy techniques (Ryan
& Osborne, 1988) prevent the simplex method from cycling in dead loops. These improvements have significantly
enhanced the efficiency and stability of the simplex method.

For the fundamental linear programming (LP)
problems, the simplex method remains popular,
which usually requires an appropriate initial basis
as a warm start to accelerate the solving process.
Predicting an initial basis close to an optimal one
can often accelerate the solver, but a closer initial
basis does not always result in greater acceleration. To achieve better acceleration, we propose
a GNN model based on a tripartite graph representation inspired by LP duality. This approach
enables more effective feature extraction for general LP problems and enhances the expressiveness of GNNs. Additionally, we introduce novel
loss functions targeting basic variable selection
and basis feasibility, along with data preprocessing schemes, to further improve learning capability. In addition to achieving high prediction accuracy, we enhance the quality of the initial basis
for practical use. Experimental results show that
our approach greatly surpasses the state-of-the-art
method in predicting initial basis with greater accuracy and in reducing the number of iterations
and solving time of the LP solver.

Since the simplex method pivots from basic solution to basic
solution, the strategy for choosing the initial basis greatly
impacts performance. A better starting point may be closer
to the potential optimal solution in terms of logical pivot
distance, often resulting in fewer simplex iterations. The
most fundamental strategy is the logical basis introduced
by (Chvátal, 1983), which simply selects all slack variables.
This strategy is straightforward, ensuring nonsingularity
and convenient inverse computation, making it still active
in simplex solvers like HiGHS (Huangfu & Hall, 2018b).
However, this conservative strategy is independent of input
problems and does not seek better starting points for various
problems. The potential for performance improvement has
prompted extensive research.

1. Introduction
Linear programming (LP) has played a vital role in decisionmaking since it was first introduced by (Dantzig, 1948).
Many real-world optimization problems can be formulated
as linear models or approximated through linearization. Furthermore, LP remains the most frequently used optimization
technique in complex optimization problems such as Mixed
Integer Programming (MIP).

The seminal work (Bixby, 1992) presented a heuristic
method implemented in CPLEX (Gearhart et al., 2013), constructing the initial basis in a preference order. It prioritizes
slack and free variables over bounded and non-singleton
variables to keep the basis sparse and well-behaved, while
minimizing the inclusion of artificial variables to avoid their
restrictive bounds on optimization. It works better for easier
problems but is less effective for harder ones. The “Idiot”
crash (Galabova & Hall, 2020), another practical method, is
more complex and time-consuming. Implemented by For-

The simplex method is a widely-used algorithm for LP
problems, known for obtaining theoretical optimal solu1

Sch. of Artificial Intelligence & Sch. of Computer Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

