An Error Analysis of Flow Matching for Deep Generative Modeling

Zhengyu Zhou 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

ential equation (ODE) (Chen et al., 2018; Grathwohl et al.,
2019). However, training neural ODEs at scale is intractable,
as it requires simulating the ODE. The introduction of Flow
Matching (FM) has made CNFs highly efficient for generative modeling of complex data (Karras et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Lipman et al.,
2023; Neklyudov et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2023; Chen & Lipman, 2023; Albergo et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023; De Bortoli
et al., 2021).

Continuous Normalizing Flows (CNFs) have
proven to be a highly efficient technique for generative modeling of complex data since the introduction of Flow Matching (FM). The core of
FM is to learn the constructed velocity fields of
CNFs through deep least squares regression. Despite its empirical effectiveness, theoretical investigations of FM remain limited. In this paper,
we present the first end-to-end error analysis of
CNFs built upon FM. Our analysis shows that for
general target distributions with bounded support,
the generated distribution of FM is guaranteed to
converge to the target distribution in the sense of
the Wasserstein-2 distance. Furthermore, the convergence rate is significantly improved under an
additional mild Lipschitz condition of the target
score function.

The success of FM motivates a line of research investigating
the generation quality guarantees from the perspective of
sampling (Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Albergo et al.,
2023; Lu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023c). These works
assume the underlying velocity field is accurately estimated
up to a small error under L2 -norm and provide generation
quality guarantees. However, two issues remain unsolved in
these works. The first is to provide guarantees for learning
the velocity field of the underlying ODE. The second is
to relax the strong assumptions on the underlying velocity
field, which may be hard to check. This paper takes a step
forward by providing an end-to-end analysis1 of the deep
generative modeling based on FM under mild assumptions.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Contemporary generative models have primarily been designed around the construction of a map between two probability distributions that transform samples from the prior
distribution to the target distribution. The roots of transportbased sampling and density estimation can be traced back to
maximum entropy methods for Gaussianizing data (Tabak
& Turner, 2013; Tabak & Vanden-Eijnden, 2010). Normalizing Flows (NFs) provide a neural network implementation
of these methods by imposing a structured transformation
to make the change of measure tractable in discrete, sequential steps (Dinh et al., 2017; Durkan et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2018; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015). Continuous Normalizing Flows (CNFs) extend this idea to a continuous-time setting by viewing the
map T (x) = Xt (x) as the solution of an ordinary differ-

• We provide the first end-to-end analysis for the deep
generative models based on FM.
• We prove that the deep generative models built upon
FM are guaranteed to converge to the target distribution
under mild assumption. Furthermore, the convergence
rate gets significantly improved under an additional
Lipschitz condition of the target score function.
1.1. Assumptions
Assumption 1.1 (Bounded support). The target distribution
π1 is supported on [0, 1]d .

1

Assumption 1.2 (Lipschitz score). Let π1 (dx)

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

1

=

End-to-end learning in generative modeling involves using
finite samples from the target distribution as input to learn the
underlying distribution, and then generating samples from the
learned distribution as output. The goal of end-to-end analysis is
to provide guarantees for the accuracy of the learned distribution
based on the finite input samples, enabling more reliable generative
modeling.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

