The Sharpness Disparity Principle in Transformers
for Accelerating Language Model Pre-Training

Jinbo Wang * 1 Mingze Wang * 1 Zhanpeng Zhou * 2 Junchi Yan 2 Weinan E 1 3 4 Lei Wu 1 3 4

Abstract

They have become the de facto design in modern AI models (Team et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a).

Transformers consist of diverse building blocks,
such as embedding layers, normalization layers,
self-attention mechanisms, and point-wise feedforward networks. Thus, understanding the differences and interactions among these blocks is
important. In this paper, we uncover a clear
sharpness disparity across these blocks, which
emerges early in training and intriguingly persists throughout the training process. Motivated
by this finding, we propose Blockwise Learning
Rate (LR), a strategy that tailors the LR to each
block’s sharpness, accelerating large language
model (LLM) pre-training. By integrating Blockwise LR into AdamW, we consistently achieve
lower terminal loss and nearly 2× speedup compared to vanilla AdamW. We demonstrate this acceleration across GPT-2 and LLaMA, with model
sizes ranging from 0.12B to 2B and datasets of
OpenWebText, MiniPile, and C4. Finally, we
incorporate Blockwise LR into other optimizers such as Adam-mini (Zhang et al., 2024c),
a recently proposed memory-efficient variant of
Adam, achieving a combined 2× speedup and
2× memory saving. These results underscore the
potential of exploiting the sharpness disparity to
improve LLM training.

Compared to traditional architectures, e.g., multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
and recurrent neural networks (RNNs), transformers exhibit
distinctive alloy-like characteristics, where diverse types
of blocks synergistically combine to achieve superior performance. A transformer at minimum includes self-attention
(further broken down into query-key (QK) and value-output
(VO)) blocks, point-wise feedforward networks (FFN), normalization layers (Norm), and embedding layers (Emb).
Uncovering the distinct properties of these blocks, as well as
the differences and interactions among them, is thus crucial
for gaining a deeper insight into transformer models (Wang
& E, 2024).
In practice, transformers are typically trained using the
AdamW optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2017). Dissecting the alloy-like characteristics of
transformers can provide insights into why Adam outperforms stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for transformer
training (Devlin, 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Pesme & Flammarion, 2023; Kunstner et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b) and
even holds promise for unlocking further improvements in
training efficiency (Popel & Bojar, 2018; Xiong et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2024c). Particularly, Zhang et al. (2024b) and
Zhang et al. (2024c) observed that unlike MLPs and CNNs,
the Hessian (aka sharpness or curvature) of transformers
exhibits a distinct blockwise heterogeneity. Building on this
insight, Zhang et al. (2024c) successfully reduced Adam’s
memory footprint nearly by half without sacrificing training
efficiency for a variety of LLM and non-LLM training tasks.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved remarkable success across fields, including natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020), vision (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020), and scientific computing (Jumper et al., 2021).

Our Contribution. In this work, we aim to explore how
we can leverage the aforementioned alloy-like characteristics of transformers to improve training efficiency. Specifically, our contributions can be summarized as follows:

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Sciences,
Peking University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Center
for Machine Learning Research, Peking University 4 AI for
Science Institute, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lei
Wu <leiwu@math.pku.edu.cn>, Mingze Wang <mingzewang@stu.pku.edu.cn>.

• The sharpness disparity principle. Motivated by the
alloy-like characteristics, we examine the sharpness of
transformers at the level of block type. Surprisingly, we
discover a distinct disparity in sharpness across different
block types, summarized as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

