Preference Adaptive and Sequential Text-to-Image Generation
Ofir Nabati 1 Guy Tennenholtz 1 ChihWei Hsu 1 Moonkyung Ryu 1 Deepak Ramachandran 2 Yinlam Chow 2
Xiang Li 1 Craig Boutilier 1

Abstract

such, single-turn T2I generation may fail to encapsulate
a user’s nuanced and evolving image conception. This is
especially true for complex or abstract concepts, where a
user’s initial prompt may not suffice in achieving a desired
visual representation.

We address the problem of interactive text-toimage (T2I) generation, designing a reinforcement learning (RL) agent which iteratively improves a set of generated images for a user through
a sequence of prompt expansions. Using human
raters, we create a novel dataset of sequential preferences, which we leverage, together with largescale open-source (non-sequential) datasets. We
construct user-preference and user-choice models using an EM strategy and identify varying
user preference types. We then leverage a large
multimodal language model (LMM) and a valuebased RL approach to suggest an adaptive and
diverse slate of prompt expansions to the user.
Our Preference Adaptive and Sequential Text-toimage Agent (PASTA) extends T2I models with
adaptive multi-turn capabilities, fostering collaborative co-creation and addressing uncertainty or
underspecification in a user’s intent. We evaluate
PASTA using human raters, showing significant
improvement compared to baseline methods. We
also open-source our sequential rater dataset and
simulated user-rater interactions to support future
research in user-centric multi-turn T2I systems.

Addressing this challenge requires moving beyond the
paradigm of one-shot T2I generation towards a more iterative and interactive process (von Rütte et al., 2023; Wang,
2024; Liu et al., 2024), e.g., a collaborative setting where an
assistive agent interacts with a user, guiding them through
a series of refinements of their initial prompt. This interactive setup could allow for a more nuanced elicitation of
the user’s intent, gradually shaping the generated images
towards a desired outcome.
To this end, we introduce a Preference Adaptive and
Sequential Text-to-image Agent (PASTA), which learns
from user preference feedback to guide the user through
a sequence of prompt expansions, iteratively refining the
generated image. This sequential approach (see Figure 1)
allows users to articulate their vision more completely by
gradually reducing uncertainty or underspecification in their
original prompt. Our framework leverages the power of
large multimodal language models (LMMs) (Gemini-Team,
2024; Achiam et al., 2023) and reinforcement learning (RL)
(Sutton, 2018; Fan et al., 2023) to facilitate user-adaptive
co-creation.
Our approach for PASTA involves a multi-stage data collection and training process. We first collect multi-turn interaction data from human raters with a baseline LMM. Using
this sequential data, as well as large-scale, open source
(single-turn) preference data, we train a user simulator. Particularly, we employ an EM-strategy to train user preference and choice models, which capture implicit user preference types in the data. We then construct a new large-scale
dataset, which consists of interactions between a simulated
user and the LMM.1 . Finally, we leverage this augmented
data, encompassing both human and simulated interactions,
to train PASTA – our value-based RL agent, which presents
a sequence of diverse slates of images to a user. PASTA

1. Introduction
Advances in text-to-image (T2I) generation, fueled by powerful diffusion models (Croitoru et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2023;
Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023;
Yu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2024), have
unlocked unprecedented possibilities for image generation,
as users can readily translate textual descriptions into stunning visuals. That said, capturing precise user intent remains
a major challenge (Wu et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2024). As
1

Google Research 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Ofir Nabati <ofirnabati@gmail.com>, Guy Tennenholtz
<guytenn@gmail.com>.

1

Both human and simulation data is open-sourced to support research on multi-turn T2I generation. Link to the dataset:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/googleai/pasta-data.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

