Discovering Spoofing Attempts on Language Model Watermarks

Thibaud Gloaguen 1 Nikola Jovanović 1 Robin Staab 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

tipudi et al., 2024; Christ et al., 2024b). As such watermarks
are actively deployed on top of consumer LLMs (Dathathri
et al., 2024a) and widely embraced by regulators (Biden,
2023; CEU, 2024), ensuring their reliability is crucial.

LLM watermarks stand out as a promising way to
attribute ownership of LLM-generated text. One
threat to watermark credibility comes from spoofing attacks, where an unauthorized third party
forges the watermark, enabling it to falsely attribute arbitrary texts to a particular LLM. Despite recent work demonstrating that state-of-theart schemes are, in fact, vulnerable to spoofing,
no prior work has focused on post-hoc methods
to discover spoofing attempts. In this work, we
for the first time propose a reliable statistical
method to distinguish spoofed from genuinely watermarked text, suggesting that current spoofing
attacks are less effective than previously thought.
In particular, we show that regardless of their
underlying approach, all current learning-based
spoofing methods consistently leave observable
artifacts in spoofed texts, indicative of watermark
forgery. We build upon these findings to propose
rigorous statistical tests that reliably reveal the
presence of such artifacts and thus demonstrate
that a watermark has been spoofed. Our experimental evaluation shows high test power across
all learning-based spoofing methods, providing
insights into their fundamental limitations and
suggesting a way to mitigate this threat. We make
all our code available here.

LLM watermarks To embed a signal, at each step of
generation, using a private key ξ, the watermark algorithm
scores each token, preferentially sampling higher-scoring
ones. While a wide range of watermarking schemes have
been proposed (Christ et al., 2024b; Kuditipudi et al., 2024;
Aaronson, 2023), the most studied and at this time the only
ones deployed in prominent consumer LLMs (Dathathri
et al., 2024a) are from the Red-Green (Kirchenbauer et al.,
2023) family. In Red-Green watermarks, the algorithm
uses ξ and a few previous tokens (context) to partition the
vocabulary into green and red tokens. It then increases the
probability of sampling green tokens. Given a text, the
watermark detector first computes the color of each token
under ξ, wherein a high proportion of green tokens in this
color sequence indicates watermarked text.
Spoofing attacks Recent works have demonstrated targeted attacks on Red-Green watermarks that allow for impersonating (spoofing) the watermark (Sadasivan et al., 2023;
Jovanović et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024).
In spoofing attacks, a malicious actor (spoofer) generates,
without knowing the private key ξ, a text that is detected
as watermarked. State-of-the-art attacks are learning-based
and adhere to a common pipeline (see App. J for a full
taxonomy). First, the malicious actor queries the targeted
model to build a dataset D of genuinely watermarked text.
Then, by either applying statistical methods (Jovanović et al.,
2024), integer programming (Zhang et al., 2024), or finetuning (Gu et al., 2024), the spoofer learns how to forge
the watermark and can generate watermarked text without
additional queries to the original model (Step 1 in Figure 1).

1. Introduction
The abilities of large language models (LLMs) to generate
human-like text at scale (Bubeck et al., 2023; Dubey et al.,
2024) come with a growing risk of potential misuse. This
makes reliable detection of machine-generated text increasingly important. Researchers have proposed the concept of
watermarking: augmenting generated text with an imperceptible signal that can later be detected to attribute ownership
of a text to a specific LLM (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Kudi-

Being able to generate spoofed text at scale poses a serious
threat to the credibility of watermarks. Spoofed text can be
falsely attributed to the model provider, causing reputational
damage, or used as an argument to evade accountability
(Zhou et al., 2024). Moreover, in the case of multi-bit
watermarks that embed client IDs in generated text (Wang
et al., 2024), spoofing attacks can be used to impersonate
and incriminate a specific user.

1
ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Thibaud Gloaguen
<tgloaguen@student.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

