Human-Aligned Image Models Improve Visual Decoding from the Brain

Nona Rajabi 1 Antônio H. Ribeiro 2 * Miguel Vasco 1 * Farzaneh Taleb 1 Mårten Björkman 1 Danica Kragic 1

Abstract
Decoding visual images from brain activity has
significant potential for advancing brain-computer
interaction and enhancing the understanding of
human perception. Recent approaches align the
representation spaces of images and brain activity
to enable visual decoding. In this paper, we introduce the use of human-aligned image encoders to
map brain signals to images. We hypothesize that
these models more effectively capture perceptual
attributes associated with the rapid visual stimuli presentations commonly used in visual brain
data recording experiments. Our empirical results
support this hypothesis, demonstrating that this
simple modification improves image retrieval accuracy by up to 21% compared to state-of-the-art
methods. Comprehensive experiments confirm
consistent performance improvements across diverse EEG architectures, image encoders, alignment methods, participants, and brain imaging
modalities1 .

Query

Figure 1. Performance of image retrieval from EEG data. We
show how the use of human-aligned versions of standard image
encoders consistently leads to an increase in performance across
image retrieval tasks from brain activity. The bars represent the
top-1 retrieval performance averaged over subjects.

1. Introduction
shared representation space.
Decoding visual information from brain activity has long
been a key goal in neuroscience and computer vision, with
the potential to revolutionize brain-computer interfaces,
deepen our understanding of neural processes, and enable
advanced assistive technologies. Current state-of-the-art
methods for visual decoding rely on three core components:
(i) a brain-signal encoder that processes high-dimensional,
multivariate time-series data from the brain; (ii) a pre-trained
image encoder capable of generating semantically rich image embeddings; and (iii) a self-supervised loss function
that aligns brain signals and image embeddings within a

Despite progress, visual decoding, especially from low
signal-to-noise ratio data like electroencephalogram (EEG),
remains a significant challenge. Previous approaches have
explored various brain signal encoders (Benchetrit et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), additional encoding
models (Scotti et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), and auxiliary loss
functions (Ferrante et al., 2024). Yet, overall performance
remains limited; for example, state-of-the-art EEG-based
models achieve only 28% top-1 retrieval accuracy from a
database of 200 unseen test images. Here, we take another
approach and focus on the nature of the image encoder and
how it affects the performance of visual decoding methods.

*
Equal contribution 1 Division of Robotics, Perception, and
Learning, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
2
Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Correspondence to: Nona Rajabi <nonar@kth.se>.

We investigate the use of human-aligned image representation models (Fel et al., 2022; Muttenthaler et al., 2023b;
Sundaram et al., 2024) for visual decoding from brain signals. These models are specifically designed to ensure that
images perceived as similar by humans are closer in the
representation space, effectively aligning the embeddings
with human perception. This alignment is particularly rele-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
All codes are available at https://github.com/
NonaRjb/AlignVis.git

1

