Exploiting Similarity for Computation and Communication-Efficient
Decentralized Optimization

Yuki Takezawa 1 2 Xiaowen Jiang 3 4 Anton Rodomanov 3 Sebastian U. Stich 3

Abstract

mization is reducing communication costs since parameter
exchanges between nodes are often more expensive than
local computation at each node due to high latency and limited bandwidth of the network (Lian et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2019). A key technique to reduce the communication complexity is for each node to perform multiple local updates
before the communication. The concept of multiple local
updates was initially applied for Decentralized Gradient
Descent (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Lian et al., 2017) and
Gradient Tracking (Lorenzo & Scutari, 2016; Pu & Nedic,
2021). However, increasing the number of local steps requires a smaller learning rate, which ultimately requires the
same communication cost to achieve the desired accuracy
level (Koloskova et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024a). This is
because, in Decentralized Gradient Descent, each node tries
to minimize its own local loss function by performing gradient descent multiple times, but fully minimizing its local
loss function is not desirable. Gradient Tracking also has
the same issue, and this inconsistency hinders the use of
multiple local updates to reduce communication complexity.
Thus, to take advantage of multiple local updates, we need
to resolve this inconsistency.

Reducing communication complexity is critical
for efficient decentralized optimization. The proximal decentralized optimization (PDO) framework is particularly appealing, as methods within
this framework can exploit functional similarity
among nodes to reduce communication rounds.
Specifically, when local functions at different
nodes are similar, these methods achieve faster
convergence with fewer communication steps.
However, existing PDO methods often require
highly accurate solutions to subproblems associated with the proximal operator, resulting in
significant computational overhead.
In this work, we propose the Stabilized Proximal Decentralized Optimization (SPDO) method,
which achieves state-of-the-art communication
and computational complexities within the PDO
framework. Additionally, we refine the analysis
of existing PDO methods by relaxing subproblem accuracy requirements and leveraging average functional similarity. Experimental results
demonstrate that SPDO significantly outperforms
existing methods.

An effective approach to address this challenge is to develop
decentralized optimization methods based on the proximalpoint method, where nodes solve the subproblem associated
with the proximal operator in their local updates (termed
PDO framework in this work). Scutari & Sun (2019) demonstrated that combining proximal-point updates with gradient tracking yields an efficient decentralized optimization
scheme, known as SONATA. This method effectively exploits the similarity of local loss functions across nodes to
significantly reduce communication complexity (Sun et al.,
2022; Tian et al., 2022). However, achieving such low
communication complexity requires solving the proximal
subproblem with high accuracy at each node, leading to
suboptimal computational overhead during local updates.

1. Introduction
Decentralized optimization is coming to be a pivotal
paradigm due to its use for privacy preservation and efficient training on large-scale datasets (Nedic & Ozdaglar,
2009; Lian et al., 2017; Koloskova et al., 2020). In decentralized optimization, nodes have different loss functions
and are connected by an underlying network topology. Then,
the nodes exchange parameters with their neighbors every
round and minimize the average loss function.
One of the most important challenges in decentralized opti-

In this work, we pose the following question: Can we develop a proximal decentralized optimization (PDO) method
that achieves low communication complexity without sacrificing computational efficiency? We provide an affirmative
answer by introducing the Stabilized Proximal Decentralized Optimization (SPDO) method. SPDO improves upon

1

Kyoto University 2 OIST 3 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security 4 Saarland University. Correspondence to: Yuki
Takezawa <yuki-takezawa@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

