Action-Dependent Optimality-Preserving Reward Shaping

Grant C. Forbes 1 Jianxun Wang 1 Leonardo Villalobos-Arias 1 Arnav Jhala 1 David L. Roberts 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
There is growing interest in the Reinforcement Learning
(RL) literature in using reward shaping to train agents in
sparse-rewards environments that would otherwise be intractable (Mataric, 1994; Randløv & Alstrøm, 1998; Bellemare et al., 2016); specifically, interest in Intrinsic Motivation (IM): complex, non-Markovian reward functions
used to encourage exploration in sparse reward environments (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018).

Recent RL research has utilized reward shaping–
particularly complex shaping rewards such as intrinsic motivation (IM)–to encourage agent exploration in sparse-reward environments. While
often effective, “reward hacking” can lead to the
shaping reward being optimized at the expense
of the extrinsic reward, resulting in a suboptimal
policy. Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS)
techniques such as Generalized Reward Matching (GRM) and Policy-Invariant Explicit Shaping
(PIES) have mitigated this. These methods allow for implementing IM without altering optimal
policies. In this work we show that they are effectively unsuitable for complex, exploration-heavy
environments with long-duration episodes. To
remedy this, we introduce Action-Dependent Optimality Preserving Shaping (ADOPS), a method
of converting intrinsic rewards to an optimalitypreserving form that allows agents to utilize IM
more effectively in the extremely sparse environment of Montezuma’s Revenge. We also prove
ADOPS accommodates reward shaping functions
that cannot be written in a potential-based form:
while PBRS-based methods require the cumulative discounted intrinsic return be independent
of actions, ADOPS allows for intrinsic cumulative returns to be dependent on agents’ actions
while still preserving the optimal policy set. We
show how action-dependence enables ADOPS’s
to preserve optimality while learning in complex,
sparse-reward environments where other methods
struggle.

It has been noted that both traditional reward shaping (Randløv & Alstrøm, 1998) and IM (Burda et al.,
2019) can be “hacked,” with the agent learning to optimize the shaping reward at the expense of the actual reward. Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS) aims to
rectify this and provide a form for reward-shaping terms in
which they can be guaranteed to not alter the set of optimal
policies of the underlying environment. To apply PBRS
to IM, previous work on Potential-Based Intrinsic Motivation (PBIM) (Forbes et al., 2024a) and Generalized Reward
Matching (GRM) (Forbes et al., 2024b) implement arbitrary
intrinsic rewards while preserving the theoretical optimality
guarantees of PBRS. These methods have proven effective
at speeding up training and preventing divergence from an
optimal policy in grid world and cliff walking domains, with
a tabular exploration reward and Random Network Distillation (RND), respectively. However, their efficacy is still
untested in more complex environments. Policy-Invariant
Explicit Shaping (PIES) (Behboudian et al., 2022), another
method developed for implementing shaping rewards without altering the optimal policy, has similarly been tested thus
far only in relatively simple environments, and not in any
environments wherein training with intrinsic reward is itself
essential in consistently obtaining any extrinsic rewards in
agent-environment interactions during training. Testing in
Montezuma’s Revenge, a benchmark environment that has
been widely acknowledged (Mnih et al., 2015; Burda et al.,
2019) to possess these characteristics, we find that all of
these methods, while preserving the optimal policy set, detract from the agent’s ability to learn to the extent that none
of them can outperform an agent training on RND alone.

1

Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA. Correspondence to: Grant C. Forbes
<gforbes@ncsu.edu>, Jianxun Wang <jwang75@ncsu.edu>,
Leonardo Villalobos-Arias <lvillal@ncsu.edu>, Arnav Jhala
<ahjhala@ncsu.edu>, David L. Roberts <dlrober4@ncsu.edu>.

Motivated by this, we develop Action-Dependent
Optimality-Preserving Shaping (ADOPS), a method for
converting any arbitrary shaping reward (including IM)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

