Pareto-frontier Entropy Search with
Variational Lower Bound Maximization
Masanori Ishikura 1 Masayuki Karasuyama 1

Abstract

(e.g., Knowles, 2006; Emmerich, 2005; Ponweiser et al.,
2008; Belakaria et al., 2019; Suzuki et al., 2020; Qing et al.,
2022; Tu et al., 2022).

This study considers multi-objective Bayesian
optimization (MOBO) through the information
gain of the Pareto-frontier. To calculate the information gain, a predictive distribution conditioned
on the Pareto-frontier plays a key role, which is
deﬁned as a distribution truncated by the Paretofrontier. However, it is usually impossible to obtain the entire Pareto-frontier in a continuous domain, and therefore, the complete truncation cannot be known. We consider an approximation
of the truncated distribution by using a mixture
distribution consisting of two possible approximate truncations obtainable from a subset of the
Pareto-frontier, which we call over- and undertruncation. Since the optimal balance of the mixture is unknown beforehand, we propose optimizing the balancing coefﬁcient through the variational lower bound maximization framework,
by which the approximation error of the information gain can be minimized. Our empirical
evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of the
proposed method particularly when the number
of objective functions is large.

This study focuses on multi-objective BO (MOBO) based
on the information gain of the Pareto-frontier. Since the optimal solution of an MOO problem is not unique in general,
the optimal values are represented as a set of output vectors, called the Pareto-frontier F ∗ . Pareto-frontier entropy
search (PFES) (Suzuki et al., 2020) considers the mutual information between the Pareto-frontier and a candidate point
as an acquisition function of MOBO. The effectiveness of
the basic idea of PFES has been repeatedly shown (Qing
et al., 2022; Tu et al., 2022).
In the information-theoretic approaches considering the information of the Pareto-frontier (Suzuki et al., 2020; Qing
et al., 2022; Tu et al., 2022), the predictive distribution
given the Pareto-frontier p(f (x) | F ∗ ) plays a key role
in the information evaluation, where f (x) is a vector of
objective function values at the input x. In this distribution, f (x) cannot be better than F ∗ because F ∗ should be
the Pareto-frontier. Therefore, p(f (x) | F ∗ ) becomes a
truncated distribution (see Fig. 1(a) for which details will
be discussed in Section 3.2). However, it is practically impossible to obtain the entire F ∗ in a continuous space, and
we only obtain a ﬁnite size subset FS∗ ⊆ F ∗ (red stars
in Fig. 1(a)). This means that the exact truncation by F ∗
shown in Fig. 1(a) cannot be calculated. To avoid this issue, all the existing studies use approximations based on an
overly truncated distribution created by FS∗ (Fig. 1(d)). A
drawback of this approach is that the effect of truncation
by F ∗ on f (x) is always estimated stronger than the true
truncation, because of which we call it over-truncation.

1. Introduction
Multi-objective optimization (MOO) of black-box functions is ubiquitous in a variety of ﬁelds such as materials
science, engineering, drug design, and AutoML. Evolutionary algorithms have been classically studied for MOO,
but they require a large number of function evaluations,
which is often difﬁcult for practical problems. On the
other hand, Bayesian optimization (BO) based approaches
to MOO, which use a probabilistic surrogate model (typically, Gaussian process), have been widely studied recently

In this study, we introduce the variational lower bound
maximization approach into the mutual information (MI)
estimation of information-theoretic MOBO, which is called
Pareto-frontier Entropy search with Variational lower
bound maximization (PFEV). In addition to the conventional over-truncation, we also consider a conservative approach, called under-truncation (shown as Fig. 1(c)). The
under-truncation estimates the effect of truncation by F ∗
weaker than the true truncation. Therefore, to balance two
opposite approaches, we combine the over and the under-

1

Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan. Correspondence to: Masayuki Karasuyama
<karasuyama@nitech.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

