Adapting While Learning:
Grounding LLMs for Scientific Problems with Tool Usage Adaptation

Bohan Lyu * 1 Yadi Cao * 2 Duncan Watson-Parris 2 Leon Bergen 2 Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick 2 Rose Yu 2

Abstract

of large language models (LLMs) in solving scientific problems, from answering general questions (Lu et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2024b) to contributing to scientific discoveries (Ma et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022).
However, except for the largest models like ChatGPT-o1 and
DeepSeek-v3, the abilities of LLMs for scientific reasoning
are still typically limited to high school levels (Rein et al.,
2024; Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2024). LLMs
have the innate behavior of hallucination (Farquhar et al.,
2024) and can produce scientifically invalid outputs.

Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate
promising capabilities in solving scientific
problems but often suffer from the issue of
hallucination. While integrating LLMs with
tools can mitigate this issue, models finetuned
on tool usage become overreliant on them
and incur unnecessary costs. Inspired by how
human experts assess problem complexity before
selecting solutions, we propose a novel twocomponent fine-tuning method, Adapting While
Learning (AWL). In the first component World
Knowledge Learning (WKL), LLMs internalize
scientific knowledge by learning from toolgenerated solutions. In the second component
Tool Usage Adaptation (TUA), we categorize
problems as easy or hard based on the model’s
accuracy, and train it to maintain direct reasoning
for easy problems while switching to tools for
hard ones. We validate our method on 6 scientific
benchmark datasets across climate science,
epidemiology, physics, and other domains. Compared to the original instruct model (8B), models
post-trained with AWL achieve 29.11% higher
answer accuracy and 12.72% better tool usage
accuracy, even surpassing state-of-the-art models
including GPT-4o and Claude-3.5 on 4 customcreated datasets. Our code is open-source at
https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/
Adapting-While-Learning.

Recent studies have shown that LLMs can mitigate hallucination by accessing general-purpose tools (Schick et al.,
2023; Tang et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2024b). Naturally, incorporating specialized
scientific tools, such as physics-based simulators, presents a
solution to complex scientific problems (Schick et al., 2023;
Ma et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2022). However, recent studies
also indicate that LLMs lack the ability to make adaptive
decisions about tool use (Yu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023):
for hard problems, LLMs may not know when or how to
use tools, resulting in hallucinatory responses; conversely,
for easy problems, LLMs may become over-reliant on tools,
resulting in unnecessary computational cost overheads.
We observe that human scientists often first gauge the difficulty of a problem before deciding whether to direct reason or employ external tools (Payne et al., 1993; Kruger &
Dunning, 1999). Hence, we seek to instill similar adaptive
capabilities in LLMs to achieve a balance between accuracy
and cost when solving scientific problems.
To this end, we propose a novel training paradigm, Adapting
While Learning (AWL), which consists of two components.
The first component, World Knowledge Learning (WKL),
uses supervised fine-tuning and preference learning to align
a pre-trained LLM with highly accurate solutions generated
using information from external tools, thereby internalizing
scientific knowledge. In the second component, Tool Usage
Adaptation (TUA), we evaluate the LLM’s direct answering ability and classify questions as easy or hard based on
the model’s accuracy. While maintaining the same alignment target for easy questions, we train the model to follow
external tool-usage traces for hard questions, enabling intelligent selection based on problem complexity.

1. Introduction
To realize the ultimate dream of building an AI scientist,
numerous works have explored the impressive capabilities
*
Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University. Work partially
done during Bohan Lyu’s visit to UC San Diego. 2 University
of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Rose Yu
<roseyu@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

