SCISSOR: Mitigating Semantic Bias through Cluster-Aware Siamese Networks
for Robust Classification
Shuo Yang 1 Bardh Prenkaj 1 Gjergji Kasneci 1

Abstract

• Positive sample
• Negative sample

Furniture
Bed

Shortcut learning undermines model generalization to out-of-distribution data. While the literature attributes shortcuts to biases in superficial
features, we show that imbalances in the semantic
distribution of sample embeddings induce spurious semantic correlations, compromising model
robustness. To address this issue, we propose
SCISSOR (Semantic Cluster Intervention for Suppressing ShORtcut), a Siamese network-based debiasing approach that remaps the semantic space
by discouraging latent clusters exploited as shortcuts. Unlike prior data-debiasing approaches,
SCISSOR eliminates the need for data augmentation and rewriting. We evaluate SCISSOR on
6 models across 4 benchmarks: Chest-XRay and
Not-MNIST in computer vision, and GYAFC and
Yelp in NLP tasks. Compared to several baselines, SCISSOR reports +5.3 absolute points in
F1 score on GYAFC, +7.3 on Yelp, +7.7 on ChestXRay, and +1 on Not-MNIST. SCISSOR is also
highly advantageous for lightweight models with
∼9.5% improvement on F1 for ViT on computer
vision datasets and ∼11.9% for BERT on NLP.
Our study redefines the landscape of model generalization by addressing overlooked semantic
biases, establishing SCISSOR as a foundational
framework for mitigating shortcut learning and
fostering more robust, bias-resistant AI systems.

Coffee
Machine

Desk
Sofa

× Classification hyperplane
influenced by shortcut
√ Classification hyperplane
of the ground truth

SCISSOR

Train set

SCISSOR

Train set
Food

Ice
Cream

Doughnut

Bread
Soup

Figure 1. Illustration of sentiment classification, where semantic
space shows clusters for “Food” and “Furniture.” “Coffee Machine”
and “Ice Cream” are misclassified test samples.

large language models extremely limit their scalability and
practical deployment (Li & Liang, 2021; Hu et al., 2022).
In contrast, the pre-training and fine-tuning pipeline offers a
cost-effective and adaptable solution (Devlin et al., 2019).
However, pre-trained models often fail to maintain the performance observed during fine-tuning when applied to realistic data (Sun et al., 2024). Further analysis originated
this to data biases (Yuan et al., 2024), which is known as the
shortcut issue. Specifically, models rely on spurious correlations between features and labels, obtaining substantially
better results on independently-and-identically-distributed
(ID) data than on out-of-distribution (OOD) data.
For instance, fact-checking models may evaluate the truthfulness of a claim by counting its negations (Thorne et al.,
2018), and bird models may misclassify birds as waterbirds
based on water in the background (Sagawa et al., 2020). Although these shortcuts may hold for specific datasets, they
significantly hinder the applicability of models to real-world
scenarios (Sugawara et al., 2018).

1. Instruction
In recent years, machine learning models have surpassed
human capabilities in various domains, such as education
and E-commerce (Kasneci et al., 2023; Bodonhelyi et al.,
2024). However, the high operational and usage costs of
*

1
Equal contribution
Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.
Correspondence to: Gjergji Kasneci
<gjergji.kasneci@tum.de>.

Current research typically attributes shortcuts to the fragility
of superficial features, e.g., words or pixels (Chen et al.,
2023; Xu et al., 2023a), as opposed to the robustness of semantic features. However, we challenge this assumption and
argue that the distribution of semantic embeddings (Reimers
& Gurevych, 2019) can also appear as shortcuts.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

