TransPL: VQ-Code Transition Matrices for Pseudo-Labeling of
Time Series Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Jaeho Kim 1 Seulki Lee 1

Abstract

ral transitions and inherent sensor characteristics. As such,
a model trained on one specific domain (i.e. source) may
not generalize to previously unseen domains (i.e. target).
For instance, in human activity recognition using wearable
devices, the accelerometer’s gravity component may remain stable across users but the gyroscope readings can
shift dramatically when users wear devices with varying
tightness (Parkka et al., 2007). Therefore, characterizing
the temporal transitions within time series and incorporating selective shift in sensors (channels) for time series domain adaptation potentially enhances both the model
adaptation process and the transparency of the black-box
methodology, as we understand “what” needs to be adapted.

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for time
series data remains a critical challenge in deep
learning, with traditional pseudo-labeling strategies failing to capture temporal patterns and
channel-wise shifts between domains, producing
sub-optimal pseudo labels. As such, we introduce TransPL, a novel approach that addresses
these limitations by modeling the joint distribution P(X, y) of the source domain through
code transition matrices, where the codes are derived from vector quantization (VQ) of time series patches. Our method constructs class- and
channel-wise code transition matrices from the
source domain and employs Bayes’ rule for target domain adaptation, generating pseudo-labels
based on channel-wise weighted class-conditional
likelihoods. TransPL offers three key advantages: explicit modeling of temporal transitions
and channel-wise shifts between different domains, versatility towards different UDA scenarios (e.g. weakly-supervised UDA), and explainable pseudo-label generation. We validate
TransPL’s effectiveness through extensive analysis on four time series UDA benchmarks and confirm that it consistently outperforms state-of-theart pseudo-labeling methods by a strong margin
(6.1% accuracy improvement, 4.9% F1 improvement), while providing interpretable insights into
the domain adaptation process through its learned
code transition matrices.

In this work, we propose TransPL, a novel unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) pseudo-labeling strategy for time
series classification. TransPL models the temporal transitions via vector quantized (VQ) codebooks (Van Den Oord
et al., 2017) and applies a selective channel adaptation strategy by quantifying the alignment between the channel code
transition matrices of the source and target domains. In
the UDA setup, the target model has access to both the
labeled source and the unlabeled target domain training sets.
TransPL models the jointP(X, y)of the labeled source domain through the construction of code transition matrices,
where the transition matrices are used for pseudo-labeling
the unlabeled target’s training set using Bayes’ rule. Previous pseudo-labeling strategies (He et al., 2023b) are mostly
derived from image domains (Lee et al., 2013; Liu et al.,
2023b), where they operate as black boxes that fail to explicitly model the temporal dynamics and selective channel
shifts inherent to time series. Instead, they rely on the
source domain’s classifier or the clustering of the target
domain, resulting in sub-par model performance and blackbox pseudo-labels. In light of this, TransPL provides the
following contributions:1

1. Introduction
Time series often exhibit strong variability across different
domains (e.g. users, devices) due to both dynamic tempo-

1. We formulate unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
for time series as learning discrete transitions between
vector quantized (VQ) codes that characterize temporal dynamics based on our novel coarse and fine VQ
structure. The learned codes are used to construct class-

1

Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Seulki Lee <seulki.lee@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

https://github.com/eai-lab/TransPL

