Mind Your Step (by Step): Chain-of-Thought can Reduce Performance
on Tasks where Thinking Makes Humans Worse

Ryan Liu * 1 Jiayi Geng * 1 Addison J. Wu 1 Ilia Sucholutsky 2 Tania Lombrozo 3 Thomas L. Griffiths 1 3

Abstract

formance of models in many tasks, particularly those involving symbolic reasoning (Sprague et al., 2025). More
generally, inference-time reasoning has become a default
component of the newest LLMs and LMMs such as OpenAI’s o-series models (OpenAI, 2024a) and Claude’s web
interface and thinking models (Anthropic, 2025). However,
there also exist cases where CoT decreases performance,
but the literature has not identified any patterns as to when
this happens. As inference-time reasoning becomes the new
norm in deployed frontier models, it is imperative to understand and predict when CoT has a negative effect on model
performance.

Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting has become a
widely used strategy for improving large language
and multimodal model performance. However, it
is still an open question under which settings CoT
systematically reduces performance. In this paper, we seek to identify the characteristics of tasks
where CoT reduces performance by drawing inspiration from cognitive psychology, focusing on
six representative tasks from the psychological
literature where deliberation hurts performance in
humans. In three of these tasks, state-of-the-art
models exhibit significant performance drop-offs
with CoT (up to 36.3% absolute accuracy for OpenAI o1-preview compared to GPT-4o), while in
others, CoT effects are mixed, with positive, neutral, and negative changes. While models and
humans do not exhibit perfectly parallel cognitive
processes, considering cases where thinking has
negative consequences for humans helps identify
settings where it negatively impacts models. By
connecting the literature on human verbal thinking and deliberation with evaluations of CoT, we
offer a perspective for understanding the impact
of inference-time reasoning.

A key challenge for determining the limits of CoT is the
sheer variety of tasks for which LLMs and LMMs are used.
While the machine learning community has dedicated great
efforts towards developing a large set of benchmarks for
these models (e.g., Hendrycks et al., 2021; Suzgun et al.,
2023), applications of models extend beyond benchmarks
to diverse contexts and variations of tasks that could all
potentially affect performance. Exploring this vast space to
identify settings where CoT has negative effects is a daunting problem. This motivates the need to develop heuristics
to help us identify risky cases that could pose challenges for
inference-time reasoning.
In this paper, we explore the effectiveness of a heuristic
formed by drawing a parallel between CoT reasoning and humans engaging in verbal thought (Lombrozo, 2024). Specifically, we explore whether tasks for which thinking decreases
human performance are also tasks where CoT harms model
performance. This heuristic is motivated by the idea that in
some cases, the tasks themselves, in conjunction with shared
traits between humans and models, result in verbal thinking
negatively impacting performance. However, models and
humans also have different capabilities and consequently
different constraints for some tasks (Griffiths, 2020; Shiffrin
& Mitchell, 2023; McCoy et al., 2024). For example, LLMs
have context lengths that exceed human memory limitations.
Thus, we do not expect our heuristic to predict model performance perfectly, but rather allow us to quickly identify
cases where CoT has a significant negative impact.

1. Introduction
Chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021) is a
widely used technique for prompting large language and
multimodal models (LLMs and LMMs), instructing models
to “think step-by-step” or providing other structure that
should be incorporated into the response. Large metastudies have shown that this technique improves the per*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 NYU Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, NY, USA 3 Department
of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Ryan Liu <ryanliu@princeton.edu>, Jiayi Geng
<jiayig@princeton.edu>.

To explore our approach, we first draw on the psychology
literature for a collection of tasks where verbal thinking
hurts human performance (Schooler & Engstler-Schooler,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

