Breaking the Quadratic Barrier:
Robust Cardinality Sketches for Adaptive Queries

Edith Cohen 1 2 Mihir Singhal 3 1 Uri Stemmer 2 1

Abstract

V ⊂ [n] to their sketches S(V ), and an estimator that
processes the sketch S(U ) and returns an approximation
of the cardinality |U |. An important property of sketching
maps is composability: The sketch S(U ∪ V ) of the union
of two sets U and V can be computed directly from the
sketches S(U ) and S(V ). Composability is crucial for most
applications, particularly in distributed settings where data
is generated and analyzed across multiple locations and
times. To intuit why composition is necessary, note that it
is not possible to obtain a cardinality estimate of U ∪ V
from separate cardinality estimates of U and V , since the
sets may or may not overlap (the same key might occur in
both sets). Therefore we must compose the sketches before
applying an estimator.

Cardinality sketches are compact data structures
that efficiently estimate the number of distinct
elements across multiple queries while minimizing storage, communication, and computational
costs. However, recent research has shown that
these sketches can fail under adaptively chosen queries, breaking down after approximately
Õ(k 2 ) queries, where k is the sketch size. In this
work, we overcome this quadratic barrier by designing robust estimators with fine-grained guarantees. Specifically, our constructions can handle an exponential number of adaptive queries,
provided that each element participates in at
most Õ(k 2 ) queries. This effectively shifts the
quadratic barrier from the total number of queries
to the number of queries sharing the same element, which can be significantly smaller. Beyond
cardinality sketches, our approach expands the
toolkit for robust algorithm design.

It is known that any sublinear composable cardinality sketch
that is statistically guaranteed for all inputs must be randomized (Kane et al., 2010). By this, we mean that the sketching
map cannot be predetermined and must instead be sampled
from a distribution. The guarantees are expressed in terms
of the sketch size k: for any sequence of 2O(k) queries, with
high probability over the sampling of the map, all queries
are estimated within a small relative error.

1. Introduction

Cardinality sketches are extensively used in practice. MinHash sketches are composable sketches based on hash mappings of keys to priorities, where the sketch of a set is
determined by the minimum priorities of its elements (Flajolet & Martin, 1985; Flajolet et al., 2007; Cohen, 1997;
Broder, 2000; Rosén, 1997; Cohen, 1997; Broder, 1997;
Bar-Yossef et al., 2002)1 . Most practical implementations2
use MinHash sketches of various types, particularly bottomk and HyperLogLog sketches (Flajolet et al., 2007; Heule
et al., 2013). In many applications, a sketch is computed
for each part of the data that reside in different locations
and occurs in different time periods. The original data is
often discarded. The estimates are used for localized analysis, where cardinality estimates are computed for disjoint
datasets, but also for analysis that spans multiple locations
and time horizons, which requires composability. To ensure
composability, the same map must be used to sketch all

When dealing with massive datasets, compact summary
structures (known as sketches) allow us to drastically reduce storage, communication, and computation while still
providing useful approximate answers.
Cardinality sketches are specifically designed to estimate
the number of distinct elements in a query set (Flajolet
& Martin, 1985; Flajolet et al., 2007; Cohen, 1997; Alon
et al., 1999; Bar-Yossef et al., 2002; Kane et al., 2010;
Cohen, 2015; Blasiok, 2020). For a ground set [n] of keys,
a sketch is defined by a sketching map S that maps subsets
1

Google Research 2 School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv
University, Israel 3 School of Computer Science, UC
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Edith
Cohen <edith@cohenwang.com>, Mihir Singhal <mihir.a.singhal@gmail.com>, Uri Stemmer <u@uri.co.il>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2

1

For a survey see (Cohen, 2008; 2023).
See, e.g., (Apache Software Foundation, Accessed: 2024; Google
Cloud, Accessed: 2024).

