Haste Makes Waste: A Simple Approach for Scaling Graph Neural Networks

Rui Xue 1 Tong Zhao 2 Neil Shah 2 Xiaorui Liu 3

Abstract

data (Hamilton, 2020). They exhibit significant advantages
across various general graph learning tasks, including node
classification, link prediction, and graph classification (Kipf
& Welling, 2016; Gasteiger et al., 2019; Veličković et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2019; Xue et al., 2023b). GNNs have also
proven to be highly effective in various applications, such as
recommendation systems, biological molecules, and transportation (Tang et al., 2020; Sankar et al., 2021; Fout et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024). However, scalability becomes a dominant bottleneck when applying GNNs
to large-scale graphs. This is because the recursive feature
propagations in GNNs lead to the notorious neighborhood
explosion problem since the number of neighbors involved
in the mini-batch computation grows exponentially with the
number of GNN layers (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018; Han et al., 2023). This is particularly undesirable for
deeper GNNs that try to capture long-range dependency on
large graphs using more feature propagation layers. This
neighborhood explosion problem poses a significant challenge as it cannot be accommodated within the limited GPU
memory and computation resources during training and inference, which hampers the expressive power of GNNs and
limits their applications to large-scale graphs.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable success in graph representation learning and various sampling approaches
have been proposed to scale GNNs to applications with large-scale graphs. A class of promising GNN training algorithms take advantage of
historical embeddings to reduce the computation
and memory cost while maintaining the model
expressiveness of GNNs. However, they incur
significant computation bias due to the stale feature history. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive analysis of their staleness and inferior performance on large-scale problems. Motivated by our discoveries, we propose a simple
yet highly effective training algorithm (REST) to
effectively reduce feature staleness, which leads
to significantly improved performance and convergence across varying batch sizes, especially
when staleness is predominant. The proposed algorithm seamlessly integrates with existing solutions, boasting easy implementation, while comprehensive experiments underscore its superior
performance and efficiency on large-scale benchmarks. Specifically, our improvements to stateof-the-art historical embedding methods result in
a 2.7% and 3.6% performance enhancement on
the ogbn-papers100M and ogbn-products dataset
respectively, accompanied by notably accelerated convergence. The code can be found at
https://github.com/RXPHD/REST.

Existing works have made significant contributions to address this issue from various perspectives, such as sampling, distributed computing, and pre-computing or postcomputing approaches. In this paper, we focus on the
most commonly used sampling approaches. In particular,
various sampling approaches have been proposed to mitigate the neighborhood explosion problem in large-scale
GNNs (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Chiang
et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2020). These sampling approaches
attempt to reduce the graph size by sampling nodes and
edges to lower the memory and computation costs in each
mini-batch iteration. However, they also introduce estimation variance of embedding approximation in the sampling
process, and they inevitably lose accurate graph information.

1. Introduction and Related Works
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as powerful tools for representation learning on graph-structured
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, US 2 Snap Inc., Bellevue,
US 3 Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, US. Correspondence to: Xiaorui Liu
<xliu96@ncsu.edu>.

Historical embedding methods have emerged as promising
solutions to address this issue, such as VR-GCN (Chen
et al., 2017), MVS-GCN (Cong et al., 2020), GAS (Fey
et al., 2021), and GraphFM (Yu et al., 2022). They propose
to reduce the estimation variance of sampling methods using
historical embeddings. Specifically, during each training
iteration, they preserve intermediate node embeddings at

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

