QUTE: Quantifying Uncertainty in TinyML models with Early-exit-assisted
ensembles for model-monitoring

Nikhil Pratap Ghanathe 1 Steven J E Wilton 1

Abstract

Input (f0 )

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) provides a
resource-efficient solution for on-device monitoring of tinyML models deployed remotely without access to true labels. However, existing UQ
methods impose significant memory and compute
demands, making them impractical for ultra-lowpower, KB-sized tinyML devices. Prior work has
attempted to reduce overhead by using early-exit
ensembles to quantify uncertainty in a single forward pass, but these approaches still carry prohibitive costs. To address this, we propose QUTE,
a novel resource-efficient early-exit-assisted ensemble architecture optimized for tinyML models.
QUTE introduces additional output blocks at the
final exit of the base network, distilling early-exit
knowledge into these blocks to form a diverse
yet lightweight ensemble. We show that QUTE
delivers superior uncertainty quality on tiny models, achieving comparable performance on larger
models with 59% smaller model sizes than the
closest prior work. When deployed on a microcontroller, QUTE demonstrates a 31% reduction
in latency on average. In addition, we show that
QUTE excels at detecting accuracy-drop events,
outperforming all prior works.

f1

D

f2
gθ1

pθ1 (y|x)

gθ2
pθ2 (y|x)

fD−1

fD

fout

pϕ (y|x)

foutk

pϕk (y|x)

fout2

pϕ2 (y|x)

fout1

pϕ1 (y|x)

gθD−1

K

pθD−1 (y|x)

Resource-hungry EEs assist the output blocks
{foutk }K
k=1 only during training, promoting
diversity. Removed for inference
Ensemble (K) = {pϕ1 (y|x), pϕ2 (y|x), ...., pϕK (y|x)}

Figure 1: QUTE architecture. {fout }K
k=1 represents the ’K’
additional output blocks at the final exit, which are assisted
by ’K’ early-exit blocks {gθk }K
k=1 only during training to
promote diversity (see Figure 2). For inference, all earlyexits and fout are removed
and covariate-shifted data caused by environmental and sensor variations that manifest often unpredictably in the field.
The ability of tinyML models to accurately measure the uncertainty of their predictions is crucial for two reasons. First,
these devices generate data that is frequently used in critical
decision-making. In the context of an autonomous vehicle
(AV), uncertain predictions could result in the downstream
system making cautious driving decisions (Tang et al., 2022).
Second, tinyML devices often operate in remote environments (Vargas et al., 2021). If the inputs to the model
changes (perhaps due to spatter, fog, frost, noise, motion
blur, etc.), being aware of the model’s unreliability may
prompt an engineer to take remedial action. Many prior
methods for drift/corruption detection are either statistical
tests/methods that operate directly on input data (Bifet &
Gavalda, 2007) with huge memory requirements, or require
true labels for error-rate calculation (Gama et al., 2004;
Baier et al., 2022). In contrast, uncertainty quantification
(UQ) methods aim to estimate a model’s prediction confidence without requiring true labels, providing an efficient
solution for model monitoring, particularly in resource and
power-constrained environments.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in embedded systems and machine
learning (ML) have produced a new class of edge devices
containing powerful ML models. These milliwatt-scale KBsized devices, often termed TinyML devices, have low compute and memory requirements. They are often deployed in
remote environments with no availability of true labels. This
makes them susceptible to both out-of-distribution (OOD)
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to:
Nikhil Pratap Ghanathe <nikhilghanathe@ece.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In ML models, there are two main types of uncertainty (Kendall & Gal, 2017): epistemic and aleatoric. Epis1

