Conformal Tail Risk Control for Large Language Model Alignment

Catherine Chen 1 Jingyan Shen 2 Zhun Deng 3 Lihua Lei 4 5

Abstract

including those of high sensitivity. While LLMs generally
perform quite well, there remains a low probability associated with the event that the models generate undesirable and
even catastrophic outputs, including misinformation, malicious use cases, and harmful/toxic comments. Although
these responses are relatively rare, each occurrence has the
potential to cause significant harm to individuals or even
society as a whole.

Recent developments in large language models
(LLMs) have led to their widespread usage for
various tasks. The prevalence of LLMs in society
implores the assurance on the reliability of their
performance. In particular, risk-sensitive applications demand meticulous attention to unexpectedly poor outcomes, i.e., tail events, for instance,
toxic answers, humiliating language, and offensive outputs. Due to the costly nature of acquiring
human annotations, general-purpose scoring models have been created to automate the process of
quantifying these tail events. This phenomenon introduces potential human-machine misalignment
between the respective scoring mechanisms. In
this work, we present a lightweight calibration
framework for blackbox models that ensures the
alignment of humans and machines with provable
guarantees. Our framework provides a rigorous
approach to controlling any distortion risk measure that is characterized by a weighted average
of quantiles of the loss incurred by the LLM with
high confidence. The theoretical foundation of our
method relies on the connection between conformal risk control and a traditional family of statistics, i.e., L-statistics. To demonstrate the utility of
our framework, we conduct comprehensive experiments that address the issue of human-machine
misalignment.

Quantitative notions of disutility, such as toxicity, are typically based on human annotations that are costly to acquire.
To reduce labor cost, general purpose models, for example, Detoxify (Hanu & Unitary team, 2020), have been
created to automatically generate disutility measures for
LLM outputs. Given the existence of both human and machine assessments, a common issue is the misalignment
of the two metrics, which might be caused by distribution
shift of human opinions when deploying the model. This
is further complicated by the lack of an inherent scale that
governs machine scores. While many techniques, such as,
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF),
have been proposed to improve alignment, these approaches
typically do not provide guarantees regarding the alignment
of machine-generated scores. Even when such guarantees
exist, they often rely on assumptions that are hard to defend.
Moreover, many RLHF approaches require computationally
intensive model refitting (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler
et al., 2019; Casper et al., 2023).
In this work, we address the issue of misalignment through
the lens of risk control. In particular, we treat the humanannotated disutility score as the ground-truth risk measure
and calibrate the raw outputs generated by the LLM to
control certain functionals of the risk distribution at a prespecified level. Unlike existing methods, our method does
not involve model refitting and provides finite-sample guarantees of risk control under no assumptions about the LLM
or the underlying data generation process.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have proven to be pervasive in society with applications across various settings,
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, CA 2 Department of
Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, NY 3 Department of Computer Science, UNC Chapel
Hill, NC 4 Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, CA
5
Department of Statistics (by courtesy), Stanford University, CA.
Correspondence to: Catherine Chen <cyc2152@stanford.edu>.

The proposed framework substantially generalizes the existing literature in conformal risk control (Bates et al., 2021;
Angelopoulos et al., 2021; 2023), which only holds for traditional risk measures characterized by the expectation of
a loss function common in supervised learning problems.
These risk measures are not suitable for tail risks associated
with low probability events. By contrast, other works only

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

