Wasserstein Flow Matching: Generative Modeling Over Families of Distributions

Doron Haviv * 1 2 Aram-Alexandre Pooladian * 3 Dana Pe’er 2 4 Brandon Amos 5

Abstract

access to finitely many samples from a distribution, devise
a scheme which generates new samples from the same distribution. Generative modeling has also been revolutionary
in the biomedical sciences, for drug design (Jumper et al.,
2021), and single-cell genomics (Lopez et al., 2018). Nearly
all frameworks exploit the notion that datasets (of, say, genomic profiles of cells, images, videos, or corpora of text
documents) are instantiations of probability measures, and
the task is to transform a point sampled from random noise
to generate a data point that obeys the distribution of interest.

Generative modeling typically concerns transporting a single source distribution to a target distribution via simple probability flows. However, in
fields like computer graphics and single-cell genomics, samples themselves can be viewed as distributions, where standard flow matching ignores
their inherent geometry. We propose Wasserstein
flow matching (WFM), which lifts flow matching
onto families of distributions using the Wasserstein geometry. Notably, WFM is the first algorithm capable of generating distributions in high
dimensions, whether represented analytically (as
Gaussians) or empirically (as point-clouds). Our
theoretical analysis establishes that Wasserstein
geodesics constitute proper conditional flows over
the space of distributions, making for a valid FM
objective. Our algorithm leverages optimal transport theory and the attention mechanism, demonstrating versatility across computational regimes:
exploiting closed-form optimal transport paths for
Gaussian families, while using entropic estimates
on point-clouds for general distributions. WFM
successfully generates both 2D & 3D shapes
and high-dimensional cellular microenvironments
from spatial transcriptomics data. Code is available at Wasserstein Flow Matching.

Among the zoo of available generative models, one approach
noted for its flexibility and simplicity is Flow Matching
(FM) (Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Lipman et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2022). For a fixed target probability measure, FM learns an implicitly defined vector field that can
transform a source measure (e.g., the standard Gaussian) to
the target. Unlike discrete time and probabilistic generative
models (such as Diffusion Models by Song et al. (2020)),
FM learns a deterministic, continuous normalizing flow by
regressing onto a simple conditional probability flow. This
approach, while originally designed for Euclidean domains,
can be readily adopted to Riemannian geometries (Chen
& Lipman, 2023). Riemannian flow matching (RFM) is
widely used for generating samples over geometries such as
spheres, tori, translation/rotation groups, simplices, triangular meshes, mazes, and molecular positions and structures.
However, modern data can exhibit a richer structure in
which the samples themselves are distributions. In computational graphics, 3D models are shape distributions observed
through point-clouds. Likewise, recent developments in
single-cell genomics analysis have demonstrated that geneexpression profiles from groups of cells aggregated via their
mean and covariance can capture cellular microenvironments or highlight fine-grain clusters (Haviv et al., 2024b;
Persad et al., 2023). For both general distributions and Gaussian settings, it is natural to search for a unified generative
model that respects the underlying geometry of the data.

1. Introduction
Today’s abundance of data and scalability of training massive neural networks has made it possible to generate hyperrealistic images on the basis of training examples (OpenAI,
2022), as well as video and audio clips (Vyas et al., 2023;
Xing et al., 2023), and, of course, text (Bubeck et al., 2023).
All of these are instances of generative modeling: given
*

Equal contribution 1 Weill Cornell 2 Memorial Sloan–Kettering
Cancer Center 3 Center for Data Science, New York University
4
Howard Hughes Medical Institute 5 Meta AI. Correspondence to:
Doron Haviv <havivd@mskcc.org>, Aram-Alexandre Pooladian
<ap6599@nyu.edu>, Brandon Amos <bda@meta.com>.

Contributions. To this end, we introduce Wasserstein
Flow Matching (WFM), a principled extension of the FM
framework lifted to the space of probability distributions.
As illustrated in Figure 1, a single point in our source and
target datasets is itself a distribution. These distributions
are either represented analytically as Gaussians or realized

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

