Constant Stepsize Local GD for Logistic Regression: Acceleration by Instability

Michael Crawshaw 1 Blake Woodworth 2 Mingrui Liu 1

Abstract

jectives satisfying some hetorogeneity requirement (Woodworth et al., 2020a;b; Koloskova et al., 2020). While the
resulting guarantees are very general, they do not always
reflect practice, since they describe the worst-case, rather
than cases which may appear in practice. For Local SGD
and its deterministic variant, Local GD, these worst-case
guarantees rely on the potentially unrealistic condition of
small step sizes η ≤ O(1/K), where K is the communication interval (Woodworth et al., 2020b; Koloskova et al.,
2020). For Local GD, this small step size can guarantee
monotonic decrease of the objective, but such stable convergence is far removed from practice, as non-monotonic
decrease of the objective is common in practical machine
learning (Jastrzebski et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2021).

Existing analysis of Local (Stochastic) Gradient
Descent for heterogeneous objectives requires
stepsizes η ≤ 1/K where K is the communication interval, which ensures monotonic decrease of the objective. In contrast, we analyze
Local Gradient Descent for logistic regression
with separable, heterogeneous data using any stepsize η > 0. With R communication rounds
and M clients, we show convergence at a rate
O(1/ηKR) after an initial unstable phase laste
ing for O(ηKM
) rounds. This improves upon
the existing O(1/R) rate for general smooth, convex objectives. Our analysis parallels the single
machine analysis of (Wu et al., 2024a) in which
instability is caused by extremely large stepsizes,
but in our setting another source of instability is
large local updates with heterogeneous objectives.

Motivated by this gap between theory and practice, we
take a problem-specific approach and analyze Local GD for
logistic regression. Our central question is:
Can Local GD for logistic regression achieve accelerated
convergence with a large step size (η ≫ 1/K)?

1. Introduction

Despite the apparent simplicity of this setting, existing theory is unable to answer this question. In the single-machine
setting, GD is known to converge for logistic regression
with any step size (Wu et al., 2024b;a), and a large enough
step size will cause non-monotonic decrease of the objective.
For the distributed setting, previous work for this problem
considered a two-stage variant of Local GD (Crawshaw
et al., 2025), that uses a small step size η ≤ O(1/K) before
switching to a larger step size later in training. It remains
open to analyze the vanilla Local GD with a constant stepsize in this setting.

As the area of distributed optimization grows — owing to
recent applications in federated learning (McMahan et al.,
2017) and large-scale distributed deep learning (Verbraeken
et al., 2020) — the gap between theory and practice has
grown proportionally. Local Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) and its variants have been successfully used for distributed learning with heterogeneous data in practice for
years (Wang et al., 2021; Reddi et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023),
but so far we have little theoretical understanding of this
success (Wang et al., 2022).
The majority of theoretical works in distributed optimization
take a worst-case approach to algorithm analysis: they consider the worst-case efficiency over some large class of optimization problems, such as the class of convex, smooth ob-

Contributions In this paper, we prove that Local GD
for distributed logistic regression converges with any step
size η > 0 and any communication interval
 K≥ 1. In
e γ 3 R yields a
particular, we show that choosing ηK = Θ
M
convergence rate faster than existing lower bounds of Local
GD for distributed convex optimization (see Section 3 for
definitions of all parameters).

1

Department of Computer Science, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, George
Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. Correspondence
to: Michael Crawshaw <mcrawsha@gmu.edu>, Mingrui Liu
<mingruil@gmu.edu>.

Our accelerated convergence crucially uses ηK ≫ 1, which
violates the condition η ≤ O(1/K) from previous work and
potentially creates non-monotonic objective decrease across
communication rounds. To handle this instability, we adapt

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

