M3-JEPA: Multimodal Alignment via Multi-gate MoE based on
the Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture

Hongyang Lei * 1 Xiaolong Cheng * 1 Qi Qin * 2 Dan Wang 1 Huazhen Huang 3 Qingqing Gu 1 Yetao Wu 1
Luo Ji 1

Abstract

max information content

Current multimodal learning strategies primarily optimize in the original token space. Such
a framework is easy to incorporate with the backbone of pretrained language model, but might result in modality collapse. To alleviate such issues,
we leverage the Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA) on the multimodal tasks, which
converts the input embedding into the output embedding space by a predictor and then conducts
the cross-modal alignment on the latent space.
We implement this predictor by a Multi-Gate Mixture of Experts (MMoE) and name the framework
as M3-JEPA, accordingly. The gating function
disentangles the modality-specific and shared information and derives information-theoretic optimality. The framework is implemented with both
contrastive and regularization loss, and solved by
alternative gradient descent (AGD) between different multimodal tasks. By thoroughly designed
experiments, we show that M3-JEPA can obtain
state-of-the-art performance on different modalities and tasks, generalize to unseen datasets and
domains, and is computationally efficient in both
training and inference. Our observation suggests
that M3-JEPA might become a new basis to selfsupervised learning in the open world.

min energy:

: contrastive loss

MoEpredictor

: regularization loss
: mutual information
: conditional entropy

x-encoder

y-encoder

x

y

provided data
to be predicted
any-to-any

A
Text

Image

Audio

Figure 1. The paradigm of M3-JEPA on any-to-any multi-modality
tasks. The self-supervised learning is conducted with two encoding branches of input and output signals, as well as an MoE predictor which projects the input embedding into the output latent
space. M3-JEPA is an energy-based model that minimizes both
contrastive and regularization losses. M3-JEPA is also conditioned
on the inherent information content (g) which maximizes the mutual information and minimizes the conditional entropy.

cess and integrate information from multiple modalities
like text, image, audio and video, becoming an important
way to solve complex tasks involving heterogeneous data
sources (Alayrac et al., 2022; Radford et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022a; Liu et al.). Modern multi-modal studies are
dominated by generative architecture, which can generally
be classified into two main categories. The first category
trains the model from scratch (Wang et al., 2022a; 2023a;
Oquab et al., 2025), which asks for large-scale data therefore
faces high training costs. Another category often employs
a pretrained Large Language Model (LLM) as the backbone while finetuning a lightweight cross-modal connector
(Alayrac et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024a; Liu
et al., 2023; Jun Zhan, 2024). In this manner, the prior

1. Introduction
Human perception is inherently multi-modal, seamlessly
integrating diverse sensory inputs from vision, hearing,
touch, and other senses to comprehend the world. Inspired
by this capability, modern modeling techniques also pro*
Equal contribution 1 Geely AI Lab, Zhejiang, China 2 Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. Correspondence to:
Luo Ji <Luo.Ji1@geely.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

