TimePro: Efficient Multivariate Long-term Time Series Forecasting with
Variable- and Time-Aware Hyper-state

Xiaowen Ma * 1 Zhenliang Ni * 1 Shuai Xiao 1 Xinghao Chen 1
https://github.com/xwmaxwma/TimePro

Abstract

in multivariate modeling (Liang et al., 2024; Ahamed &
Cheng, 2024; Ma et al., 2024).

In long-term time series forecasting, different
variables often influence the target variable over
distinct time intervals, a challenge known as the
multi-delay issue. Traditional models typically
process all variables or time points uniformly,
which limits their ability to capture complex variable relationships and obtain non-trivial time representations. To address this issue, we propose
TimePro, an innovative Mamba-based model that
constructs variate- and time-aware hyper-states.
Unlike conventional approaches that merely transfer plain states across variable or time dimensions,
TimePro preserves the fine-grained temporal features of each variate token and adaptively selects
the focused time points to tune the plain state.
The reconstructed hyper-state can perceive both
variable relationships and salient temporal information, which helps the model make accurate
forecasting. In experiments, TimePro performs
competitively on eight real-world long-term forecasting benchmarks with satisfactory linear complexity.

Bi-Mamba+ (Liang et al., 2024) introduces a bidirectional
structure and splits time series into smaller segments to
more comprehensively model the data, incorporating a forgetting gate to selectively integrate new features with historical ones, thereby retaining historical information over
longer ranges. S-Mamba (Wang et al., 2025) marks the
time points of each variable through the autonomous linear layer, and extracts the correlation between variables
through the bidirectional Mamba layer. It also incorporates
a feedforward neural network (FNN) to learn time dependence. TimeMachine (Ahamed & Cheng, 2024) combines
four Mamba modules to capture both channel-mixed and
channel-independent contexts through multi-scale contextual cues. TSMamba (Ma et al., 2024) further optimizes time
series forecasting performance through channel-compressed
attention modules and a two-stage training strategy, with
experiments showing that its innovative components enhance forecasting accuracy while reducing computational
overhead. The mentioned methods often employ different
ways to scan features from various directions. However,
these methods overlook the fact that different variables have
different impact durations on the target variable, i.e., the
multi-delay issue, which limits their performance.

1. Introduction

The multi-delay issue in multivariate time series forecasting
(Xu et al., 2016; Chandereng & Gitter, 2020) is defined as
the temporal discrepancy in the propagation of influence
from different predictor variables to the target variable, characterized by the presence of distinct and non-uniform time
lags between the changes in predictor variables and their
corresponding effects on the target variable. However, existing mamba models process all variables or time points in a
uniform manner, making it difficult to capture critical time
points and obtain non-trivial time representations. Moreover,
this problem also occurs in transformer-based models. For
example, PatchTST (Nie et al., 2023) captures global temporal dependencies in a channel-independent manner, while
treating them uniformly for all variables. iTransformer (Liu
et al., 2024b) focuses on modeling variable relationships, yet
uniformly performs a coarse linear projection for different

Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2024) has shown significant advantages in time series forecasting (Ahamed & Cheng, 2024),
characterized by its linear computational complexity, and
efficient long-term dependency capture capability. Unlike
Transformers, which have quadratic complexity concerning sequence length, Mamba achieves linear complexity,
making it highly scalable for long sequences. Mamba can
also capture long-term dependencies, which is particularly
beneficial in time series forecasting. Furthermore, it can
not only handle long series of data but also perform well
* Equal contributions. 1 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Xinghao Chen <xinghao.chen@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

