Provably Efficient Exploration in Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Bo Yue 1 Jian Li 2 Guiliang Liu 1 *

Abstract

sistently guarantee safe control is challenging, which is
further exacerbated when the ground-truth constraint is timevarying and context-dependent.

Optimizing objective functions subject to constraints is fundamental in many real-world applications. However, these constraints are often
not readily defined and must be inferred from expert agent behaviors, a problem known as Inverse
Constraint Inference. Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) is a common solver
for recovering feasible constraints in complex environments, relying on training samples collected
from interactive environments. However, the efficacy and efficiency of current sampling strategies
remain unclear. We propose a strategic exploration framework for sampling with guaranteed
efficiency to bridge this gap. By defining the feasible cost set for ICRL problems, we analyze how
estimation errors in transition dynamics and the
expert policy influence the feasibility of inferred
constraints. Based on this analysis, we introduce
two exploratory algorithms to achieve efficient
constraint inference via 1) dynamically reducing
the bounded aggregate error of cost estimations or
2) strategically constraining the exploration policy
around plausibly optimal ones. Both algorithms
are theoretically grounded with tractable sample
complexity, and their performance is validated
empirically across various environments.

Instead of utilizing a pre-defined constraint, an alternative approach, Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning
(ICRL) (Malik et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2025), seeks to learn
constraint signals from the demonstrations of expert agents
and imitate their behaviors by adhering to the inferred constraints. ICRL effectively incorporates expert experience
into the online CRL paradigm and thus better explains how
expert agents optimize cumulative rewards under their empirical constraints. Under this framework, existing ICRL
algorithms often assume the presence of a known dynamic
model (Scobee & Sastry, 2020; McPherson et al., 2021), or
a generative transition model that responds to queries for
any state-action pair (Papadimitriou et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023). However, this setting has a considerable gap with
real-world scenarios where such global transition models
are often unavailable or even time-varying. In such cases,
agents have to physically navigate to new states to learn
about transition dynamics through exploration.
To mitigate the gap, some recent studies (Malik et al., 2021;
Baert et al., 2023) explicitly maximized the policy entropy
throughout the learning process, yielding soft-optimal policy representations that favor less-selected actions. However,
this strategy often induces overly conservative constraints
that forbid any behavior not present in the expert demonstrations. Moreover, such an uncertainty-driven exploration
ignores the potential estimation errors in dynamic models
and expert policies. To date, a theoretical framework is
still lacking to demonstrate how well such exploration approaches facilitate the accurate estimation of constraints.

1. Introduction
Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) tackles sequential decision-making problems with safety constraints and
has achieved considerable success in various safety-critical
applications (Gu et al., 2022). However, in many real-world
environments, such as robot control (Garcı́a & Shafie, 2020;
Thomas et al., 2021) and autonomous driving (Krasowski
et al., 2020), specifying the exact constraint that can con-

This paper introduces a strategic exploration framework
for sampling to solve ICRL problems with guaranteed efficiency. Recognizing the inherent challenge of pinpointing
the exact constraint that expert agents adhere to in their
demonstrations (Ng et al., 2000), the objective of our framework is to recover a set of feasible constraints, rather than to
specify a unique constraint with pre-defined heuristics or restrictions. This approach has the advantage of analyzing the
intrinsic sample complexity of ICRL problems only, without
being obfuscated by other factors (Lazzati et al., 2024b). By
representing constraints with reward advantages, we bound

*
Corresponding Author 1 School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Stony Brook University, New York. Correspondence to: Guiliang Liu <liuguiliang@cuhk.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

