Feasible Action Search for Bandit Linear Programs via Thompson Sampling

Aditya Gangrade 1 Aldo Pacchiano 1 2 Clayton Scott 3 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract

unknown objective and noisy measurements of the quality
of actions. The generality of this setup lends itself to many
applications in, e.g., machine learning, control system, and
resource allocation. However, the standard theory assumes
that the constraints of these LPs are known, which is unrealistic in a multitude of applications in these domains. This
motivates the safe linear bandit (SLB) problem, wherein
the learner attempts to select actions with high reward while
not violating unknown (linear) constraints at any time using
noisy feedback of the rewards and constraint levels.

We study the ‘feasible action search’ (FAS) problem for linear bandits, wherein a learner attempts
to discover a feasible point for a set of linear constraints Φ∗ a ≥ 0, without knowledge of the matrix Φ∗ ∈ Rm×d . A FAS learner selects a sequence of actions at , and uses observations of
the form Φ∗ at + noise to either find a point with
nearly optimal ‘safety margin’, or detect that the
constraints are infeasible, where the safety margin of an action measures its (signed) distance
from the constraint boundary. While of interest
in its own right, the FAS problem also directly
addresses a key deficiency in the extant theory of
‘safe linear bandits’ (SLBs), by discovering a safe
initialisation for low-regret SLB methods.
We propose a novel efficient FAS-learner based
on Thompson Sampling (TS), FAST, which applies a coupled random perturbation to an estimate of Φ∗ , and plays a maximin point of a
game induced by this perturbed matrix. We prove
that FAST stops in e
O(d3 /ε2 M∗2 ) steps, and incurs
e 3 /|M∗ |) safety cost, to either correctly detect
O(d
infeasibility, or find a point aout that is at least
(1 − ε)M∗ -safe, where M∗ is the optimal safety
margin of Φ∗ . Further, instantiating prior SLB
methods withp
aout yields the first SLB methods
O( d3 T /M∗2 ) regret and O(1) risk
that incur e
without a priori knowledge of a safe action. The
main technical novelty lies in the extension of TS
to this multiobjective setting, for which we both
propose a coupled noise design, and provide an
analysis that avoids convexity considerations.

The recent literature has described several methods that address this problem in a strong sense, ensuring low regret
whilst never violating safety, i.e., playing an infeasible action. Such an algorithm must be initialised with a safe action,
asafe , to begin with, in order to ‘seed’ the method with an
initial safe region to explore over. Moreover, the safety margin of asafe (see below) quantitatively affects regret bounds,
and so must be large to ensure good performance. However,
no prior method discusses how to get hold of such a point.
This not only limits the applicability of these algorithms,
but also hides their true safety costs, since the discovery
of such asafe would, with high likelihood, require playing
some unsafe actions. We address this question by designing
an efficient algorithm for feasible action search (FAS).
Concretely, consider the program maxa∈A θ∗⊤ a : Φ∗ a ≥ α,
where the reward parameters θ∗ ∈ Rd and constraint parameters Φ∗ ∈ Rm×d are unknown, while A is a known convex
domain. The safety margin of an action a ∈ A, M (a) :=
minλ≥0,1⊤
λ⊤ Φ∗ a, measures a ‘signed distance’ of a
m λ=1
from the constraint boundaries. Given ε, δ ∈ (0, 1), a FAS
learner selects a sequence of actions {at } ⊂ A, and accumulates information by observing noisy risk measurements
St = Φ∗ at + noise in response. This continues until a
stopping time, τ , at which point the learner either

1. Introduction

• declares infeasibility, i.e., that A ∩ {Φ∗ a ≥ 0} = ∅, OR
• outputs an action aout , and a ‘certificate’ Mout such that

Linear bandits capture an online approach to the fundamental decision-making paradigm of linear programs (LPs) with

M (aout ) ≥ Mout , and Mout ≥ (1 − ε)M∗ ,
where M∗ := maxa∈A M (a) is the optimal safety margin.

1

Boston University 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
University of Michigan. Correspondence to: A. Gangrade <gangrade@bu.edu>.
3

The goal is to minimise τ, while ensuring correctness with
probability at least 1 − δ. Ideal methods should adapt their
stopping time to the unknown M∗ , incur limited ‘safety
costs’ during exploration, and be computationally efficient.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

