Token Assorted: Mixing Latent and Text Tokens for
Improved Language Model Reasoning

DiJia Su 1 Hanlin Zhu * 2 Yingchen Xu * 1 3 Jiantao Jiao 2 Yuandong Tian† 1 Qinqing Zheng† 1

Abstract

guage Models (LLMs) can exhibit sophisticated reasoning
and planning abilities using chain-of-thought (CoT) methodologies, including prompting LLMs with examples where
complex problems are broken down into explicit reasoning steps (Wei et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2022a; Yao et al.,
2024). More recently, a number of studies have further
shown that when models are trained to articulate the intermediate steps of a reasoning process (Nye et al., 2021b;
Lehnert et al., 2024), they achieve significantly higher accuracy. The effectiveness of this approach has been demonstrated across multiple domains, including mathematical
problem-solving (Yue et al., 2023; Gandhi et al., 2024; Yu
et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2024), logical inference (Lin et al.,
2024; Dziri et al., 2024), multistep planning tasks (Lehnert
et al., 2024; Su et al., 2024), etc.

Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at reasoning and planning when trained on chainof-thought (CoT) data, where the step-by-step
thought process is explicitly outlined by text tokens. However, this results in lengthy inputs
where many words support textual coherence
rather than core reasoning information, and processing these inputs consumes substantial computation resources. In this work, we propose a
hybrid representation of the reasoning process,
where we partially abstract away the initial reasoning steps using latent discrete tokens generated
by VQ-VAE, significantly reducing the length of
reasoning traces. We explore the use of latent
trace abstractions in two scenarios: 1) training the
model from scratch for the Keys-Finding Maze
problem, 2) fine-tuning LLMs on this hybrid data
with an extended vocabulary including unseen
latent tokens, for both logical and mathematical
reasoning problems. To facilitate effective learning, we introduce a simple training procedure that
randomly mixes latent and text tokens, which enables fast adaptation to new latent tokens. Our
approach consistently outperforms the baselines
methods in various benchmarks, such as Math
(+4.2%, Llama-3.2-1B), GSM8K (+4.1%, Llama3.2-3B), and Fresh-Gaokao-Math-2023 (+13.3%,
Llama-3.1-8B) with an average reduction of 17%
in reasoning trace’s length.

1

However, training with explicit reasoning traces in text space
comes with notable computational costs (Deng et al., 2023;
2024), as the models must process lengthy input sequences.
In fact, much of the text serves primarily to maintain linguistic coherence, rather than conveying core reasoning
information. Several works have attempted to mitigate this
issue. For example, Hao et al. (2024) investigate reasoning in continuous latent space as a means of compressing
the reasoning trace, and Deng et al. (2024) explore internalizing the intermediate steps through iterative CoT eliminations, see Section 2 for more examples. Nonetheless,
these approaches rely on multi-stage training procedures
that resemble curriculum learning, which still incur significant computational costs, and their final performances fall
behind models trained with complete reasoning traces.
To tackle this challenge, we propose to use discrete latent tokens to abstract the initial steps of the reasoning
traces. These latent tokens, obtained through a vectorquantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE), provide a
compressed representation of the reasoning process by condensing surface-level details. More precisely, we replace the
text tokens with their corresponding latent abstractions from
left to right until a pre-set location, leaving the remaining
tokens unchanged. We then fine-tune LLMs with reasoning traces with such assorted tokens, allowing the models
to learn from both abstract representations of the thinking
process and detailed textual descriptions. One technical

Introduction

Reasoning capabilities are increasingly recognized as a critical component of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) systems. Recent research has demonstrated that Large LanEqual contribution † Equal advising 1 Meta AI 2 UC Berkeley
UCL. Correspondence to: DiJia Su, Yuandong Tian, Qinqing
Zheng.
*

3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

