HetSSNet: Spatial-Spectral Heterogeneous Graph Learning Network for
Panchromatic and Multispectral Images Fusion

Mengting Ma * 1 Yizhen Jiang * 2 Mengjiao Zhao 2 Jiaxin Li 3 Wei Zhang 2

Abstract

SSNet.

Remote sensing pansharpening aims to reconstruct spatial-spectral properties during the fusion of panchromatic (PAN) images and lowresolution multi-spectral (LR-MS) images, finally
generating the high-resolution multi-spectral (HRMS) images. In the mainstream modeling strategies, i.e., CNN and Transformer, the input images are treated as the equal-sized grid of pixels
in the Euclidean space. They have limitations
in facing remote sensing images with irregular
ground objects. Graph is the more flexible structure, however, there are two major challenges
when modeling spatial-spectral properties with
graph: 1) constructing the customized graph structure for spatial-spectral relationship priors; 2)
learning the unified spatial-spectral representation through the graph. To address these challenges, we propose the spatial-spectral heterogeneous graph learning network, named HetSSNet.
Specifically, HetSSNet initially constructs the heterogeneous graph structure for pansharpening,
which explicitly describes pansharpening-specific
relationships. Subsequently, the basic relationship
pattern generation module is designed to extract
the multiple relationship patterns from the heterogeneous graph. Finally, relationship pattern aggregation module is exploited to collaboratively
learn unified spatial-spectral representation across
different relationships among nodes with adaptive
importance learning from local and global perspectives. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
significant superiority and generalization of Het-

1. Introduction
With the increasing demand of earth observation and monitoring, existing optical satellites (e.g., GaoFen-2, QuickBird) can simultaneously record bundled low-resolution
multispectral (LR-MS) and high-resolution panchromatic
(PAN) images from the same scene (Ma et al., 2025b;a).
Due to physical limitations of existing satellite sensors, the
recorded LR-MS image usually includes rich spectral property but relatively sparse spatial property, while their corresponding PAN image contains abundant spatial property
but sparse spectral property. Since the remote sensing image with rich spatial-spectral properties, i.e., high-resolution
multispectral (HR-MS) image, are crucial for practical applications (Li et al., 2022; Han et al., 2024; Asokan & Anitha,
2019; Cheng & Han, 2016; Li et al., 2022), pansharpening technique, which could obtain the HR-MS image by
reconstructing spatial-spectral properties during the fusion
of the recorded PAN and LR-MS images, has been widely
explored (Xing et al., 2023).
Conventional pansharpening methods include component
substitution (CS) approaches (Carper et al., 1990), multiresolution analysis (MRA) methods (Khan et al., 2008), and
variational optimization (VO) methods (Deng et al., 2019).
These methods only have the ability of shallow non-linear
representation; therefore, it is difficult to achieve a good performance of spatial and spectral properties reconstruction.
Recently, pansharpening has witnessed significant progress
with the development of deep learning. However, it is taken
for granted that the mainstream learning-based models propose to process the input LR-MS and PAN images as a regular grid of pixels in the Euclidean space, i.e., treat all pixels
of LR-MS and PAN images features in a fairly rigid manner.
For example, in the CNN-based methods (e.g., DCFNet (Wu
et al., 2022) and MDCUN (Yang et al., 2022)), each pixels
of PAN and LR-MS images is rigidly designated to communicate with its nearest neighbors; in the Transformer-based
model (e.g., HyperTransfromer (Bandara & Patel, 2022) and
CTINN (Zhou et al., 2022b)), all pixels of LR-MS and PAN
images are assigned to equal-sized attention grids for atten-

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China 2 School of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 3 School of
Computer Science and Technology (National Exemplary Software
School), Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Chongqing, China. Correspondence to: Wei Zhang <cstzhangwei@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

