From Individual Experience to Collective Evidence:
A Reporting-Based Framework for Identifying Systemic Harms

Jessica Dai 1 Paula Gradu 1 Inioluwa Deborah Raji 1 Benjamin Recht 1

Abstract

development time (e.g., as surveyed in Pessach & Shmueli
(2022))—or in identifying unfair ones, motivating post-hoc
audits that occur after the entire decision-making process
has completed (e.g., Byun et al. (2024); Martinez & Kirchner (2021)). However, in most applications where fairness
is a concern, problems with the system may only emerge
over time, and it is not necessarily obvious which subgroups
might be important. Moreover, such approaches to fairness
provide no mechanism for individuals to raise concerns.

When an individual reports a negative interaction with some system, how can their personal
experience be contextualized within broader patterns of system behavior? We study the reporting database problem, where individual reports
of adverse events arrive sequentially, and are aggregated over time. In this work, our goal is to
identify whether there are subgroups—defined by
any combination of relevant features—that are
disproportionately likely to experience harmful
interactions with the system. We formalize this
problem as a sequential hypothesis test, and identify conditions on reporting behavior that are sufficient for making inferences about disparities in
true rates of harm across subgroups. We show
that algorithms for sequential hypothesis tests can
be applied to this problem with a standard multiple testing correction. We then demonstrate our
method on real-world datasets, including mortgage decisions and vaccine side effects; on each,
our method (re-)identifies subgroups known to
experience disproportionate harm using only a
fraction of the data that was initially used to discover them.

It is exactly this question of individual agency that drives
our work. In addition to normative reasons, which suggest
that individuals ought to have a voice in expressing concerns
with their treatment (e.g., the literature on contestability of
algorithmic decisions (Vaccaro et al., 2019)), recent legislation has also highlighted individual reporting as a policy
mandate for the governance of AI systems (e.g., the E.U.
AI act (European Parliament, 2023)). While such legislation has yet to see full implementation, mechanisms for
individual incident reporting already exist in a variety of
domains, including consumer finance, medical devices, and
vaccines and pharmaceuticals. A key component of reporting databases in the latter settings is that information from
individual reports are aggregated to build collective knowledge about specific vaccines or pharmaceuticals—and, when
applicable, this aggregated information can drive downstream decisionmaking, such as updating vaccine guidelines
or drug treatment protocols (e.g., Oster et al. (2022)).

1. Introduction

In this paper, we consider what a realistic approach to assessing fairness claims from an incident reporting database
might look like in practice. We are primarily interested in
designing a framework for the general public to report and
contest large-scale harms by leveraging reports of individual
experience to inform collective evidence of discrimination.
To this end, we propose reporting databases, which allow
individuals to submit reports of negative interactions, as a
new mechanism for post-deployment fairness auditing. In
particular, we identify conditions on reporting behavior and
show how they can be used to to make inferences about rates
of true harm in Section 3. Our formalization of the problem
allows us to leverage known approaches to sequential hypothesis testing. In Section 4 we show how to instantiate
two reasonable algorithms for our test and provide theoreti-

The impact of injustice is most acutely felt by the individual.
But if an individual experiences harm, how can they know
whether their experience is an isolated incident or part of a
larger pattern of discrimination?
Fairness work has historically focused on model developers and third-party auditors as the main actors involved in
creating fair mechanisms, motivating methods to construct
models that are fair with respect to pre-defined subgroups at
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
U.C. Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Jessica
Dai <jessicadai@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

