LipsNet++: Unifying Filter and Controller into a Policy Network

Xujie Song 1 Liangfa Chen 2 Tong Liu 1 Wenxuan Wang 1 Yinuo Wang 1
Shentao Qin 1 Yinsong Ma 3 Jingliang Duan 1 2 * Shengbo Eben Li 1 *

Abstract

environments (Bertsekas, 2019; Guan et al., 2021; Li, 2023;
Wang et al., 2024b). Neural networks, capable of modeling
complex nonlinear functions (Hornik et al., 1989; Kidger &
Lyons, 2020), are commonly used as the container for the
control policy fitted by RL. However, RL-trained policy networks often encounter the action fluctuation problem, where
consecutive actions exhibit significant variations despite
minor differences in the adjacent observations. While this
problem is often overlooked during simulation and training
stages, it will result in serious issues in real-world applications like performance reduction, actuators’ wear, and safety
risk (Song et al., 2023; Mysore et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2024a; 2025). This problem is prevalent in various scenarios, including drone control (Mysore
et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2019), robot locomotion (Zhang et al.,
2024), robot manipulation (Yu et al., 2021), and autonomous
driving (Cai et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Wasala et al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2024), etc. These reported action fluctuation problem indicates that it constitutes a considerable gap
in sim-to-real RL applications.

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is effective
for decision-making and control tasks like autonomous driving and embodied AI. However,
RL policies often suffer from the action fluctuation problem in real-world applications, resulting in severe actuator wear, safety risk, and performance degradation. This paper identifies the
two fundamental causes of action fluctuation: observation noise and policy non-smoothness. We
propose LipsNet++, a novel policy network with
Fourier filter layer and Lipschitz controller layer
to separately address both causes. The filter layer
incorporates a trainable filter matrix that automatically extracts important frequencies while suppressing noise frequencies in the observations.
The controller layer introduces a Jacobian regularization technique to achieve a low Lipschitz
constant, ensuring smooth fitting of a policy function. These two layers function analogously to the
filter and controller in classical control theory, suggesting that filtering and control capabilities can
be seamlessly integrated into a single policy network. Both simulated and real-world experiments
demonstrate that LipsNet++ achieves the state-ofthe-art noise robustness and action smoothness.
The code and videos are publicly available at
https://xjsong99.github.io/LipsNet v2.

In order to make RL more applicable in real-world scenarios,
researchers are working hard to solve the problem. CAPS
(Mysore et al., 2021) and L2C2 (Kobayashi, 2022) mitigate
fluctuations by introducing penalty terms in the actor loss,
enforcing action similarity across successive time steps or
similar states. SR2 L (Shen et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2022)
employs adversarial noise and minimizes action differences
between actual and perturbed states. PIC (Chen et al., 2021)
and TAAC (Yu et al., 2021) design two-stage policies by using one network to output the current action, and the other to
output action inertia scalar or make choice between the current and the last action. MLP-SN (Takase et al., 2020) and
LipsNet (Song et al., 2023) smooth control actions by constraining the Lipschitz constant of policy network. However,
both CAPS and L2C2 require sensitive hyperparameter tuning and involve compulsory sampling of neighboring states.
SR2 L, PIC, and TAAC need special policy evaluation or policy improvement mechanisms. MLP-SN suffers from severe
performance loss and difficulty in Lipschitz constant tuning.
LipsNet, the previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) method, has
network structure limitation and is unsuitable for high-realtime tasks due to slow inference speed. Most importantly,
none of them explicitly address observation noise—a factor

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has become a powerful
approach for addressing optimal control tasks in physical
1

School of Vehicle and Mobility & College of AI,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 School of Mechanical
Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China 3 Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to:
Shengbo Eben Li <lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jingliang Duan
<duanjl@ustb.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

