Sort Before You Prune: Improved Worst-Case Guarantees of the DiskANN
Family of Graphs

Siddharth Gollapudi 1 Ravishankar Krishnaswamy 2 Kirankumar Shiragur 2 Harsh Wardhan 2

Abstract

is to design an efficient data structure which, for any query
point q ∈ X, and target k, efficiently identifies the k nearest
neighbors of q from P . In real-world applications, these
points can be thought of as mathematical representations of
online data, such as documents, images, or user behaviors,
with their distances being an appropriately chosen metric,
such as Euclidean or cosine similarity for vector representations of objects, or Jaccard similarity when the dataset
P consists of sets of words. In these settings, the approximate version of the problem, abbreviated ANNS, is usually
considered instead. For this problem, the data structure
is allowed to return sub-optimal results, and its quality is
typically measured by the approximation ratio: the ratio
of the distances of the k th furthest point identified by the
algorithm to that of the true k th furthest point in the dataset.
In more applied papers, a notion of recall@k is instead used
to measure the quality of a solution, which is the fraction of
true k nearest neighbors of a query that are computed by the
algorithm in its k candidate near neighbors, averaged over
all queries.

Graph-based data structures have become powerful and ubiquitous tools for scalable approximate nearest-neighbor (ANN) search over the past
decade. In spite of their apparent practical performance, there has only recently been progress on
the worst-case performance of these data structures. Indeed, the influential work of Indyk & Xu
introduced the key concept of α-reachable graphs,
showing that graphs constructed by the DiskANN
algorithm

 (Subramanya et al., 2019) produce an
α+1
α−1 -approximate solution with a simple bestfirst search that runs in poly-logarithmic query
time. In our work, we improve and generalize this
analysis as follows:
• We introduce sorted α-reachable graphs, and
use this notion to obtain a stronger approxiα
mation factor of α−1
for the DiskANN algorithm on Euclidean metrics.
• We present the first worst-case theoretical
analysis for the popular beam-search algorithm, which is used in practice to search
these graphs for k > 1 candidate nearest
neighbors.

The ANNS problem has been extensively researched in the
theoretical as well as applied communities (Beygelzimer
et al., 2006; Babenko & Lempitsky, 2014; Johnson et al.,
2017; Weber et al., 1998; Baranchuk et al., 2018; Malkov &
Yashunin, 2016; Jégou et al., 2011; Arya & Mount, 1993;
Indyk & Motwani, 1998a) and serves as the cornerstone
for numerous applications across diverse domains: computer vision (Wang et al., 2012), data mining (Camerra
et al., 2010), information retrieval (Manning et al., 2008),
classification (Fix & Hodges, 1989), and recommendation
systems (Dahiya et al., 2021), to name a few. With the recent explosion of semantic search powered by deep learning
models (Devlin et al., 2018) and large language models, the
problem is playing an even larger role in powering the AI
revolution.

We also present empirical results validating the
significance of sorted α-reachable graphs, which
aligns with our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
In the nearest-neighbor search (NNS) problem, there is an
underlying metric space (X, D), where X is a set of points
and D : X × X → R≥0 is a distance function between
points in X. Given a dataset P ⊆ X of n points, the goal

Initial ANNS results have focused on smaller datasets (on
the order of millions of points represented as vectors in tens
of dimensions), developing a plethora of breakthrough techniques centered around space partitioning (Johnson et al.,
2017), such as Locality Sensitive Hashing (Indyk & Motwani, 1998b; Andoni & Indyk, 2008), KD-trees (Arya et al.,
1998), and cover trees (Beygelzimer et al., 2006), to name a

∗

Authors listed alphabetically. 1 UC Berkeley 2 Microsoft Research India. Correspondence to: Siddharth Gollapudi <sgollapu@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

