DUNIA: Pixel-Sized Embeddings via Cross-Modal Alignment for Earth
Observation Applications

Ibrahim Fayad 1 2 Max Zimmer 3 Martin Schwartz 1 Fabian Gieseke 4 Philippe Ciais 1 Gabriel Belouze 1
Sarah Brood 5 Aurelien De Truchis 2 Alexandre d’Aspremont 5 2

Abstract
Significant efforts have been directed towards
adapting self-supervised multimodal learning for
Earth observation applications. However, most
current methods produce coarse patch-sized embeddings, limiting their effectiveness and integration with other modalities like LiDAR. To
close this gap, we present DUNIA, an approach to learn pixel-sized embeddings through
cross-modal alignment between images and fullwaveform LiDAR data. As the model is trained in
a contrastive manner, the embeddings can be directly leveraged in the context of a variety of environmental monitoring tasks in a zero-shot setting.
In our experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the embeddings for seven such tasks:
canopy height mapping, fractional canopy cover,
land cover mapping, tree species identification,
plant area index, crop type classification, and perpixel waveform-based vertical structure mapping.
The results show that the embeddings, along with
zero-shot classifiers, often outperform specialized
supervised models, even in low-data regimes. In
the fine-tuning setting, we show strong performances near or better than the state-of-the-art on
five out of six tasks.

Figure 1. DUNIA’s alignment strategy leverages temporal and vertical information at the pixel level, enabling the model to develop a
cross-modal understanding from a single satellite image. This approach serves as a foundation for cross-modal retrieval tasks across
diverse EO applications. The pre-trained model is represented in
navy blue, the multi-temporal autoencoder (AE) in yellow, and the
waveform AE in green.

for key EO applications, ranging from monitoring natural
resources (Chen et al., 2023; Fayad et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2022; 2023; Tolan et al., 2024; Lang et al.,
2023; Pauls et al., 2024; Schwartz et al., 2023; Pauls et al.,
2025) and assessing environmental impacts (Dalagnol et al.,
2023; Wagner et al., 2023), to climate monitoring and forecast (Andrychowicz et al., 2023; Schultz et al., 2021), as
well as agricultural and land resource management (Ienco
et al., 2019; Kussul et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019).
While research of new deep learning architectures and upcoming remote satellite missions is expected to enhance existing EO applications, supervised deep learning approaches
have key limitations. First, these models depend on labeled
data, often requiring large annotated datasets. For example, the estimation of above-ground biomass (AGB) still
heavily relies on traditional methods due to limited groundbased measurements and the need to use other variables as
proxies (Morin et al., 2023; Schwartz et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
With the rapid expansion of Earth Observation (EO) satellite
missions, deep learning has emerged as a powerful solution
1

Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement,
LSCE/IPSL, France 2 Kayrros SAS, Paris 75009, France
3
Department for AI in Society, Science, and Technology, Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany 4 Department of Information Systems, University of Münster, Germany 5 Department of Computer Science,
CNRS, INRIA & École Normale Supérieure, Paris 75230, France.
Correspondence to: Ibrahim Fayad <ifayad@lsce.ipsl.fr>.

Second, EO models are often tailored to specific tasks, limiting their adaptability and reusability, even when using
similar input data sources. For instance, a land cover classification model cannot easily predict canopy height due to
differences in input-output relationships, as the network may

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

