Conformal Anomaly Detection in Event Sequences

Shuai Zhang 1 Chuan Zhou 1 2 Yang Liu 1 Peng Zhang 3 Xixun Lin 4 Shirui Pan 5

Abstract

Detecting anomalies in event data plays a vital role in safetycritical applications, including information security, finance,
and healthcare. For example, rapid information spreading
may signal rumors (Naumzik & Feuerriegel, 2022), abnormal transaction activities may reveal fraud (Zhu et al., 2020),
and irregular patient health records may suggest rare medical conditions (Liu & Hauskrecht, 2021).

Anomaly detection in continuous-time event sequences is a crucial task in safety-critical applications. While existing methods primarily focus
on developing a superior test statistic, they fail
to provide guarantees regarding the false positive rate (FPR), which undermines their reliability
in practical deployments. In this paper, we propose CADES (Conformal Anomaly Detection in
Event Sequences), a novel test procedure based
on conformal inference for the studied task with
finite-sample FPR control. Specifically, by using the time-rescaling theorem, we design two
powerful non-conformity scores tailored to event
sequences, which exhibit complementary sensitivities to different abnormal patterns. CADES
combines these scores with Bonferroni correction to leverage their respective strengths and
addresses non-identifiability issues of existing
methods. Theoretically, we prove the validity of
CADES and further provide strong guarantees on
calibration-conditional FPR control. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets,
covering various types of anomalies, demonstrate
that CADES outperforms state-of-the-art methods
while maintaining FPR control.

Continuous-time event sequences are commonly modeled
using temporal point processes (TPPs), a class of stochastic processes that characterize the random occurrence of
events (Zhang et al., 2020). Given access to normal training
data, i.e., in-distribution (ID) data, previous works (Shchur
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023) frame the task of detecting
anomalous event sequences as an out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection problem for TPPs. They perform hypothesis testing to determine whether an event sequence is drawn from
the unknown data-generating TPP. While these studies primarily focus on developing a superior test statistic, they lack
rigorous theoretical guarantees for controlling the false positive rate (FPR, i.e., the probability of misclassifying an ID
sample as OOD). Such guarantees, however, are crucial for
the deployment of OOD detection methods in safety-critical
applications (Kaur et al., 2022; Magesh et al., 2023).
Conformal inference (a.k.a. conformal prediction, Vovk
et al. (2005)) provides a flexible framework for establishing
the desired FPR guarantees. Its application in OOD detection is often referred to as conformal OOD detection (Kaur
et al., 2022) or conformal anomaly detection (Smith et al.,
2015). The detection performance largely depends on the
choice of the non-conformity score1 (Kaur et al., 2022; Angelopoulos et al., 2024), which quantifies how different an
input is from the ID samples. Recent advances in this field
have received significant attention (Bates et al., 2023; Ma
et al., 2024; Marandon et al., 2024), but these approaches
have mainly focused on image data, leaving continuous-time
event sequence data unexplored.

1. Introduction
Event sequences consist of the timestamps and marks of
discrete events occurring in continuous time. They are abundant and ubiquitous in our daily life. Examples include
news dissemination on social networks (Trivedi et al., 2019),
trading actions in stock markets (Zuo et al., 2020), and electronic health records in medical systems (Shi et al., 2023).
1
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences 2 School of Cyber Security, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Cyberspace Institute of Advanced
Technology, Guangzhou University 4 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Griffith University. Correspondence to: Chuan Zhou <zhouchuan@amss.ac.cn>.

In this paper, we aim to extend conformal inference to
anomaly detection in event sequences. Common test statistics for event sequences, such as the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
(KS) statistic (Barnard, 1953) and the sum-of-squaredspacings statistic (Shchur et al., 2021), suffer from severe

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
In this paper, we use the terms non-conformity score and test
statistic interchangeably.

1

