Scaling Probabilistic Circuits via Monarch Matrices

Honghua Zhang * 1 Meihua Dang * 2 Benjie Wang * 1 Stefano Ermon 2 Nanyun Peng 1 Guy Van den Broeck 1

Abstract

2021). The tractability of PCs have been exploited in a
number of domains, including fair and explainable machine
learning (Choi et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b), causal inference (Wang et al., 2021a; Zečević et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2022; Wang & Kwiatkowska, 2023), controllable generation
(Liu et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024), and neuro-symbolic
AI (Ahmed et al., 2022; Maene et al., 2024).

Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) are tractable representations of probability distributions allowing
for exact and efficient computation of likelihoods
and marginals. Recent advancements have improved the scalability of PCs either by leveraging
their sparse properties or through the use of tensorized operations for better hardware utilization.
However, no existing method fully exploits both
aspects simultaneously. In this paper, we propose
a novel sparse and structured parameterization
for the sum blocks in PCs. By replacing dense
matrices with sparse Monarch matrices, we significantly reduce the memory and computation costs,
enabling unprecedented scaling of PCs. From a
theory perspective, our construction arises naturally from circuit multiplication; from a practical perspective, compared to previous efforts on
scaling up tractable probabilistic models, our approach not only achieves state-of-the-art generative modeling performance on challenging benchmarks like Text8, LM1B and ImageNet, but also
demonstrates superior scaling behavior, achieving
the same performance with substantially less compute as measured by the number of floating-point
operations (FLOPs) during training.

Recent advancements in PC learning techniques (Liu et al.,
2023b; Gala et al., 2024) and efficient tensorized implementations (Peharz et al., 2020; Dang et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2024a) have significantly enhanced the expressiveness and
scalability of PCs. However, to further boost the performance of PCs, simply scaling up the model size is insufficient; we need to better utilize the available capacity. To this
end, Dang et al. (2022) found that learned PCs empirically
exhibit significant sparsity, and leveraged this observation
to iteratively learn PC structures through pruning and growing. However, the sparse connections learned are arbitrary,
making them difficult to tensorize and parallelize effectively.
In this paper, we focus on leveraging structured sparse parameterizations for the sum blocks in PCs, which represent
linear maps. To the best of our knowledge, all previous circuit architectures utilizing tensorized operations have relied
on dense matrices to parameterize these linear maps (Peharz
et al., 2020), which incur a quadratic cost in the number of
nodes. Inspired by recent advances in low-rank approximations for transformers (Hu et al., 2022), we propose a novel,
more efficient parameterization for the sum blocks.

1. Introduction

We begin by illustrating how our parameterization naturally
arises from circuit multiplication. Previous analysis (Shen
et al., 2016; Vergari et al., 2021) showed that multiplying
two (compatible) circuits could result in a quadratic increase
in size in the worst case. However, we observe that the linear
maps in the sum blocks generated by multiplication are not
dense but rather the Kronecker product of the linear maps
from the original blocks, which can be implemented more
efficiently. Further, by explicitly materializing this map as
interleaving sums and permutations, we identify an interesting connection between these product circuits and some
recently introduced class of structured matrices including
Butterfly matrices (Dao et al., 2019) and Monarch matrices (Dao et al., 2022). Building on this insight, we propose
replacing the dense linear maps in PCs with Monarch layers.

Probabilistic circuits (PCs) are a unifying representation
of tractable probability distributions through computation
graphs (Choi et al., 2020; Darwiche, 2003). The key property that separates PCs from other deep generative models
such as flow-based models (Papamakarios et al., 2021) and
VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013) is their tractability. This
property enables PCs to compute various queries, including
marginal probabilities, exactly and efficiently (Vergari et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Honghua Zhang
<hzhang19cs@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

