CtrlSynth: Controllable Image Text Synthesis for
Data-Efficient Multimodal Learning

Qingqing Cao 1 Mahyar Najibi 2 Sachin Mehta 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

High-quality large-scale datasets have driven the success of
large foundational AI models (Radford et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023). Collecting and
annotating datasets at large-scale is challenging and costly.
One solution is to crawl data from the web; however, web
data is noisy (Lai et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2023), has longtail distributions (Udandarao et al., 2024), and often causes
privacy or copyright issues (Schuhmann et al., 2022). Synthetic data presents a viable and complementary alternative
to overcome these challenges, as it allows for precise control over data generation and customization to meet specific
requirements. A large body of work has focused on improving the quality of synthetic data for image and text data,
from the generation of high-quality images (Dunlap et al.,
2023; Islam et al., 2024) to the improvement of synthetic
captions (Lai et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2023). While these
works have shown that synthetic data successfully improves
model performance for various vision or vision-language
tasks, their synthetic pipeline is often ad hoc and tailored
to specific purposes such as training better CLIP models or
improving domain-specific vision models (e.g., DiffuseMix
uses diffusion models to augment images and improves accuracy on image classification tasks Islam et al., 2024). These
data synthesis works also lack explicit fine-grained control
over the generated texts or images, which are important for
tasks with long-tail distribution (e.g., augmenting tail class
samples) or enforcing safety requirements (e.g., mitigating
biased or sensitive content generation Schramowski et al.,
2023).

Pretraining robust vision or multimodal foundation models (e.g., CLIP) relies on large-scale
datasets that may be noisy, potentially misaligned,
and have long-tail distributions. Previous works
have shown promising results in augmenting
datasets by generating synthetic samples. However, they only support domain-specific ad hoc
use cases (e.g., either image or text only, but not
both), and are limited in data diversity due to
a lack of fine-grained control over the synthesis process. In this paper, we design a controllable image-text synthesis pipeline, CtrlSynth,
for data-efficient and robust multimodal learning. The key idea is to decompose the visual
semantics of an image into basic elements, apply
user-specified control policies (e.g., remove, add,
or replace operations), and recompose them to
synthesize images or texts. The decompose and
recompose feature in CtrlSynth allows users to
control data synthesis in a fine-grained manner by
defining customized control policies to manipulate the basic elements. CtrlSynth leverages the
capabilities of pretrained foundation models such
as large language models or diffusion models to
reason and recompose basic elements such that
synthetic samples are natural and composed in
diverse ways. CtrlSynth is a closed-loop, trainingfree, and modular framework, making it easy to
support different pretrained models. With extensive experiments on 31 datasets spanning different
vision and vision-language tasks, we show that
CtrlSynth substantially improves zero-shot classification, image-text retrieval, and compositional
reasoning performance of CLIP models.

In this work, we aim to systematically control the synthetic
pipeline for generating image-text data while accommodating different use cases (e.g., improving long-tail task performance, enhancing compositional reasoning of CLIP models,
etc.). Our intuition is that large foundation models are already pretrained on a wide range of data and contain general
knowledge about concepts, objects, and their relationships.
For example, text-to-image models (e.g., Rombach et al.,
2022; Podell et al., 2024) can generate detailed high-quality
images based on text instructions. Similarly, large language
models (LLMs) (e.g., OpenAI, 2022; Touvron et al., 2023)
have strong instruction-following capabilities, which can be

1
Apple 2 Work done at Apple. Correspondence to: Qingqing
Cao <qicao@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

