OmniArch: Building Foundation Model For Scientific Computing

Tianyu Chen 1 Haoyi Zhou 1 Ying Li 2 Hao Wang 2 Chonghan Gao 1 Rongye Shi 3
Shanghang Zhang 2 Jianxin Li 1

Abstract

① Multi-Physics
U-Net

Foundation models have revolutionized language
modeling, while whether this success is replicated in scientific computing remains unexplored.
We present OmniArch, the first prototype aiming at solving multi-scale and multi-physics scientific computing problems with physical alignment. We addressed all three challenges with
one unified architecture. Its pre-training stage
contains a Fourier Encoder-decoder fading out
the disharmony across separated dimensions and
a Transformer backbone integrating quantities
through temporal dynamics, and the novel PDEAligner performs physics-informed fine-tuning
under flexible conditions. As far as we know,
we first conduct 1D-2D-3D united pre-training
on the PDEBench, and it sets not only new performance benchmarks for 1D, 2D, and 3D PDEs
but also demonstrates exceptional adaptability to
new physics via in-context and zero-shot learning
approaches, which supports realistic engineering
applications and foresight physics discovery.

FNO

…
Velocity

Density

② Multi-Scale
2D

1e-2

Poseidon(2D Only)

Pressure

DPOT(2D+3D)

Arbitrary Combination?

1D

1D PDEs

MPP(2D Only)

1e-1

OmniArch
3D

Shared Model?

1

③ Physics Alignment
Initial State 𝒕𝒕𝟎𝟎

Predicted State 𝒕𝒕𝒊𝒊

1e-1
1e-2

⊢ Equations？

2D PDEs

1e-1
1e-2

3D PDEs

Figure 1: OmniArch achieves state-of-the-art performance
(nRMSE Loss) on 1D-2D-3D PDE tasks with single foundation model. The baselines include the task-specific expert
models and the pre-trained models.
on state-of-the-art High-Performance Computing (HPC)
clusters. To expedite PDE solving, pioneers have explored
the construction of neural operators that learn mappings
between function spaces, offering the potential to generalize
across different discretizations. For the requisite precision,
neural operators are often enhanced with physics-informed
normalization techniques, such as customized loss functions
derived from the governing physical equations (Raissi et al.,
2019).

1. Introduction
Developing robust neural surrogate models for temporal
partial differential equations (PDEs) is crucial for various
scientific and engineering applications, including aircraft
design, weather forecasting, and semiconductor manufacturing (Allen et al., 2022; Pathak et al., 2022). These PDEs
describe spatial-temporal dynamic systems that are foundational to these industries. Traditional scientific computing
methods, such as Finite Element Methods (FEMs) and Finite
Volume Methods (FVMs) (Oden, 1989), require extensive
handcrafted coding and are computationally intensive, even

The primary limitation of neural operator methods lies in
their case-specific design, restricting their application scope
and hindering broad transferability across diverse physical
systems. Recent efforts aim to enhance the transferability of neural operators by developing foundational models
that leverage advancements in learning strategies, architectural design, and data curation (Alkin et al., 2024; Sun
et al., 2024; Shen et al.). In terms of learning, the pre-train
and fine-tune paradigm, proven effective for Fourier Neural
Operator (FNO) models (Subramanian et al., 2023), has
been adapted to PDE contexts. Additionally, Lie groupbased self-supervised learning (Lie-SSL) (Mialon et al.,
2023) introduces physics-constrained transformations for
PDEs, primarily addressing inverse problems. Architec-

1

SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 SKLMIP, School of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Jianxin Li <lijx@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

