Efficiently Vectorized MCMC on Modern Accelerators

Hugh Dance 1 Pierre Glaser 1 Peter Orbanz 1 Ryan Adams 2

Abstract

MCMC chains in parallel: one can simply write single-chain
MCMC code, and call vmap to turn it into vectorized, multichain code that can run in parallel on the same processor.
Many state-of-the-art MCMC libraries have consequently
adopted machine learning frameworks with automatic vectorization tools as their backend.

With the advent of automatic vectorization tools
(e.g., JAX’s vmap), writing multi-chain MCMC
algorithms is often now as simple as invoking
those tools on single-chain code. Whilst convenient, for various MCMC algorithms this results
in a synchronization problem—loosely speaking,
at each iteration all chains running in parallel must
wait until the last chain has finished drawing its
sample. In this work, we show how to design
single-chain MCMC algorithms in a way that
avoids synchronization overheads when vectorizing with tools like vmap, by using the framework
of finite state machines (FSMs). Using a simplified model, we derive an exact theoretical form of
the obtainable speed-ups using our approach, and
use it to make principled recommendations for
optimal algorithm design. We implement several
popular MCMC algorithms as FSMs, including
Elliptical Slice Sampling, HMC-NUTS, and Delayed Rejection, demonstrating speed-ups of up
to an order of magnitude in experiments.

One limitation with automatic vectorization tools is how
they handle control flow. Since all instructions must be
executed in lock-step, if the algorithm has a while loop,
all chains must wait until the last chain has finished its iterations. This can lead to large inefficiencies for MCMC
algorithms that generate each sample using variable-length
while loops. Roughly speaking, if vectorization executes,
say, 100 chains in parallel, all but one finish after at most
10 steps, and the remaining chain runs for 1000 steps, then
about 99% of the GPU capacity assigned to vmap is wasted
(and our simulations show the effect can indeed be this drastic). For the No-U-Turn Sampler (HMC-NUTS) (Hoffman
et al., 2014), this problem is well-documented (BlackJax,
2019; Sountsov et al., 2024; Radul et al., 2020). It also affects various other algorithms, such as variants of slice sampling (Neal, 2003; Murray et al., 2010; Cabezas and Nemeth,
2023), delayed rejection methods (Mira et al., 2001; Modi
et al., 2024) and unbiased Gibbs sampling (Qiu et al., 2019).

1. Introduction

In this work, we show how to transform MCMC algorithms
into equivalent samplers that avoid these synchronization
barriers when using vmap-style vectorization. In particular,

Automatic vectorization is the act of transforming a function to handle batches of inputs without user intervention.
Implementations of automatic vectorization algorithms are
now available in many mainstream scientific computing libraries, and have dramatically simplified the task of running
multiple instances of a single algorithm concurrently. They
are routinely used to train neural networks (Flax, 2023) and
in other scientific applications, e.g., Schoenholz and Cubuk
(2021); Oktay et al. (2023); Pfau et al. (2020).

1. We develop a novel approach to transform MCMC
algorithms into finite state machines (FSMs), that can
avoid synchronization barriers with vmap.
2. We analyze the time complexity of our FSMs against
standard MCMC implementations and derive a theoretical bound on the speed-up under a simplified model.

This paper focuses on the use of automatic vectorization
for Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms. Tools
like JAX’s vmap provide a convenient way to run multiple

3. We use our analysis to develop principled recommendations for optimal FSM design, which enable us to
nearly obtain the theoretical bound in speed-ups for
certain MCMC algorithms.

1

Gatsby Unit, University College London, UK 2 Department of
Computer Science, Princeton University, USA. Correspondence
to: Hugh Dance <hugh.dance.15@ucl.ac.uk>.

4. We implement popular MCMC algorithms as FSMs,
including Elliptical Slice Sampling, HMC-NUTS, and
Delayed-Rejection MH - demonstrating speed-ups of
up to an order of magnitude in experiments.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

