Reward-Guided Iterative Refinement in Diffusion Models at Test-Time
with Applications to Protein and DNA Design

Masatoshi Uehara * 1 Xingyu Su * 2 Yulai Zhao 3 Xiner Li 2 Aviv Regev 1
Shuiwang Ji† 2 Sergey Levine† 4 Tommaso Biancalani† 1

Abstract
To fully leverage the capabilities of diffusion
models, we are often interested in optimizing
downstream reward functions during inference.
While numerous algorithms for reward-guided
generation have been recently proposed due to
their significance, current approaches predominantly focus on single-shot generation, transitioning from fully noised to denoised states.
We propose a novel framework for test-time reward optimization with diffusion models. Our
approach employs an iterative refinement process consisting of two steps in each iteration:
noising and reward-guided denoising. This sequential refinement allows for the gradual correction of errors introduced during reward optimization. Finally, we demonstrate its superior
empirical performance in protein and cell-type
specific regulatory DNA design. The code is available at https://github.com/masa-ue/ProDifEvoRefinement.

Figure 1: Our proposed framework follows an iterative process, with each iteration injecting noise into the sample and
then denoising it while optimizing rewards. For sequences,
this can be implemented via masked diffusion, initialized
from pre-trained diffusion models (left). Our algorithm can
continuously refine the outputs by gradually correcting errors introduced during reward-guided denoising, improving
the design over successive iterations (middle). For instance,
for the task of optimizing the similarity (RMSD) of a protein
to a target structure (Red), we can progressively minimize
the RMSD through refinement, optimizing the design from
an initial (Orange) fit to a better final fit (Green), as shown
on the right.

2023; Fan et al., 2023; Uehara et al., 2024), while in protein
sequence diffusion models, it could include metrics such as
stability, structural constraints, or binding affinity (Verkuil
et al., 2022), and in DNA sequence diffusion models, it may
involve activity levels (Sarkar et al., 2024; Lal et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have achieved significant success across
various domains, including computer vision and scientific
fields (Ramesh et al., 2021; Watson et al., 2023). These
models enable sampling from complex natural image spaces
or molecular spaces that resemble natural structures. Beyond the capabilities of such pre-trained diffusion models,
there is often a need to optimize downstream reward functions. For instance, in text-to-image diffusion models, the
reward function may be the alignment score (Black et al.,

Building on the motivation above, we focus on optimizing
downstream reward functions while preserving the naturalness of the designs. (e.g., a natural-like protein sequence
exhibiting strong binding affinity) by seamlessly integrating
these reward functions with pre-trained diffusion models
during inference. While numerous studies have proposed
to incorporate rewards into the generation process of diffusion models (e.g., classifier guidance (Dhariwal and Nichol,
2021) by setting rewards as classifiers, derivative-free methods (Wu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024)), they rely on a singleshot denoising pass for generation. However, a natural
question arises:

*

1
Equal contribution
EvolutionaryScale (Work done
2
at Genentech) Texas A&M University 3 Princeton University 4 UC Berkley. Correspondence to: Masatoshi Uehara <masatoshi.uehara@evolutionaryscale.ai>, Xingyu Su
<xingyu.su@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Can we further leverage inference-time computation during
generation to refine the model’s output?
1

