How Much Can Transfer? BRIDGE: Bounded Multi-Domain
Graph Foundation Model with Generalization Guarantees

Haonan Yuan 1 Qingyun Sun 1 Junhua Shi 1 Xingcheng Fu 2 Bryan Hooi 3 Jianxin Li 1 Philip S. Yu 4

Abstract

them a powerful tool for solving real-world problems. As
large models like GPTs and DeepSeek have shown remarkable success in handling multi-modal Euclidean data (Chang
et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025a), they struggle with graphs.
The inherent non-Euclidean structures, combined with heterogeneity and task diversity, makes it hard for large models
to process effectively (Mao et al., 2024a; Jin et al., 2024).

Graph Foundation Models hold significant potential for advancing multi-domain graph learning,
yet their full capabilities remain largely untapped.
Existing works show promising task performance
with the “pretrain-then-prompt” paradigm, which
lacks theoretical foundations to understand why
it works and how much knowledge can be transferred from source domains to the target. In this
paper, we introduce BRIDGE, a Bounded gRaph
foundatIon model pre-trained on multi-Domains
with Generalization guarantEes. To learn discriminative source knowledge, we align multi-domain
graph features with domain-invariant aligners during pre-training. Then, a lightweight Mixture of
Experts (MoE) network is proposed to facilitate
downstream prompting through self-supervised
selective knowledge assembly and transfer. Further, to determine the maximum amount of transferable knowledge, we derive an optimizable generalization error upper bound from a graph spectral perspective given the Lipschitz continuity. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of BRIDGE on both node and graph classification
compared with 15 state-of-the-art baselines.

Within this context, Graph Foundation Models (GFMs) have
garnered significant attention in very recent studies (Mao
et al., 2024b; Shi et al., 2024a; Zi et al., 2024). A GFM is
typically defined as a graph learning model pre-trained on
extensive multi-domain graph data and adapted for diverse
downstream graph tasks (Bommasani et al., 2021). Such a
“pretrain-then-finetune” paradigm has validated its feasibility
of constructing GFMs (Tang et al., 2024a; He & Hooi, 2024;
Lachi et al., 2024). Beyond that, graph prompt learning
is a promising technique to speed up test-time fine-tuning,
demonstrating the updated “pretrain-then-prompt” paradigm
enabling generalization capabilities to any target domains
and diverse tasks, showing a potential path to GFMs.
However, despite the initial success, “pretrain-then-prompt”
frameworks still face notable limitations: (1) Over-reliance
on text-attributed graphs. Several methods rely heavily on
aligning features with textual descriptions, leveraging language models to interpret domain-specific semantics (Tang
et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024; Tan et al.,
2024). Yet, many open graph datasets lack explicit text attributes, making such approaches impractical for extensive
real-world applications. Furthermore, obtaining textual annotations for non-text graphs can be costly, time-consuming,
and prone to domain biases induced by language model
hallucinations (Ribeiro et al., 2021), ultimately hindering
generalization. (2) Insufficient theoretical analysis. While
graph prompts have empirically demonstrated strong performance in transferring knowledge across graph domains (Sun
et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024b), theoretical insights remain
sparse. Beyond discussing learnable parameters and finetuning methods, there is limited theoretical understanding of
the mechanisms behind effective prompt-based transfer, especially in few-shot scenarios. Consequently, foundational
theoretical bounds guiding graph prompt generalization remain unclear.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is pervasive across a wide range of domains, including social network analysis (Fan et al., 2019),
recommendation systems (Wu et al., 2019), drug discovery (Lin et al., 2021), and bioinformatics (Gligorijević et al.,
2021), etc. Graphs are capable of representing complex relationships and attributed knowledge between entities, making
1
SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Beihang University 2 Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University 3 School of Computing, National University of Singapore
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Chicago.
Correspondence to: Qingyun Sun <sunqy@buaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

