Fast and Robust: Task Sampling with Posterior and Diversity Synergies for
Adaptive Decision-Makers in Randomized Environments

Yun Qu * 1 Qi Wang * 1 Yixiu Mao * 1 Yiqin Lv 1 Xiangyang Ji 1

Abstract

environment, e.g., placing a distribution over Markov decision processes (MDPs), for policy search in a zero-shot
or few-shot manner. This facilitates the rise of domain randomization (DR) (Muratore et al., 2018) and Meta-RL (Finn
et al., 2017) paradigms, which train adaptive policies in task
episodic learning. Simultaneously, adaptation robustness to
worst-case scenarios is catching increasing attention as most
real-world decision-making scenarios are inherently risksensitive, where failures in adaptation can cause catastrophic
outcomes, e.g., damage to robots (Carpin et al., 2016) or
accidents in autonomous driving (Rempe et al., 2022).

Task robust adaptation is a long-standing pursuit in sequential decision-making. Some riskaverse strategies, e.g., the conditional value-atrisk principle, are incorporated in domain randomization or meta reinforcement learning to prioritize difficult tasks in optimization, which demand costly intensive evaluations. The efficiency
issue prompts the development of robust active
task sampling to train adaptive policies, where
risk-predictive models are used to surrogate policy evaluation. This work characterizes the optimization pipeline of robust active task sampling
as a Markov decision process, posits theoretical
and practical insights, and constitutes robustness
concepts in risk-averse scenarios. Importantly, we
propose an easy-to-implement method, referred to
as Posterior and Diversity Synergized Task Sampling (PDTS), to accommodate fast and robust
sequential decision-making. Extensive experiments show that PDTS unlocks the potential of robust active task sampling, significantly improves
the zero-shot and few-shot adaptation robustness
in challenging tasks, and even accelerates the
learning process under certain scenarios. Our
project website is at https://thu-rllab.
github.io/PDTS_project_page.

Active Inference’s Promise for Adaptive Robust DecisionMaker: When risk-averse principles are incorporated in DR
and Meta-RL to enhance adaptation robustness (Wang et al.,
2024c; Lv et al., 2024; Greenberg et al., 2024); prioritizing challenging tasks to optimize demands intensive and
expensive policy evaluation in massive environments over
iteration. To overcome the efficiency bottleneck, Wang et al.
(2025) constructs a risk predictive model to actively infer
MDP difficulties for worst subset selection in policy search,
which we identify as a method of the robust active task
sampling (RATS) paradigm in Fig. 1. As policy evaluation in arbitrary MDPs can be amortized by executing this
risk predictive model, the resulting model predictive task
sampling (MPTS) (Wang et al., 2025) enables expanding
the scope of task subset selection, e.g., screening B from B̂
MDPs, to learn adaptive policies without extra environment
interaction cost. This reflects RATS’s huge potential for
efficient, robust decision-making when exhaustive policy
evaluation is prohibitive in the vast MDP space.

1. Introduction

Challenges in Theoretical Analysis and Implementations:
Despite RATS’s promise in decision-making, we can still
perceive several issues from its latest SOTA method MPTS.
(i) No versatile tool is developed for theoretical analysis,
e.g., the robustness concept in optimization, which is an
indispensable consideration in risk-averse cases. (ii) It
requires a dedicated pseudo batch size B̂ and other configurations. As implied in Meta-RL results (Wang et al.,
2025), appropriately mixing up the random and predictive
samplers is decisive in task subset selection; otherwise, it
degrades generalization and robustness (See Sec. 3.2). (iii)
There lack comprehensive discussions about acquisition

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has garnered remarkable
progress in solving complicated sequential decision-making
problems in the past few years (Sutton & Barto, 2018). However, an existing challenge is effectively transferring the RL
policy to unseen but similar scenarios without learning from
scratch. A commonly used strategy is to randomize the
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiangyang Ji
<xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

