Batch List-Decodable Linear Regression via Higher Moments

Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Daniel M. Kane * 2 Sushrut Karmalkar * 3 Sihan Liu * 2 Thanasis Pittas * 1

Abstract

setting. In the process, we give an SoS proof of
the Marcinkiewicz-Zygmund inequality that may
be of broader applicability.

We study the task of list-decodable linear regression using batches. A batch is called clean if the
points it contains are i.i.d. samples from an unknown linear regression distribution. For a parameter α ∈ (0, 1/2), an unknown α-fraction of the
batches are clean and no assumptions are made
on the remaining batches. The goal is to output a
small list of vectors at least one of which is close
to the true regressor vector in ℓ2 -norm. (Das et al.,
2023) gave an efficient algorithm for this task,
under natural distributional assumptions, with the
following guarantee. Under the assumption that
the batch size n satisfies n ≥ Ω̃(α−1 ) and the
number of batches is m = poly(d, n, 1/α), their
algorithm runs in polynomial time and outputs a
2
list of O(1/α
√ ) vectors at least one of which is
−1/2
Õ(α
/ n) close to the target regressor. Here
we design a new polynomial-time algorithm for
this task with significantly stronger guarantees
under the assumption that the low-degree moments of the covariates distribution are Sum-ofSquares (SoS) certifiably bounded. Specifically,
for any constant δ > 0, as long as the batch size is
n ≥ Ωδ (α−δ ) and the degree-Θ(1/δ) moments
of the covariates are SoS certifiably bounded,
our algorithm uses m = poly((dn)1/δ , 1/α)
batches, runs in polynomial-time, and outputs
an O(1/α)-sized
list of vectors one of which is
√
O(α−δ/2 / n) close to the target. That is, our algorithm achieves substantially smaller minimum
batch size and final error, while achieving the
optimal list size. Our approach leverages higherorder moment information by carefully combining the SoS paradigm interleaved with an iterative
method and a novel list pruning procedure for this

1. Introduction
In several modern applications of data analysis, including federated learning (Wang et al., 2021), sensor networks
(Wax & Ziskind, 1989), and crowdsourcing (Steinhardt et al.,
2016), it is typically infeasible to collect large datasets from
a single source. Instead, samples are collected in batches
from multiple sources. Unfortunately, it is often hard to find
sources that provide many samples, i.e., that have large-size
batches. A standard example is a movie recommendation
system using rates collected from users. Here, an individual
user is often unlikely to provide rating scores for a large
number of movies, frequently resulting in data batches with
relatively small sizes. Even less favorable, in such crowdsourcing settings, it is also the case that a majority of the
participants might be unreliable (Steinhardt et al., 2017;
2016; Charikar et al., 2017). Such practical settings serve
as motivation for this work. Formally, we study the task
of linear regression under the assumption that we are given
access to the model through small batches of samples collected from different sources. Importantly, as motivated by
our running example, we consider the setting where most
batches might not be collected from reliable sources.
Definition 1.1 (List-Decodable Linear Regression using
Batches). Let Dβ ∗ be the distribution on pairs (X, y) ∈
Rd+1 such that y = β ∗ ⊤ X + ξ, for ξ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and X ∼
G that are drawn independently from each other. Suppose
we are given m batches of size n each, where for each
batch, with probability α the batch consists entirely of i.i.d.
samples from Dβ ∗ and with probability 1 − α it is drawn
from some arbitrary distribution. The goal is to output a list
L of vectors in Rd with |L| ≤ O(1/α), and the guarantee
that there is a βb ∈ L such that ∥βb − β ∗ ∥2 is small.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, United States 2 Department of
Compuetr Science and Engineering, University of California San
Diego, San Diego, United States 3 Microsoft Research, Cambridge,
England. Correspondence to: Thanasis Pittas <pittas@wisc.edu>.

For the vanilla setting of linear regression, with batch
size n = 1 and no outliers, the classical least-squares estimator is essentially optimal. Unfortunately, even a single
outlier is enough to force the least-squares estimator to deviate arbitrarily. To address this discrepancy, Huber (1964);
Rousseeuw & Leroy (1987) proposed classical robust estimators that could handle a constant fraction of outliers.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

