Decision-aware Training of Spatiotemporal Forecasting Models
to Select a Top-K Subset of Sites for Intervention

Kyle Heuton 1 F. Samuel Muench 1 Shikhar Shrestha 2 Thomas J. Stopka 2 Michael C. Hughes 1

Abstract

from mitigating overdoses in public health (Marks et al.,
2021b) to forest fire management (Cheng & Wang, 2008)
to wildlife monitoring (Golden et al., 2022; Hefley et al.,
2017). Across these domains, there is a pressing need for
predictive models that can make accurate predictions of
near-term future events at fine spatiotemporal resolutions.
Such models can enable inform data-driven decisions about
how to allocate limited resources to maximize utility.

Optimal allocation of scarce resources is a common problem for decision makers faced with
choosing a limited number of locations for intervention. Spatiotemporal prediction models
could make such decisions data-driven. A recent
performance metric called fraction of best possible reach (BPR) measures the impact of using a
model’s recommended size K subset of sites compared to the best possible top-K in hindsight. We
tackle two open problems related to BPR. First,
we explore how to rank all sites numerically given
a probabilistic model that predicts event counts
jointly across sites. Ranking via the per-site mean
is suboptimal for BPR. Instead, we offer a better ranking for BPR backed by decision theory.
Second, we explore how to train a probabilistic
model’s parameters to maximize BPR. Discrete
selection of K sites implies all-zero parameter
gradients which prevent standard gradient training. We overcome this barrier via advances in
perturbed optimizers. We further suggest a training objective that combines likelihood with a BPR
constraint to deliver high-quality top-K rankings
as well as good forecasts for all sites. We demonstrate our approach on two where-to-intervene
applications: mitigating opioid-related fatal overdoses for public health and monitoring endangered wildlife.

In this work, we seek to help decision-makers select where
to intervene. Given historical data for a fixed set of S candidate spatial sites, we develop models that can recommend a
specific subset of given size K for some action or intervention. We think of hyperparameter K as setting the budget
for interventions. In an ideal world, decision-makers could
afford interventions in all S sites. However, when resource
constraints allow only K sites to receive interventions, a decision selecting a specific K-of-S subset is required. While
such decisions may often be heuristic in current practice,
we hope to offer data-driven solutions.
With this goal in mind, choosing a sensible performance
metric is critical to assessing which models have real-world
utility. Common metrics such as squared error or absolute
error are not well matched to where-to-intervene decisions
because they treat all sites equally. Recent work on overdose forecasting has suggested a metric termed the fraction
of best possible reach, or BPR (Heuton et al., 2022; 2024).
BPR measures a ratio of event counts. The numerator sums
over the model’s recommended K sites, while the denominator sums over the best possible K selected in hindsight.
This type of evaluation has been used in a preregistered
trial (Marshall et al., 2022) for assessing forecasts of opioid
overdoses in Rhode Island, as well as a follow-up feasability study (Allen et al., 2023). BPR is applicable to many
where-to-intervene problems beyond public health.

1. Introduction
Statistical machine learning methods for spatiotemporal
forecasting can play a vital role in high-stakes applications

While some publications have reported BPR in evaluations,
we suggest that a natural goal would be for this performance metric to inform two other key parts of data-driven
decision-making: model-based ranking and model training.
By ranking, we mean that given fixed model parameters,
the knowledge of BPR as the metric of interest should im-

1

Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, United States 2 Department of Public Health
and Community Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States. Correspondence to: Kyle
Heuton <kyle.heuton@tufts.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Code: https://github.com/tufts-ml/decision-aware-topk

1

