Multiaccuracy and Multicalibration via Proxy Groups

Beepul Bharti 1 2 Mary Versa Clemens-Sewall 3 Paul Yi 4 Jeremias Sulam 1 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Predictive machine learning algorithms are increasingly
being used in high-stakes decision-making contexts such
as healthcare (Shailaja et al., 2018), employment (Freire
& de Castro, 2021), credit scoring (Thomas et al., 2017),
and criminal justice (Rudin et al., 2020). Although these
predictive models demonstrate impressive overall performance, growing evidence indicates that they can often exhibit biases and discriminate against certain sensitive groups
(Obermeyer & Mullainathan, 2019; Dastin, 2022; Li et al.,
2023). For instance, ProPublica’s investigation (Angwin
et al., 2022) revealed significant racial disparities in recidivism risk assessment algorithms, which disproportionately
classified African Americans as high-risk for re-offending.
As the deployment of these algorithms increases, regulatory
bodies worldwide, including the US Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP) (of Science & Policy, 2022),
European Union (Commission, 2021), and United Nations
(United Nations Educational & , UNESCO), have emphasized the importance of ensuring that predictive algorithms
avoid discrimination and uphold fairness.

As the use of predictive machine learning algorithms increases in high-stakes decision-making,
it is imperative that these algorithms are fair
across sensitive groups. However, measuring and
enforcing fairness in real-world applications can
be challenging due to missing or incomplete sensitive group information. Proxy-sensitive attributes
have been proposed as a practical and effective solution in these settings, but only for parity-based
fairness notions. Knowing how to evaluate and
control for fairness with missing sensitive group
data for newer, different, and more flexible frameworks, such as multiaccuracy and multicalibration, remains unexplored. In this work, we address this gap by demonstrating that in the absence of sensitive group data, proxy-sensitive attributes can provably be used to derive actionable
upper bounds on the true multiaccuracy and multicalibration violations, providing insights into a
predictive model’s potential worst-case fairness
violations. Additionally, we show that adjusting
models to satisfy multiaccuracy and multicalibration across proxy-sensitive attributes can significantly mitigate these violations for the true, but
unknown, sensitive groups. Through several experiments on real-world datasets, we illustrate that
approximate multiaccuracy and multicalibration
can be achieved even when sensitive group data
is incomplete or unavailable.

These concerns have led to the emergence of algorithmic
fairness, a field dedicated to ensuring that predictive models
do not inadvertently discriminate against sensitive groups
defined by sensitive attributes such as race, age, or biological sex. Unfortunately, measuring and controlling a model’s
fairness can be challenging in many real-world settings, as
sensitive group information is often incomplete or unavailable (Holstein et al., 2019; Garin et al.; Yi et al., 2025).
In certain contexts, like healthcare, privacy and legal regulations such as the HIPAA Privacy Rule restrict access
to sensitive data. In other cases, the information was not
collected because it was considered unnecessary (Weissman & Hasnain-Wynia, 2011; Fremont et al., 2016; Zhang,
2018). Despite these obstacles, it remains crucial to evaluate a model’s fairness before and during its deployment.
This raises the question: how can we evaluate and promote
fairness when sensitive group information is imperfect or
missing altogether?

1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 2 Mathematical Institute of Data Science,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 3 Department of Applied Mathematics & Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 4 St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Arlington,
USA 5 Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to: Beepul Bharti <bbharti1@jhu.edu>, Jeremias Sulam <jsulam1@jhu.edu>.

One popular approach, widely applied in healthcare (Brown
et al., 2016), finance (Zhang, 2018), and politics (Imai &
Khanna, 2016) is to utilize proxy attributes in place of true
attributes. Proxy methods have been immensely effective

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

