Elucidating the design space of language models for image generation

Xuantong Liu 1 Shaozhe Hao 2 Xianbiao Qi∗ 3 Tianyang Hu† 4 Jun Wang 1 Rong Xiao 3 Yuan Yao† 1

Abstract

generation is commonly facilitated by autoregressive (AR)
language models, like LLaMA-3 (Touvron et al., 2023a) and
GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), which operate by predicting
subsequent tokens based on preceding ones in a sequence.
On the other hand, image generation predominantly utilizes
diffusion models, such as Dall·E 3 (Betker et al., 2023)
and Stable Diffusion v3 (Esser et al., 2024), which learn to
gradually denoise images for all pixels simultaneously.

The success of large language models (LLMs) in
text generation has inspired their application to
image generation. However, existing methods either rely on specialized designs with inductive biases or adopt LLMs without fully exploring their
potential in vision tasks. In this work, we systematically investigate the design space of LLMs for
image generation and demonstrate that LLMs can
achieve near state-of-the-art performance without domain-specific designs, simply by making
proper choices in tokenization methods, modeling
approaches, scan patterns, vocabulary design, and
sampling strategies. We further analyze autoregressive models’ learning and scaling behavior,
revealing how larger models effectively capture
more useful information than the smaller ones.
Additionally, we explore the inherent differences
between text and image modalities, highlighting
the potential of LLMs across domains. The exploration provides valuable insights to inspire
more effective designs when applying LLMs to
other domains. With extensive experiments, our
proposed model, ELM achieves an FID of 1.54
on 256×256 ImageNet and an FID of 3.29 on
512×512 ImageNet, demonstrating the powerful
generative potential of LLMs in vision tasks.

The recent success of large language models (LLMs) has
bolstered the research community’s confidence to achieve
artificial general intelligence (AGI) and inspired their application in computer vision tasks, such as image (Esser
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2024) and video
generation (Kondratyuk et al., 2024). A significant advantage of integrating LLMs into image generation is the ability
to transfer established techniques from text-based applications, such as enabling undefined output length (Xiao et al.,
2023) and speed-up strategies (Kwon et al., 2023). Moreover, the scalability of LLMs makes them the preferred
foundation for building unified multi-modal models (Team
et al., 2023; Kondratyuk et al., 2024). Nevertheless, LLMs
for image generation remain underexplored. Recent efforts
often rely on domain-specific strategies, such as sequencing visual tokens from low to high resolution (Tian et al.,
2024), using continuous space modeling with diffusion loss
(Li et al., 2024), or randomly permuting image tokens to
utilize bidirectional information (Yu et al., 2024a). These
approaches introduce inductive biases depending on domain
knowledge, which may limit LLMs’ true potential. Meanwhile, preliminary attempts (Esser et al., 2021; Chang et al.,
2022; Yu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2024; Yu
et al., 2024b) take a simpler approach by discretizing images
into token sequences with vector-quantization (VQ) autoencoders and training LLMs on token prediction objectives,
leaving much of the design space unexplored.

1. Introduction
In the domain of artificial intelligence generated content
(AIGC), text and image generation (Brown, 2020; Ho et al.,
2022) represent the principal focal points. Despite their
shared goal of content generation, these two modalities predominantly employ distinct methods. On the one hand, text

In this study, we delve into the potential of language models
for image generation tasks. Start with image tokenization,
we compare VQGAN (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Esser
et al., 2021) and BAE (binary autoencoder) (Wang et al.,
2023; Yu et al., 2023). Our comparison involving reconstruction ability, scalability, and generation performance
shows that BAE consistently outperforms VQGAN across
all dimensions. Despite this, current language model-based
image generation methods largely rely on VQGAN (Yu

Project lead, † Corresponding authors 1 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 The University of Hong
Kong 3 Intellifusion 4 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Xuantong Liu <xliude@connect.ust.hk>,
Xianbiao Qi <qixianbiao@gmail.com>, Tianyang Hu
<hutianyang.up@outlook.com>, Yuan Yao <yuany@ust.hk>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

