Modular Duality in Deep Learning

Jeremy Bernstein 1 Laker Newhouse 1

Abstract

weight ´ LR ˚ weight.grad
type error!
weight ´ LR ˚ dualizepweight.gradq
all good!

An old idea in optimization theory says that
since the gradient is a dual vector it may not be
subtracted from the weights without first being
mapped to the primal space where the weights
reside. We take this idea seriously in this paper
and construct such a duality map for general neural networks. Our map, which we call modular
dualization, forms a unifying theoretical basis for
training algorithms that are a) fast and b) scalable.
Modular dualization involves first assigning operator norms to layers based on the semantics of
each layer, and then using these layerwise norms
to recursively induce a duality map on the weight
space of the full neural architecture. We derive
GPU-friendly algorithms for dualizing Embed,
Linear and Conv2D layers—the latter two methods are based on a Newton-Schulz iteration. We
conclude with small experiments demonstrating
the speed, scalability and novel numerical properties of duality-based optimizers. Our methods
were used in the Muon optimizer, which recently
set speed records for training NanoGPT and was
scaled up to a 1.5 billion parameter transformer.

1

Why? The reason is that the loss function may not be equally
smooth in all directions in weight space, and there is no reason for the sizes of different components of the raw gradient
vector1 to respect this heterogeneity. In other words, the geometry of the loss function may be non-isotropic. Insisting
on a type check should force the user to become cognizant
of this issue and to find a suitable duality map. A good duality map should adjust the size and direction of the gradient
to respect the smoothness structure of the loss function.
Duality maps on vector spaces are commonplace in physics
and applied math. Examples include the musical isomorphism in differential geometry (Grosse, 2022), raising and
lowering indices in general relativity (Carroll, 2019) and the
bra-ket notation in quantum mechanics (Sakurai & Napolitano, 2020). Duality maps are also central to several optimization theories including mirror descent (Nemirovsky &
Yudin, 1983), natural gradient descent (Amari, 2016) and
steepest descent on a normed space (Boyd & Vandenberghe,
2004). Despite the efforts of some prescient papers (Carlson
et al., 2015b; Flynn, 2017), the latter kind of norm-based
duality map is yet to puncture the deep learning mainstream.
We believe that duality is a key theoretical concept that will
help in building performant large-scale machine learning
systems. To support this belief, we show in this paper that
two important and seemingly disparate methods in contemporary optimization research may be seen as approximations
to a single duality map. These methods are maximal update
parameterization (Yang & Hu, 2021, µP), which is aimed
at scalable training, and Shampoo (Shi et al., 2023), which
is targeted at fast training. We show in Section 4.1 that
both methods emerge as partial approximations to a single
duality map induced by the RMS–RMS operator norm.

Introduction

This paper pursues a rigorous and first-principles theoretical
framework for designing neural network training algorithms.
We hope that such a framework will facilitate the design of
a next generation of fast and scalable optimizers that are
automatically tailored to different neural architectures.
While gradient descent is the workhorse of modern machine
learning, the most vanilla form of the algorithm does not,
in our view, pass a basic type check. For a gradient update
to type check, we insist that the gradient must be passed
through a duality map before being multiplied by a learning
rate and applied to the weights:

1
In this paper, we use the term “gradient” to mean the partial
derivative of the loss function. This is in accordance with the
terminology used in machine learning software libraries such as
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). We
chose this verbiage to help make the paper easily accessible to a
broad machine learning audience. However, it is worth noting that
this terminology is at odds with common mathematical parlance
(Blondel & Roulet, 2024) where a “gradient” is a primal vector
obtained by applying some form of duality map to the partial
derivative of the loss function.

1
MIT CSAIL, United States. Correspondence to: Jeremy Bernstein <jbernstein@mit.edu>, Laker Newhouse <lakern@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

