The Price of Freedom: Exploring Expressivity and Runtime Tradeoffs in
Equivariant Tensor Products

YuQing Xie 1 Ameya Daigavane 1 Mit Kotak 2 Tess Smidt 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Many complex physical systems possess inherent spatial
symmetries, and incorporating these symmetries into models has been shown to significantly improve both learning efficiency and robustness (Batzner et al., 2022; Rackers et al.,
2023; Frey et al., 2023; Owen et al., 2024). To address
the specific symmetries present in 3D systems, considerable effort has been dedicated to the development of E(3)equivariant neural networks (E(3)NNs) (Thomas et al., 2018;
Weiler et al., 2018; Kondor, 2018; Kondor et al., 2018).
E(3)NNs have delivered strong performance across a wide
range of scientific applications, including molecular force
fields (Batzner et al., 2022; Musaelian et al., 2023; Batatia
et al., 2022), catalyst discovery (Liao & Smidt, 2023), generative models (Hoogeboom et al., 2022), charge density
prediction (Fu et al., 2024), and protein structure prediction
(Lee et al., 2022; Jumper et al., 2021).

E(3)-equivariant neural networks have demonstrated success across a wide range of 3D modelling tasks. A fundamental operation in these
networks is the tensor product, which interacts
two geometric features in an equivariant manner
to create new features. Due to the high computational complexity of the tensor product, significant effort has been invested to optimize the runtime of this operation. For example, Luo et al.
(2024) recently proposed the Gaunt tensor product (GTP) which promises a significant speedup.
In this work, we provide a careful, systematic
analysis of a number of tensor product operations. In particular, we emphasize that different
tensor products are not performing the same operation. The reported speedups typically come at
the cost of expressivity. We introduce measures
of expressivity and interactability to characterize
these differences. In addition, we realized the
original implementation of GTP can be greatly
simplified by directly using a spherical grid at
no cost in asymptotic runtime. This spherical
grid approach is faster on our benchmarks and
in actual training of the MACE interatomic potential by 30%. Finally, we provide the first systematic microbenchmarks of the various tensor
product operations. We find that the theoretical
runtime guarantees can differ wildly from empirical performance, demonstrating the need for
careful application-specific benchmarking. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
atomicarchitects/PriceofFreedom.

The group E(3) consists of all rotations, translations and
reflections in 3 dimensions. A function f : X → Y is
E(3)-equivariant if it satisfies:
f (g · x) = g · f (x) ∀ g ∈ E(3), x ∈ X

(1)

where the group action · may differ on the input space X
and output space Y .
E(3)-equivariant neural networks work with features that
transform as irreducible representations of O(3), termed
‘irreps’, as described in Appendix B. How these irreps
transform under 3D rotations (elements of SO(3)) is defined
by a positive integer L, which can intuitively be thought of
as an angular frequency. As described in Section 2, tensor
products are used to construct equivariant bilinearities, a
key component of E(3) networks.

Equal contribution Department of EECS, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139, USA
2
Department of CSE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139, USA. Correspondence to: YuQing
Xie <xyuqing@mit.edu>, Tess Smidt <tsmidt@mit.edu>.

The only true tensor product is the Clebsch-Gordan tensor product (CGTP) which uses the well-studied ClebschGordan (Varshalovich et al., 1988) coefficients. However, it
has a time complexity1 of O(L5 ) as we show in Appendix E,
which can quickly become expensive for larger L. This scaling limits the direct application of E(3)-equivariant neural

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Note that Passaro & Zitnick (2023) claims a runtime of O(L6 )
for this tensor product. In Appendix E, we show that this runtime
can be reduced to O(L5 ).

*

1

1

1

