Ehrenfeucht-Haussler Rank and Chain of Thought

Pablo Barceló * 1 2 3 Alexander Kozachinskiy * 3 Tomasz Steifer * 4

Abstract

Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), which has
recently revolutionized the field of NLP and facilitated the
development of LLMs. In essence, we show that the rank of
a function f corresponds to the minimum number of Chain
of Thought (CoT) steps required by a single-layer Transformer to compute f . The Transformers used in our characterization are based on the hard attention mechanism—a
theoretical abstraction of the soft attention mechanism employed in practice. Hard attention has been widely used in
theoretical studies (Hahn, 2020b; Hao et al., 2022b; Barceló
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024) due to its amenability to
formal analysis, while still effectively capturing the essence
of practical models (Clark et al., 2019; Voita et al., 2019).

The notion of rank of a Boolean function has
been a cornerstone in PAC learning, enabling
quasipolynomial-time learning algorithms for
polynomial-size decision trees. We present a
novel characterization of rank, grounded in the
well-known Transformer architecture. We show
that the rank of a function f corresponds to the
minimum number of Chain of Thought (CoT)
steps required by a single-layer Transformer with
hard attention to compute f . Based on this characterization we establish tight bounds on the number
of CoT steps required for specific problems, showing that ℓ-fold function composition necessitates
exactly ℓ CoT steps. Furthermore, we analyze
the problem of identifying the position of the k-th
occurrence of 1 in a Boolean sequence, proving
that it requires k CoT steps.

The Transformer architecture is built upon attention layers
and a decoder. An attention layer performs attention on
the input sequence, mapping a sequence of input vectors
to another sequence of vectors of the same length. Attention layers are used to generate vector representations of
sentences in natural language. However, a more common
application of Transformers is sequence generation, where
the input sequence is mapped to an unbounded sequence
of output vectors, generated iteratively, one at a time. This
task is carried out by the decoder. In the first iteration, the
decoder processes the input sequence through the attention
layers and outputs the vector in the last position. This output
is then appended to the input sequence. During subsequent
iterations, the decoder applies its attention layers to the extended sequence, computes the next output, and appends it
to the sequence. These are the CoT steps mentioned earlier
(Merrill & Sabharwal, 2024; Liu et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Ehrenfeucht & Haussler introduced the notion of the rank of
a Boolean function and showed that, for any constant r, the
class of Boolean functions with rank at most r is properly
PAC-learnable in polynomial time. As a corollary, they
derived their renowned quasipolynomial-time PAC-learning
algorithm for polynomial-size decision trees. Pudlák &
Impagliazzo further characterized the rank—not only for
Boolean functions but also for Boolean relations—through
Prover-Delayer games. Since its introduction, this concept
has played a significant role in proof complexity (Kullmann,
1999; Esteban & Torán, 2003).

Below we summarize our main results:
• We show that the rank of a function f , denoted by
rk(f ), is the minimal number of iterations of a singlelayer decoder with one hard-attention head that computes f . We establish our result not only for Boolean
functions, generalizing the notion of the rank to the
non-Boolean case (as far as we know, for the first time).

In this paper, we present a new characterization of the notion
of rank. Surprisingly, this characterization is grounded in the
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering, Pontifical Catholic University of Chile
2
Millennium Institute for Foundational Research on Data (IMFD
Chile) 3 National Center for Artificial Intelligence (CENIA
Chile) 4 Institute of Fundamental Technological Research, Polish
Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Alexander Kozachinskiy <alexander.kozachinskyi@cenia.cl>.

• In practice, Transformers are equipped with multiple
attention heads, which enhance their computational
capabilities. We show that the ability of such Transformers to compute functions can also be characterized
using the notion of rank. Specifically, we define the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

