LAST SToP For Modeling Asynchronous Time Series

Shubham Gupta 1 2 3 * Thibaut Durand 3 Graham W. Taylor 4 Lilian W. Białokozowicz 3 5

Abstract

Unlike regular time series, which consist of values at evenly
spaced time intervals (like weather measurements), asynchronous time series consist of multiple types of discrete
events occurring sporadically over time. For example, in
the context of social media platforms like X (Twitter), user
interactions (likes, comments, shares, and follows) happen
sporadically and at irregular intervals (Zhao et al., 2015).
Each such type of interaction with a user’s profile represents
an event type, and together with their timestamps, form an
asynchronous time series (Xue et al., 2024). Modeling such
asynchronous time series is challenging due to the irregular timing and the diversity of event types, which contrasts
with the uniformity and regularity of traditional time series
data (Schirmer et al., 2022; Horn et al., 2020; Zhang et al.).
Traditionally, to model asynchronous time series, events are
grouped into a fixed, small number of categorical types (Xue
et al., 2024). Separate stochastic processes—such as Poisson processes or Hawkes processes—are then modeled for
each event type to predict which event will occur next and
when (Mei et al., 2022; Hawkes, 1971). However, this approach presents several significant drawbacks. Firstly, it
inherently limits research to datasets with a small number of
event types because modeling each event type separately becomes increasingly computationally intensive as the number
of event types grows (Zuo et al., 2020). Secondly, events can
vary widely and may not fit neatly into predefined categories.
Thirdly, this method leads to the loss of meaningful natural
language descriptions associated with the events. Fourthly,
these methods treat each event type independently, ignoring any interactions between them — for example, likes
and shares of a tweet are not independent events. Lastly,
extending these methods to other tasks require significant
theoretical development (Shchur et al., 2021).
Deep learning models have significantly revolutionized techniques for time series modeling, and even more so with the
introduction of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). However, there are often limitations due to the scarcity of training
data, overfitting in specific domains, and the highly specialized architectural designs. In response to those challenges,
Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as a powerful and promising direction to model time series data. For
example, Gruver et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2023); Xue &
Salim (2023); Jin et al. (2024) have illustrated how LLMs
can be used as time series forecasters when the input time
series is encoded as a string of numeric digits, by casting the

We present a novel prompt design for Large Language Models (LLMs) tailored to Asynchronous
Time Series. Unlike regular time series, which
assume values at evenly spaced time points, asynchronous time series consist of timestamped
events occurring at irregular intervals, each described in natural language. Our approach effectively utilizes the rich natural language of event
descriptions, allowing LLMs to benefit from their
broad world knowledge for reasoning across different domains and tasks. This allows us to extend
the scope of asynchronous time series analysis beyond forecasting to include tasks like anomaly
detection and data imputation. We further introduce Stochastic Soft Prompting, a novel prompttuning mechanism that significantly improves
model performance, outperforming existing finetuning methods such as QLoRA. Through extensive experiments on real-world datasets, we
demonstrate that our approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance across different tasks and
datasets. 1

1

Introduction

An asynchronous time series (also named temporal event
sequence or continuous-time event sequence) is a temporally
ordered set of events that describe the progression of actions
or occurrences. Asynchronous time series are ubiquitous
in daily life, such as healthcare (Lorch et al., 2018; Rizoiu
et al., 2018), finance (Bacry et al., 2015; Jin et al., 2020),
e-commerce (Hernandez et al., 2017), and social media
(Zhang et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2023). In each of those
domains, predicting the next events plays a crucial role.
*

Work was while the author was an intern at RBC Borealis
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Canada 2 Université Laval, Canada
3
RBC Borealis 4 Vector Institute, Canada 5 Electronic Arts. Correspondence to: Shubham Gupta <shgup1@ulaval.ca>, Thibaut
Durand <thibaut.durand@borealisai.com>, Lilian W. Bialokozowicz <lilian.bialokozowicz@gmail.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/BorealisAI/last-stop.

1

