Language Models May Verbatim Complete Text
They Were Not Explicitly Trained On

Ken Ziyu Liu 1 2 Christopher A. Choquette-Choo * 1 Matthew Jagielski * 1 Peter Kairouz 1 Sanmi Koyejo 3
Percy Liang * 3 Nicolas Papernot * 1

Abstract

was trained on?), copyright (e.g., has the model been trained
on copyrighted text?), and more generally AI safety (e.g.,
did the LLM successfully unlearn text that was identified as
harmful post hoc training?). In each of these settings, it is
important that the evaluation of membership be robust.

An important question today is whether a given
text was used to train a large language model
(LLM). A completion test is often employed:
check if the LLM completes a sufficiently complex text. This, however, requires a ground-truth
definition of membership; most commonly, it is
defined as a member based on the n-gram overlap
between the target text and any text in the dataset.
In this work, we demonstrate that this n-gram
based membership definition can be effectively
gamed. We study scenarios where sequences are
non-members for a given n and we find that completion tests still succeed. We find many natural
cases of this phenomenon by retraining LLMs
from scratch after removing all training samples
that were completed; these cases include exact duplicates, near-duplicates, and even short overlaps.
They showcase that it is difficult to find a single
viable choice of n for membership definitions. Using these insights, we design adversarial datasets
that can cause a given target sequence to be completed without containing it, for any reasonable
choice of n. Our findings highlight the inadequacy
of n-gram membership, suggesting membership
definitions fail to account for auxiliary information available to the training algorithm.

With direct access to the training dataset, determining sequence membership is straightforward given a fixed criterion
for defining when two text sequences are “the same.” A common approach is to compare sequences by their n-grams, as
this is both efficient and reasonable. Two sequences match
verbatim if all their n-grams are equal for all n, and approximately if most do for some n (Lee et al., 2021). However,
this definition must align with downstream concerns in privacy, copyright, and safety—domains focused on what an
LLM can reproduce as an intuitive notion of membership.
Consider a setting where a long text sequence is generated
verbatim by an LLM. The sequence has high entropy due
to its length, which makes it very unlikely to have been
generated by chance. Thus, one may intuitively conclude
that this sequence was in the training data. This raises a
key question: can an LLM generate a target sequence even
if it was never included as an n-gram in its training data?
Our findings confirm that the answer is affirmative: n-gram
membership establishes a threshold dependent on n, and
this threshold can be gamed. In other words, our findings
show that that formally defining a robust and accurate notion
of membership is challenging.
We assess whether an LLM generates a target sequence by
prompting it with a prefix and checking if it completes the
corresponding suffix, a process we refer to as a completion
test. Language models are known to complete some of their
training data (Nasr et al., 2023). In our work, we first find
that even after removing a set of extracted sequences from
the training dataset and retraining the LLM from scratch,
the retrained model can still verbatim complete 40% of
them under our experimental conditions (Section 4). Upon
investigation, we find that these removed yet still completed
sequences are either de facto members of the training set
(but for a different definition of membership) or lacking
sufficient complexity: many examples have near duplicates,
sequences with m < n-grams that are not removed, or are

1. Introduction
Training data membership asks whether a data point was
used to train a given model. For large language models
(LLMs), it is useful to answer questions related to privacy
(e.g., is the LLM leaking information contained in the text it
*

Equal contribution 1 Google 2 Work completed while on
internship at Google DeepMind.
Now at Stanford Uni3
versity.
Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Ken
Liu <kzliu@cs.stanford.edu>, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo
<cchoquette@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

