Smooth Interpolation for
Improved Discrete Graph Generative Models

Yuxuan Song * 1 2 Juntong Shi * 3 Jingjing Gong * 1 2 Minkai Xu 4
Stefano Ermon 4 Hao Zhou 1 Wei-Ying Ma 1

Abstract
Though typically represented by the discrete node
and edge attributes, the graph topological information can be sufficiently captured by the graph
spectrum in a continuous space. It is believed
that incorporating the continuity of graph topological information into the generative process
design could establish a superior paradigm for
graph generative modeling. Motivated by such
prior and recent advancements in the generative
paradigm, we propose Graph Bayesian Flow Networks (GraphBFN) in this paper, a principled
generative framework that designs an alternative generative process emphasizing the dynamics of topological information. Unlike recent
discrete-diffusion-based methods, GraphBFN employs the continuous counts derived from sampling infinite times from a categorical distribution as latent to facilitate a smooth decomposition of topological information, demonstrating
enhanced effectiveness. To effectively realize
the concept, we further develop an advanced
sampling strategy and new time-scheduling techniques to overcome practical barriers and boost
performance. Through extensive experimental
validation on both generic graph and molecular
graph generation tasks, GraphBFN could consistently achieve superior or competitive performance with significantly higher training and sampling efficiency. The code is available at https:
//github.com/AlgoMole/GraphBFN.

*

Figure 1: The top figures compares the sampling trajectories of GraphBFN to DiGress and GruM (Vignac et al.,
2022; Jo et al., 2024). A smaller spectral gap reflects better
graph clusterability (i.e. clearer sample). Both the visualizations and curves demonstrate that GraphBFN allows a much
smoother transformation of graph topology information.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling of graph-structured data is an important task with applications in various important scenarios,
e.g. molecule generation (Jin et al., 2018; Zang & Wang,
2020), traffic modeling (Yu & Gu, 2019) and protein design (Ingraham et al., 2019). With the development of deep
generative models, there have been fruitful lines of research
conducted to tackle the challenges, e.g., Generative Adversarial Networks (Martinkus et al., 2022; De Cao & Kipf,
2018), Variational Auto-encoders (Jin et al., 2018; 2020),
and Autoregressive models (You et al., 2018).
Recently, diffusion models (DMs) (Song & Ermon, 2019;
Ho et al., 2020) have emerged as a powerful generative
model across various fields (Zeng et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022). Learning DMs for graphs is challenging due to the
discrete and complex relational nature of graphs. Niu et al.
(2020); Jo et al. (2022) propose to dequantize the node
vector and adjacent matrix with uniform/Gaussian noise
and learn Gaussian DMs over the dequantized variables.
However, these approaches face problems due to the in-

1

Equal contribution Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR),
Tsinghua University 2 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 3 University of Southern California,
USA 4 Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to: Hao Zhou
<zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

