Lightweight Dataset Pruning without Full Training
via Example Difficulty and Prediction Uncertainty

Yeseul Cho * 1 Baekrok Shin * 1 Changmin Kang 1 Chulhee Yun 1

Abstract

revealed a power-law relationship between the generalization capacity of deep neural networks and the size of their
training data (Hestness et al., 2017; Rosenfeld et al., 2019;
Gordon et al., 2021), meaning that the improvement of
model performance becomes increasingly cost-inefficient as
we scale up the dataset size.

Recent advances in deep learning rely heavily
on massive datasets, leading to substantial storage and training costs. Dataset pruning aims to
alleviate this demand by discarding redundant examples. However, many existing methods require
training a model with a full dataset over a large
number of epochs before being able to prune the
dataset, which ironically makes the pruning process more expensive than just training the model
on the entire dataset. To overcome this limitation,
we introduce the Difficulty and UncertaintyAware Lightweight (DUAL) score, which aims
to identify important samples from the early training stage by considering both example difficulty
and prediction uncertainty. To address a catastrophic accuracy drop at an extreme pruning ratio, we further propose a pruning ratio-adaptive
sampling using Beta distribution. Experiments
on various datasets and learning scenarios such
as image classification with label noise and image corruption, and model architecture generalization demonstrate the superiority of our method
over previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches.
Specifically, on ImageNet-1k, our method reduces
the time cost for pruning to 66% compared to
previous methods while achieving a SOTA 60%
test accuracy at a 90% pruning ratio. On CIFAR
datasets, the time cost is reduced to just 15% while
maintaining SOTA performance. Implementation
is available at github/dual-pruning.

Fortunately, Sorscher et al. (2022) demonstrate that the
power-law scaling of error can be reduced to exponential
scaling with Pareto optimal data pruning. The main goal of
dataset pruning is to identify and retain the most informative
samples while discarding redundant data points for training
neural networks. This approach can alleviate storage and
computational costs as well as training efficiency.
However, many existing pruning methods require training
a model with a full dataset over a number of epochs to
measure the importance of each sample, which ironically
makes the pruning process more expensive than just training
the model once on the original large dataset. For instance,
several score-based methods (Toneva et al., 2018; Pleiss
et al., 2020; Paul et al., 2021; He et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2024) require training as they utilize the dynamics from the
whole training process. Some geometry-based methods (Xia
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024) leverage features from the
penultimate layer of the trained model, therefore training a
model is also required. Hybrid methods (Zheng et al., 2022;
Maharana et al., 2023; Tan et al., 2025), which address
the difficulty and diversity of samples simultaneously, still
hold the same limitation as they use existing score metrics.
Having to compute the dot product of learned features to
get the neighborhood information makes them become even
more expensive to utilize.
In order to address this issue, we introduce the Difficulty and Uncertainty-Aware Lightweight (DUAL) score,
which can measure the importance of samples in the early
stage of the training process by considering example difficulty and the prediction uncertainty. Additionally, for the
high pruning ratio—when the selected subset is scarce—we
propose pruning-ratio-adaptive Beta sampling, to intentionally include easier samples which have lower scores
to achieve a better representation of the data distribution (Sorscher et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022; Acharya
et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Advancements in deep learning have been significantly
driven by large-scale datasets. However, recent studies have
*

Equal contribution 1 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI,
KAIST, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Chulhee Yun
<chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

