Is Your Model Fairly Certain? Uncertainty-Aware Fairness Evaluation for LLMs

Yinong Oliver Wang* 1 Nivedha Sivakumar 2 Falaah Arif Khan* 3 Rin Metcalf Susa 2 Adam Golinski 2
Natalie Mackraz 2 Barry-John Theobald 2 Luca Zappella 2 Nicholas Apostoloff 2

Abstract

1

Less Biased

Model A

Accuracy &
Uncertainty
Changes

“his” refers to doctor with high confidence (certain)

Model B

More Biased

“his” refers to doctor with low confidence (uncertain)

Model C

The recent rapid adoption of large language models (LLMs) highlights the critical need for benchmarking their fairness. Conventional fairness metrics, which focus on discrete accuracy-based evaluations (i.e., prediction correctness), fail to capture the implicit impact of model uncertainty (e.g.,
higher model confidence about one group over another despite similar accuracy). To address this
limitation, we propose an uncertainty-aware fairness metric, UCerF, to enable a fine-grained evaluation of model fairness that is more reflective
of the internal bias in model decisions compared
to conventional fairness measures. Furthermore,
observing data size, diversity, and clarity issues
in current datasets, we introduce a new genderoccupation fairness evaluation dataset with 31,756
samples for co-reference resolution, offering a
more diverse and suitable dataset for evaluating
modern LLMs. We establish a benchmark, using
our metric and dataset, and apply it to evaluate
the behavior of ten open-source LLMs. For example, Mistral-7B exhibits suboptimal fairness
due to high confidence in incorrect predictions, a
detail overlooked by Equalized Odds but captured
by UCerF. Overall, our proposed LLM benchmark, which evaluates fairness with uncertainty
awareness, paves the way for developing more
transparent and accountable AI systems.

“his” refers to nurse with low confidence (uncertain)

Model D

“The doctor gave the nurse a gift since it’s his/her birthday.”
Who does the pronoun “his”/“her” refer to?

“his” refers to nurse with high confidence (certain)

“her” refers to nurse with high confidence (certain)

“her” refers to nurse with high confidence (certain)

“her” refers to nurse with high confidence (certain)

“her” refers to nurse with high confidence (certain)

Figure 1. Overview of uncertainty impact in fairness evaluation. Given the question at the top, both pronouns “his” and “her”
should resolve to nurse without bias. Models A&B exhibit bias
as the prediction is flipped by the pronoun. Model C predicts
correctly in both cases despite having different confidence levels.
Model D achieves correct, confident, and unbiased resolution for
both pronouns. While correctness can reveal bias in Model A&B,
incorporating uncertainty reveals additional insight into fairness.

behavior on different demographic subpopulations is not
thoroughly examined (Bommasani et al., 2021; Field et al.,
2021; Zhou et al., 2024). While extensive study of fairness
in various contexts is important, in this work, we focus on
gender-occupation bias, a critical topic with profound social
implications, e.g., LLM-based hiring systems can induce
harmful discrimination (Armstrong et al., 2024).

Introduction

Conventional methods for evaluating model fairness that primarily focus on accuracy-based metrics, such as Equalized
Odds (EO) (Hardt et al., 2016), fall short of capturing the
full spectrum of fairness concerns as they overlook model
uncertainty which can affect fairness (Orgad & Belinkov,
2022; Kuzucu et al., 2023). As illustrated in Fig. 1, considering only the accuracy leads to a discrete and coarse
assessment of fairness. For instance, model C and D would
be deemed equally fair under EO, overlooking disparities in
uncertainty. Under our uncertainty-aware fairness criteria,
model D is more fair as it exhibits similar confidence levels
for both pronouns. When users employ model C, particularly with high-temperature sampling, it is more suitable to

As large language models (LLMs) become integral to highstakes decision-making processes, they face risks of reinforcing, and even amplifying, societal inequalities if their
*Work completed during internship at Apple. 1 Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, US. 2 Apple Inc.,
Cupertino, CA, US. 3 Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, NY, US.. Correspondence to: Yinong Oliver Wang
<yinongwa@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

