PAC Learning with Improvements

Idan Attias 1 2 Avrim Blum 2 Keziah Naggita 2 Donya Saless 2 Dravyansh Sharma 2 3 Matthew Walter 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
There has been growing interest in recent years in machine
learning settings where a deployed classifier will influence
the behavior of the entities it is aiming to classify. For example, a classifier that maps loan applicants to credit scores and
then uses a particular cutoff θ̂ to determine whether an applicant should receive a loan will induce those below the cutoff
value to take actions to improve their score. This setting is
called strategic classification (Hardt et al., 2016) or measure
management (Bloomfield, 2016) when the actions taken do
not truly improve the agent’s quality, and performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020) more generally. In this work,
our focus is on the case that the improvements are real e.g.,
paying off high-interest credit card debt, taking a money
management class, etc. for genuinely improving one’s loan
application. That is, the agent responds to the classifier in
order to potentially improve their classification (Kleinberg
& Raghavan, 2020; Miller et al., 2020), changing its true features in the process. The classifier must take this “strategic
improvement” response into account.

One of the most basic lower bounds in machine
learning is that in nearly any nontrivial setting, it
takes at least 1/ϵ samples to learn to error ϵ (and
more, if the classifier being learned is complex).
However, suppose that data points are agents who
have the ability to improve by a small amount if
doing so will allow them to receive a (desired)
positive classification. In that case, we may actually be able to achieve zero error by just being
“close enough”. For example, imagine a hiring test
used to measure an agent’s skill at some job such
that for some threshold θ, agents who score above
θ will be successful and those who score below
θ will not (i.e., learning a threshold on the line).
Suppose also that by putting in effort, agents can
improve their skill level by some small amount r.
In that case, if we learn an approximation θ̂ of θ
such that θ ≤ θ̂ ≤ θ + r and use it for hiring, we
can actually achieve error zero, in the sense that
(a) any agent classified as positive is truly qualified, and (b) any agent who truly is qualified can
be classified as positive by putting in effort. Thus,
the ability for agents to improve has the potential
to allow for a goal one could not hope to achieve
in standard models, namely zero error. In this
paper, we explore this phenomenon more broadly,
giving general results and examining under what
conditions the ability of agents to improve can
allow for a reduction in the sample complexity
of learning, or alternatively, can make learning
harder. We also examine both theoretically and
empirically what kinds of improvement-aware algorithms can take into account agents who have
the ability to improve to a limited extent when it
is in their interest to do so.

Unlike previous works on strategic improvement that focus extensively on efficiently incentivizing and maximizing
agent improvement (e.g., Miller et al. 2020; Kleinberg &
Raghavan 2020; Haghtalab et al. 2020; Shavit et al. 2020,
among others), we aim to understand how an agent’s capacity for improvement impacts learnability, sample complexity, and algorithm design for accurate classification. One
high-level take-away from our theoretical analysis and empirical results is that the ability of agents to improve favors
algorithms that are more “conservative” in their decisions.
This is both due to the reduced concern over false-negative
errors (since agents in those regions may still be able to improve to be classified as positive) and the increased concern
over false-positive errors (which may cause individuals to
“improve” incorrectly).
To illustrate the potential reduction in sample complexity
that result from agents’ ability to improve, one of the most
basic lower bounds in machine learning is that in nearly any
nontrivial setting, it takes at least 1/ϵ samples to learn to
error ϵ (and more, if the classifier being learned is complex).
However, if agents have the ability to improve by a small
amount, we may actually be able to achieve zero error by just
being “close enough”. To the best of our knowledge, this has

Authors are listed alphabetically. 1 University of Illinois at
Chicago 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 3 Northwestern
University.
Correspondence to: Keziah Naggita <knaggita@ttic.edu>, Donya Saless <donya@ttic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

