Universal Approximation of Mean-Field Models via Transformers

Shiba Biswal * 1 Karthik Elamvazhuthi * 1 Rishi Sonthalia * 2

Abstract

which are independent of the particles’ identities and are
permutation-equivariant. Examples include biological entities (Lopez et al., 2012), robots (Elamvazhuthi & Berman,
2019), traffic flow (Piccoli et al., 2009; Siri et al., 2021), and
parameters in two-layer neural networks (Mei et al., 2019).
A common approach to simplifying the analysis of such
systems is to consider the continuum limit as the number
of particles n → ∞, resulting in mean-field models rooted
in statistical physics. Instead of specifying the dynamics
of each agent, the particles are modeled using probability
measures. This paper learns the mean-field dynamics of
particles via particle trajectories using transformers.

This paper investigates the use of transformers to
approximate the mean-field dynamics of interacting particle systems exhibiting collective behavior.
Such systems are fundamental in modeling phenomena across physics, biology, and engineering,
including opinion formation, biological networks,
and swarm robotics. The key characteristic of
these systems is that the particles are indistinguishable, leading to permutation-equivariant dynamics. First, we empirically demonstrate that
transformers are well-suited for approximating
a variety of mean field models, including the
Cucker-Smale model for flocking and milling,
and the mean-field system for training two-layer
neural networks. We validate our numerical experiments via mathematical theory. Specifically,
we prove that if a finite-dimensional transformer
effectively approximates the finite-dimensional
vector field governing the particle system, then
the L2 distance between the expected transformer
and the infinite-dimensional mean-field vector
field can be uniformly bounded by a function of
the number of particles observed during training.
Leveraging this result, we establish theoretical
bounds on the distance between the true meanfield dynamics and those obtained using the transformer.

1

Let Ω ⊂ Rd . Consider a vector field F : Ω × P(Ω) → Rd .
The following equation describes the general mean-field
behavior of interacting particles evolving on Ω,
dz
= F(z, µ), z(0) = z0 ∼ µ0 ,
dt
where z ∈ Ω denotes the state of a particle, µ ∈ P(Ω) is
the distribution of the particles at time t, and µ0 is the initial
distribution. The above equation can be approximated by
a finite particle-level model. Let z = (z1 , . . . , zn ) ∈ Ωn
represent the state of n particles, and consider the following,
żi = F(zi , νzn ),
where the empiricalP
distribution of the n-particle system
n
given by νzn := n1 i=1 δzi ∈ Dn (Ω). Several works
learn the mean-field dynamics by learning the particle-level
dynamics. Pham & Warin (2023) constructed a neural network via binning as approximations of the vector field and
proved approximation capabilities when restricted to dynamics on measures that admit densities. The works of
Feng et al. (2024); Lu et al. (2019); Miller et al. (2023)
present a kernel-based method for identifying the dynamics of interacting particle systems. Whereas, Messenger
& Bortz (2022) presents a form of the SINDy algorithm
for identifying mean-field dynamics of interacting particle
systems. Kratsios et al. (2022) constructed a probabilistic transformer that can satisfy additional constraints via
maps on measures. Additionally, Furuya et al. (2025) use a
continuous version of transformers and attention (Vuckovic
et al., 2020; Geshkovski et al., 2023) and provide universal
approximation of measure theoretic maps. Similarly (Adu &
Gharesifard, 2024) have proven an approximation result for

Introduction

The identification of dynamical system models for physical
processes is a fundamental application of machine learning
(ML). Of particular interest are systems of particles exhibiting collective behaviors—such as swarming, flocking, opinion dynamics, and consensus. These systems involve a large
number of particles or agents that follow identical dynamics,
*
Equal contribution 1 Theoretical Division, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA 2 Boston College, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Shiba Biswal
<sbiswal@lanl.gov>, Rishi Sonthalia <sonthal@bc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

