L LAVAG UARD:
An Open VLM-based Framework for Safeguarding Vision Datasets and Models

Lukas Helff * 1 2 Felix Friedrich * 1 2 Manuel Brack * 1 3 Kristian Kersting 1 2 3 4 Patrick Schramowski 1 2 3 5

Abstract
This paper introduces LlavaGuard, a suite of
VLM-based vision safeguards that address
the critical need for reliable guardrails in the
era of large-scale data and models. To this
end, we establish a novel open framework,
describing a customizable safety taxonomy,
data preprocessing, augmentation, and training
setup. For teaching a VLM safeguard on safety,
we further create a multimodal safety dataset
with high-quality human expert annotations,
where each image is labeled with a safety rating,
category, and rationale. We also employ advanced augmentations to support context-specific
assessments. The resulting LlavaGuard models,
ranging from 0.5B to 7B, serve as a versatile
tool for evaluating the safety compliance of
visual content against flexible policies. In
comprehensive experiments, LlavaGuard outperforms both state-of-the-art safeguards and
VLMs in accuracy and in flexibly handling
different policies. Additionally, we demonstrate
LlavaGuard’s performance in two real-world
applications: large-scale dataset annotation and
moderation of text-to-image models. We make
our entire framework, including the dataset,
model weights, and training code, publicly
available at https://ml-research.github.

Figure 1: LlavaGuard judges images for safety compliance
to a policy, providing a safety rating, category, and rationale.

scale of these datasets, which are impractical to monitor
comprehensively, inevitably includes unsafe and biased content, leading to pressing safety concerns and ethical considerations (Bender et al., 2021; Thiel, 2023; Cho et al.,
2023). Consequently, models like text-to-image models
(T2I), trained on such large-scale datasets, will output unsafe (Schramowski et al., 2023) and biased (Bianchi et al.,
2023; Friedrich et al., 2024a;b) images, highlighting the
urgent need for effective safeguards.

io/human-centered-genai/projects/
llavaguard.

Furthermore, emerging legal frameworks for AI, such as
those in the EU (EU, 2023), US (US, 2023), and UK (UK,
2023), are pushing for advanced generative models to comply with new regulations. This has led to the proposal
of various safety approaches and taxonomies to systematically assess and mitigate the risks associated with largescale data and models (Inan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023;
Schramowski et al., 2023; Tedeschi et al., 2024). However, prior safety research focuses primarily on the text
domain, leaving a distinct lack of frameworks for the visual modality. Moreover, there is a dearth of datasets and
pipelines necessary for building advanced safeguards. Consequently, users largely have to rely on rigid NSFW classifications (Qu et al., 2024; Birhane & Prabhu, 2021; Birhane
et al., 2023; Schramowski et al., 2022; NotAI-tech, 2019;
Laborde, 2020), which lack the context-awareness and flexibility needed for more nuanced, fine-grained analysis.

Warning: This paper contains explicit imagery and other
content that readers may find disturbing.

1. Introduction
Recently, large generative AI models, such as vision language models (VLM), have demonstrated notable capabilities in producing remarkable text and images. A key factor driving their performance is the extensive amount of
web-scraped data used during training. However, the sheer
*

Equal contribution 1 TU Darmstadt 2 hessian.AI 3 DFKI 4 Centre
for Cognitive Science, Darmstadt 5 CERTAIN, Germany. Correspondence to: Lukas Helff <helff@cs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We bridge this gap by introducing LlavaGuard (Fig. 1), a
versatile framework for assessing potentially unsafe image
1

