Sparse Autoencoders, Again?

Yin Lu 1 Xuening Zhu 1 Tong He 2 David Wipf 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Is there really much more to say about sparse autoencoders (SAEs)? Autoencoders in general, and
SAEs in particular, represent deep architectures
that are capable of modeling low-dimensional latent structure in data. Such structure could reflect, among other things, correlation patterns
in large language model activations, or complex
natural image manifolds. And yet despite the
wide-ranging applicability, there have been relatively few changes to SAEs beyond the original recipe from decades ago, namely, standard
deep encoder/decoder layers trained with a classical/deterministic sparse regularizer applied within
the latent space. One possible exception is the
variational autoencoder (VAE), which adopts a
stochastic encoder module capable of producing
sparse representations when applied to manifold
data. In this work we formalize underappreciated
weaknesses with both canonical SAEs, as well as
analogous VAEs applied to similar tasks, and propose a hybrid alternative model that circumvents
these prior limitations. In terms of theoretical support, we prove that global minima of our proposed
model recover certain forms of structured data
spread across a union of manifolds. Meanwhile,
empirical evaluations on synthetic and real-world
datasets substantiate the efficacy of our approach
in accurately estimating underlying manifold dimensions and producing sparser latent representations without compromising reconstruction error.
In general, we are able to exceed the performance
of equivalent-capacity SAEs and VAEs, as well as
recent diffusion models where applicable, within
domains such as images and language model activation patterns. A link to the code is here.
1

Autoencoders represent a widely-applicable neural network
model for obtaining useful low-dimensional representations
of data, particularly when training labels are not available
(Berahmand et al., 2024; Goodfellow et al., 2016). The basic architecture is simple: An encoder network first projects
each observable data sample to a latent representation (usually low-dimensional), after which a decoder network attempts sample reconstruction based on this latent representation. Sparse autoencoders (SAE) (Ng, 2011; Ranzato et al.,
2006; 2007) adopt an additional degree of design flexibility by accommodating a higher-dimensional latent space,
but with the inclusion of an attendant regularization factor
applied to the encoder output that encourages sparse representations (meaning most dimensions are pushed to zero).
This capability facilitates adaptive latent representations
reflecting complex underlying data structure, whereby the
pattern of nonzeros can vary on a sample-by-sample basis
unlike with a regular autoencoder.
Informally speaking, autoencoders (including SAEs) can
be viewed as something like the horseshoe crabs of the
deep learning kingdom, having existed for decades (or
“eons”) with more or less the same hardy conceptual design (Bourlard & Kamp, 1988; Hinton & Zemel, 1993; LeCun, 1987; Rumelhart et al., 1986). For example, the SAE
models used for learning interpretable representations of
present-day large language model (LLM) activation patterns
(Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2024; Chaudhary &
Geiger, 2024; Gao et al., 2024) are nearly identical in form
to original architectures from long ago; likewise for a variety
of other modern use cases (Lan et al., 2024; Movva et al.,
2025; Pach et al., 2025; Stevens et al., 2025). One notable
exception is the variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), which substitutes the
deterministic latent space of traditional autoencoders, with
an alternative stochastic representation. Although seemingly
distinct from the SAE, it has recently been shown that VAEs
can also address sparse autoencoding tasks in certain settings (Dai et al., 2021). Still, VAE models notwithstanding,
given the long-lasting and durable usage of SAEs with minimal changes, it is natural to question the extent to which
further innovation is possible on top of the original SAE
design space, or if any such innovation is even needed at all.

School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 Amazon Web Services.
Correspondence to:
Yin Lu <yinlu23@m.fudan.edu.cn>,
Xuening Zhu <xueningzhu@fudan.edu.cn>,
Tong He
<htong@amazon.com>, David Wipf <davidwipf@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

