Resolving Lexical Bias in Model Editing

Hammad Rizwan 1 Domenic Rosati 1 Ga Wu 1 Hassan Sajjad 1

Abstract
Model editing aims to modify the knowledge
of a pre-trained language model. Previous approaches have often involved direct alterations to
model weights, which can result in model degradation. Recent weight-preserving techniques avoid
making modifications to the model’s weights
by employing an adapter that implements edits
through auxiliary components. These rely heavily
on scoping mechanisms based on distance functions on the model’s representation space to determine when to trigger edits. We demonstrate
that current adapter methods are critically vulnerable to strong lexical biases, leading to issues such as applying edits to irrelevant prompts
with overlapping words. This paper presents a
principled approach to learning a disentangled
representation space that facilitates precise localization of edits by maintaining distance between irrelevant prompts while preserving proximity among paraphrases. In our empirical study,
we show that our method, Projector Editor Networks for Model Editing - PENME, achieves
state-of-the-art model editing results while being computationally efficient during inference
compared to previous methods and adaptable
across different architectures. We provide the
codebase of PENME here: https://github.
com/hammadrizwan/PENME.git

Figure 1. Projector networks mitigate lexical bias: a critical problem in adapter-based model editing techniques. Percentage of
samples where irrelevant but lexically similar prompts are closer
than semantically similar paraphrases in the representation space
before and after our learned projection (PENME).

evolves, new information requires updates to the models,
e.g. the leader of a country may change over time.
Periodically updating LLMs using fine-tuning is one potential solution, however, it risks degradation in performance,
leading to training from scratch to preserve the model’s
original performance (Luo et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025).
However, retraining is often impractical due to the need of
substantial computational resources, time, data, and labor.
Model editing has been proposed as a sample and compute
efficient way to update LLMs (Yao et al., 2023). Historically weight-modifying techniques that make surgical small
parameters updates such as ROME (Meng et al., 2022) have
been popular. However, these techniques are known to be
computationally inefficient (Yu et al., 2024) and result in
catastrophic forgetting (Gupta et al., 2024a), the full impact
of which is difficult to determine (Rosati et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are successful in solving a
diverse range of natural language processing tasks (Devlin
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Touvron et al., 2023b; Radford
et al., 2019). Despite their successes, LLMs are fallible in
large part due to the noisy and imperfect nature of the data
used for training (Zhu et al., 2020). Moreover, as the world
Department of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada. Correspondence to: Hammad Rizwan <hammad.rizwan@dal.ca>.

Weight-preserving approaches solve these problems by
maintaining the original model parameters and use additional components like key-value codebook adapters
(GRACE and MELO) (Hartvigsen et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2024) that apply a scoping mechanism to determine whether
to trigger a model edit, using a distance function over model
representations to assess semantic similarity between the
input and an edits registered in a codebook.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We find that the performance of weight-preserving methods is heavily reliant on scoping mechanism which suffers
from a critical vulnerability of Lexical bias (Figures 1 and

1

1

