Beyond Zero Initialization: Investigating the
Impact of Non-Zero Initialization on LoRA Fine-Tuning Dynamics

Shiwei Li 1 2 * Xiandi Luo 1 * Xing Tang 2 Haozhao Wang 1 Hao Chen 3 Weihong Luo 3 Yuhua Li 1
Xiuqiang He 2 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract
Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) is a widely used
parameter-efficient fine-tuning method. In standard LoRA layers, one of the matrices, A or B, is
initialized to zero, ensuring that fine-tuning starts
from the pretrained model. However, there is
no theoretical support for this practice. In this
paper, we investigate the impact of non-zero initialization on LoRA’s fine-tuning dynamics from
an infinite-width perspective. Our analysis reveals that, compared to zero initialization, simultaneously initializing A and B to non-zero values improves LoRA’s robustness to suboptimal
learning rates, particularly smaller ones. Further
analysis indicates that although the non-zero initialization of AB introduces random noise into
the pretrained weight, it generally does not affect
fine-tuning performance. In other words, finetuning does not need to strictly start from the
pretrained model. The validity of our findings is
confirmed through extensive experiments across
various models and datasets. The code is available
at https://github.com/Leopold1423/
non_zero_lora-icml25.

Figure 1. LoRA’s fine-tuning dynamics with zero initlization (i.e.,
Init[A]) and non-zero initialization (i.e., Init[AB]). Compared to Init[A], Init[AB] improves LoRA’s robustness to
suboptimal learning rates, generally leading to better performance.

storage-intensive, presenting significant challenges for their
practical deployment. To address these issues, various
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have been
proposed to reduce the number of trainable parameters,
thereby decreasing the cost of fine-tuning (Xu et al., 2023).
Among these PEFT methods, low-rank adaptation (LoRA)
(Hu et al., 2022) has gained considerable attention due to its
efficiency and minimal impact on inference latency. LoRA
approximates the update of the pretrained weight matrix W
using smaller low-rank matrices, A and B, as illustrated
in Figure 1. The forward pass of LoRA is formulated as
Y = (W + α/rBA)X, where r is the LoRA rank and α is a
tunable scaling factor. During fine-tuning, W remains fixed,
while only matrices A and B are updated, usually via the
Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024) and DeepSeek-V3 (DeepSeek-AI, 2024), have
achieved unprecedented performance across a broad range
of tasks. These state-of-the-art models typically contain
hundreds of billions of parameters. Consequently, fully
fine-tuning these models is computationally expensive and
*

Equal contribution. 1 Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China 2 Shenzhen Technology University,
Shenzhen, China 3 FiT, Tencent, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Xing Tang <xing.tang@hotmail.com>, Haozhao Wang
<hz wang@hust.edu.cn>, Ruixuan Li <rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

In standard LoRA layers, either A or B is initialized to zero,
ensuring that fine-tuning starts from the pretrained model.
Building on this premise, Hayou et al. (2024b) explores
the difference between applying Kaiming initialization (He
et al., 2016) to A and B. However, there is no theoretical
justification for the zero initialization of LoRA, which raises

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

