DMM: Distributed Matrix Mechanism for Differentially-Private Federated
Learning Based on Constant-Overhead Linear Secret Resharing

Alexander Bienstock 1 Ujjwal Kumar 2 Antigoni Polychroniadou 1

Abstract

gradients are then aggregated and sent to the central server
using different techniques to update the model parameters
for the next iteration (e.g., (McMahan et al., 2016; Fallah
et al., 2020; Sahu et al., 2018)).

Federated Learning (FL) solutions with central
Differential Privacy (DP) have seen large improvements in their utility in recent years arising from
the matrix mechanism, while FL solutions with
distributed (more private) DP have lagged behind.
In this work, we introduce the distributed matrix
mechanism to achieve the best-of-both-worlds;
better privacy of distributed DP and better utility
from the matrix mechanism. We accomplish this
using a novel cryptographic protocol that securely
transfers sensitive values across client committees
of different training iterations with constant communication overhead. This protocol accommodates the dynamic participation of users required
by FL, including those that may drop out from
the computation. We provide experiments which
show that our mechanism indeed significantly improves the utility of FL models compared to previous distributed DP mechanisms, with little added
overhead.

The main privacy metric for FL is differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2006). Roughly speaking, DP guarantees that with high probability, one cannot tell whether
a user participated in a given FL execution. There are two
different notions of DP that can be considered. In central
DP, there is a centralized server who receives the aggregated gradients from the clients in each iteration (perhaps
using a Secure Aggregation protocol (Kairouz et al., 2021a;
Bonawitz et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2022; Karthikeyan & Polychroniadou, 2024; Li et al., 2023)) and then updates the
model by adding its own DP noise to these aggregated gradients. See the left side of Figure 1 for a flowchart illustrating
the process. In this case, DP holds with respect to those to
whom the server sends the updated models (assuming that
the server did indeed add noise), but not the server itself.
In distributed DP, there may still be a centralized server,
however, the clients utilize a Secure Aggregation protocol
to release to the server only an aggregation of their gradients
with their own DP noise already added in. Thus, DP holds
with respect to the server as well; in particular, the clients do
not need to trust the server to add noise. Indeed, distributed
DP is important for particularly sensitive data that cannot
be known by anyone else and for which we cannot rely on a
central server to protect.

1. Introduction
In Federated Learning (FL), a machine learning model is
trained using data from several end-users/clients. Since
such data can often be sensitive, a key challenge in FL is
maintaining utility of the trained models, while preserving
privacy of the end-users. FL has experienced an explosion
of progress in recent years, both in industry and research.

There has been tremendous progress recently in the area
of central DP for FL, e.g., (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a;
Dvijotham et al., 2024; McMahan et al., 2024). These works
use a sophisticated set of techniques from the DP literature
called the matrix mechanism (Hubert Chan et al., 2010;
Dwork et al., 2010) to achieve excellent privacy-utility tradeoffs. Indeed, in this setting, since the central server receives
all of the gradients in the clear and samples all noise on
its own, it can correlate the noise across iterations in a
complex manner. Intuitively, this means that noise can be
re-used across iterations so that the cumulative noise across
all iterations is lower compared to sampling new, fresh noise
to hide the gradients in each iteration.

In more detail, in each training iteration of FL, typically a
central server sends the current model parameters to a set
of clients, which we call a committee, who locally execute
a step of Stochastic Gradient Descent on their own data
to obtain gradients with respect to a loss function. These
1
J.P. Morgan AI Research & J.P. Morgan AlgoCRYPT
CoE, New York, New York, USA 2 J.P. Morgan, Mumbai, India.
Correspondence to: Alexander Bienstock
<alex.bienstock@jpmchase.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

On the other hand, in the setting of distributed DP, the
1

