Hi-Patch: Hierarchical Patch GNN for Irregular Multivariate Time Series

Yicheng Luo 1 Bowen Zhang 1 Zhen Liu 1 Qianli Ma † 1

Abstract

Due to sensor malfunctions, varying sampling sources, or
human factors, the final sampled time series often exhibits
irregularities in real-world applications, resulting in an Irregular Multivariate Time Series (IMTS). The peculiarity
of IMTS lies in two aspects: firstly, the sampling interval
within each variable is uneven. Secondly, different variables
are asynchronously sampled and have distinct sampling
rates. The subgraph in the top left corner of Figure 1 illustrates an IMTS example with two variables.

Multi-scale information is crucial for multivariate time series modeling. However, most existing time series multi-scale analysis methods
treat all variables in the same manner, making
them unsuitable for Irregular Multivariate Time
Series (IMTS), where variables have distinct origin scales/sampling rates. To fill this gap, we
propose Hi-Patch, a hierarchical patch graph network. Hi-Patch encodes each observation as a
node, represents and captures local temporal and
inter-variable dependencies of densely sampled
variables through an intra-patch graph layer, and
obtains patch-level nodes through aggregation.
These nodes are then updated and re-aggregated
through a stack of inter-patch graph layers, where
several scale-specific graph networks progressively extract more global temporal and intervariable features of both sparsely and densely sampled variables under specific scales. The output
of the last layer is fed into task-specific decoders
to adapt to different downstream tasks. Experiments on 8 datasets demonstrate that Hi-Patch
outperforms state-of-the-art models in IMTS forecasting and classification tasks. Code is available
at: https://github.com/qianlima-lab/Hi-Patch.

As a unique type of multivariate time series, IMTS also exhibits the inherent multi-scale characteristics of time series.
Unfortunately, most existing multi-scale analysis methods
assume that the input series are regularly sampled and have
limitations in handling IMTS. The mainstream approach
of these methods is to downsample or segment the original series based on several fixed time steps (Challu et al.,
2023; Shabani et al., 2023), thereby forming several views
that reflect features at different scale levels, as shown in
the bottom row of Figure 1. On this basis, global temporal
and inter-variable dependencies are extracted from coarsegrained views, while local dependencies are extracted from
fine-grained views. This approach assumes that all variables
have a consistent original scale so that each downsampled
view consistently reflects the features of all variables at the
same granularity level, thereby achieving consistent separation of multi-scale patterns for all variables.
However, in IMTS, some variables have only a few observations and do not possess fine-grained features, making
their downsampled view meaningless (e.g., the variable V0
in Figure 1). Some other variables are densely sampled and
require multiple downsampling steps to reflect global patterns (e.g., the variable V1 in Figure 1). In such cases, it is
difficult to determine a consistently suitable downsampling
level for all variables, making existing methods infeasible
from the beginning. Furthermore, in IMTS, a downsampled
view can contain mixed granularity features, as shown in
the top row of Figure 1, but existing methods tend to extract
and analyze single-level features at a specific scale, which
are difficult to handle mixed features. Additionally, despite
the distinct scales/sampling rates occurring among variables
in IMTS, they are not entirely independent but exhibit correlations (Luo et al., 2024). Specifically, variables in MTS
may display different inter-variable correlations at different
time scales (Cai et al., 2024). How to extract multi-scale

1. Introduction
Time series analysis has important applications in various
fields such as healthcare (Lan et al., 2024), climate forecasting (Verma et al., 2024) and traffic planning (Li et al.,
2024b). Due to the complexity and non-stationarity of realworld systems, multivariate time series often exhibit different variations and fluctuations at different scales (Chen
et al., 2024a). Previous studies (Cai et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2024a) have demonstrated that effectively capturing
multi-scale features is essential for time series modeling.
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Qianli Ma <qianlima@scut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

