Rethinking Latent Redundancy in Behavior Cloning: An Information Bottleneck
Approach for Robot Manipulation

Shuanghao Bai 1 Wanqi Zhou 1 Pengxiang Ding 2 3 Wei Zhao 2 Donglin Wang 2 Badong Chen 1
Visual
Observation

Abstract
Behavior Cloning (BC) is a widely adopted visual
imitation learning method in robot manipulation.
Current BC approaches often enhance generalization by leveraging large datasets and incorporating
additional visual and textual modalities to capture
more diverse information. However, these methods overlook whether the learned representations
contain redundant information and lack a solid
theoretical foundation to guide the learning process. To address these limitations, we adopt an
information-theoretic perspective and introduce
mutual information to quantify and mitigate redundancy in latent representations. Building on
this, we incorporate the Information Bottleneck
(IB) principle into BC, which extends the idea of
reducing redundancy by providing a structured
framework for compressing irrelevant information while preserving task-relevant features. This
work presents the first comprehensive study on
redundancy in latent representations across various methods, backbones, and experimental settings, while extending the generalizability of the
IB to BC. Extensive experiments and analyses
on the CortexBench and LIBERO benchmarks
show consistent performance improvements with
IB across various settings, underscoring the importance of reducing input data redundancy and
highlighting its practical value for real-world applications. Project Page: BC-IB Website.

(e.g.

)

Proprioceptive
State
Others
(e.g. text)

O
S
…

𝐼𝐼(𝑋𝑋, 𝑍𝑍)

X

𝐼𝐼(𝑍𝑍, 𝐴𝐴)

Z

Input
Latent
Representations Representations

A

Action

Figure 1: Policy architecture of BC. Current BC methods
(black arrows) do not impose restrictions on the latent representations Z, potentially allowing redundant information
from the input representations X.
from expert demonstrations. BC has been widely studied in autonomous driving (Bain & Sammut, 1995; Torabi
et al., 2018), robotics control (Argall et al., 2009) and game
AI (Pearce & Zhu, 2022). In robot manipulation, BC has
become a foundational approach, enabling robots to replicate expert actions based on sensory inputs such as images
or proprioception information like gripper states. To enhance the generalization of robots, most BC methods focus
on incorporating large datasets of human or manipulation
videos (Jang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024; Cheang et al.,
2024; Saxena et al., 2025; Cui et al., 2025), or integrating
additional text and visual information (Jia et al., 2024; Wen
et al., 2024a; Hu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b). While
these methods have made significant progress in improving generalization by leveraging more diverse information,
they often neglect a critical aspect: whether the learned
representations contain significant redundant information.

1. Introduction

1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong
University, China. 2 Westlake University 3 Zhejiang University.
Correspondence to: Badong Chen <chenbd@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>,
Donglin Wang <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>.

Why do we need to explore this? Firstly, the inherent challenges of input data redundancy remain largely unexplored
in BC for robot manipulation, despite their potential impact
on policy performance and generalization. Secondly, most
existing methods lack a solid theoretical foundation to guide
the learning process. This raises a key question: how can
we formally characterize and reduce redundancy in inputs
or representations in a theoretically grounded way?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

How to explore this? As illustrated in Figure 1, in BC, the
inputs are typically encoded into individual representations
and concatenated to form the input representation X. This is

Behavior Cloning (BC), one of the simplest and most widely
used methods in Imitation Learning (IL), learns a mapping from states to actions by training on state-action pairs

1

