Learn Beneficial Noise as Graph Augmentation

Siqi Huang * 1 2 Yanchen Xu * 1 2 Hongyuan Zhang 2 3 Xuelong Li 2

Abstract

efforts on how to extend CL to graph, which is known as
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) (Veličković et al., 2018;
Zhu et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2021b; Rong
et al., 2020). Compared with traditional contrastive learning methods, GCL considers not only how to contrast data
points but also how to generate augmentation by leveraging
the topological structure (Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020;
Zhu et al., 2021), local features (Veličković et al., 2018;
Peng et al., 2020), and global context of graphs (Sun et al.,
2020).

Although graph contrastive learning (GCL) has
been widely investigated, it is still a challenge
to generate effective and stable graph augmentations. Existing methods often apply heuristic
augmentation like random edge dropping, which
may disrupt important graph structures and result
in unstable GCL performance. In this paper, we
propose Positive-incentive Noise driven Graph
Data Augmentation (PiNGDA), where positiveincentive noise (pi-noise) scientifically analyzes
the beneficial effect of noise under the information
theory. To bridge the standard GCL and pi-noise
framework, we design a Gaussian auxiliary variable to convert the loss function to information
entropy. We prove that the standard GCL with
pre-defined augmentations is equivalent to estimate the beneficial noise via the point estimation.
Following our analysis, PiNGDA is derived from
learning the beneficial noise on both topology
and attributes through a trainable noise generator
for graph augmentations, instead of the simple
estimation. Since the generator learns how to
produce beneficial perturbations on graph topology and node attributes, PiNGDA is more reliable
compared with the existing methods. Extensive
experimental results validate the effectiveness and
stability of PiNGDA.

Despite the progress in GCL methods, graph data augmentation remains a key challenge, which is substantially different
from visual data. Unlike the reliable and stable visual augmentations (e.g., cropping, flipping, translation) that play
the core roles in visual contrastive models (He et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020), graph topology is more complex with
non-Euclidean structure. It results in difficulties of defining
efficient and stable augmentation to retain crucial topological properties.
In early GCL models, typical graph augmentations included
random modifications to edges and nodes. For example,
random edge dropping (Gao et al., 2021b; Rong et al., 2020)
stochastically removes a portion of edges, while random
node dropping (Feng et al., 2020) removes nodes and their
links from the graph. Such random methods increase diversity but may disrupt inherent graph structure. More
recent works propose adaptive augmentation techniques.
GCA (Zhu et al., 2021) sets the probability of dropping an
edge based on centrality measures of the involved nodes,
aiming to better preserve graph connectivity. NCLA (Shen
et al., 2023) learns adaptive graph augmentations and embeddings using a multi-head graph attention mechanism and
a neighbor contrastive loss. Although providing more flexibility than completely random schemes, these predefined
augmentation rules can still be considered as a priori assumptions. The heuristic methods usually lead to instability,
since the perturbations may introduce severe topological
noise and hinder GCL pre-training and downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
With the development of Contrastive Learning (CL) in computer vision (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Bachman
et al., 2019; Falcon & Cho, 2020), natural language processing (Gao et al., 2021a; Yan et al.), and other fields(Radford
et al., 2021), more and more researchers have paid great
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics
and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom 3 The
University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Hongyuan Zhang
<hyzhang98@gmail.com>, Xuelong Li <xuelong li@ieee.org>.

To address the challenges by learning effective graph augmentations, some works have explored learning-based approaches. JOAO (You et al., 2021b) proposes a optimization
framework to automatically select data augmentation methods for each sample. It treats augmentation selection as

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

