Pareto Merging:
Multi-Objective Optimization for Preference-Aware Model Merging

Weiyu Chen 1 James T. Kwok 1

Abstract
Accuracy on Model B's Dataset

Pareto Merging
for user 1
Model B

Pareto Merging
for user 2

...

Model merging, which combines multiple models into a single model, has gained popularity in
recent years. By efficiently integrating the capabilities of various models, this significantly reduces the parameter count and memory usage.
However, current methods can only produce one
single merged model. This necessitates a performance trade-off due to conflicts among the
various models, and the resultant one-size-fits-all
model may not align with the preferences of different users who may prioritize certain models
over others. To address this issue, we propose
preference-aware model merging, and formulate
this as a multi-objective optimization problem
in which the performance of the merged model
on each base model’s task is treated as an objective. In a single merging process, the proposed parameter-efficient structure generates a
Pareto set of merged models, with each representing a Pareto-optimal solution for a preference.
Users can then select merged models tailored to
their preferences from this learned Pareto set. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
Pareto Merging produces diverse trade-off models and achieves higher test accuracy compared to
state-of-the-art merging baselines.

Merged model by
exsiting methods
Pareto Merging
for user n

Model A

Accuracy on Model A's Dataset

Figure 1. Comparison of existing methods and the proposed Pareto
Merging for merging two models with varying user preferences.

multiple fine-tuned models results in a significant increase
in parameter count and memory usage. As many of them
originate from the same pre-trained model (e.g., ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)), it is thus desirable to combine them to
a single model while still maintaining the full capabilities of
these fine-tuned models, even without access to their original training data. This process, known as model merging
(Matena & Raffel, 2022; Jin et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b),
offers an efficient way to leverage the abundance of publicly
accessible fine-tuned models.
A naive model merging approach is to average the weights
of the fine-tuned models. However, this merged model often
suffers from poor performance. To address this problem,
various more advanced methods have been developed. For
example, Matena & Raffel (2022) uses the Fisher matrix to
preserve key features in the various models. RegMean (Jin
et al., 2023) minimizes prediction discrepancies through
weight adjustments. Ilharco et al. (2023) proposes to first
obtain the differences (called task vectors) between the finetuned models and the original pre-trained model. A merged
model is then created by combining the pre-trained model
together with the sum of these task vectors. Further methods
have been proposed to improve performance by reducing
redundancy and conflicts among task vectors (Yadav et al.,
2023), and addressing gradient mismatches (Daheim et al.,
2024). Recently, AdaMerging (Yang et al., 2024b) is proposed that adaptively weights the task vectors based on the
entropies of their model predictions.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning pre-trained models is a widely-adopted approach to create specialized models for various downstream
tasks (He et al., 2022; Wortsman et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024a;
Hu et al., 2021; Dettmers et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024).
Nowadays, many fine-tuned models are publicly available
on online platforms such as HuggingFace. However, having
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to:
Weiyu Chen <wchenbx@cse.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

