Enhancing Ligand Validity and Affinity in
Structure-Based Drug Design with Multi-Reward Optimization

Seungbeom Lee * 1 Munsun Jo * 2 Jungseul Ok 1 3 Dongwoo Kim 1 3

Abstract

0.75

Ours

0.7
FLAG

Pocket2Mol

Ours

Reference

Deep learning-based structure-based drug design
aims to generate ligand molecules with desirable
properties for protein targets. While existing models have demonstrated competitive performance in
generating ligand molecules, they primarily focus
on learning the chemical distribution of training
datasets, often lacking effective steerability to ensure the desired chemical quality of generated
molecules. To address this issue, we propose a
multi-reward optimization framework that finetunes generative models for attributes, such as
binding affinity, validity, and drug-likeness, together. Specifically, we derive direct preference
optimization for a Bayesian flow network, used as
a backbone for molecule generation, and integrate
a reward normalization scheme to adopt multiple objectives. Experimental results show that
our method generates more realistic ligands than
baseline models while achieving higher binding
affinity, expanding the Pareto front empirically
observed in previous studies.

10

MolCRAFT

FLAG
AR

Reference
MolCraft
DecompDiff

0.65

DecompDiff
AR

0.6

IPDiff
TargetDiff

TargetDiff

20

DecompOpt

DecompOpt
IPDiff

AliDiff
0.55

−7

−8

(a) Vina Dock vs. SA

−9

30

AliDiff
−7

−8

−9

(b) Vina Dock vs. SE

Figure 1. Comparison of the median Vina docking score (lower is
better) against Synthetic accessibility (SA, higher is better) and
Strain Energy (SE, lower is better). The dashed blue line represents
a Pareto front obtained from previous works.

els (Huang et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2024; Guan et al., 2023),
they often neglect other crucial factors like ease of conformation stability such as strain energy or synthesis. In practice,
drug discovery demands a careful balance of many properties, making single-objective or narrowly focused solutions
insufficient.
In current deep generative modeling for SBDD, standard
strategies generally concentrate on minimizing the discrepancy between a generated ligand and a training set of proteinligand complexes. Although this can lead to strong binding affinities, improving multiple objectives beyond binding, e.g., synthetic accessibility, usually requires careful
tuning of loss terms or elaborate constraints. As a result,
purely likelihood-based approaches can struggle to expand
the Pareto front, which captures trade-offs among distinct
objectives.

1. Introduction
Designing ligand molecules that simultaneously optimize
multiple objectives – such as binding affinity, synthetic accessibility, and strain energy – is a central challenge in
structure-based drug design (SBDD). Conventional deeplearning approaches typically address only one or two objectives at a time, most commonly focusing on high binding
affinity and basic chemical feasibility, e.g., through simple
validity checks via the valency rule. While these methods
have advanced the generative capabilities of molecular mod*

0

Pocket2Mol

Figure 1 illustrates the trade-offs among Vina docking score
measuring binding affinity to target protein, synthetic accessibility (SA), and strain energy (SE) using results from nine
different generative models, along with a reference dataset
included in the test set. Although recently proposed methods such as MolCRAFT (Qu et al., 2024), IPDiff (Huang
et al., 2024), and AliDiff (Gu et al., 2024), outperform the
reference data in terms of Vina docking score, they underperform on SA and SE. Ideally, a design process would push

1

Equal contribution Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, South Korea 2 KT Corporation, South Korea
3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, POSTECH,
South Korea. Correspondence to: Dongwoo Kim <dongwoo.kim@postech.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

