Monte Carlo Tree Diffusion for System 2 Planning

Jaesik Yoon 1 2 Hyeonseo Cho 1 Doojin Baek 1 Yoshua Bengio 3 Sungjin Ahn 1 4

Abstract

error accumulation (Hafner et al., 2022; Hamed et al., 2024),
making it particularly well-suited for planning tasks with
long horizons or sparse rewards.

Diffusion models have recently emerged as a
powerful tool for planning. However, unlike
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)—whose performance naturally improves with inference-time
scaling—standard diffusion-based planners offer only limited avenues for scalability. In this
paper, we introduce Monte Carlo Tree Diffusion (MCTD), a novel framework that integrates
the generative strength of diffusion models with
the adaptive search capabilities of MCTS. Our
method reconceptualizes the denoising as a treestructured process, allowing partially denoised
plans to be iteratively evaluated, pruned, and refined. By selectively expanding promising trajectories while retaining the flexibility to revisit and improve suboptimal branches, MCTD
achieves the benefits of MCTS such as controlling exploration-exploitation trade-offs within the
diffusion framework. Empirical results on challenging long-horizon tasks show that MCTD
outperforms diffusion baselines, yielding higherquality solutions as inference-time computation
increases.

Despite their strengths, it remains uncertain how diffusionbased planners can effectively enhance planning accuracy
through the computation scaling on the inference time—a
property referred to as inference-time scalability. One potential approach is to increase the number of denoising steps or,
alternatively, draw additional samples (Zhou et al., 2024).
However, it is known that performance gains from increasing denoising steps plateau quickly (Karras et al., 2022;
Song et al., 2021a;b), and independent random searches
with multiple samples are highly inefficient as they fail to
leverage information from other samples. Moreover, how
to effectively manage the exploration-exploitation tradeoff
within this framework also remains unclear.
In contrast, Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Coulom,
2007), a widely adopted planning method, demonstrates
robust inference-time scalability. By leveraging iterative
simulations, MCTS refines decisions and adapts based on exploratory feedback, making it highly effective in improving
planning accuracy as more computation is allocated. This
capability has established MCTS as a cornerstone in many
System 2 reasoning tasks, such as mathematical problemsolving (Guan et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024a) and program
synthesis (Brandfonbrener et al., 2024). However, unlike
diffusion-based planners, traditional MCTS relies on a forward model for tree rollouts, inheriting its limitations including losing global consistency. In addition to being restricted
to discrete action spaces, the resulting search tree can grow
excessively large in both depth and width. This leads to
significant computational demands, particularly in scenarios
involving long horizons and large action spaces.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have recently emerged as a powerful approach to planning, enabling the generation of complex
trajectories by modeling trajectory distributions using largescale offline data (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a;c;b). Unlike traditional
autoregressive planning methods, diffusion-based planners,
such as Diffuser (Janner et al., 2022), generate entire trajectories holistically through a series of denoising steps,
eliminating the need for a forward dynamics model. This
approach effectively addresses key limitations of forward
models, such as poor long-term dependency modeling and

This raises a crucial question: how can we combine the
strengths of Diffuser and MCTS to overcome their limitations and enhance the inference-time scalability of
diffusion-based planning? To address this, we propose
Monte Carlo Tree Diffusion (MCTD), a framework that
integrates diffusion-based trajectory generation with the iterative search capabilities of MCTS for more efficient and
scalable planning.

1

KAIST 2 SAP 3 Mila 4 New York University. Correspondence to: Jaesik Yoon <jaesik.yoon@kaist.ac.kr>, Sungjin Ahn
<sungjin.ahn@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

MCTD builds on three key innovations. First, it restructures
denoising into a tree-based rollout process, enabling semi1

