ResQ: Mixed-Precision Quantization of Large Language Models
with Low-Rank Residuals
Utkarsh Saxena 1 Sayeh Sharify 2 Kaushik Roy 1 Xin Wang 2

Abstract

state called KV (key-value) cache, and generation, where
tokens are generated autoregressively. The prefilling stage
is compute-bound, requiring trillions of floating-point operations (FLOPs), whereas the generation stage is memorybound due to iterative accesses and updates of the KV cache.
These high computational costs are further amplified by
modern LLMs’ large sizes – some exceeding 400 billion
parameters – and the increasingly long context lengths that
necessitates large KV caches.

Post-training quantization (PTQ) of large language models (LLMs) holds the promise in reducing the prohibitive computational cost at inference time. Quantization of all weight, activation
and key-value (KV) cache tensors to 4-bit without
significantly degrading generalizability is challenging, due to the high quantization error caused
by extreme outliers in activations. To tackle this
problem, we propose ResQ, a PTQ method that
pushes further the state-of-the-art. By means of
principal component analysis (PCA), it identifies
a low-rank subspace (in practice 1/8 of the hidden
dimension) in which activation variances are highest, and keep the coefficients within this subspace
in high precision, e.g. 8-bit, while quantizing the
rest to 4-bit. Within each subspace, invariant random rotation is applied to further suppress outliers.
We show that this is a provably optimal mixed precision quantization scheme that minimizes error.
With the Llama and Qwen2.5 families of models, we demonstrate that ResQ outperforms recent
uniform and mixed precision PTQ methods on
a variety of benchmarks, achieving up to 33%
lower perplexity on Wikitext than the next best
method SpinQuant, and upto 5× speedup over
16-bit baseline. Code is available here.1

Quantization algorithms are powerful and principled approaches to address the immense computational demands of
LLMs at both stages of inference. Quantization of weights
reduces parameter storage, KV cache quantization lowers
memory usage of KV cache during generation, whereas
activation quantization decreases the complexity of floatingpoint operation. However, effective low-precision quantization is difficult due to large outliers in activations, which
can be ∼ 20× larger than other values (Dettmers et al.,
2022). While post-training methods like KIVI (Liu et al.,
2024c) and KVQuant (Hooper et al., 2024) achieve 2-bit
KV cache quantization, and techniques like GPTQ (Frantar
et al., 2023) and AWQ (Lin et al., 2024c) optimize very
low-precision weights, quantizing activations below 8-bit
precision remains an open challenge.
Recent LLM activation quantization methods feature two
useful strategies: differential treatment of outliers retain outlier channels in high precision, leading to mixed-precision
quantization (e.g., Dettmers et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2024;
Ashkboos et al. 2024b; Figure 1a), whereas invariant random rotation suppress outliers, leading to less difficult
uniform low-precision quantization (e.g., Ashkboos et al.
2024c; Liu et al. 2025; Figure 1b). Both reduce quantization
error and improve signal-to-quantization-noise ratio (Figure
1d,e) locally; yet a notable model performance gap persists
from the 16-bit baseline. For example, SpinQuant (Liu et al.,
2025) at 4-bit, applied to Meta-Llama-3-8B (Meta,
2024b), exhibits ∼ 20% higher perplexity than the 16-bit
floating point baseline, even after nontrivial optimization.

1. Introduction
Growing capabilities of large language models (LLMs)
come with an increasing computational cost at inference
time. LLM inference has two distinct stages: prefilling,
which processes the input prompt and populates the internal
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, USA 2 d-Matrix, Santa Clara, USA.
Correspondence to: Utkarsh Saxena <saxenau@purdue.edu>.

To mend this gap, we introduce ResQ, a novel PTQ method
that combines the strengths of both aforementioned strategies and thereby improve model efficiency with aggressive 4bit quantization of activation, weight, and KV cache. Specif-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/utkarsh-dmx/project-r
esq

1

