VersaPRM: Multi-Domain Process Reward Model via Synthetic Reasoning Data

Thomas Zeng 1 Shuibai Zhang 1 Shutong Wu 1 Christian Classen 1 Daewon Chae 2 Ethan Ewer 1 Minjae Lee 3
Heeju Kim 3 Wonjun Kang 3 Jackson Kunde 1 Ying Fan 1 Jungtaek Kim 1 Hyung Il Koo 3
Kannan Ramchandran 4 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 1 Kangwook Lee 1

Abstract

to rank multiple generated solutions and select the best answer (Lightman et al., 2024). Reward models evaluate the
quality of solutions, helping guide LLMs toward better outputs. In particular, Outcome Reward Models (ORMs) are
used to provide supervision based solely on the correctness
of the final outcome. However, ORMs fail to address errors in intermediate steps, limiting their effectiveness for
complex, multi-step reasoning tasks (Luo et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024). Because ORMs suffer
from this limitation, Process Reward Models (PRMs) have
been proposed to offer fine-grained, step-by-step feedback
on the correctness of each reasoning step (Lightman et al.,
2024; Uesato et al., 2022). PRMs have proven highly effective during inference, improving the reranking of generated solutions and guiding LLMs through search-based
algorithms (Wan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a).

Process Reward Models (PRMs) have proven
effective at enhancing mathematical reasoning
for Large Language Models (LLMs) by leveraging increased inference-time computation. However, they are predominantly trained on mathematical data and their generalizability to nonmathematical domains has not been rigorously
studied. In response, this work first shows that
current PRMs have poor performance in other
domains. To address this limitation, we introduce VersaPRM, a multi-domain PRM trained
on synthetic reasoning data generated using our
novel data generation and annotation method. VersaPRM achieves consistent performance gains
across diverse domains. For instance, in the
MMLU-Pro category of Law, VersaPRM via
weighted majority voting, achieves a 7.9% performance gain over the majority voting baseline—
surpassing Qwen2.5-Math-PRM’s gain of 1.3%.
We further contribute to the community by opensourcing all data, code and models for VersaPRM.

Several studies have shown that PRMs trained on extensive process supervision significantly outperform ORMs in
mathematical reasoning tasks, with notable improvements
reported on datasets such as MATH500 and GSM800K (Luo
et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2024; Uesato et al., 2022).
While substantial investigation has been made in creating training data (Lightman et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024b), training PRMs (Xiong et al., 2024), and evaluation (Zheng et al., 2024) with respect to mathematical
reasoning, the application of PRMs to non-mathematical
domains—such as Biology, Chemistry, and Law—remains
underexplored. To investigate the capability of math PRMs
in non-mathematical domains, we test open-source math
PRMs such as Math-Shepherd (Wang et al., 2024b) and
Qwen-2.5-Math-PRM (Zheng et al., 2024). Not surprisingly,
these PRMs demonstrate poor performance, indicating their
limited domain generalizability. They exhibit only marginal
improvements over the baseline in Law, Philosophy, and
Biology as illustrated in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant potential in tackling complex reasoning tasks. Specifically, they can employ a step-by-step Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) approach to generate more accurate and reliable solutions (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022; Yao et al.,
2023; Madaan et al., 2023). Moreover, by using additional
test-time computation, the reasoning performance of LLMs
can be further enhanced (Snell et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2024).
An important and widely-adopted test-time computation
method is using external verifiers, such as reward models
1

To address this limitation, we propose fine-tuning PRMs
on a synthetically generated multi-domain CoT dataset, to
significantly enhance reasoning capabilities beyond mathematics. We call this resulting multi-domain PRM VersaPRM, short for versatile PRM. Notably, by sampling questions from the MMLU-Pro dataset (Wang et al., 2024c), we
generate CoTs to produce step-by-step reasoning using an

2

University of Wisconsin–Madison Korea University
FuriosaAI 4 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence
to: Kangwook Lee <kangwook.lee@wisc.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

