Best of Both Worlds: Regret Minimization versus Minimax Play

Adrian Müller * 1 Jon Schneider * 2 Stratis Skoulakis * 3 Luca Viano * 4 Volkan Cevher 4

Abstract

vations, and Bob does likewise. Both players then receive
their respective costs in this round prior to moving to the
next round.

In this paper, we investigate the existence of online learning algorithms with bandit feedback that
simultaneously guarantee O(1) regret compared
√
to a given comparator strategy, and Õ( T ) regret compared to any fixed strategy, where T is
the number of rounds. We provide the first affirmative answer to this question whenever the
comparator strategy supports every action. In the
context of zero-sum games with min-max value
zero, both in normal- and extensive form, we show
that our results allow us to guarantee to risk at
most O(1) loss while being able to gain Ω(T )
from exploitable opponents, thereby combining
the benefits of both no-regret algorithms and minimax play.

To minimize her cumulative cost, Alice could compute an
equilibrium strategy and simply play it in every round (minimax play (Von Neumann & Morgenstern, 2007)). This
way, she would be guaranteed to never lose anything to Bob
in expectation. However, she might also not win anything
from Bob even if he plays suboptimal (non-equilibrium)
strategies. A classic example of this dilemma is Rock-PaperScissors, for which the min-max strategy is the uniform
strategy, which wins zero even from an opponent that always plays Rock. Alternatively, Alice could run a learning
algorithm (regret minimization (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi,
2006)). This way, her average cost would approach the one
of the best strategy in hindsight, allowing her to exploit such
opponents. However, by running such an algorithm she
would have to deviate from the equilibrium strategy, thereby
risking incurring a significant amount of costs during learning. More formally, there are two popular lines of thought
on how Alice could minimize her overall cost over the T
rounds of play:

1. Introduction
Two-player zero-sum games form one of the most fundamental classes studied in game theory, capturing direct
competition between two opposing agents. In a zero-sum
game, Alice and Bob choose mixed strategies µ ∈ P and
ν ∈ P ′ , respectively, from some strategy polytopes P
and P ′ . Their expected payoffs are specified by a function V . Alice aims to minimize V (µ, ν), whereas Bob
aims to maximize it. This definition subsumes the classical
normal-form zero-sum games (Von Neumann & Morgenstern, 2007) like Rock-Paper-Scissors, as well as the more
complex extensive-form zero-sum games (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994), such as Heads-up Poker. A zero-sum game
is called fair if its min-max value is zero, meaning that
minµ∈P maxν∈P ′ V (µ, ν) = 0. This models the fact that
none of the players has a strategic advantage due to the structure of the game. For instance, a game is always fair if it is
symmetric, i.e. when P = P ′ and V (µ, ν) = −V (ν, µ), as
is the case for many games of interest. Now suppose Alice
repeatedly plays a fair zero-sum game against her unknown
opponent Bob for T consecutive rounds. In each round, she
chooses her next strategy based on all her previous obser1

2

3

1) Min-Max Equilibrium: In every round t, Alice
simply selects the min-max strategy µt = µ⋆ ∈
arg minµ∈P maxν∈P ′ V (µ, ν). She then loses at most
V ⋆ := minµ∈P maxν∈P ′ V (µ, ν) units to Bob. For fair
zero-sum games, we have V ⋆ = 0, meaning that she will
not lose anything in expectation. However, for example in
normal-form games, she also never wins any units if µ⋆ is
full-support (Braggion et al., 2020), and even otherwise may
not win anything (Section 5). In summary:
Alice is guaranteed not to lose anything, but might
not win anything even if Bob plays poorly.
2) Regret Minimization: Alice selects µt ∈ P according to
a no-regret algorithm. Then she can guarantee that, no matter Bob’s strategies ν 1 , . . . , ν T ∈ P ′ , the regret compared
to any fixed strategy µ satisfies
T
X

4

ETH Zürich Google Research Aarhus University EPFL.
Correspondence to: Adrian Müller <admuell@ethz.ch>.

t=1

V (µt , ν t ) −

T
X

√
V (µ, ν t ) ≤ O( T ).

t=1

In fair zero-sum games, plugging in the equilibrium µ = µ⋆ ,
we have V (µ, ν t ) ≤ V ⋆ = 0. This means that the above
regret guarantee ensures that Alice might lose at most

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

