Ex-VAD: Explainable Fine-grained Video Anomaly Detection Based on
Visual-Language Models

Chao Huang 1 Yushu Shi 1 Jie Wen 2 Wei Wang 1 Yong Xu 2 Xiaochun Cao 1 *

Abstract
Visual
Encoder

With advancements in visual language models
(VLMs) and large language models (LLMs),
video anomaly detection (VAD) has progressed
beyond binary classification to fine-grained categorization and multidimensional analysis. However, existing methods focus mainly on coarsegrained detection, lacking anomaly explanations.
To address these challenges, we propose Ex-VAD,
an Explainable Fine-grained Video Anomaly
Detection approach that combines fine-grained
classification with detailed explanations of anomalies. First, we use a VLM to extract frame-level
captions, and an LLM converts them to videolevel explanations, enhancing the model’s explainability. Second, integrating textual explanations
of anomalies with visual information greatly enhances the model’s anomaly detection capability. Finally, we apply label-enhanced alignment
to optimize feature fusion, enabling precise finegrained detection. Extensive experimental results
on the UCF-Crime and XD-Violence datasets
demonstrate that Ex-VAD significantly outperforms existing State-of-The-Art methods.

Classifier
or scorer

Visual
Encoder

Classifier
…

(b) Multi-classification VAD

(a) Binary classification VAD

Visual
Encoder
Classifier
VLM

LLM
VLM
&
LLM

(c) Training-free VAD

…

Text
Encoder
Anomaly
Explanation

(d) Our Explainable VAD

Figure 1. Recent research in VAD can be categorized into three
types: a) Traditional binary classification VAD, b) Multiclassification VAD, and c) Training-free VAD. Building on the
optimization of these approaches, our Ex-VAD is presented as: d)
Explainable VAD based on VLMs and LLMs.

et al., 2021; Nawaratne et al., 2020). For example, rapid
detection of dangerous behaviors for timely intervention in
surveillance, detection of abnormal road conditions to avoid
accidents in autonomous driving, and identification of abnormal vital signs to provide timely assistance in healthcare
monitoring.

1. Introduction

Traditional VADs (Huang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025;
Huang et al., 2023; 2022; Ramachandra et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2024; Zaigham Zaheer et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2023)
typically coarse-grained analyze videos, determining only
whether a video contains abnormal behavior and categorizing it as normal or anomalous. However, such approaches (Nguyen & Meunier, 2019) face significant limitations in practical applications. First, coarse-grained detection fails to provide detailed descriptions of specific types
of abnormal behavior, which is inadequate in scenarios that
require tailored responses to distinct anomalies, for example, addressing varying security threats in surveillance systems or diagnosing multiple abnormal conditions in medical
monitoring. Second, coarse-grained methods are easily influenced by the complexity of video backgrounds and the
diversity of scenes, making it challenging to pinpoint the
time and type of anomalies accurately. This deficiency com-

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is an important technology with a wide range of applications that cover areas such
as security surveillance, healthcare, autonomous driving,
and content auditing (Zhao et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019;
Samaila et al., 2024). It aims to improve the safety and efficiency of systems by automatically identifying anomalous
events or behaviors through the analysis of video data (Ren
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China 2 Harbin Institute
of Technology, School of Computer Science and Technology,
Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Xiaochun Cao <caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

