Improving LLM Video Understanding with 16 Frames Per Second

Yixuan Li * 1 Changli Tang * 1 Jimin Zhuang 1 Yudong Yang 1 Guangzhi Sun 2 Wei Li 2 Zejun Ma 2
Chao Zhang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across many natural language processing tasks, with some even nearing human-level performance
(OpenAI et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024; Touvron et al.,
2023; Du et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2023). The impressive ability of LLMs to understand, generate, and reason with text
has sparked significant interest among researchers, drawing
attention from both academia and industry to expand their
capabilities to multimodal understanding.

Human vision is dynamic and continuous. However, in video understanding with multimodal
large language models (LLMs), existing methods primarily rely on static features extracted
from images sampled at a fixed low frame rate
of frame-per-second (FPS) ⩽2, leading to critical
visual information loss. In this paper, we introduce F-16, the first multimodal LLM designed
for high-frame-rate video understanding. By increasing the frame rate to 16 FPS and compressing visual tokens within each 1-second clip, F16 efficiently captures dynamic visual features
while preserving key semantic information. Experimental results demonstrate that higher frame
rates considerably enhance video understanding
across multiple benchmarks, providing a new approach to improving video LLMs beyond scaling
model size or training data. F-16 achieves state-ofthe-art performance among 7-billion-parameter
video LLMs on both general and fine-grained
video understanding benchmarks, such as VideoMME and TemporalBench. Furthermore, F-16
excels in complex spatiotemporal tasks, including high-speed sports analysis (e.g., basketball,
football, gymnastics, and diving), outperforming SOTA proprietary visual models like GPT-4o
and Gemini-1.5-pro. Additionally, we introduce
a novel decoding method for F-16 that enables
highly efficient low-frame-rate inference without requiring model retraining. We will release
the source code, model checkpoints, and data at
https://github.com/bytedance/F-16.

In video understanding, videos contain both slowly changing elements, such as backgrounds and scenes, and rapidly
changing, fleeting details, such as body movements and
micro-expressions. Given the high frame count in videos,
processing every frame is computationally expensive. As
a result, existing video LLMs (Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2024b; Wang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024b; Cheng et al.,
2024; Tang et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2024) primarily focus on
slowly changing elements, typically employing low-framerate sampling or selecting a fixed number of frames, effectively treating every 1-second video clip as a few images.
However, this approach has a critical limitation: while lowframe-rate sampling like 1 frame-per-second (FPS) may be
sufficient for capturing a video’s overall theme and context,
it fails to preserve rapidly changing visual cues, leading
to information loss. This significantly hinders the model’s
ability to comprehend dynamic scenes, thereby limiting its
overall video understanding capabilities.
To address these limitations, this paper introduces F-16, a
video LLM designed for more human-like video perception
by processing coherent video frames at a higher frame rate
of 16 FPS. A key challenge in high-frame-rate video understanding is the increased visual token sequence length and
redundant information across consecutive frames. To mitigate this, we propose a visual-text aligner that not only transforms visual features into text-like tokens suitable for the
LLM backbone but also compresses redundant intra-frame
and inter-frame information within each 1-second video
clip. To leverage the strengths of existing high-performance
image encoders, we adopt a 3-layer multi-layer perception
(MLP) as the aligner, extending a pre-trained image LLM
to process the dynamic features in 16 FPS videos while

*
Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance. Correspondence to: Chao Zhang <cz277@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

