Antidote: Post-fine-tuning Safety Alignment for Large Language Models against
Harmful Fine-tuning Attack

Tiansheng Huang 1 Gautam Bhattacharya 2 Pratik Joshi 2 Joshua Kimball 2 Ling Liu 1

Abstract
Safety aligned Large Language Models (LLMs)
are vulnerable to harmful fine-tuning attacks – a
few harmful data mixed in the fine-tuning dataset
can break the LLMs’s safety alignment. While
several defenses have been proposed, our evaluation shows that existing defenses fail when some
specific training hyper-parameters are chosen – a
large learning rate or a large number of training
epochs in the fine-tuning stage can easily invalidate the defense. To this end, we propose Antidote, a post-fine-tuning stage solution, which remains agnostic to the training hyper-parameters
in the fine-tuning stage. Antidote relies on the
philosophy that by removing the harmful parameters, the harmful model can be recovered from the
harmful behaviors, regardless of how those harmful parameters are formed in the fine-tuning stage.
With this philosophy, we introduce a one-shot
pruning stage after harmful fine-tuning to remove
the harmful weights that are responsible for the
generation of harmful content. Despite its embarrassing simplicity, empirical results show that
Antidote can reduce harmful score while maintaining accuracy on downstream tasks.

Pretrained LLM

Alignment data

User data

Harmful data

 Alignment

 User
finetuning

One-shot
Pruning

Aligned LLM

Customized LLM

Aligned LLM

Figure 1. Antidote with a three-stage pipeline, i.e., i) safety alignment, ii) user fine-tuning, iii) one-shot pruning. While existing
defenses focus on the first stage, e.g., (Huang et al., 2024d; Rosati
et al., 2024a) or the second stage (Huang et al., 2024b; Mukhoti
et al., 2023), Antidote utilizes the post-fine-tuning stage to prune
the harmful weights to recover the model from harmful behaviors.

ally safety aligned to guarantee that the outputs of the LLM
meet the safety preference, i.e., to refuse to generate harmful
content even when the users trigger them to do so. However,
recent studies (Qi et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Zhan et al.,
2023; Lermen et al., 2023; Yi et al., 2024a) show that a few
harmful data mixed in the fine-tuning dataset can trigger the
model to forget the alignment knowledge it learned previously –it no longer uses refusal response when users submit
a harmful prompt.
Existing mitigation strategies can be broadly categorized
into two categories, i.e., alignment stage defense and user
fine-tuning stage defense. The first category is concerned
with how to improve the large language model’s immunization towards the harmful fine-tuning data in the alignment
stage. For example, (Huang et al., 2024d) add artificial
perturbation in the alignment stage to simulate the harmful
embedding drift in the fine-tuning stage, and utilizes a minimax optimization to enforce the model to be immune to the
perturbation. (Rosati et al., 2024b) utilize a representation
noising technique to degrade the representation distribution
of the harmful data to a random Gaussian noise, such that
the harmful content generation is more difficult to learn by
harmful fine-tuning data. For fine-tuning-stage mitigation,
the core idea is to mitigate the forgetting of the alignment
knowledge but also to learn the knowledge for the users’
tasks. To achieve this goal, (Mukhoti et al., 2023) add a
regularization to constrain drift in feature space to mitigate
the forgetting of alignment knowledge and (Huang et al.,
2024b) separate the fine-tuning stage into two states, which
alternatively optimize the alignment and fine-tuning dataset.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning-as-a-service has become a new paradigm for
Large Language Models (LLM) service with an increasing demand for personalized service delivery. Typically,
fine-tuning data are uploaded by the users, and the service provider (e.g., OpenAI1 ) finetunes a pre-trained LLM,
which is then served to meet the users’ customized need.
Before fine-tuning for user tasks, a pre-trained LLM is usu1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Dolby Laboratories. Correspondence to: Tiansheng Huang <thuang374@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Fine-tuning API by OpenAI: https://platform.
openai.com/docs/guides/fine-tuning.

1

