Cover Learning for Large-Scale Topology Representation

Luis Scoccola 1 Uzu Lim 2 Heather A. Harrington 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

Classical unsupervised learning methods like
clustering and linear dimensionality reduction
parametrize large-scale geometry when it is discrete or linear, while more modern methods from
manifold learning find low dimensional representation or infer local geometry by constructing a
graph on the input data. More recently, topological data analysis popularized the use of simplicial
complexes to represent data topology with two
main methodologies: topological inference with
geometric complexes and large-scale topology visualization with Mapper graphs – central to these
is the nerve construction from topology, which
builds a simplicial complex given a cover of a
space by subsets. While successful, these have
limitations: geometric complexes scale poorly
with data size, and Mapper graphs can be hard to
tune and only contain low dimensional information. In this paper, we propose to study the problem of learning covers in its own right, and from
the perspective of optimization. We describe a
method for learning topologically-faithful covers
of geometric datasets, and show that the simplicial
complexes thus obtained can outperform standard
topological inference approaches in terms of size,
and Mapper-type algorithms in terms of representation of large-scale topology.

1.1. Context
We are concerned with the problem of learning a representation of the large-scale structure of geometric datasets, such
as point clouds. Classical instances of this problem are the
clustering problem, linear dimensionality reduction, and
manifold learning. More recently, building on tools from
algebraic topology and computational geometry, topological data analysis (TDA) was born with the goal of learning
and quantifying the topology of data beyond the discrete
and linear cases. What distinguishes TDA from previous
methodologies, such as classical manifold learning, is its
explicit reliance on (higher-dimensional) simplicial complexes, with the stated goal often being that of producing
a simplicial complex which recovers the topology of the
underlying space from which the data was sampled.
Simplicial complexes (Appendix A.1) are a specific type of
hypergraph, and were originally used in topology to model
topological spaces combinatorially; see Figure 1 for an example. Recent applications include neuroscience (Gardner
et al., 2022), biology (Benjamin et al., 2024), physics (Sale
et al., 2023), and machine learning (Maggs et al., 2024).
The two main methodologies in TDA are topological inference with geometric complexes, and large-scale topology
visualization with Mapper graphs; we elaborate on the limitations of these in Section 2 and Appendix A.4. In this
paper, we propose cover learning as a unified unsupervised
learning procedure which can efficiently represent the largetopology of geometric data, and simultaneously address the
limitations of these two methodologies.
We now give more context and motivation for cover learning,
and then describe our contributions.

1

Centre de Recherches Mathématiques et Institut des sciences
mathématiques, Laboratoire de combinatoire et d’informatique
mathématique de l’Université du Québec à Montréal, Université
de Sherbrooke, Canada. 2 Queen Mary University of London,
United Kingdom. 3 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany; Centre for Systems Biology,
Dresden, Germany; Faculty of Mathematics, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; Mathematical Institute, University of
Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Luis Scoccola
<luis.scoccola@gmail.com>.

1.2. Learning simplicial complexes
A simplicial complex on a set X consists of a simplicial
complex K together with a function K0 → Parts(X) from
the vertices of K to the set of subsets of X, the idea being
that vertices represent groups of data points, and higherdimensional simplices represent relationships between these.
Simplicial complex learning is the process of constructing
a simplicial complex on an input dataset, and it encom-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

