Finite-Time Convergence Rates in Stochastic Stackelberg Games
with Smooth Algorithmic Agents

Eric Frankel 1 Kshitij Kulkarni 2 Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy 1 Sewoong Oh 1 Lillian J. Ratliff 1

Abstract

Westenbroek et al., 2019). For example, recommendation
systems deploy predictive models of engagement to encourage user interactions (Calvano & Polo, 2021; Hardt et al.,
2022), crowd-sourcing markets leverage incentives to elicit
responses (Dasari et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2018; Scheid et al.,
2024; Shah & Zhou, 2016; Xie et al., 2014), and in multiagent systems, control policies influence outcomes of agent
competition (Ho et al., 1982; Ratliff & Fiez, 2020; Yang
et al., 2022). Common to these domains is the assumption
that agent preferences are fully known and their behavior
is stationary: the decision-maker knows how agents will
react and expects them to react the same over time. Yet, in
practice this assumption is frequently violated, particularly
when competitive agents adapt their response to a decisionmaker’s action (Fiez et al., 2020; Liu & Ratliff, 2024; Miller
et al., 2021; Narang et al., 2023; Perdomo et al., 2020).

Decision-makers often adaptively influence downstream competitive agents’ behavior to minimize
their cost, yet in doing so face critical challenges:
(i) decision-makers might not a priori know
the agents’ objectives; (ii) agents might learn
their responses, introducing stochasticity and nonstationarity into the decision-making process; and
(iii) there may be additional non-strategic environmental stochasticity. Characterizing convergence of this complex system is contingent on
how the decision-maker controls for the tradeoff
between the induced drift and additional noise
from the learning agent behavior and environmental stochasticity. To understand how the learning
agents’ behavior is influenced by the decisionmaker’s actions, we first consider a decisionmaker that deploys an arbitrary sequence of actions which induces a sequence of games and corresponding equilibria. We characterize how the
drift and noise in the agents’ stochastic algorithms
decouples from their optimization error. Leveraging this decoupling and accompanying finite-time
efficiency estimates, we design decision-maker algorithms that control the induced drift relative to
the agent noise. This enables efficient finite-time
tracking of game theoretic equilibrium concepts
that adhere to the incentives of the players’ collective learning processes.

A natural abstraction between the decision-maker and agents
is a Stackelberg game, where the decision-maker takes
the role of leader and the agents take the role of followers (Stackelberg et al., 1952). Stackelberg games can
be viewed as a bilevel optimization problem wherein the
decision-maker seeks to optimize its objective subject to a
variational inequality that captures the equilibrium behavior
of the agents. As a class of convex structured problems,
monotone variational inequalities have garnered much attention in machine learning due to their application to classical (Combettes et al., 2023; Ghadimi & Lan, 2015) and
modern problems such as adversarial learning (Fiez et al.,
2020; 2021a; Gidel et al., 2019; Goodfellow et al., 2014), robust and multi-agent reinforcement learning (Foerster et al.,
2018; Pinto et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2022), auction theory (Syrgkanis et al., 2015), and recently to fine-tune large
language models (Amini et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Decision-making not only under uncertainty but also in environments with competitive learning agents arises quite
naturally and frequently in machine learning applications
(Cai et al., 2015; Dean et al., 2024; Kim & Perdomo, 2023;

In the setting we consider, the agents are learning and
therefore adapting their behavior for any deployed decisionmaker action. This alone makes the decision-maker’s objective time-varying: indeed, even for a fixed decision-maker’s
action deployed over a time horizon, the agents’ learning
process may not have stabilized at an equilibrium, much
less for a sequence of decision-maker actions. Moreover,
the environment itself is also stochastic and is unknown to
the decision-maker beyond query access. Ignoring that the

1

University of Washington, Seattle 2 University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Eric Frankel <ericsf@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

