Optimal Transfer Learning for Missing Not-at-Random Matrix Completion

Akhil Jalan 1 Yassir Jedra 2 Arya Mazumdar 3 Soumendu Sundar Mukherjee 4 Purnamrita Sarkar 5

Abstract

pij (Ma and Chen, 2019; Bhattacharya and Chatterjee, 2022).
Various MNAR models have been formulated based on
missingness structures in panel data (Agarwal et al., 2023b),
recommender systems (Jedra et al., 2023), and electronic
health records (Zhou et al., 2023).

We study transfer learning for matrix completion
in a Missing Not-at-Random (MNAR) setting
that is motivated by biological problems. The
target matrix Q has entire rows and columns
missing, making estimation impossible without
side information. To address this, we use a noisy
and incomplete source matrix P , which relates to
Q via a feature shift in latent space. We consider
both the active and passive sampling of rows and
columns. We establish minimax lower bounds
for entrywise estimation error in each setting. Our
computationally efficient estimation framework
achieves this lower bound for the active setting,
which leverages the source data to query the most
informative rows and columns of Q. This avoids
the need for incoherence assumptions required
for rate optimality in the passive sampling setting.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
through comparisons with existing algorithms on
real-world biological datasets.

Motivated by biological problems, we consider a challenging
e (a
MNAR structure where most rows and columns of Q
noisy version of Q) are entirely missing. Specifically, we
consider both the active sampling and passive sampling
settings for e
Q. In active sampling, a practitioner can
choose rows R and columns C so that entries in R ×C are
observed. This follows experimental design constraints
in metabolite balancing experiments (Christensen and
Nielsen, 2000a), marker selection for single-cell RNA
sequencing (Vargo and Gilbert, 2020), patient selection
for companion diagnostics (Huber et al., 2022), and gene
expression microarrays (Hu et al., 2021).
The requirement that entire rows and columns must be
observed is due to real-world constraints, such as the use
of certain assays or experimental protocols. For example,
metabolite balancing is a method for measuring pairwise
metabolic interactions in cells, but requires choosing a set of
metabolites (rows & columns) beforehand (Christensen and
Nielsen, 2000b). Another example comes from gene expression microarray measurements, which require a choice of patients (rows) and genes (columns) to measure beforehand (Hu
et al., 2021). We study both of these settings in Section 3.

1. Introduction
We study transfer learning in the context of matrix completion, a fundamental problem motivated by theory (Candès and
Recht, 2009; Candès and Tao, 2010) and practice (FernándezVal et al., 2021; Einav and Cleary, 2022; Gao et al., 2022).
A major body of work studies matrix completion in the
Missing Completely-at-Random (MCAR) setting (Jain et al.,
2013; Chatterjee, 2015; Chen et al., 2020), where each entry
is observed i.i.d. with probability p. A more general missingness pattern, known as Missing Not-at-Random (MNAR),
considers an underlying propensity matrix pij so that the
(i, j)th entry is observed independently with probability

In the passive sampling setting, the practitioner cannot
choose the experiments. We model this by sampling each row
(column) with probability pRow (pCol ). For example, microarray analysis detects RNA segments corresponding to known
genes by using chemical hybridization. However, rows may
be missing because of a patient sample failing to hybridize,
and columns may be missing because of gene probe failure
(Hu et al., 2021). For an illustration, see Figure 1.

1

Department of Computer Science, UT Austin, USA
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems (LIDS), MIT,
USA 3 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute & Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, UC San Diego, USA 4 Statistics and
Mathematics Unit (SMU), Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata,
India 5 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, UT Austin,
USA. Correspondence to: Akhil Jalan <akhiljalan@utexas.edu>.
2

This setting is inherently difficult because there are many
entries (i,j) for which row i and column j are both missing in
e Clearly, even when Q is low-rank and incoherent, estimaQ.
tion is impossible without side information (Proposition 2.1).
Transfer learning is necessary to achieve vanishing estimation error since no information about Qij is known. Hence,
we consider transfer learning in a setting where one has a
noisy and masked Pe corresponding to a source matrix P . P

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

