Lightspeed Geometric Dataset Distance via Sliced Optimal Transport

Khai Nguyen * 1 Hai Nguyen * 2 Tuan Pham 1 Nhat Ho 1

Abstract

continual learning, and fairness evaluation. Additionally,
dataset distances are valuable in emerging areas such as
synthetic data evaluation, 3D shape comparison, and federated learning, where comparing heterogeneous data distributions is fundamental. By capturing meaningful similarities
and differences between datasets, these measures facilitate
data-driven insights, enhance model robustness, and support
novel applications across diverse fields.

We introduce sliced optimal transport dataset distance (s-OTDD), a model-agnostic, embeddingagnostic approach for dataset comparison that
requires no training, is robust to variations in
the number of classes, and can handle disjoint
label sets. The core innovation is Moment Transform Projection (MTP), which maps a label,
represented as a distribution over features, to
a real number. Using MTP, we derive a data
point projection that transforms datasets into onedimensional distributions. The s-OTDD is defined as the expected Wasserstein distance between the projected distributions, with respect
to random projection parameters. Leveraging
the closed form solution of one-dimensional optimal transport, s-OTDD achieves (near-)linear
computational complexity in the number of data
points and feature dimensions and is independent
of the number of classes. With its geometrically
meaningful projection, s-OTDD strongly correlates with the optimal transport dataset distance
while being more efficient than existing dataset
discrepancy measures. Moreover, it correlates
well with the performance gap in transfer learning
and classification accuracy in data augmentation.

A common approach to comparing datasets relies on proxies, such as analyzing the learning curves of a predefined
model (Leite & Brazdil, 2005; Gao & Chaudhari, 2021)
or examining its optimal parameters (Achille et al., 2019;
Khodak et al., 2019) on a given task. Another strategy
involves making strong assumptions about the similarity
or co-occurrence of labels between datasets (Tran et al.,
2019). However, these methods often lack theoretical guarantees, are heavily dependent on the choice of the probe
model, and require training the model to completion (e.g.,
to identify optimal parameters) for each dataset under comparison. To address limitations of previous approaches,
model-agnostic approaches are developed. These methods
often assess task similarity based on the similarity between
joint or conditional input-output distributions, occasionally
incorporating the loss function as well. Principled notions
of domain discrepancy (Ben-David et al., 2006; Mansour
et al., 2009) provide a more rigorous foundation but are
frequently impractical due to computational intractability or
poor scalability to large datasets.

1. Introduction

More recently, approaches based on Optimal Transport (Villani, 2008; Peyré & Cuturi, 2020) (OT) have demonstrated
promise in modeling dataset similarities (Alvarez-Melis &
Fusi, 2020; Tan et al., 2021). Authors in (Alvarez-Melis &
Fusi, 2020) introduced optimal transport dataset distance
(OTDD) which is based on a hierarchical OT framework
drawing from (Yurochkin et al., 2019). In this approach, an
inner OT problem calculates the label distance between the
class-conditional distributions of two supervised learning
tasks. This label distance is then integrated into the transportation cost of an outer OT problem, yielding a dataset
distance that accounts for both sample and label discrepancies, and can handle disjoint sets of labels from different
datasets. Meanwhile, authors in (Tan et al., 2021) treat the
optimal transport plan between the input distributions of
datasets as a joint probability distribution and leverage con-

Dataset distances provide a powerful framework for comparing datasets based on their underlying structures, distributions, or content. These measures are essential in applications where understanding the relationships between
datasets drives decision-making, such as assessing data quality, detecting distributional shifts, or quantifying biases.
They play a critical role in machine learning workflows,
enabling tasks like domain adaptation, transfer learning,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA 2 Qualcomm AI
Research, Qualcomm Vietnam Company Limited. Correspondence
to: Khai Nguyen <khainb@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

