Phase and Amplitude-aware Prompting for Enhancing Adversarial Robustness

Yibo Xu 1 Dawei Zhou 1 Decheng Liu 1 Nannan Wang 1

Abstract

引入问题的图
Previous defense

Deep neural networks are found to be vulnerable
to adversarial perturbations. The prompt-based
defense has been increasingly studied due to its
high efficiency. However, existing prompt-based
defenses mainly exploited mixed prompt patterns,
where critical patterns closely related to object
semantics lack sufficient focus. The phase and
amplitude spectra have been proven to be highly
related to specific semantic patterns and crucial
for robustness. To this end, in this paper, we propose a Phase and Amplitude-aware Prompting
(PAP) defense. Specifically, we construct phaselevel and amplitude-level prompts for each class,
and adjust weights for prompting according to the
model’s robust performance under these prompts
during training. During testing, we select prompts
for each image using its predicted label to obtain the prompted image, which is inputted to the
model to get the final prediction. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Prompt with mixed
patterns

+

Target
model

Rabbit

Tested example
Proposed defense

Tested example

Amplitude-level prompt
Amplitude
spectrum

+

Phase
spectrum

+

model

Low-frequency

Phase

Phase-level prompt

Bird

Adversarial Natural

Different semantic patterns
Original
High-frequency

Target

Figure 1. Differences between previous defenses and our defense.
Previous method use mixed patterns like pixel or frequency domains for prompting. However, they do not explicitly focus on
specific semantic patterns. The phase and amplitude spectra can reflect structures and textures specifically. Our method utilizes these
specific patterns for prompting, further improving the robustness.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been found to be vulnerable to adversarial noises (Szegedy et al., 2014; Xiao
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2023). This vulnerability has
posed a significant threat to many deep learning applications
(Jaiswal et al., 2022; Mi et al., 2023; Shukla et al., 2024),
promoting the development of defenses (Madry et al., 2018;
Zhou et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2024; Xia et al., 2024).

2022; Zhou et al., 2023). However, existing prompt-based
defenses mainly focus on mixed patterns, such as pixel and
frequency domains (see Figure 1). These patterns cannot
explicitly reflect specific patterns like structures and textures. To this end, we seek to disentangle the mixed patterns,
and construct prompts for stabilizing model predictions by
utilizing patterns closely related to the object semantics.

Recently, prompt-based defenses have been increasingly
investigated (Huang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2024). It is of interest since it does not retrain target
models like adversarial training does (Wu et al., 2020; Wei
et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2024), and does not perform major
modifications on data as in denoising methods (Nie et al.,

The amplitude and phase spectra of the data have been
proven to be able to reflect the specific semantic patterns.
Previous studies indicated the amplitude spectrum holds
texture patterns (Randen & Husoy, 1999; Sidhu & Raahemifar, 2005), while the phase spectrum reflects structural
patterns (Kovesi, 2000; Zhang et al., 2011). Besides, cognitive sciences reveal that people tend to recognize objects by
utilizing the phase spectrum (Freeman & Simoncelli, 2011;
Gladilin & Eils, 2015), which can also help improve the
model’s generalization ability (Chen et al., 2021). Also, the
amplitude spectrum has been proven to be easily manipulated by noises and thus further processes are needed to
mitigate this problem for robustness (Chen et al., 2021). To

1

Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China. Correspondence to: Nannan Wang <nnwang@xidian.edu.cn>, Dawei Zhou
<dwzhou.xidian@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

