Learning from True-False Labels via Multi-modal Prompt Retrieving

Zhongnian Li 1 2 Jinghao Xu 1 Peng Ying 1 Meng Wei 1 Xinzheng Xu 1 2 3

Abstract

mains in the time-consuming process of collecting such
annotated datasets. To address this challenge, various forms
of weakly supervised learning have been proposed and explored in a range of settings, including semi-supervised
learning(Van Engelen & Hoos, 2020; Cao et al., 2022; Guo
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2024), positive-unlabeled learning(Sakai et al., 2018; Chapel et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2024b; 2025), noisy-label learning(Menon et al.,
2015; Ghosh et al., 2017; Han et al., 2020), partial-label
learning(Cour et al., 2011a; Feng et al., 2020b; Xia et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2024a), and complementary-label learning(Ishida et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018; Gao & Zhang, 2021;
Wei et al., 2023).

Pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
exhibit strong zero-shot classification abilities,
demonstrating great potential for generating
weakly supervised labels. Unfortunately, existing weakly supervised learning methods are short
of ability in generating accurate labels via VLMs.
In this paper, we propose a novel weakly supervised labeling setting, namely True-False Labels
(TFLs) which can achieve high accuracy when
generated by VLMs. The TFL indicates whether
an instance belongs to the label, which is randomly and uniformly sampled from the candidate
label set. Specifically, we theoretically derive a
risk-consistent estimator to explore and utilize the
conditional probability distribution information
of TFLs. Besides, we propose a convolutionalbased Multi-modal Prompt Retrieving (MRP)
method to bridge the gap between the knowledge of VLMs and target learning tasks. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed TFL setting and MRP learning
method. The code to reproduce the experiments
is at github.com/Tranquilxu/TMP.

Recently, pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
(Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024)
trained on large-scale labeled data have achieved remarkable results and exhibit significant potential in generating
high-quality weakly supervised labels, thereby reducing annotation costs(Menghini et al., 2023). Unfortunately, as
shown in Figure 1 (a), the VLMs supervised labels are often
of low quality because the zero-shot results from VLMs
may be incorrect(Wang et al., 2022; Menghini et al., 2023).
Specifically, the VLMs supervised label will be annotate as
“Sea horse” (i.e., label with the highest confidence), while
the ground-truth label is “Bass”. These VLMs supervised
labels with noise semantics may degrade the performance
of models on target learning tasks. This fact further inspires
us to explore and leverage novel weakly supervised labeling settings to harness VLMs for generating higher-quality
labels.

1. Introduction
In recent years, supervised learning has exhibited remarkable performance across a diverse range of visual tasks,
including image classification(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), object detection(Zong et al., 2023), and semantic segmentation(Chen et al., 2018). This success can be largely attributed to the abundance of fully annotated training web
data on the internet. However, a significant challenge re-

In this paper, we propose a novel weakly supervised classification setting: learning from True-False Labels (TFLs),
which can achieve high accuracy and avoid the cost of manual annotation when generated by VLMs. Besides, the
utilization of TFLs can markedly enhance the efficiency of
human annotation. The TFL indicates whether an instance
belongs to the label, which is randomly and uniformly sampled from the candidate label set. Specifically, an instance
will be annotated with a “True" label when it belongs to
the sampled label, and with a “False" label when it does
not. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1 (b), for an image
with the ground-truth label “Bass”, annotators will easily
annotate the instance with “Bass” and “True” label when
the randomly sampled label is also “Bass”. Conversely, the

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China 2 Mine Digitization Engineering Research Center of the Ministry of Education, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou,
China 3 State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Xinzheng Xu
<xxzheng@cumt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

