Overcoming the Curse of Dimensionality in Reinforcement Learning
Through Approximate Factorization

Chenbei Lu 1 Laixi Shi 2 Zaiwei Chen 3 Chenye Wu 4 Adam Wierman 5

Abstract

Specifically, the size of the state and action spaces grows
exponentially with the dimension of the RL problem, making it difficult—if not impossible—to efficiently represent,
learn, and optimize policies in high-dimensional settings.

Factored Markov Decision Processes (FMDPs)
offer a promising framework for overcoming the
curse of dimensionality in reinforcement learning
(RL) by decomposing high-dimensional MDPs
into smaller and independently evolving components. Despite their potential, existing studies on
FMDPs face three key limitations: reliance on
perfectly factorizable models, suboptimal sample complexity guarantees for model-based algorithms, and the absence of model-free algorithms.
To address these challenges, we introduce approximate factorization, which extends FMDPs to handle imperfectly factored models. Moreover, we
develop a model-based algorithm and a modelfree algorithm (in the form of variance-reduced
Q-learning), both achieving the first near-minimax
sample complexity guarantees for FMDPs. A key
novelty in the design of these two algorithms is
the development of a graph-coloring-based optimal synchronous sampling strategy. Numerical
simulations based on the wind farm storage control problem corroborate our theoretical findings.

To mitigate the curse of dimensionality, a common practical
approach is to employ function approximation to approximate the solution of an RL problem within a prespecified
function class, such as neural networks. While effective in
certain applications, these methods often lack strong theoretical guarantees, with most existing work focusing on
linear function approximation (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996;
Bhandari et al., 2018; Srikant & Ying, 2019; Chen et al.,
2023) and some extensions to nonlinear methods, which
typically rely on strong assumptions (Fan et al., 2020; Xu &
Gu, 2020). Consequently, achieving provable sample efficiency for large-scale sequential decision-making remains a
significant challenge in RL.
Fortunately, many real-world applications, when modeled
as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), exhibit structured
transition probabilities and reward functions that can be
leveraged to design algorithms with improved sample complexity. For instance, in robotic control, high-dimensional
state spaces often consist of substates that evolve independently or depend on a low-dimensional subset of the previous state. Specifically, consider a warehouse with multiple
mobile robots transporting goods, each robot typically plans
and moves based on its own position and objective, largely
independent of the internal states of other robots unless they
are highly close. These problems can be modeled using
the factored MDP (FMDP) framework (Osband & Van Roy,
2014), which decomposes the original MDP into smaller and
independently evolving MDPs. In this framework, the sample complexity scales with the sum, rather than the product,
of the individual state-action space sizes, thereby offering a
potential solution to the curse of dimensionality.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
become an increasingly popular framework for solving sequential decision-making problems in recent years (Kober
et al., 2013; Haydari & Yılmaz, 2020; Chen et al., 2022;
Charpentier et al., 2021). However, despite its promising
potential, RL still faces significant challenges, in particular the curse of dimensionality (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University 3 Edwardson School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University 4 School of Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 5 Computing &
Mathematical Sciences Department, Caltech. Correspondence to:
Chenye Wu <wuchenye@cuhk.edu.cn>.

While promising, the FMDP framework has several major
limitations: (1) it assumes that the original MDP can be
perfectly decomposed into smaller MDPs; (2) for modelbased algorithms, a significant gap remains between the
best-known sample complexity and the theoretical lower
bound (Chen et al., 2020; Xu & Tewari, 2020); and (3) no
provable model-free algorithms currently exist for FMDPs.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

