P RO S EC: Fortifying Code LLMs with Proactive Security Alignment

Xiangzhe Xu * 1 Zian Su * 1 Jinyao Guo 1 Kaiyuan Zhang 1 Zhenting Wang 2 Xiangyu Zhang 1

Abstract

Guo et al., 2024b). As these models are more widely deployed in productions, their safety becomes increasingly
crucial. Insecure code generated by these models has been
shown to introduce vulnerabilities, posing risks in realworld applications (Pearce et al., 2021; 2022). Recent studies reveal that even state-of-the-art code LLMs frequently
generate insecure code (He & Vechev, 2023; Bhatt et al.,
2023; He et al., 2024), highlighting the urgent need for the
alignment with secure coding practices.

While recent code-specific large language models
(LLMs) have greatly enhanced their code generation capabilities, the safety of these models remains under-explored, posing potential risks as insecure code generated by these models may introduce vulnerabilities into real-world systems. Existing methods collect security-focused datasets
from real-world vulnerabilities for instruction tuning in order to mitigate such issues. However,
they are largely constrained by the data sparsity
of vulnerable code, and have limited applicability
in the multi-stage post-training workflows of modern LLMs. In this paper, we propose P RO S EC,
a novel proactive security alignment approach
designed to align code LLMs with secure coding practices. P RO S EC systematically exposes
the vulnerabilities in a code LLM by synthesizing vulnerability-inducing coding scenarios from
Common Weakness Enumerations (CWEs) and
generates fixes to vulnerable code snippets, allowing the model to learn secure practices through
preference learning objectives. The scenarios synthesized by P RO S EC trigger 25× more vulnerable
code than a normal instruction-tuning dataset, resulting in a security-focused alignment dataset 7×
larger than the previous work. Experiments show
that models trained with P RO S EC are 25.2% to
35.4% more secure compared to previous work
without degrading models’ utility.

Enhancing the ability of code LLMs to generate secure code
necessitates additional design considerations in their posttraining stages, similar to the alignment of general safety,
truthfulness, and ethical considerations (Ganguli et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2024c; Ji et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024; Hurst
et al., 2024). Early efforts, such as SafeCoder (He et al.,
2024), seek to address security concerns during the instruction tuning phase by constructing datasets of vulnerable
code and corresponding fixes from GitHub commits. The
security-focused dataset is then integrated with standard
instruction tuning datasets to teach the pre-trained model
to generate secure code while preserving utility. However,
instruction tuning-based security alignment with real-world
data faces two critical challenges:
Sparsity of Real-World Vulnerability Data. Vulnerable
code snippets in real-world programs and their fixes are
often sparse and highly contextual, limiting the effectiveness and generalizability of training secure code LLMs from
real-world vulnerabilities. For instance, SafeCoder collects
only 465 entries from 145 million git commits. One crucial
underlying reason for the sparsity is that human programmers have already avoided most insecure practices before
commits so these processes never appear in web data.

1. Introduction

Limited Applicability in Post-Training Pipelines. Coupling security alignment with the standard instruction tuning
phase restricts its utility in modern LLM training workflows. Code LLMs can undergo multi-stage post-training
processes based on human/AI feedback for further performance improvements (Lee et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024a). Reverting to the initial instruction tuning
stage for security alignment necessitates retraining, which is
resource-intensive and risks discarding the benefits of prior
post-training efforts.

Large language models (LLMs) capable of generating code
based on human instructions have revolutionized programming by significantly facilitating tasks such as code generation (Zhu et al., 2024) and refinement (Zheng et al., 2024;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, IN, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Xiangzhe Xu
<xu1415@purdue.edu>, Zian Su <su284@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose P RO S EC, a proactive security
1

