The Polynomial Stein Discrepancy for Assessing Moment Convergence

Narayan Srinivasan 1 2 Matthew Sutton 3 Christopher Drovandi 1 2 Leah South 1 2

Abstract

target distribution P . These discrepancies can be applied
when P is only known up to a normalising constant, making
them particularly appealing in the context of Bayesian inference. Unlike classical tools for assessing sample quality
in Bayesian inference, Stein discrepancies are applicable
to hyperparameter tuning (Gorham & Mackey, 2017) and
goodness-of-fit testing (Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu et al.,
2016) for biased Monte Carlo algorithms like stochastic gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC, Welling &
Teh, 2011; Nemeth & Fearnhead, 2021).

We propose a novel method for measuring the
discrepancy between a set of samples and a desired posterior distribution for Bayesian inference.
Classical methods for assessing sample quality
like the effective sample size are not appropriate
for scalable Bayesian sampling algorithms, such
as stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics, that
are asymptotically biased. Instead, the gold standard is to use the kernel Stein Discrepancy (KSD),
which is itself not scalable given its quadratic cost
in the number of samples. The KSD and its faster
extensions also typically suffer from the curse-ofdimensionality and can require extensive tuning.
To address these limitations, we develop the polynomial Stein discrepancy (PSD) and an associated
goodness-of-fit test. While the new test is not fully
convergence-determining, we prove that it detects
differences in the first r moments for Gaussian targets. We empirically show that the test has higher
power than its competitors in several examples,
and at a lower computational cost. Finally, we
demonstrate that the PSD can assist practitioners
to select hyper-parameters of Bayesian sampling
algorithms more efficiently than competitors.

Currently, the most widely adopted Stein discrepancy is
the kernel Stein discrepancy (KSD, Gorham & Mackey,
2017; Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016), which
applies a so-called Stein operator (Stein, 1972) to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. The KSD has an analytically
tractable form and can perform well in tuning and goodnessof-fit tasks using the recommended inverse multiquadric
(IMQ) base kernel. However, the computational cost of
KSD is quadratic in the number of samples, n, from the
distribution Q, so it is infeasible to directly apply KSD in
applications where large numbers of MCMC iterations have
been used. To address this bottleneck, Liu et al. (2016)
introduced an early linear-time alternative. However, the
statistic suffers from poor statistical power compared to
its quadratic-time counterpart, meaning that the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is false is low.
Several approaches have been disseminated in the literature to tackle these problems and reduce the cost of using
Stein discrepancies. Notably, the finite set Stein discrepancy
(FSSD, Jitkrittum et al., 2017) and the random feature Stein
discrepancy (RFSD, Huggins & Mackey, 2018) have been
proposed as linear-time alternatives to KSD.

1. Introduction
Reliable assessment of posterior approximations was recently named one of three “grand challenges in Bayesian
computation” (Bhattacharya et al., 2024). Stein discrepancies (Gorham & Mackey, 2015) can assist with this by
providing ways to assess whether a distribution Q, known
via samples {x(i) }ni=1 ∼ Q, is a good approximation to a

The main idea behind FSSD is to use a finite set of test
locations to evaluate the Stein witness function, which can
be computed in linear-time. The FSSD test can effectively
capture the differences between P and Q, by optimizing the
test locations and kernel bandwidth. However, the test is
sensitive to the test locations and other tuning parameters, all
of which need to be optimized (Jitkrittum et al., 2017). The
test requires that the samples be split for this optimisation
and for evaluation. Additionally, the FSSD experiences a
degradation of power relative to the standard KSD in high
dimensions (Huggins & Mackey, 2018).

1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Australia 2 QUT
Centre for Data Science, Brisbane, Australia 3 School of
Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
Correspondence to:
Narayan Srinivasan <narayanseshadri.srinivasan@hdr.qut.edu.au>, Leah South
<l1.south@qut.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

