HGOT: Self-supervised Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network with Optimal
Transport

Yanbei Liu 1 Chongxu Wang 1 Zhitao Xiao 1 Lei Geng 1 Yanwei Pang 2 Xiao Wang 3

Abstract

model can achieve state-of-the-art performance
on various downstream tasks. In particular, in
the node classification task, HGOT achieves
an average of more than 6% improvement in
accuracy compared with state-of-the-art methods.

Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks
(HGNNs), have demonstrated excellent capabilities in processing heterogeneous information
networks. Self-supervised learning on heterogeneous graphs, especially contrastive
self-supervised strategy, shows great potential
when there are no labels. However, this approach
requires the use of carefully designed graph
augmentation strategies and the selection of
positive and negative samples. Determining
the exact level of similarity between sample
pairs is non-trivial. To solve this problem, we
propose a novel self-supervised Heterogeneous
graph neural network with Optimal Transport
(HGOT) method which is designed to facilitate
self-supervised learning for heterogeneous graphs
without graph augmentation strategies. Different
from traditional contrastive self-supervised
learning, HGOT employs the optimal transport
mechanism to relieve the laborious sampling
process of positive and negative samples. Specifically, we design an aggregating view (central
view) to integrate the semantic information
contained in the views represented by different
meta-paths (branch views). Then, we introduce
an optimal transport plan to identify the transport
relationship between the semantics contained
in the branch view and the central view. This
allows the optimal transport plan between graphs
to align with the representations, forcing the
encoder to learn node representations that are
more similar to the graph space and of higher
quality. Extensive experiments on four real-world
datasets demonstrate that our proposed HGOT

1. Introduction
Heterogeneous graphs are prevalent in numerous real-world
contexts, including academic networks (Wang et al. 2019),
biomedical networks (Bai et al. 2021), social networks (Cao
et al. 2021) and so on. These graphs serve to represent
diverse relationships among various types of nodes. In recent years, a range of heterogeneous graph neural networks
(HGNNs) has been developed to effectively capture the intricate structures and abundant semantic information inherent
in these graphs, demonstrating commendable performance
in the domain of heterogeneous graph representation learning (Wang et al. 2020, Dong et al. 2020). To date, HGNNs
have found extensive applications across a variety of fields
(Tian et al. 2022a, Bansal et al. 2019, Wang et al. 2021a).
The majority of current HGNNs rely on supervised or semisupervised learning methods (Sun et al. 2025, Ji et al. 2024),
necessitating the guidance of labeled data throughout the
model’s learning process. However, acquiring node labels
from heterogeneous graph data poses significant challenges
and incurs high costs in many applications (Hu et al. 2020).
Consequently, in the absence of labeled data, self-supervised
learning (SSL) emerges as a viable alternative, as it seeks to
derive valuable supervisory signals directly from the input
data.
In the realm of self-supervised learning applied to heterogeneous graphs, contrastive learning has emerged as a prominent technique. This approach involves carefully designed
graph augmentation strategies and the selection of positive
and negative samples. The objective is to enhance the similarity between positive samples while concurrently reducing the similarity between negative samples. Some works
(Zhao et al. 2024, Zhu et al. 2022) on heterogeneous graph
contrastive learning propose different graph augmentation
strategies to better capture the underlying high-order semantic structure information. In addition, many methods

1

School of Life Sciences, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
School of Electrical and Infomation Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 3 School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhitao Xiao <xiaozhitao@tiangong.edu>, Xiao Wang < xiao wang@buaa.edu >.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

