Fundamental limits of learning in sequence multi-index models and deep
attention networks: high-dimensional asymptotics and sharp thresholds

Emanuele Troiani 1 Hugo Cui 2 Yatin Dandi 1 3 Florent Krzakala 3 Lenka Zdeborová 1

Abstract

thus constitute a function class able to represent intricate
dependencies between the tokens of sequential covariates.
In spite of their ubiquity, the study of such models from a
theoretical viewpoint is still in its infancy.

In this manuscript, we study the learning of deep
attention neural networks, defined as the composition of multiple self-attention layers, with tied and
low-rank weights. We first establish a mapping of
such models to sequence multi-index models, a
generalization of the widely studied multi-index
model to sequential covariates, for which we establish a number of general results. In the context
of Bayes-optimal learning, in the limit of large
dimension D and proportionally large number of
samples N , we derive a sharp asymptotic characterization of the optimal performance as well as
the performance of the best-known polynomialtime algorithm for this setting –namely approximate message-passing–, and characterize sharp
thresholds on the minimal sample complexity required for better-than-random prediction performance. Our analysis uncovers, in particular, how
the different layers are learned sequentially. Finally, we discuss how this sequential learning can
also be observed in a realistic setup.

This situation stands in contrast with the wealth of results
on multi-index models, central to many theoretical works
e.g. (Arous et al., 2021; Abbe et al., 2022; Veiga et al., 2022;
Ba et al., 2022; Arnaboldi et al., 2023; Collins-Woodfin
et al., 2024; Damian et al., 2024a; Bietti et al., 2023; Moniri
et al., 2024; Berthier et al., 2024). Multi-index models
define functions based on low-dimensional subspaces of
covariates and are popular exemplars among theoreticians.
However, shallow architectures like multi-index models are
structurally simpler than attention models. Specifically, they
(a) lack the hierarchical structure from multiple attention
layers and (b) act on less structured, non-sequential covariates. These distinctions make it unclear whether results
from multi-index models apply to multilayer attention architectures. Here, we show these models share a deep formal
connection, enabling a transfer of insights and analytical
approaches.
Namely, our first motivation is to extend the theoretical
framework of multi-index models to sequence models. We
consider the class of sequence multi-index (SMI) functions
introduced by (Cui et al., 2024a; Cui, 2025), and defined
over length M sequences of D-dimensional tokens x ∈
RD×M of the form


Wx
SMI
.
(1)
yW
(x) = g √
D

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a shift in paradigm in the
automated learning from sequential data, such as language
(Brown et al., 2020; Kenton & Toutanova, 2019). The
backbone of many of these technological advances arguably
lies in the use of transformer architectures (Vaswani
et al., 2017) – a parametrization allowing the model to
dynamically focus on relevant portions of the input, and
extricate increasingly complex correlations between tokens
through the successive application of attention layers. They

where W ∈ RP ×D is a learnable projection matrix, and
g : RP ×M → RK is a (possibly multi-dimensional) link
function. The K−dimensional output could represent
–to give an example– the predicted class probabilities in
a sentiment classification task. As we shall see, SMI
functions prove very versatile generalizations of multi-index
models (M = 1) to sequence data of length M > 1, that
can be studied using related ideas and theoretical tools.

1
Statistical Physics Of Computation Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 2 Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, Harvard University 3 Information
Learning and Physics Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL). Correspondence to: Emanuele Troiani
<emanuele.troiani@epfl.ch, lenka.zdeborova@epfl.ch>.

Our second motivation is to deploy the formalism developed for SMI models to study complex neural architectures.
Remarkably, the SMI class encompasses a range of models – with a particularly noteworthy example being deep

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

