Geometric Resampling in Nearly Linear Time for Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader
with Best-of-Both-Worlds Guarantee in Bandit Problems
Botao Chen * 1 Jongyeong Lee * 2 Junya Honda 1 3

Abstract

environment and the player can only observe the incurred
loss ℓt,It from the chosen arm. The player’s objective is
to minimize his/her cumulative losses over all rounds. The
performance of the player is measured by the pseudo-regret,
which describes the gap between the cumulative loss of the
player and of the optimal arm fixed in hindsight.

This paper studies the complexity and optimality of Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader (FTPL) policy in the K-armed bandit problems. FTPL is
a promising policy that achieves the Best-ofBoth-Worlds (BOBW) guarantee without solving an optimization problem unlike Follow-theRegularized-Leader (FTRL). However, FTPL
needs a procedure called geometric resampling
to

estimate the loss, which needs O K 2 per-round
average complexity, usually worse than that of
FTRL. To address this issue, we propose a novel
technique, which we call Conditional Geometric Resampling (CGR), for unbiased loss estimation applicable to general perturbation distributions. CGR reduces the average complexity to
O(K log K) without sacrificing the regret bounds.
We also propose a biased version of CGR that can
control the worst-case complexity while keeping
the BOBW guarantee for a certain perturbation
distribution. We confirm through experiments that
CGR does not only significantly improve the average and worst-case runtime but also achieve better
regret thanks to the stable loss estimation.

Stochastic setting (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Auer et al., 2002a)
and adversarial setting (Auer et al., 2002b; Audibert &
Bubeck, 2009) are two fundamental formulations of the
environment to determine loss vectors. In the stochastic
setting, the losses ℓt,i from arm i are i.i.d. from an unknown
but fixed distribution over [0, 1] with expectation µi . The
suboptimality gap is expressed by ∆i = µi − µi∗ for the
optimal arm i∗ ∈ arg mini∈[K] µi . The optimal (problemdependent)
regret bound given these gaps is known to be
P
log T
O(
i:∆i >0
∆i ) (Lai & Robbins, 1985), which can be
achieved by several policies such as UCB (Auer et al.,
2002a; Cappé et al., 2013) and Thompson sampling (Kaufmann et al., 2012; Agrawal & Goyal, 2013; Riou & Honda,
2020), some of which further improve the regret bound by
incorporating the dependence on the loss distribution itself.
In the adversarial setting, the loss vectors ℓt are not assumed
to follow any specific distribution, and the environment
may choose them based on the history of the
√ decisions.
For this setting, the optimal regret bound O( KT ) (Auer
et al., 2002b) is achieved by some policies, including a
family of policies called the Follow-the-Regularized-Leader
(FTRL) with appropriate regularization functions (Audibert
& Bubeck, 2009; Zimmert & Lattimore, 2019).

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a sequential decisionmaking problem under uncertainty, which describes a model
of a gambler playing slot machines. It has been widely
applied in practical scenarios, such as online advertising,
clinical trials, recommendation systems. In this problem,
the player chooses an arm It out of K arms in each round
t ∈ [T ] = {1, 2, . . . , T } for time horizon T . The loss vector
⊤
K
ℓt = (ℓt,1 , ℓt,2 , . . . , ℓt,K ) ∈ [0, 1] is determined by the

In reality, the environment to determine the loss is often
unknown, and thus it becomes necessary to develop a policy that is optimal in both stochastic and adversarial settings at the same time. The Tsallis-INF policy (Zimmert &
Seldin, 2021) is an FTRL-based policy√that can overcome
this difficulty. Tsallis-INF
P achieves TO( KT ) regret in the
adversarial setting and i̸=i∗ O( log
∆i ) regret in the stochastic setting, which is called a Best-of-Both-Worlds (BOBW,
Bubeck & Slivkins, 2012) guarantee. It has also been shown
that FTRL framework can achieve BOBW for the problems
beyond the classic bandit problems, such as partial monitoring (Tsuchiya et al., 2023b;c) and combinatorial-semi
bandits (Zimmert et al., 2019; Ito, 2021).

*
Equal contribution 1 Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan 2 Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea 3 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Botao Chen <chen.botao.63r@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp>,
Jongyeong Lee <jongyeong@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

