Adversarial Robust Generalization of Graph Neural Networks

Chang Cao 1 Han Li 1 2 Yulong Wang 1 2 Rui Wu 3 Hong Chen 1 2

Abstract

susceptibility of GNNs to adversarial attacks in node classification tasks. These attacks are deliberately designed by
the attackers to mislead the graph model’s prediction, which
significantly deteriorates the performance and applicability of GNNs in security-related domains (Zhang & Zitnik,
2020; Finkelshtein et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023). Therefore,
it is crucial to enhance the adversarial robustness of GNNs
for node classification tasks.

While Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
shown outstanding performance in node classification tasks, they are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, which are imperceptible changes to input samples. Adversarial training, as a widely
used tool to enhance the adversarial robustness of
GNNs, has presented remarkable effectiveness in
node classification tasks. However, the generalization properties for explaining their behaviors
remain not well understood from the theoretical
viewpoint. To fill this gap, we develop a high
probability generalization bound of general GNNs
in adversarial learning through covering number
analysis. We estimate the covering number of the
GNN model class based on the entire perturbed
feature matrix by constructing a cover for the perturbation set. Our results are generally applicable
to a series of GNNs. We demonstrate their applicability by investigating the generalization performance of several popular GNN models under
adversarial attacks, which reveal the architecturerelated factors influencing the generalization gap.
Our experimental results on benchmark datasets
provide evidence that supports the established theoretical findings.

One principal approach to learning robust models is adversarial training, which has proven to be a powerful defense
against adversarial attacks (Bai et al., 2021). Its core mechanism is a min-max optimization problem by incorporating
the adversarial samples that maximize the classification
error into the training to minimize the classification error
(Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2019). The empirical
advancements of adversarial training in the literature (Wang
et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2023) prompt numerous studies to
develop relevant theoretical analysis. However, generalization analysis in adversarial learning presents more obstacles
as compared to its non-adversarial counterpart, i.e., the nonsmoothness of adversarial loss caused by the maximization
operation in the min-max process (Bai et al., 2021). Previous works mitigate the negative impact of non-smoothness
via restricted assumptions about losses or model functions
(Awasthi et al., 2020; Gao & Wang, 2021; Xiao et al., 2022),
or controlling the adversarial perturbation set (Mustafa et al.,
2022). Since the aforementioned works are confined to nongraph data, this raises a question of whether adversarial
generalization can be extended to graph learning.

1. Introduction

Unlike non-graph data, each node in GNNs aggregates
messages from its neighbor nodes through the messagepassing mechanism. This causes the accessibility of predictors to unlabeled samples in the test set during training
(Oono & Suzuki, 2020), which results in the invalidation
of previous analytical methods based on inductive learning
(Günnemann, 2022; Mustafa et al., 2022). The information interaction of nodes also leads to the correlation of
perturbations between different nodes, making the adversarial perturbation set of graph data different from that of
non-graph data.

As powerful architectures for processing complex graphstructured data, GNNs have shown excellent performance in
certain security scenarios (Yan et al., 2023), such as malware
detection (Liu et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024), intrusion detection (Zhou et al., 2021; Tran & Park, 2024), and blockchain
(Cai et al., 2023; Seo et al., 2024). Despite their tremendous success, Zügner et al. (2018) first demonstrate the
1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan 430070, China 2 Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, China
3
Horizon Robotics, Haidian District, BeiJing 100190, China. Correspondence to: Han Li <lihan125@mail.hzau.edu.cn>.

To overcome these difficulties, we explore the adversarial
generalization of GNNs in transductive settings by assessing
the complexity of the adversarial loss function class through

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

