Step-DAD: Semi-Amortized Policy-Based Bayesian Experimental Design

Marcel Hedman * 1 Desi R. Ivanova * 1 Cong Guan 1 Tom Rainforth 1

Abstract

signs. The goal is then to choose designs that are maximally
informative about θ. Namely, we maximize the Expected
Information Gain (EIG) (Lindley, 1956; 1972), which measures the expected reduction in our uncertainty about θ from
running an experiment with a given design.

We develop a semi-amortized, policy-based, approach to Bayesian experimental design (BED)
called Stepwise Deep Adaptive Design (StepDAD). Like existing, fully amortized, policybased BED approaches, Step-DAD trains a design
policy upfront before the experiment. However,
rather than keeping this policy fixed, Step-DAD
periodically updates it as data is gathered, refining it to the particular experimental instance. This
test-time adaptation improves both the flexibility
and the robustness of the design strategy compared with existing approaches. Empirically, StepDAD consistently demonstrates superior decisionmaking and robustness compared with current
state-of-the-art BED methods.

The traditional adaptive BED approach, illustrated in Fig 1a,
involves iterating between making design decisions by optimizing the EIG of the next experiment step, and updating the underlying model through Bayesian updates that
condition on the data obtained so far. Unfortunately, this
approach leads to sub-optimal design decisions, as it is a
greedy, myopic, strategy that fails to consider future experiment steps (Foster, 2021; Huan and Marzouk, 2016).
Furthermore, it requires substantial computation to be undertaken at each experiment iteration, making it impractical
for real-time applications (Rainforth et al., 2024).
Foster et al. (2021) showed that this traditional framework
can be significantly improved upon by taking a policy-based
approach (PB-BED). As shown in Fig 1b, their Deep Adaptive Design (DAD) framework, and its extensions (Blau
et al., 2022; Ivanova et al., 2021; Lim et al., 2022), are
based on learning a design policy network that maps from
experimental histories to new designs. This policy is trained
before the experiment, then deployed to make design decisions automatically at test time. This provides a fully
amortized approach that eliminates the need for significant
computation during the experiment itself, thereby enabling
real-time, adaptive, and non-myopic design strategies that
represent the current state-of-the-art in adaptive BED.

1. Introduction
Adaptive experimentation plays a crucial role in science
and engineering: it enables targeted and efficient data acquisition by sequentially integrating information gathered
from past experiment iterations into subsequent design decisions (Atkinson et al., 2007; MacKay, 1992; Myung et al.,
2013). For example, consider an online survey that aims to
infer individual preferences through personalized questions.
By strategically tailoring future questions based on insights
from past responses, the survey can rapidly hone in on relevant questions for each specific individual, enabling precise
preference inference with fewer, more targeted questions.

In principle, these fully amortized approaches can learn theoretically optimal design strategies (in terms of total EIG).
In practice, learning a policy that remains optimal for all
possible experiment realizations is rarely realistic. In particular, the dimensionality of experimental history expands
as the experiment progresses, making it increasingly difficult to account for all possible eventualities through upfront
training alone. Moreover, deficiencies in our model can
mean that data observed in practice can be highly distinct
from the simulated data used to train the policy.

Bayesian experimental design (BED) offers a principled framework for solving such optimal design problems (Chaloner and Verdinelli, 1995; Rainforth et al., 2024;
Ryan et al., 2016). In BED, the quantity of interest (e.g.
individual preferences), is represented as an unknown parameter θ and modelled probabilistically through a joint
generative model on θ and experiment outcomes given de*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Marcel Hedman <marcel.hedman@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Desi R. Ivanova
<desi.ivanova@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

To address these limitations, and allow utilisation of any
available computation during the experiment, we introduce
a hybrid, semi-amortized, PB-BED approach, called Stepwise Deep Adaptive Design (Step-DAD). As illustrated in

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

