Predicting mutational effects on protein binding from folding energy

Arthur Deng 1 Karsten Householder 1 Fang Wu 1 K. Christopher Garcia 1 Brian Trippe 1

Abstract

others, accurate prediction of binding energies would support in silico design of proteins with requisite specificity.
Given two interacting proteins and amino acid substitutions,
the goal is to predict the differences in the change in Gibbs
free energy upon binding (the “∆∆G” or “ddG”).

Accurate estimation of mutational effects on
protein-protein binding energies is an open problem with applications in structural biology and
therapeutic design. Several deep learning predictors for this task have been proposed, but, presumably due to the scarcity of binding data, these
methods underperform computationally expensive estimates based on empirical force fields. In
response, we propose a transfer-learning approach
that leverages advances in protein sequence modeling and folding stability prediction for this task.
The key idea is to parameterize the binding energy
as the difference between the folding energy of
the protein complex and the sum of the folding
energies of its binding partners. We show that using a pre-trained inverse-folding model as a proxy
for folding energy provides strong zero-shot performance, and can be fine-tuned with (1) copious
folding energy measurements and (2) more limited binding energy measurements. The resulting
predictor, S TA B- DD G, is the first deep learning
predictor to match the accuracy of the state-ofthe-art empirical force-field method FoldX, while
offering an over 1,000x speed-up.1

Deep-learning (DL) methods have so far underperformed
more classical methods based on empirical force fields in
binding energy prediction. Notably, Bushuiev et al. (2024)
find that recent results suggesting the superiority of DL
predictors are confounded by dataset contamination — extant DL predictors generalize poorly when evaluated on
interfaces not represented in the training set, and a Rosettabased predictor Flex ddG provides state-of-the-art performance (Barlow et al., 2018; Bushuiev et al., 2024). Presumably, this underperformance of DL methods owes in part
to the scarcity of training data, with experimental ∆∆G
measurements for fewer than 350 distinct interfaces in the
largest public curated dataset (Jankauskaitė et al., 2019).
In this work, we introduce a transfer learning approach that
helps address this data limitation by reducing binding energy prediction to predicting folding energies. Our approach
is based on two observations. First, as a consequence of
the state function property of free energy, the binding energy between two proteins A and B, ∆Gbind (A:B), can be
computed as
∆Gbind (A:B)=∆Gfold (A:B)−∆Gfold (A)−∆Gfold (B),
(1)
where ∆Gfold denotes the free energy difference between
folded and unfolded states of a protein monomer or complex (Figure 1a). This observation will allow us to use both
folding stability and binding energy datasets in a supervised
learning approach.

1. Introduction
Computation of mutational effects on binding energies is
of central importance in structural biology and protein engineering. For example, three recent studies (Householder
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a; Johansen et al., 2024) designed proteins that bind to target proteins found on cancer
cells, but the therapeutic promise of these molecules depends on their specificity; “off-target” binding to proteins
differing at only one or two positions could induce toxicity
to non-cancer cells (see Appendix A). In this setting and

The second observation is that protein sequences and structure data in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) can inform an initial predictor of protein folding energies. This observation
builds on the strong correlation between folding energies
and likelihoods predicted by probabilistic models of protein
sequences. Such correlations were first observed for Potts
models (Lapedes et al., 2012; Hopf et al., 2017), and then
later neural network models of sequence (Riesselman et al.,
2018; Rives et al., 2021), as well as backbone structure conditional sequence models (Hsu et al., 2022a; Notin et al.,
2023). We can leverage these correlations by using a pre-

1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Arthur Deng <lxdeng@stanford.edu>, Brian Trippe <btrippe@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code:
https://github.com/LDeng0205/
StaB-ddG

1

