Feature Shift Localization Network
Mı́riam Barrabés * 1 2 Daniel Mas Montserrat * 1 Kapal Dev 2 Alexander G. Ioannidis 1 3

Abstract

biomedical, and life sciences datasets, where different samples are generated at different organizations (e.g., hospitals,
labs), with differing lab technologies, hardware, and data
processing producing unique structural biases. In clinical genomics, feature shifts can arise from heterogeneous data acquisition protocols, which may involve differences in genotyping arrays or phenotype curation procedures (MorenoGrau et al., 2024). Similar shifts are found in social sciences,
streaming, and e-business applications, where combining
tabular and structured data from multiple sources, regions,
and times without proper homogenization steps can lead
to mismatching and biased features due to incorrect data
collection procedures, human entry errors, faulty standardization, or erroneous data processing (Barchard & Pace,
2011; Dai et al., 2015). Similarly, multi-sensor applications in the manufacturing industry, medicinal monitoring,
finance analysis, and defense can suffer feature shifts due
to faulty sensors and measuring devices (Qian et al., 2022;
Barrabés et al., 2023). While numerous techniques enable
pre-processing data sources to reduce feature shifts, proper
data homogenization can be a challenging task requiring
data-dependent and domain-specific techniques (Lim et al.,
2018). When data homogenization fails, unattended feature
shifts can negatively impact downstream applications, leading to erroneous scientific results or biased machine learning
models, which makes feature shift localization critical in
many data-driven domains.

Feature shifts between data sources are present in
many applications involving healthcare, biomedical, socioeconomic, financial, survey, and multisensor data, among others, where unharmonized
heterogeneous data sources, noisy data measurements, or inconsistent processing and standardization pipelines can lead to erroneous features.
Localizing shifted features is important to address the underlying cause of the shift and correct or filter the data to avoid degrading downstream analysis. While many techniques can
detect distribution shifts, localizing the features
originating them is still challenging, with current solutions being either inaccurate or not scalable to large and high-dimensional datasets. In
this work, we introduce the Feature Shift Localization Network (FSL-Net), a neural network
that can localize feature shifts in large and highdimensional datasets in a fast and accurate manner. The network, trained with a large number
of datasets, learns to extract the statistical properties of the datasets and can localize feature shifts
from previously unseen datasets and shifts without the need for re-training. The code and readyto-use trained model are available at https:
//github.com/AI-sandbox/FSL-Net.

Feature shift localization is the task of enumerating which
features of multi-dimensional datasets are originating the
distribution shift between two or more data sources. The
localization step is necessary to identify and correct the error source, whether by data removal or correction in tabular
data-based applications or through physical intervention in
multi-sensory scenario applications. Extensive literature
on anomaly detection and distribution shift detection (Yu
et al., 2018; Pan et al., 2020) has led to numerous tools for
automated shift detection that are common in data-centric
AI (DCAI) and machine learning systems (MLSys) technologies, providing functionalities for data quality control,
homogenization, and monitoring (Ginart et al., 2022; Piano
et al., 2022; Zha et al., 2023; Subasri et al., 2023). While
many methods focus on asserting whether two datasets follow the same distribution, most do not localize the exact
features causing the shift, and recent promising shift localization techniques still fail to scale to large and high-

1. Introduction
Feature distribution shifts between data sources are common
in many real-world applications using multi-dimensional
data composed of a set of “corrupted” features (i.e., dimensions) with mismatching statistical qualities between
sources. These feature shifts are prevalent in healthcare,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Biomedical Data Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, Munster Technological University, Cork T12
P928, Ireland 3 Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95060 USA. Correspondence to: Alexander G. Ioannidis <ioannidis@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

