Continuous Bayesian Model Selection for
Multivariate Causal Discovery

Anish Dhir * 1 Ruby Sedgwick * 1 2 Avinash Kori 1 Ben Glocker 1 Mark van der Wilk 3

Abstract

Biology (Sachs et al., 2005) to Medicine (Feuerriegel et al.,
2024) to Economics (Hicks et al., 1980). There are two main
approaches for learning the ground truth causal structure
from data. The first approach assumes a restricted model
class for the data generating process (Peters et al., 2017,
Ch. 4), but its guarantees often fail when these assumptions
do not hold. The second approach requires interventional
data for all variables, which can be costly, ethically challenging, or even impossible (Li et al., 2019). Consequently,
learning a unique causal structure often relies on impractical
assumptions, limiting its real-world applicability.

Current causal discovery approaches require restrictive model assumptions in the absence of interventional data to ensure structure identifiability.
These assumptions often do not hold in real-world
applications leading to a loss of guarantees and
poor performance in practice. Recent work has
shown that, in the bivariate case, Bayesian model
selection can greatly improve performance by exchanging restrictive modelling for more flexible
assumptions, at the cost of a small probability
of making an error. Our work shows that this
approach is useful in the important multivariate
case as well. We propose a scalable algorithm
leveraging a continuous relaxation of the discrete
model selection problem. Specifically, we employ
the Causal Gaussian Process Conditional Density Estimator (CGP-CDE) as a Bayesian nonparametric model, using its hyperparameters to
construct an adjacency matrix. This matrix is
then optimised using the marginal likelihood and
an acyclicity regulariser, giving the maximum a
posteriori causal graph. We demonstrate the competitiveness of our approach, showing it is advantageous to perform multivariate causal discovery
without infeasible assumptions using Bayesian
model selection.

Recent work has shown that, in the absence of interventional
data and in the bivariate case, Bayesian model selection can
more accurately infer the unique causal structure of a system
(Dhir et al., 2024). Unlike previous methods, including other
Bayesian methods1 , which impose constraints on the function class, this framework allows the use of more flexible
model classes. This comes at a cost of loosened identifiability guarantees but with the ability to posit more realistic
assumptions. However, Dhir et al. (2024) only study the bivariate case, while most applications require understanding
causal relationships between multiple variables. It is thus an
open question whether the advantages of this method hold
in the multivariate case. Furthermore, the approach in Dhir
et al. (2024) requires computing and comparing the posteriors of all possible causal graphs. As the number of graphs
grows super-exponentially with the number of variables,
this becomes computationally intractable for scalability.
A potential solution lies in continuous optimisation causal
discovery approaches (Zheng et al., 2018; Nazaret et al.,
2024). These approaches interpret causal discovery as a
single continuous optimisation problem that is amenable
to gradient based methods. The emphasis of this line of
work has been either on scaling to a larger number of variables or on loosening model assumptions. Our contribution
tackles the latter. We argue that the potential advantages
of Bayesian methods enable them to outperform their nonBayesian counterparts.

1. Introduction
In many systems, such as protein signalling networks, variables causally relate to each other, since changing a variable
only modifies certain variables (Sachs et al., 2005). Uncovering these unique underlying causal structures from data can
allow us to gain new insights in a wide range of fields, from
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK 2 Xyme, Oxford, UK 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Anish Dhir <anish.dhir13@imperial.ac.uk>.

We investigate whether and how well Bayesian model se1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

These methods are usually concerned with inferring a distribution instead of a single causal structure.

1

