C OM R EC GC: Global Graph Counterfactual Explainer
through Common Recourse

Grégoire Fournier 1 Sourav Medya 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Graph Neural Networks (G NNs) have been widely used for
graph classification across various domains such as electrical design (Mirhoseini et al., 2020), physical simulation
(Bhattoo et al., 2022), or drug discovery (Jiang et al., 2020;
Cao et al., 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017). Despite their popularity and their good performance, the predictions of G NNs
are not yet fully understood, and explaining G NN’s behavior has become a central focus of recent research efforts
(Armgaan et al., 2024; Kosan et al., 2024; Kakkad et al.,
2023; Yuan et al., 2023). Our work focuses on the concept
of Counterfactual Explanation (CE) in the context of binary classification (e.g., ‘reject’ vs. ‘accept’ classes). This
involves designing the minimal changes required in each
‘reject’, or undesirable graph, to be able to change to an
‘accept’ graph, or counterfactual graph, that is often similar
in structure. A global CE, in particular, aims to identify a
small set of ‘accept’ graphs relevant to all ‘reject’ graphs,
thereby providing insights into the critical decision regions
recognized by the base G NN model. This global explanation
approach highlights the model-level behavior as opposed to
an instance level or local one (Verma et al., 2024).

Graph neural networks (G NNs) have been widely
used in various domains such as social networks,
molecular biology, or recommendation systems.
Concurrently, different explanations methods of
G NNs have arisen to complement its black-box
nature. Explanations of the G NNs’ predictions
can be categorized into two types—factual and
counterfactual. Given a G NN trained on binary
classification into “accept” and “reject” classes, a
global counterfactual explanation consists in generating a small set of “accept” graphs relevant to
all of the input “reject” graphs. The transformation of a “reject” graph into an “accept” graph is
called a recourse. A common recourse explanation is a small set of recourse, from which every
“reject” graph can be turned into an “accept” graph.
Although local counterfactual explanations have
been studied extensively, the problem of finding
common recourse for global counterfactual explanation remains unexplored, particularly for G NNs.
In this paper, we formalize the common recourse
explanation problem, and design an effective algorithm, C OM R EC GC, to solve it. We benchmark
our algorithm against strong baselines on four different real-world graphs datasets and demonstrate
the superior performance of C OM R EC GC against
the competitors. We also compare the common
recourse explanations to the graph counterfactual
explanation, showing that common recourse explanations are either comparable or superior, making them worth considering for applications such
as drug discovery or computational biology.

Another important aspect of CE explanation is the implicit
provision of recourse—graph transformations that convert
a ‘reject’ graph into an ‘accept’ graph (Verma et al., 2022;
Karimi et al.). This is particularly valuable in applications
where it is possible to take action to reverse a decision,
such as in loan applications or in modifying a compound to
change physical or chemical properties of molecules (e.g.,
mutagenicity (Riesen & Bunke, 2008)).
The instance-specific or local counterfactual explanations
are insightful and capable of providing recourse for each
instance (Abrate & Bonchi, 2021; Bajaj et al., 2021; Lucic
et al., 2022; Tanyel et al., 2023; Chhablani et al., 2024).
However, the explanations generated are generally large in
number and not straightforward to interpret at the model
level. Global counterfactual explainers have been proposed
to address these issues (Huang et al., 2023; Ley et al., 2023).
We present additional related work in Appendix A. In (Huang
et al., 2023), the authors build global counterfactuals for
G NNs. However, a major limitation of their approach is
its generalizability when considering recourse. A single

1
Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science,
University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, USA.
Correspondence to: Grégoire Fournier <gfourn2@uic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

