Boosting Virtual Agent Learning and Reasoning: A Step-Wise,
Multi-Dimensional, and Generalist Reward Model with Benchmark

Bingchen Miao 1 2 * Yang Wu 2 * Minghe Gao 1 * Qifan Yu 1 Wendong Bu 1 2 Wenqiao Zhang 1 Yunfei Li 2
Siliang Tang 1 Tat-Seng Chua 3 Juncheng Li 1 B

Abstract

(MLLMs (Li et al., 2023a;b; Pan et al., 2025; 2024b)) process multimodal inputs (UI elements (Zhang et al., 2024a),
text (Shen et al., 2023), visuals (Yan et al., 2023)) to navigate
digital environments, performing tasks and generating outputs that manipulate interfaces or provide responses. The
training of GVAs relies on outcome-based rewards from
human-annotated trajectories, where task completion serves
as the primary supervision signal (He et al., 2024).

The development of Generalist Virtual Agents
(GVAs) has shown significant promise in autonomous task execution. However, current
training paradigms face critical limitations, including reliance on outcome supervision and
labor-intensive human annotations. To address
these challenges, we propose Similar, a stepwise multi-dimensional generalist reward model,
which offers fine-grained signals for agent training and can choose better actions for inferencetime scaling. Specifically, we begin by systematically defining five dimensions for evaluating agent
actions. Building on this framework, we design an
MCTS-P algorithm to automatically collect and
annotate step-wise, five-dimensional agent execution data. Using this data, we train Similar
with our crafted Triple-M strategy. Furthermore,
we introduce the first benchmark in the virtual
agent domain for step-wise, multi-dimensional
reward model training and evaluation, named
SRM. This benchmark consists of two components: SRMTrain, which serves as the training
set for Similar, and SRMEval, a manually selected test set for evaluating the reward model.
Experimental results demonstrate that Similar,
through its step-wise, multi-dimensional assessment and synergistic gain, provides GVAs with
effective intermediate signals during both training
and inference-time scaling. The code is available
in https://github.com/antgroup/Similar.

However, this paradigm with the outcome reward for GVAs
has significant limitations. 1) Lack of multi-dimensional
fine-grained process supervision: Existing methods typically focus on global task success or the final state of the
task, overlooking intermediate steps in execution (Yu et al.,
2024a). This oversight makes it impossible to pinpoint
failures in unsuccessful trajectories or identify errors in
successful ones, resulting in inefficient learning and reasoning processes (Uesato et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023;
Gao et al., 2025). In contrast, a Process Reward Model
(PRM) offers a better alternative by providing fine-grained
supervision signals to guide agent behavior. 2) Reliance
on human-annotated trajectories with reward signals:
Domain experts need to meticulously annotate trajectories
consisting of dozens of steps with accurate outcome-based
rewards to train GVAs (He et al., 2024). Furthermore, obtaining step-wise fine-grained process-based rewards makes
the process labor-intensive, time-consuming, and nearly infeasible at scale (Deng et al., 2023; Burns et al., 2022). 3)
Difficulty in scaling inference-time. Recent outstanding
work has demonstrated that inference-time scaling can significantly enhance agent performance (DeepSeek-AI et al.,
2025; Wu et al., 2024b). However, relying on result-based
training with extensive human annotation limits the ability to handle complex tasks by selecting the best action
or step-by-step assessments. (Snell et al., 2024; Zelikman
et al., 2022). Therefore, our focus has shifted to breaking result-oriented manual annotation-dependent training
methods through step-wise automatic reward model.

1. Introduction
Generalist Virtual Agents (GVAs (Gao et al., 2024; Bu et al.,
2025)) powered by Multimodal Large Language Models
*
Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China 3 National University of Singapore, Kent Ridge, Singapore. Correspondence to: Juncheng Li
<junchengli@zju.edu.cn>.
2

To address these challenges, we propose Similar, a stepwise multi-dimensional generalist reward model. It provides fine-grained supervision signals for agent training and
inference-time scaling, enabling automated, multi-faceted
assessment without relying on labor-intensive human an-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

