PipeOffload: Improving Scalability of Pipeline Parallelism
with Memory Optimization

Xinyi Wan * 1 2 Penghui Qi * 1 2 Guangxing Huang 1 Min Lin 1 Jialin Li 2

Abstract

remains constrained by the activation memory. Increasing
the number of PP stages reduces layers per device but necessitates more in-flight microbatches to minimize pipeline
bubbles. This trade-off leaves overall activation memory
demands unchanged.

Pipeline parallelism (PP) is widely used for training large language models (LLMs), yet its scalability is often constrained by high activation memory consumption as the number of in-flight microbatches grows with the degree of PP. In this paper,
we focus on addressing this challenge by leveraging the under-explored memory offload strategy
in PP. With empirical study, we discover that in
the majority of standard configurations, at least
half, and potentially all, of the activations can be
offloaded with negligible overhead. In the cases
where full overload is not possible, we introduce
a novel selective offload strategy that decreases
peak activation memory in a better-than-linear
manner. Furthermore, we integrate memory offload with other techniques to jointly consider
overall throughput and memory limitation. Our
experiments proves that the per-device activation
memory effectively reduces with the total number
of stages, making PP a stronger alternative than
TP, offering up to a 19% acceleration with even
lower memory consumption. The implementation
is open-sourced at this url.

In this work, we address this memory limitation of PP by
offloading memory to the host. While memory offload is
widely adopted in data parallelism (DP) (Goyal et al., 2017;
Ren et al., 2021), its potential in PP remains largely unexplored. PP is particularly suited for memory offload because
the gap between the forward pass and the backward pass creates a natural window for offloading and reloading activation
memory without interfering with other computations. This
contrasts sharply with activation rematerialization (Chen
et al., 2016) which introduces significant recomputation
overhead. Memory offload, when properly scheduled and
overlapped with other computation, can be a free lunch.
Formally, for a single transformer layer, if we define To as
the round-trip time for its activation memory to be moved
from device to host (D2H) and then host to device (H2D),
Tc as the time for its total forward and backward compute,
then the ratio between them, denoted as k = To /Tc , is an
important indicator on the proportion of the activation memory that can be offloaded without introducing significant
efficiency drawbacks. Full activation memory offload is
possible if k ≤ 1, as the offload operations can be fully
overlapped by compute. Without considering the trivial layers which can be recomputed with negligible overhead (e.g.
Dropout, GeLU, LayerNorm), we can estimate the offload
cost for the rest of the layers and subsequently estimate k.
With sequence length (s), hidden size (h), PCI-E duplex
bandwidth (Bo ) and GPU compute bandwidth (Bc ), k is
computed as: (Narayanan et al., 2021; Korthikanti et al.,
2023)
To
10
Bc
k=
=
∗
(1)
Tc
3(6h + s) Bo

1. Introduction
As modern large transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017)
scale towards trillions of parameters, model parallelism becomes essential for distributing model parameters across
multiple devices. Compared to ZeRO (Rajbhandari et al.,
2020) and tensor parallelism (Shoeybi et al., 2019), pipeline
parallel (PP) (Huang et al., 2019; Harlap et al., 2018) has
a lower communication volume and a higher arithmetic intensity. However, while PP shards layers across devices
to reduce parameter memory requirements, its scalability
*

Equal contribution 1 Sea AI Lab 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Min Lin <linmin@sea.com>, Jialin Li
<lijl@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Note that the value of k decreases as model size or sequence
length increases. Figure 1 (left) demonstrates that the value
of k is surprisingly small under typical hidden dimension
and sequence size settings, indicating that a significant portion of activation memory can be offloaded. We observe
that k ≤ 1 when the hidden dimension exceeds 8k or the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

