BANDIT S PEC: Adaptive Speculative Decoding via Bandit Algorithms

Yunlong Hou *

†

1

† ‡

Fengzhuo Zhang * 1 Cunxiao Du * 2 Xuan Zhang * 3 Jiachun Pan 1 Tianyu Pang 2
Chao Du 2 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 Zhuoran Yang 4

Abstract

Step 1.
Prefix: Adaptive speculative _ _ _

Speculative decoding has emerged as a popular
method to accelerate the inference of Large Language Models (LLMs) while retaining their superior text generation performance. Previous methods either adopt a fixed speculative decoding configuration regardless of the prefix tokens, or train
draft models in an offline or online manner to
align them with the context. This paper proposes
a training-free online learning framework to adaptively choose the configuration of the hyperparameters for speculative decoding as text is being
generated. We first formulate this hyperparameter selection problem as a Multi-Armed Bandit
problem and provide a general speculative decoding framework BANDIT S PEC. Furthermore,
two bandit-based hyperparameter selection algorithms, UCBS PEC and EXP3S PEC, are designed
and analyzed in terms of a novel quantity, the
stopping time regret. We upper bound this regret under both stochastic and adversarial reward
settings. By deriving an information-theoretic
impossibility result, it is shown that the regret performance of UCBS PEC is optimal up to universal constants. Finally, extensive empirical experiments with LLaMA3 and Qwen2 demonstrate that
our algorithms are effective compared to existing
methods, and the throughput is close to the oracle
best hyperparameter in simulated real-life LLM
serving scenarios with diverse input prompts.

Step 3. Adaptive speculative
Prefix: decoding via a _ _ _

Draft decoding is a

Eagle-2

Verify decoding via a

Eagle-2

Suffix Tree

Accept
rate

Suffix Tree

…….

2/3

Step 2.
Prefix: Adaptive speculative decoding via _ _ _

Eagle-2
Suffix Tree

…….

Which model
should I choose？

PLD

Draft suffix tree way
Verify a
tree method
Accept
rate

Rest
1/3

Figure 1. Given the prefix tokens and the candidate hyperparameter configurations (e.g., models), which configuration should be
selected to decode the next tokens? We formulate this problem as
a bandit problem and propose a general framework BANDIT S PEC.

tokens (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023). This
autoregressive decoding approach involves multiple forward
passes, with each pass generating one token sequentially.
Consequently, this process can lead to significant latency
during inference.
Speculative decoding was introduced by Leviathan et al.
(2023); Chen et al. (2023) to accelerate the inference of
LLMs. The standard speculative decoding framework has
been extended with improved performance since then. A
thorough overview is presented at Appendix A. While the
existing speculative decoding methods are diverse, most
previous works adopt a fixed one across tasks, severely limiting their potential. For instance, when dealing with code
debugging or grammar-checking tasks, the generated tokens
are expected to resemble most of the input tokens. Therefore, retrieval-based speculative decoding techniques are
preferred (Hu et al., 2024). In contrast, for story generation
tasks, we expect the generated tokens to be more creative.
Thus, a draft model with a high-temperature parameter is
preferred over retrieval-based methods. The potential of
these speculative decoding methods can only be exploited
when the configuration of hyperparameters is well-aligned
to the given task. There are existing works that attempt to
achieve this goal, e.g., Zhou et al. (2024) distills the draft

1. Introduction
A Large Language Model (LLM) is trained to predict the
probability of the next token conditioned on all previous
Equal contribution † Work done as an associate member at Sea
AI Lab ‡ Project Lead 1 National University of Singapore 2 Sea AI
Lab 3 Singapore Management University 4 Yale University. Correspondence to: Cunxiao Du <cnsdunm@gmail.com>, Zhuoran
Yang <zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

