S AFETY A NALYST: Interpretable, Transparent, and Steerable Safety
Moderation for AI Behavior
Jing-Jing Li 1 2 Valentina Pyatkin 2 3 Max Kleiman-Weiner 3 Liwei Jiang 3 Nouha Dziri 2 Anne G. E. Collins 1
Jana Schaich Borg 4 Maarten Sap 5 2 Yejin Choi 6 Sydney Levine 2

Abstract

grated into people’s daily lives, it is critical to develop robust and reliable moderation systems that can identify and
prevent potentially harmful behaviors to ensure the safe usage of AI technology (Bengio et al., 2024). The safety of
AI behavior is particularly important as the Internet of Everything becomes reality (Han, 2024), especially with recent developments in AI agents that can interact with the
world through actions (Masterman et al., 2024). Dalrymple et al. (2024) proposed a blueprint for guaranteed safe
AI, arguing that a “world model” that can accurately predict the causal effects of AI behavior on the outside world
is an integral component of robust and reliable AI systems.
However, current moderation systems are not grounded in
an explicit understanding of such causal effects, since they
often rely on deep neural networks (such as LLM classifiers) to directly learn the relationship between input content and harmfulness (Markov et al., 2023; Inan et al., 2023;
Han et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024a; Bai et al., 2022; Lu
et al., 2023). The predictions made by such systems are
challenging to interpret, as their decision-making process
cannot be reliably explained.

The ideal AI safety moderation system would
be both structurally interpretable (so its decisions can be reliably explained) and steerable (to
align to safety standards and reflect a community’s values), which current systems fall short
on. To address this gap, we present S AFETY A NALYST, a novel AI safety moderation framework. Given an AI behavior, S AFETY A NALYST
uses chain-of-thought reasoning to analyze its
potential consequences by creating a structured
“harm-benefit tree,” which enumerates harmful
and beneficial actions and effects the AI behavior may lead to, along with likelihood, severity,
and immediacy labels that describe potential impacts on stakeholders. S AFETY A NALYST then
aggregates all effects into a harmfulness score
using 28 fully interpretable weight parameters,
which can be aligned to particular safety preferences. We applied this framework to develop
an open-source LLM prompt safety classification
system, distilled from 18.5 million harm-benefit
features generated by frontier LLMs on 19k
prompts. On comprehensive benchmarks, we
show that S AFETY A NALYST (average F1=0.81)
outperforms existing moderation systems (average F1<0.72) on prompt safety classification,
while offering the additional advantages of interpretability, transparency, and steerability.1

Moreover, the ideal AI safety moderation system should be
able to steer its judgments to specific safety goals shaped by
the application context, user demographics, and regulatory
requirements (Sorensen et al., 2024b; Kirk et al., 2024). For
example, an AI technology that is deployed to children may
require stricter moderation on violent or sexually explicit
content, while the same safety standards may not apply to
adult users. While LLM-based moderation systems can be
aligned to preference data through additional training, this
process could be significantly more efficient if focused on
a small subset of model parameters that explicitly quantify
different dimensions of safety preferences, which is only
possible if the system is interpretable and transparent.

1. Introduction
As artificial intelligence (AI) such as large language models (LLMs) and their applications become rapidly inte-

To
address
these
challenges,
we
introduce
S AFETY A NALYST: an AI safety moderation framework that produces an interpretable “harm-benefit tree”
using chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning and aggregates
the leaf nodes via a transparent process that can be
steered to accommodate different safety preferences. The
harm-benefit tree describes what actions may cause which
harmful or beneficial effects (along with their likelihood,

1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 3 University of Washington 4 Duke University
5
Carnegie Mellon University 6 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Jing-Jing Li <jl3676@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://jl3676.github.io/SafetyAnalyst/

1

