Perceptually Constrained Precipitation Nowcasting Model

Wenzhi Feng 1 2 3 Xutao Li 1 2 3 Zhe Wu 2 Kenghong Lin 1 3 Demin Yu 1 3 Yunming Ye 1 2 3 Yaowei Wang 1 2

Abstract
Earthfarseer
Earthfarseer

Most current precipitation nowcasting methods
aim to capture the underlying spatiotemporal dynamics of precipitation systems by minimizing
the mean square error (MSE). However, these
methods often neglect effective constraints on the
data distribution, leading to unsatisfactory prediction accuracy and image quality, especially
for long forecast sequences. To address this limitation, we propose a precipitation nowcasting
model incorporating perceptual constraints. This
model reformulates precipitation nowcasting as
a posterior MSE problem under such constraints.
Specifically, we first obtain the posteriori mean sequences of precipitation forecasts using a precipitation estimator. Subsequently, we construct the
transmission between distributions using rectified
flow. To enhance the focus on distant frames, we
design a frame sampling strategy that gradually
increases the corresponding weights. We theoretically demonstrate the reliability of our solution,
and experimental results on two publicly available radar datasets demonstrate that our model is
effective and outperforms current state-of-the-art
models.

Earthformer
Earthformer

STRPM

MAU

ConvLSTM
MAU
SimVP

STRPM

CSI

LPIPS

SimVP

DiffCast

ConvLSTM

DiffCast
PercpCast
PercpCast

Low MSE(0.65)
High LPIPS(0.30)

INPUT

High MSE(0.96)
Low LPIPS(0.23)

MSE

Figure 1. Illustration of the accuracy-perception tradeoff in precipitation prediction. Historical data (center) are input into two
state-of-the-art algorithms for forecasting precipitation. The scatter plot demonstrates the performance of current state-of-the-art
methods in terms of the accuracy-perception tradeoff, with CSI as
the primary metric for precipitation prediction.

Precipitation nowcasting aims to predict rainfall within the
next six hours, characterized by high spatiotemporal resolution and uncertainty about the future. Most of the current
precipitation prediction methods are dedicated to improving the accuracy where the forecast image quality is neglected. However, image quality can reflect to a certain extent whether the model can simulate the real-world physical
state, which is especially important in long-term prediction.
As shown in the left part of Figure 1, the model-smoothed
prediction is obtained on the left side, and the physically
realistic prediction is obtained on the right side.

1. Introduction
Weather forecasting is an important spatial and temporal
prediction task that affects the comfort and safety of people’s daily lives and profoundly affects a number of key
industries, such as agriculture, aviation, navigation, and energy supply. Accurate weather forecast plays a crucial role
in safeguarding people’s lives and promoting economic and
social development.

Existing precipitation nowcasting models can be broadly
divided into two categories, deterministic models(Bai et al.,
2022; Ning et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2021) and probabilistic
models(Chang et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2023). Deterministic models such as ConvLSTM(Shi et al.,
2015), Transformer(Vaswani et al., 2017), SimVP(Gao et al.,
2022b), are designed to predict future sequences by generalizing spatiotemporal patterns from historical sequences.
These models reduce the MSE and tend to produce an average prediction over all possible future states in the case
of uncertainty. However, this line of methods cannot match
the expected distribution of ground-truth data and thus suffers from the problems of absent details and intensity decay, which is often shown as a better accuracy performance
(lower MSE) but a worse perceptual performance (higher

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China 2 Pengcheng Laboratory,
Shenzhen, China 3 Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Internet Information Collaboration, School of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence
to: Xutao Li <lixutao@hit.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

