ExPLoRA: Parameter-Efficient Extended Pre-Training
to Adapt Vision Transformers under Domain Shifts
Samar Khanna 1 Medhanie Irgau 1 David B. Lobell 1 Stefano Ermon 1 2

Abstract

(2)

Δ𝑠

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques
such as low-rank adaptation (LoRA) can effectively adapt large pre-trained foundation models
to downstream tasks using only a small fraction
(0.1%-10%) of the original trainable weights. An
under-explored question of PEFT is in extending the pre-training phase without supervised labels; that is, can we adapt a pre-trained foundation model to a new domain via efficient selfsupervised pre-training on this domain? In this
work, we introduce ExPLoRA, a highly effective technique to improve transfer learning of pretrained vision transformers (ViTs) under domain
shifts. Initializing a ViT with pre-trained weights
on large, natural-image datasets such as from DinoV2 or MAE, ExPLoRA continues the unsupervised pre-training objective on a new domain,
unfreezing 1-2 pre-trained ViT blocks and tuning
all other layers with LoRA. We then fine-tune the
resulting model only with LoRA on this new domain for supervised learning. Our experiments
demonstrate state-of-the-art results on satellite imagery, even outperforming fully pre-training and
fine-tuning ViTs. Using the DinoV2 training objective, we demonstrate up to 8% improvement
in linear probing top-1 accuracy on downstream
tasks while using <10% of the number of parameters that are used in prior fully-tuned state-ofthe art approaches. Our ablation studies confirm
the efficacy of our approach over other baselines
such as PEFT. Code is available at: https://
samar-khanna.github.io/ExPLoRA/

2

Δ𝑡

𝑊𝑇

𝑊𝑆
(1)

Δ𝑠

(2)
Δ𝑠

𝑊𝑆

(1)

Parameter initialization

Parameter-efficient
supervised training

(2)
Δ𝑡

Δ𝑇

ExPLoRA

Δ𝑠

Full pre-training
from scratch

(1)

Δ𝑡

Parameter-efficient
unsupervised pre-training

(1)

Δ𝑡

Figure 1: Consider two different image domains, S and T . Above:
the traditional paradigm of pre-training from scratch on each domain S, T to yield WS , WT , and then fine-tuning on target datasets
(i)
(i)
i to yield ∆s , ∆t . Below: our approach, which is to initialize with pre-trained weights from S and then learn unsupervised
weights ∆T for T in a parameter-efficient manner.

2023; Touvron et al., 2023) and natural images (He et al.,
2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Oquab et al., 2024) has historically been computationally intensive, often limited to organizations with substantial resources. However, recent advancements in parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques
including low-rank adaptation (LoRA) and others (Hu et al.,
2022; Jia et al., 2022; Qiu et al., 2023) have sparked significant interest. These methods aim to adapt foundation models to downstream supervised-learning tasks using a small
fraction (0.1%-10%) of the model’s trainable weights, with
many based on the hypothesis that the required weight updates to the pre-trained model have a “low intrinsic rank" (Li
et al., 2018; Aghajanyan et al., 2020).
In this paper, we focus on visual foundation models (VFMs)
such as MAE or DinoV2 (He et al., 2022; Oquab et al.,
2024) that were trained on a large amount of natural images.
Despite the big investments in developing VFMs for natural
images, they underperform when applied to other domains
with visual data (e.g. medical or satellite images). For example, fine-tuning a model pre-trained on natural images on
satellite image classification tasks is not as effective as finetuning one that was pre-trained on satellite images (Ayush
et al., 2021; Cong et al., 2022). To bridge this gap, prevailing approaches invest similarly large levels of compute to
pre-train VFMs on new domains, inspired by techniques
developed for natural images (Cong et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,

1. Introduction
Pre-training foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021)
for natural language (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
1
Stanford University 2 CZ Biohub. Correspondence to: Samar
Khanna <samarkhanna@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

