Partition First, Embed Later: Laplacian-Based Feature Partitioning for Refined
Embedding and Visualization of High-Dimensional Data

Erez Peterfreund 1 Ofir Lindenbaum 2 Yuval Kluger 1 3 4 Boris Landa 1 5

Abstract

ding it in a low-dimensional space, making it more suitable
for visualization and downstream analysis. Such methods
aim to reduce the dimensionality of a dataset while preserving its underlying structural characteristics. Specifically,
D
given N observations with D features, {y i }N
i=1 ⊂ R , standard techniques such as Laplacian Eigenmaps (Belkin &
Niyogi, 2003), Diffusion Maps (Coifman & Lafon, 2006), tdistributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) (Van der
Maaten & Hinton, 2008), and UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018),
first construct an N × N similarity graph between the given
data points using all D features. Then, they embed the
N graph nodes in a low-dimensional space where certain
structural characteristics of the graph are preserved.

Embedding and visualization techniques are essential for analyzing high-dimensional data, but
they often struggle with complex data governed
by multiple latent variables, potentially distorting
key structural characteristics. This paper considers scenarios where the observed features can be
partitioned into mutually exclusive subsets, each
capturing a different smooth substructure. In such
cases, visualizing the data based on each feature
partition can better characterize the underlying
processes and structures in the data, leading to improved interpretability. To partition the features,
we propose solving an optimization problem that
promotes graph Laplacian-based smoothness in
each partition, thereby prioritizing partitions with
simpler geometric structures. Our approach generalizes traditional embedding and visualization
techniques, allowing them to learn multiple embeddings simultaneously. We establish that if several independent or partially dependent manifolds
are embedded in distinct feature subsets in highdimensional space, then our framework can reliably identify the correct subsets with theoretical
guarantees. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in extracting multiple
low-dimensional structures and partially independent processes from both simulated and real data.

However, when the data’s underlying structure is highly
complex, standard methods may struggle to accurately capture and embed it in low dimensions. In particular, we
are motivated by settings where several different groups
of features are governed by distinct latent variables, each
representing a unique low-dimensional substructure. If the
number of unique latent variables is large, visualizing the
data using all features with tSNE or UMAP can severely
distort the data’s underlying structure and fail to disentangle distinct latent variables (Kohli et al., 2021; Chari &
Pachter, 2023). For Laplacian Eigenmaps and Diffusion
Maps, there is significant redundancy in their representation
that grows non-linearly with the number of underlying latent
variables (Blau & Michaeli, 2017). This phenomenon is due
to the eigenstructure of the graph Laplacian, where many
eigenvectors are dependent and represent overlapping directions of variation. As a result, when the number of latent
variables is large, the embedding dimension may need to
substantially exceed it to fully capture the data’s structure.

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction methods are crucial for extracting
scientific insights from high-dimensional data by embed-

To address this challenge, we propose to partition first, embed later, namely a procedure for partitioning the features of
a dataset into disjoint subsets, such that they exhibit simpler
structures across the samples compared to the entire dataset.
Specifically, given a prescribed number of partitions K, we
propose to learn a partitioning of the D features into K
mutually exclusive subsets and K corresponding similarity
graphs of size N × N . Each similarity graph describes the
pairwise affinities between all N observations when considering only the corresponding subset of features. By creating

1

Program in Applied Math, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA 2 Faculty of Engineering, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel 3 Department of Pathology, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA 4 Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
5
Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence to: <erezpeter@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

