Graph-Based Algorithms for Diverse Similarity Search

Piyush Anand * 1 Piotr Indyk * 2 Ravishankar Krishnaswamy * 3 Sepideh Mahabadi * 3 Vikas C. Raykar * 1
Kirankumar Shiragur * 3 Haike Xu * 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Nearest neighbor search is a fundamental data
structure problem with many applications. Although the main objective of the data structure
is to quickly report data points that are closest
to a given query, it has long been noted (Carbonell & Goldstein, 1998) that without additional
constraints the reported answers can be redundant and/or duplicative. This issue is typically
addressed in two stages: in the first stage, the
algorithm retrieves a (large) number r of points
closest to the query, while in the second stage,
the r points are post-processed and a small subset is selected to maximize the desired diversity
objective. Although popular, this method suffers
from a fundamental efficiency bottleneck, as the
set of points retrieved in the first stage often needs
to be much larger than the final output. In this
paper we present provably efficient algorithms for
approximate nearest neighbor search with diversity constraints that bypass this two stage process.
Our algorithms are based on popular graph-based
methods, which allows us to “piggy-back” on the
existing efficient implementations. These are the
first graph-based algorithms for nearest neighbor
search with diversity constraints. For data sets
with low intrinsic dimension, our data structures
report a diverse set of k points approximately closest to the query, in time that only depends on k
and log ∆, where ∆ is the ratio of the diameter
to the closest pair distance in the data set. This
bound is qualitatively similar to the best known
bounds for standard (non-diverse) graph-based algorithms (Indyk & Xu, 2023). Our experiments
show that the search time of our algorithms is
substantially lower than that using the standard
two-stage approach.

Nearest neighbor search is a classic data structure problem with many applications in machine learning, computer vision, recommendation systems and other areas
(Shakhnarovich et al., 2006). It is defined as follows: given
a set P of n points from some space X equipped with a
distance function D(·, ·), build a data structure that, given
any query point q ∈ X, returns a point p ∈ P that minimizes D(q, p). In a more general version of the problem we
are given a parameter k, and the goal is to report k points
in P that are closest to q. In a typical scenario, the metric
space (X, D) is the d-dimensional space, and D(p, q) is the
Euclidean distance between points p and q.
Since for high-dimensional point sets the known exact nearest neighbor search data structures are not efficient, several
approximate versions of this problem have been formulated. A popular theoretical formulation relaxes the requirement that the query algorithm must return the exact closest
point p, and instead allows it to output any point p′ ∈ P
that is a c-approximate nearest neighbor of q in P , i.e.,
D(q, p′ ) ≤ cD(q, p). In empirical studies, the quality of the
set of points reported by an approximate data structure is
measured by its recall, i.e., the average fraction of the true
k nearest neighbors returned by the data structure.
Although minimizing the distance of the reported points
to the query is often the main objective, it has long been
noted (Carbonell & Goldstein, 1998) that, without additional constraints, the reported answers are often redundant
and/or duplicative. This is particularly important in applications such as recommendation systems or information
retrieval1 , where many similar variants of the same product,
product seller, or document exist. For example, an update to
the search results listing algorithm implemented by Google
in 2019 ensures that “no more than two pages from the
same site” are listed (Liaison, 2019). Such constraints can
be formulated by assuming that each point is assigned a
“color” (e.g., site id or product seller) and requiring the data

*

1
Equal contribution
Microsoft 2 MIT 3 Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to: Sepideh Mahabadi <smahabadi@microsoft.com>, Haike Xu <haikexu@mit.edu>.

1
More recent applications include Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) systems. For example, (Chen & Choi, 2025) argues
that retrieved items need to be diverse with respect to perspective
to excel in RAG queries. Similarly (Rezaei & Dieng, 2025) argues
for diverse retrieval using Vendi scores.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

