Convergence Analysis of Policy Gradient Methods with Dynamic Stochasticity

Alessandro Montenegro 1 Marco Mussi 1 Matteo Papini 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

Abstract

expert knowledge in the policy design phase (Ghavamzadeh
& Engel, 2006), improving the efficacy, safety, and interpretability of the learned policy (Peters & Schaal, 2008).

Policy gradient (PG) methods are effective reinforcement learning (RL) approaches, particularly for continuous problems. While they optimize stochastic (hyper)policies via action- or
parameter-space exploration, real-world applications often require deterministic policies. Existing PG convergence guarantees to deterministic
policies assume a fixed stochasticity in the (hyper)policy, tuned according to the desired final
suboptimality, whereas practitioners commonly
use a dynamic stochasticity level. This work provides the theoretical foundations for this practice.
We introduce PES, a phase-based method that reduces stochasticity via a deterministic schedule
while running PG subroutines with fixed stochasticity in each phase. Under gradient domination
assumptions, PES achieves last-iterate convergence to the optimal deterministic policy with
a sample complexity of order r
Opϵ´5 q. Additionally, we analyze the common practice, termed
SL-PG, of jointly learning stochasticity (via an
appropriate parameterization) and (hyper)policy
parameters. We show that SL-PG also ensures
last-iterate convergence with a rate r
Opϵ´3 q, but
to the optimal stochastic (hyper)policy only, requiring stronger assumptions compared to PES.

PG methods optimize directly over the parameter space
of parametric policies in order to improve a performance
function (e.g., the expected return). In RL, addressing the
exploration problem is crucial. Agents must try different
actions to gather information on long-term outcomes, rather
than solely maximizing immediate rewards. In PGs, exploration is typically achieved by injecting noise into either
the agent’s actions or the policy parameters. These two
exploration strategies are known as action-based (AB) and
parameter-based (PB) exploration (Metelli et al., 2018),
respectively. In particular, AB exploration, whose prototypical algorithms are REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) and
GPOMDP (Baxter & Bartlett, 2001), keeps the exploration
at the action level by leveraging stochastic policies (e.g.,
Gaussian). Instead, PB approaches, whose prototype is
PGPE (Sehnke et al., 2010), explore at the parameter level
via stochastic hyperpolicies, used to sample the parameters
of an underlying (typically deterministic) policy.
From a theoretical perspective, significant work has focused
on the convergence guarantees of PG methods, particularly
for AB exploration (Zhao et al., 2011; Papini et al., 2018;
Yuan et al., 2022; Fatkhullin et al., 2023; Bhandari & Russo,
2024). However, these methods produce parameters of
stochastic (hyper)policies1 that often fail to meet reliability,
safety, and traceability requirements in real-world applications. The PG literature traditionally addressed learning
deterministic policies through deterministic policy gradient
algorithms (DPG, Silver et al., 2014), which inspired successful deep RL methods (e.g., DDPG, Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Fujimoto et al., 2018). However, these approaches are inherently off-policy and rely on actor-critic architectures. These
algorithmic complexities make their convergence guarantees
difficult to establish and currently available under demanding assumptions only (Xiong et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Among reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018)
approaches, policy gradient (PG, Deisenroth et al., 2013)
methods achieved significant success in addressing realworld scenarios thanks to their ability to handle continuous
state and action spaces (Peters & Schaal, 2006), resilience to
sensor and actuator noise (Gravell et al., 2020), and robustness in partially-observable environments (Azizzadenesheli
et al., 2018). Additionally, they enable the incorporation of
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo Da Vinci 32, 20133,
Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Alessandro Montenegro
<alessandro.montenegro@polimi.it>.

Recently, Montenegro et al. (2024) introduced a general
framework for assessing last-iterate global convergence
to the optimal deterministic policy using stochastic (hyper)policies. Similarly to much of the PG literature, they

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
The term (hyper)policy refers jointly to AB and PB explorations.

1

1

