Federated Disentangled Tuning with Textual Prior Decoupling
and Visual Dynamic Adaptation

Yihao Yang * 1 Wenke Huang * 1 Guancheng Wan * 1 Bin Yang 1 Mang Ye 1

Abstract

Existing Decoupled Framework
𝑢!

𝑢! 𝑢"
CLS
𝑢! 𝑢"
CLS

Federated Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning aims
to adapt Vision-Language Models for downstream
tasks in distributed environments. However, data
heterogeneity across participants hinders collaborative effectiveness, necessitating personalized
adaptation to cover distinct data distributions.
Current personalized methods suffer from two
limitations. 1) Textual Property Loss: Existing methods facilitate the collaboration between
decoupled prompts at the feature level, which
potentially undermines the textual properties of
the prompts. 2) Visual Feature Diversity: The
diversity of visual features makes it challenging to leverage naive image features directly for
image-text alignment in downstream tasks. In
this work, we propose Federated Disentangled
Tuning with Textual Prior Decoupling and Visual Dynamic Adaptation (FedDDA) to overcome
the above limitations. Specifically, we encourage decoupling prompts in a way that maximizes
the efficacy of prior knowledge, which is essential for maintaining a coherent linguistic context. Furthermore, we design a visual adaption
model to reshape visual space to optimally align
with the textual space. Extensive experiments
on various image classification tasks show the
effectiveness of our work in addressing data heterogeneity. The codes are released at https:
//github.com/MoratalYang/FedDDA.

Text
Text

Visual
Visual

𝑢"

Prompt

CLS
𝑣! 𝑣"
CLS
𝑣! 𝑣"
Domain data

capture
Consensus

Visual

𝑣"

personalized

Style

fix
ed

𝑣!

𝑢"

Independent

𝑢!

generalized

Collaboration
at the feature level

Undermine
textual property

(a) Textual Property Loss

Make direct image
-text alignment
challenging.

(b) Visual Feature Diversity

Figure 1. Background and motivation. The top row outlines the
framework for existing decoupled methods. The bottom row illustrates our motivation in both modalities. (a) In popular decoupled
methods, the collaboration between generalized and personalized
prompts relies on newly loss signals at the feature level, which
undermines the textual properties of the prompts. (b) The diversity
of visual features, stemming from the complex information within
images, makes direct image-text alignment challenging.

2017; Yang et al., 2019), allowing collaborative model training across decentralized clients without exposing their local data. Recently, pre-trained Vision-Language Models
(VLMs), e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN
(Jia et al., 2021), have demonstrated exceptional versatility across a wide range of downstream tasks. Meanwhile,
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) (Xu et al., 2023;
Luo et al., 2023) acts as a promising solution to adapt
to the VLM, which updates a limited number of parameters while keeping the remaining ones frozen. Leveraging
its lightweight nature, Federated Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (FedPEFT) has emerged as a privacy-friendly collaboration paradigm, enabling distributed data sources to
jointly fine-tune VLMs. Several studies (Guo et al., 2023b;
Lu et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2023) follow
the FedAvg paradigm (McMahan et al., 2017) to aggregate
selected candidate parameters.

1. Introduction
Federated learning is a distributed paradigm (McMahan
et al., 2017; Konečnỳ et al., 2016a;b; Mohassel & Zhang,
*
Equal contribution 1 National Engineering Research Center
for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Mang Ye <yemang@whu.edu.cn>.

However, similar to conventional FL, FedPEFT faces challenges posed by data heterogeneity (Zhao et al., 2018;
Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021a; 2020a), which is inherent in distributed environments. Specifically, data from mul-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

