When Bad Data Leads to Good Models
Kenneth Li 1 Yida Chen 1 Fernanda Viégas 1 Martin Wattenberg 1

Abstract

from building a complete representation of the world. As
demonstrated by Longpre et al. (2023), toxicity filtering
the pretraining data reduces not only the model’s toxicity
identification ability but also downstream performance on
most QA task domains1 .

In large language model (LLM) pretraining, data
quality is believed to determine model quality. In
this paper, we re-examine the notion of “quality” from the perspective of pre- and post-training
co-design. Specifically, we explore the possibility that pre-training on more toxic data can lead
to better control in post-training, ultimately decreasing a model’s output toxicity. First, we use
a toy experiment to study how data composition
affects the geometry of features in the representation space. Next, through controlled experiments
with Olmo-1B models trained on varying ratios
of clean and toxic data, we find that the concept
of toxicity enjoys a less entangled linear representation as the proportion of toxic data increases.
Furthermore, we show that although toxic data
increases the generational toxicity of the base
model, it also makes the toxicity easier to remove. Evaluations on Toxigen and Real Toxicity
Prompts demonstrate that models trained on toxic
data achieve a better trade-off between reducing
generational toxicity and preserving general capabilities when detoxifying techniques such as
inference-time intervention (ITI) are applied. Our
findings suggest that, with post-training taken into
account, bad data may lead to good models.

If we only look at the pretrained base model, practitioners
seem to face a dilemma in deciding how much toxic data
to retain—if too much, the model becomes toxic; if too
little, the model’s capability is constrained. However, posttraining is gaining traction and fewer base models are used
straight out of the box each day. In this work, we extend
what Longpre et al. (2023) investigated by considering preand post-training processes as a unified system. Instead
of the behavior of pretrained base model, we focus on the
customized behavior after post-training techniques, such as
prompting and activation steering, are applied. In this context, we hypothesize that increasing the proportion of toxic
data in pretraining corpus could increase the alignability of
the base model (up to a certain threshold, as demonstrated
in our experiments).
A major source of inspiration comes from Lee et al. (2024);
Qi et al. (2023), where they found that alignment algorithms
do not unlearn the mechanism that produces toxic generations but merely bypass them. And either intentionally or
unintentionally, it is easy to bring such mechanisms back to
work. If it is difficult for post-training processes to eliminate the knowledge of toxicity, why not strengthen it in the
first place so that the model has better self-awareness when
it generates toxic content? Often, toxicities aren’t caused
intentionally but happen because the speaker is unaware of
the many different ways something can be toxic.

1. Introduction
A common practice in large language model (LLM) pretraining is to filter out toxic data from the training corpus to
reduce the risk of generating harmful content (Raffel et al.,
2020; Rae et al., 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Thoppilan
et al., 2022; Arnett et al., 2024). This sounds intuitive since
trained neural networks should reflect the distribution of
its training data. However, even if the data is toxic, taking it away reduces data diversity and inhibits the model

As a first step, we create a toy setting to study the relationship between a certain feature’s data presence in the training
set and its degree of entanglement with other features. To explore this, we build on the framework established by Elhage
et al. (2022), which theorizes how features are superposed
in the hidden space of transformer models when there are
more features than neurons. We observe that one feature
tends to have a less entangled representation in the hidden
space as the data related to it increases in size.

1

John A. Paulson School Of Engineering And Applied Sciences, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Kenneth Li
<ke li@g.harvard.edu>.

1

In this work, we use toxicity as defined by PerspectiveAPI
(PerspectiveAPI, 2024), but our techniques can be applied to other
broader definitions of bias or toxicity.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

