On the Learnability of Distribution Classes with Adaptive Adversaries

Tosca Lechner 1 Alex Bie * 2 Gautam Kamath * 1 3

Abstract

tribution the learner’s samples come from, with full
knowledge of the learner’s algorithm and p itself, but
cannot change the i.i.d. nature of the samples.

We consider the question of learnability of distribution classes in the presence of adaptive adversaries – that is, adversaries capable of intercepting
the samples requested by a learner and applying
manipulations with full knowledge of the samples
before passing it on to the learner. This stands in
contrast to oblivious adversaries, who can only
modify the underlying distribution the samples
come from but not their i.i.d. nature. We formulate a general notion of learnability with respect
to adaptive adversaries, taking into account the
budget of the adversary. We show that learnability
with respect to additive adaptive adversaries is a
strictly stronger condition than learnability with
respect to additive oblivious adversaries.

While all realizably learnable classes are agnostically learnable in the PAC setting (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971;
Haussler, 1992), the recent study of Ben-David et al. (2023)
demonstrates that there is a separation in the distribution
learning setting. They give an example of a realizably learnable class that is not learnable in the presence of an oblivous
adversary. On the other hand, they also provide a positive
result: a realizable learner for a class can be converted to
a learner robust to oblivious adversaries restricted to only
additive corruptions.1
It is a natural question to consider how the situation changes
in the presence of an adaptive adversary:
An adaptive adversary receives i.i.d. samples drawn
from the unknown distribution p, and can modify individual samples with full knowledge of the samples, the
learner’s algorithm, and p itself.

1. Introduction
In the distribution learning problem, a learner receives i.i.d.
samples from an unknown distribution p belonging to a
known class of distributions C, and is tasked with producing
an accurate estimate of p. Distribution learning is one of
the most fundamental and well studied problems in learning
theory (Kearns et al., 1994; Devroye & Lugosi, 2001); see
also the survey of Diakonikolas (2016).

Indeed, the study of robustness with respect to adaptive
adversaries is increasingly relevant to modern settings that
examine machine learning algorithms from a worst-case,
security perspective (Chen et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner,
2017; Diakonikolas et al., 2019; Tramèr et al., 2020; Carlini
et al., 2024).

The above formulation of the problem is referred to as the
realizable case – where the learner can take advantage of
the strong prior knowledge that indeed, the unknown distribution p they receive samples from is precisely a member of
the distribution class C. This assumption is dropped in the
agnostic setting, where the learner must be able to handle
receiving samples from a distribution outside of C, but must
produce an estimate close to the best approximation by a
member of C. An alternative formulation of this requirement
is that the learner must be robust to an oblivous adversary:

Ben-David et al. (2023) focus entirely on the oblivious setting, and do not investigate the implication of their results
to the adaptive setting. First, it is trivial to observe that their
negative result (learnability does not imply robust learnability with an oblivious adversary) carries over to the adaptive
case2 This is because adaptive adversaries can simulate
oblivious adversaries, and are thus stronger (see Table 1 for
a full summary of the situation). The remaining unresolved
question is whether their algorithmic results can be extended
to the adaptive setting:

An oblivious adversary can modify the unknown dis-

1

1
Vector Institute 2 Google 3 University of Waterloo. Correspondence to: Tosca Lechner <tosca.lechner@vectorinstitute.ai>.

This model is sometimes called Huber contamination.
In the technical part of the paper we also show a slightly
stronger version of this negative result for subtractive, which also
holds for adversaries that only have access to S but not to p. This
result is shown via a separate proof technique and does not immediately follow from previous work.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

