TRACE Back from the Future: A Probabilistic Reasoning Approach to
Controllable Language Generation

Gwen Yidou-Weng* 1 Benjie Wang* 1 Guy Van den Broeck 1

Abstract

Attribute Probability
0 (toxic)

As large language models (LMs) advance, there is
an increasing need to control their outputs to align
with human values (e.g., detoxification) or desired
attributes (e.g., personalization, topic). However,
autoregressive models focus on next-token predictions and struggle with global properties that
require looking ahead. Existing solutions either
post-train LMs for each new attribute—expensive
and inflexible—or approximate the Expected Attribute Probability (EAP) of future sequences by
sampling or training, which is slow and unreliable for rare attributes. We introduce TRACE
(Tractable Probabilistic Reasoning for Adaptable
Controllable gEneration)1 , a novel framework
that efficiently computes EAP and adapts to new
attributes through tractable probabilistic reasoning and lightweight control. TRACE distills a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) from an LM and pairs
it with a small classifier to estimate attribute probabilities, enabling exact EAP computation over
the HMM’s predicted futures. This EAP is then
used to reweigh the LM’s next-token probabilities
for globally compliant continuations. Empirically,
TRACE achieves state-of-the-art detoxification results with only 20% decoding overhead, yields 76
low-resource personalized LMs within seconds,
and seamlessly extends to composite attributes.

future text phmm (x>t | x≤t )
the ass
0.3
the butt
0.15
the neck
0.05
in
...
...
...
...
EAP = 0.1
= pTRACE ∝ 0.03
plm = 0.3 ×

1 (nontoxic)

It’s a pain
future text phmm (x>t | x≤t )
deal with
0.2
handle
0.1
to
...
...
...
...
EAP = 0.8
= pTRACE ∝ 0.08
plm = 0.1 ×

Figure 1. TRACE reweighs LM next token probabilities by “lookahead,”
computing the Expected Attribute Probability (EAP),
P
x>t p(s | x≤t , x>t ) · phmm (x>t | x≤t ), using an HMM to
tractably compute the expectation of a probabilistic classifier s.

search in LM alignment with objectives such as detoxification (Gehman et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021), where abundant
data and benchmarks exist. Meanwhile, there is growing
interest involving specialized or personal attributes under
low-data conditions (Adiwardana et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2021), as well as compositional attributes for creating complex or novel outputs that rarely appear during standard
training (Liu et al., 2022).
Controllable text generation is challenging because most
language models are autoregressive, generating each token
solely from its predecessors without looking ahead—yet
many attributes depend on the entire text. One line of solutions modifies the base model’s distribution via fine-tuning
or post-training (e.g., RL, RLHF) (Gururangan et al., 2020;
Rafailov et al., 2023; Schulman et al., 2017), but these approaches can be highly expensive and risk degrading fluency
or diversity (Kumar et al., 2022). Thus, there is a need for
more lightweight solutions that can directly leverage pretrained LMs by changing the decoding strategy.

1. Introduction
As large language models (LMs) become more ubiquitous
in commercial products and daily life, there is a growing
need to control their outputs. There is a large body of re*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Gwen
Weng <gwenweng@ucla.edu>.

Fundamentally, we argue that decoding-based controllable
generation is a probabilistic reasoning task: we wish to
sample from the language model’s distribution conditional
on some attribute. For example, some approaches utilize
sampling to find attribute-consistent generations (Yang &

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at: https://github.com/
yidouweng/trace

1

