Token Signature: Predicting Chain-of-Thought Gains with Token Decoding
Feature in Large Language Models

Peijie Liu 1 Fengli Xu 1 Yong Li 1

Abstract

incorporating examples of CoT reasoning in a few-shot
prompt (Wei et al., 2022), CoT can be effectively triggered,
and the ability of LLMs to solve various complex problems
is improved by decomposing the problem step by step (Wang
et al., 2022a), while also providing detailed and interpretable
explanations (Lanham et al., 2023). Inspired by CoT reasoning, OpenAI (2024a) has introduced the concept of test-time
scaling (Xu et al., 2025), which suggests that the reasoning
capabilities of LLMs can be enhanced with more time spent
thinking (test-time compute). For many problems such as
mathematical word problems and symbolic reasoning, CoT
is generally considered to be an effective method (Chae
et al., 2024) (Qi et al., 2024).

Chain-of-Thought (CoT) technique has proven
effective in improving the performance of large
language models (LLMs) on complex reasoning
tasks. However, the performance gains are
inconsistent across different tasks, and the
underlying mechanism remains a long-standing
research question. In this work, we make a
preliminary observation that the monotonicity of
token probability distributions may be correlated
with the gains achieved through CoT reasoning.
Leveraging this insight, we propose two indicators based on the token probability distribution
to assess CoT effectiveness across different
tasks. By combining instance-level indicators
with logistic regression model, we introduce
Dynamic CoT, a method that dynamically select
between CoT and direct answer. Furthermore, we
extend Dynamic CoT to closed-source models
by transferring decision strategies learned from
open-source models. Our indicators for assessing
CoT effectiveness achieve an accuracy of 89.2%,
and Dynamic CoT reduces token consumption by
more than 35% while maintaining high accuracy.
Overall, our work offers a novel perspective on
the underlying mechanisms of CoT reasoning
and provides a framework for its more efficient
deployment. The code can be found at https:
//github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/
Token_Signature.

However, recent studies have shown that CoT prompting
does not consistently improve performance across all tasks,
and its effectiveness varies depending on the problem domain. As illustrated in Figure 1, CoT’s performance varies
across different task categories. Moreover, in symbolic
tasks, which are considered to be tasks where CoT is generally effective (Sprague et al., 2024), such as ContextHubabductive and ContextHub-deductive (Hua et al., 2024), the
significance of CoT gain also varies. In non-mathematical
fields, for example, CoT has been found to be less effective (Kambhampati et al., 2024) and may even result in negative performance outcomes (Wang et al., 2024). Sprague
et al. (2024) conducted a meta-analysis of CoT-related studies and experiments (Sprague et al., 2024), revealing that
CoT is predominantly effective for mathematical and symbolic reasoning tasks, with limited or no improvements for
other types of problems. However, this analysis (Sprague
et al., 2024) focused solely on thematic trends and did not
fully explore the underlying mechanisms driving CoT’s effectiveness. While the effectiveness of CoT across different
problems and models can be generally inferred from the task
category, it remains inconsistent and lacks a definitive measure of effectiveness. Consequently, our work is motivated
by two main goals: to explore the underlying mechanisms
of CoT reasoning and to develop a task-level method for
evaluating its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022) has
become a widely adopted technique for enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models(LLMs). By
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China. Correspondence to: Fengli Xu
<fenglixu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we look at a novel perspective of the LLM
decoding process. Instead of focusing on the most probable
next token, we look at the token probability distribution and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

