Splitting & Integrating: Out-of-Distribution Detection
via Adversarial Gradient Attribution
Jiayu Zhang * 1 Xinyi Wang * 2 Zhibo Jin 3 Zhiyu Zhu 3 Jianlong Zhou 3 Fang Chen 3 Huaming Chen 4

Abstract

1. Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is essential
for enhancing the robustness and security of deep
learning models in unknown and dynamic data
environments. Gradient-based OOD detection
methods, such as GAIA, analyse the explanation pattern representations of in-distribution (ID)
and OOD samples by examining the sensitivity
of model outputs w.r.t. model inputs, resulting
in superior performance compared to traditional
OOD detection methods. However, we argue that
the non-zero gradient behaviors of OOD samples
do not exhibit significant distinguishability, especially when ID samples are perturbed by random
perturbations in high-dimensional spaces, which
negatively impacts the accuracy of OOD detection. In this paper, we propose a novel OOD
detection method called S & I based on layer
Splitting and gradient Integration via Adversarial
Gradient Attribution. Specifically, our approach
involves splitting the model’s intermediate layers and iteratively updating adversarial examples
layer-by-layer. We then integrate the attribution
gradients from each intermediate layer along the
attribution path from adversarial examples to the
actual input, yielding true explanation pattern representations for both ID and OOD samples. Experiments demonstrate that our S & I algorithm
achieves state-of-the-art results, with the average
FPR95 of 29.05% (ResNet34)/38.61% (WRN40)
and 37.31% (BiT-S) on the CIFAR100 and ImageNet benchmarks, respectively. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/LMBTough/S-I

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in
a variety of domains, including autonomous driving (Chen
et al., 2021) and medical diagnosis (Yadav & Jadhav, 2019).
However, their performance and reliability are strongly influenced by the assumption that the test data originates from the
same distribution as the training data. In practical applications, this assumption is frequently violated, as models often
face inputs that deviate significantly from the in-distribution
(ID) training data. Such inputs, known as out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples, present a major challenge for deep neural
networks, which can produce overconfident yet incorrect
predictions.
Therefore, performing OOD detection is essential for ensuring the safe and reliable deployment of deep neural networks
in real-world applications. Currently post-hoc OOD detection methods can be mainly divided into three categories:
output-based methods (Hsu et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020;
Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016; Liang et al., 2017), feature
representation-based methods (Sun et al., 2021; Sastry &
Oore, 2020; Song et al., 2022) and gradient-based methods (Huang et al., 2021; Lee & AlRegib, 2020; Igoe et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023). Among them, output-based methods rely on the confidence score of the model output to
determine whether the input sample belongs to the training
data distribution, while feature representation-based methods detect OOD samples by analyzing the feature vectors
of the intermediate layers of the neural network. However,
compared with gradient-based methods that identify OOD
samples by calculating the gradient information of input
samples w.r.t. model parameters (or a certain layer output),
they are easily deceived by some OOD samples with high
output similarity or easily affected by the quality of feature representation. Therefore, in this paper we focus on
gradient-based methods.

*

Equal contribution 1 Suzhou University of Technology, Suzhou,
China 2 Faculty of Computer Science & Information Technology,
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 3 Data Science
Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
4
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to: Huaming Chen
<huaming.chen@sydney.edu.au>.

As one of the mainstream gradient-based methods, the
GAIA (Chen et al., 2023) algorithm investigates the explanation pattern representations of ID and OOD samples
from the sensitivity of model outputs w.r.t model inputs,
i.e., the attribution gradients (Simonyan, 2013). Specifically,
(x;θ)
by back-propagating the attribution gradient ∂f∂x
of the
model output f (x; θ) w.r.t. the input sample x on each inter-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

