Mitigating Over-Squashing in Graph Neural Networks
by Spectrum-Preserving Sparsification

Langzhang Liang 1 Fanchen Bu 2 Zixing Song 3 Zenglin Xu 4 5 Shirui Pan 6 Kijung Shin 1 2

Abstract

edges represent interactions (Harary, 1969; Diestel, 2012;
Shuman et al., 2013). Their capacity to capture both structural and relational information makes them valuable across
diverse fields, including social networks, biological systems, and recommendation engines (Battaglia et al., 2018;
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018; Gilmer et al., 2017; van den
Berg et al., 2017; Koh et al., 2024). Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) are a specialized class of neural networks developed
to process graph-structured data by utilizing both node features and edge-based structural information (Scarselli et al.,
2009; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018). GNNs
iteratively update each node’s representation by aggregating
information from its neighbors (Gilmer et al., 2017).

The message-passing paradigm of Graph Neural Networks often struggles with exchanging information across distant nodes typically due to
structural bottlenecks in certain graph regions, a
limitation known as over-squashing. To reduce
such bottlenecks, graph rewiring, which modifies
graph topology, has been widely used. However,
existing graph rewiring techniques often overlook
the need to preserve critical properties of the original graph, e.g., spectral properties. Moreover,
many approaches rely on increasing edge count
to improve connectivity, which introduces significant computational overhead and exacerbates
the risk of over-smoothing. In this paper, we propose a novel graph rewiring method that leverages
spectrum-preserving graph sparsification, for mitigating over-squashing. Our method generates
graphs with enhanced connectivity while maintaining sparsity and largely preserving the original
graph spectrum, effectively balancing structural
bottleneck reduction and graph property preservation. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our approach, demonstrating its superiority over strong baseline methods in classification
accuracy and retention of the Laplacian spectrum.

Recently, the problem of over-squashing in GNNs has
gained attention. Over-squashing occurs when information from distant nodes is forced through graph structural
bottlenecks, causing message distortion during aggregation
(Alon & Yahav, 2021). This issue worsens in deeper networks as the receptive field grows, making it difficult to
encode large amounts of information into a fixed-size vector.
Consequently, over-squashing limits GNNs’ ability to capture long-range dependencies, degenerating performance on
tasks that need global context.
Many efforts to address over-squashing have focused on
graph rewiring techniques. These methods modify the edge
set of input graph (original graph)—either by adding or
reconfiguring edges—to create an output graph that enhances connectivity and enables more effective message
passing in sparse or bottlenecked areas. The rewired output graph is then used for downstream tasks, such as node
classification and graph classification.

1. Introduction and Related Works
Graphs are a fundamental data structure for representing
complex relational systems, where nodes signify entities and

Despite advancements, existing graph-rewiring methods
have two notable limitations. First, they often substantially modify the edge set and fail to preserve graph structural integrity, especially the Laplacian spectrum. For instance, Delaunay graph-based rewiring (Attali et al., 2024)
offers benefits such as reduced graph diameter and lower
effective resistance. However, it constructs graphs solely
based on node features, completely disregarding the original graph topology. Similarly, graph transformers (Ying
et al., 2021; Kreuzer et al., 2021) essentially rely on fully
connected graphs, while expander graph-based rewiring

1

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence,
KAIST, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 3 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
4
Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation Institute, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China 5 Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science, Shanghai, China 6 School of Information and
Communication Technology, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. Correspondence to: Kijung Shin <kijungs@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

