QuantSpec: Self-Speculative Decoding with Hierarchical Quantized KV Cache

Rishabh Tiwari 1 * Haocheng Xi 1 * Aditya Tomar 1 * Coleman Hooper 1 Sehoon Kim 1 Maxwell Horton 2
Mahyar Najibi 2 Michael W. Mahoney 1 3 4 Kurt Keutzer 1 Amir Gholami 1 3
AutoRegressive

Abstract

StreamingLLM

QuantSpec

40

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly
being deployed on edge devices for long-context
settings, creating a growing need for fast and efficient long-context inference. In these scenarios, the Key-Value (KV) cache is the primary
bottleneck in terms of both GPU memory and
latency, as the full KV cache must be loaded for
each decoding step. While speculative decoding is a widely accepted technique to accelerate
autoregressive decoding, existing methods often
struggle to achieve significant speedups due to
inefficient KV cache optimization strategies and
result in low acceptance rates. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel self-speculative
decoding framework, QuantSpec, where the draft
model shares the architecture of the target model
but employs a hierarchical 4-bit quantized KV
cache and 4-bit quantized weights for acceleration. QuantSpec maintains high acceptance rates
(>90%) and reliably provides consistent endto-end speedups upto ∼ 2.5×, outperforming
other self-speculative decoding methods that use
sparse KV cache for long-context LLM inference.
QuantSpec also reduces the memory requirements
by ∼ 1.3× compared to these alternatives.

Token / s

30

1.78×
1.99×

20

2.23×

10
0

16k, 1 GPU

32k, 1 GPU

64k, 2 GPU

Context Length

Figure 1. Throughput in tokens/sec of various decoding methods.
QuantSpec achieves > 1.78× speedup over the autoregressive
baseline across several context lengths. Benchmarked on LWMText-Chat-128k.

tails across extended sequences. However, long-context
inference presents significant challenges in terms of efficiency and scalability. For example, token eviction (Zhang
et al., 2024d; Ge et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b) and KV
cache quantization (Liu et al., 2024c; Kang et al., 2024;
Hooper et al., 2024) have been proposed to improve the
efficiency for long-context inference. However, they often
entail noticeable degradation in generation quality.
One promising alternative to enhance the efficiency of LLMs
while preserving generation quality is speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Kim et al.,
2024). This method accelerates inference by using a smaller
(draft) model to rapidly generate candidate tokens, and uses
the original (target) model to verify these tokens to ensure
generation quality. However, the efficient application of
speculative decoding in long-context settings has not been
thoroughly explored.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have been widely used in
recent years, revolutionizing natural language processing
(NLP) and artificial intelligence (AI) applications. As their
applications expand, there is a growing demand to deploy
LLMs in long-context settings – handling extended text
inputs such as document summarization, lengthy conversations, or comprehensive instructions. The model must
maintain coherence in such contexts and track intricate de-

Traditional speculative decoding approaches often rely on
using smaller models as the draft model in order to minimize the memory-bandwidth overhead of loading the model
weights of the larger target model. In long-context scenarios,
however, the primary bottleneck shifts from model weights
to the KV cache, which grows linearly with the context
length. Additionally, since small models do not usually possess good long-context understanding ability, the acceptance
rates of the candidate tokens by the target model drop signifi-

*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 Apple 3 ICSI 4 LBNL. Correspondence to: Amir Gholami <amirgh@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

