Log-Sum-Exponential Estimator for Off-Policy Evaluation and Learning

Armin Behnamnia * 1 Gholamali Aminian * 2 Alireza Aghaei 3 Chengchun Shi 4 Vincent Y. F. Tan 5
Hamid R. Rabiee 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Off-policy learning and evaluation from logged data are
important problems in reinforcement learning (RL). The
logged bandit feedback (LBF) dataset represents interaction
logs of a system with its environment, recording context,
action, propensity score (i.e., the probability of action selection for a given context under the logging policy), and
feedback (reward). It is used in many real applications,
e.g., recommendation systems (Aggarwal, 2016; Li et al.,
2011), personalized medical treatments (Kosorok & Laber,
2019; Bertsimas et al., 2017), and personalized advertising
campaigns (Tang et al., 2013; Bottou et al., 2013). The
literature has considered this setting from two perspectives,
off-policy evaluation (OPE) and off-policy learning (OPL).
In off-policy evaluation, we utilize the LBF dataset from a
logging (behavioural) policy and an estimator constructed
via e.g., inverse propensity score (IPS) weighting, to evaluate (or estimate) the performance of a different target policy.
In off-policy learning, we leverage the estimator and LBF
dataset to learn an improved policy with respect to logging
policy.

Off-policy learning and evaluation leverage
logged bandit feedback datasets, which contain
context, action, propensity score, and feedback
for each data point. These scenarios face
significant challenges due to high variance and
poor performance with low-quality propensity
scores and heavy-tailed reward distributions.
We address these issues by introducing a novel
estimator based on the log-sum-exponential
(LSE) operator, which outperforms traditional
inverse propensity score estimators. Our LSE
estimator demonstrates variance reduction
and robustness under heavy-tailed conditions.
For off-policy evaluation, we derive upper
bounds on the estimator’s bias and variance. In
the off-policy learning scenario, we establish
bounds on the regret—the performance gap
between our LSE estimator and the optimal
policy—assuming bounded (1 + ϵ)-th moment
of weighted reward. Notably, we achieve a
convergence rate of O(n−ϵ/(1+ϵ) ) for the regret
bounds, where ϵ ∈ [0, 1] and n is the size of
logged bandit feedback dataset. Theoretical
analysis is complemented by comprehensive
empirical evaluations in both off-policy learning
and evaluation scenarios, confirming the practical
advantages of our approach. The code for our estimator is available at the following link: https:
//github.com/armin-behnamnia/
lse-offpolicy-learning .

In both scenarios, OPL and OPE, the IPS estimator is proposed (Thomas et al., 2015; Swaminathan & Joachims,
2015a). However, this estimator suffers from significant
variance in many cases (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983). To
address this, some improved IPS estimators have been proposed, such as the IPS estimator with the truncated ratio of
policy and logging policy (Ionides, 2008b), IPS estimator
with truncated propensity score (Strehl et al., 2010), selfnormalizing estimator (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015b),
exponential smoothing (ES) estimator (Aouali et al., 2023),
implicit exploration (IX) estimator (Gabbianelli et al., 2023)
and power-mean (PM) estimator (Metelli et al., 2021).
In addition to the significant variance issue of IPS estimators,
there are two more challenges in real problems: estimated
propensity scores and heavy-tailed behaviour of weighted
reward due to noise or outliers. Previous works such as
Swaminathan & Joachims (2015a), Metelli et al. (2021), and
Aouali et al. (2023) have made assumptions when dealing
with LBF datasets. Specifically, these works assume that
rewards are not subject to perturbation (noise) and that true
propensity scores are available. However, these assumptions

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Engineering,
Sharif University of Technology 2 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 3 Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University 4 Department of Statistic, London School of Economics
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Gholamali Aminian
<gaminian@turing.ac.uk>, Hamid R. Rabiee <rabiee@sharif.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

