Efficient and Privacy-Preserving Soft Prompt Transfer for LLMs

Xun Wang 1 Jing Xu 1 Franziska Boenisch 1 Michael Backes 1 Christopher A. Choquette-Choo 2
Adam Dziedzic 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are strong general-purpose
language generators that can be adapted to solve various
private downstream tasks (OpenAI, 2023; Gemini-Team
et al., 2023). One prominent paradigm for adapting LLMs
to private tasks is prompting (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford
et al., 2018). Prompting is a more flexible alternative to finetuning, as it allows multiple tasks to be solved simultaneously in a single inference pass, leading to higher efficiency
and reducing the need for storing multiple fine-tuned model
copies. While discrete prompts (Schick & Schütze, 2020;
2021a; Shin et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022), which prepend
textual tokens to the LLM’s input, have been shown relatively successful for LLM adaptations, they require large
engineering efforts and lots of trials and errors. As an alternative, soft prompts (Shin et al., 2020; Lester et al., 2021;
Li & Liang, 2021; Zhong et al., 2021; Oymak et al., 2023)
prepend trainable embedding vectors to the input, which can
be tuned automatically on the private downstream data using
standard gradient-based approaches. Such gradient-based
approaches are generally known to yield higher performance
at lower computational costs (Liu et al., 2022). Additionally,
soft prompts can encode information from many more private downstream examples while using fewer input tokens
than discrete prompts. This reduces costs—since many APIs
charge per token—and leaves more of the context window
for the downstream task (Varshney & Surla, 2023).

Prompting has become a dominant paradigm for
adapting large language models (LLMs). While
discrete (textual) prompts are widely used for their
interpretability, soft (parameter) prompts have recently gained traction in APIs. This is because
they can encode information from more training
samples while minimizing the user’s token usage, leaving more space in the context window
for task-specific input. However, soft prompts
are tightly coupled to the LLM they are tuned
on, limiting their generalization to other LLMs.
This constraint is particularly problematic for efficiency and privacy: (1) tuning prompts on each
LLM incurs high computational costs, especially
as LLMs continue to grow in size. Additionally, (2) when the LLM is hosted externally, soft
prompt tuning often requires sharing private data
with the LLM provider. For instance, this is the
case with the NVIDIA NeMo API. To address
these issues, we propose POST (Privacy Of Softprompt Transfer), a framework that enables private tuning of soft prompts on a small model
and subsequently transfers these prompts to a
larger LLM. POST uses knowledge distillation
to derive a small model directly from the large
LLM to improve prompt transferability, tunes the
soft prompt locally—optionally with differential
privacy guarantees—and transfers it back to the
larger LLM using a small public dataset. Our experiments show that POST reduces computational
costs, preserves privacy, and effectively transfers
high-utility soft prompts. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sprintml/POST.

Yet, soft prompt tuning has two major limitations. 1) As
LLMs grow in size (Geng & Liu, 2023; Chiang et al., 2023;
Brown et al., 2020), it requires significantly more computation to backpropagate through the entire LLM. 2) Backpropagation requires the model and data to be on the same
device. For centrally hosted LLMs, this leaves two options:
either the user needs to share their private data with the
LLM provider, or the LLM provider needs to share their
LLM with the user. The latter is impractical as users usually
do not have the compute to deploy an LLM. Additionally,
the model is the provider’s intellectual property (Dziedzic
et al., 2022a;b;c; Dubiński et al., 2023) and should be protected. Thus, sharing it would, at the very least, disrupt
the provider’s business model, as users would no longer be
required to pay per query. Therefore, the former, i.e., users
sharing their data with the LLM provider, is implemented

1
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security,
Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Franziska Boenisch <boenisch@cispa.de>, Adam Dziedzic
<adam.dziedzic@cispa.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

