Regret-Free Reinforcement Learning for Temporal Logic Specifications

Rupak Majumdar 1 Mahmoud Salamati 1 Sadegh Soudjani 1 2

Abstract

the temporal specification is satisfied (Icarte et al., 2018;
Camacho et al., 2019; Hasanbeig et al., 2019; Kazemi et al.,
2022; Hahn et al., 2019; Oura et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2021;
Bozkurt et al., 2021; Sickert et al., 2016; Alur et al., 2022;
Fu & Topcu, 2014; Voloshin et al., 2022). In the limit, the
approximations converge to the optimal policy.

Learning to control an unknown dynamical system with respect to high-level temporal specifications is an important problem in control theory. We present the first regret-free online algorithm for learning a controller for linear temporal
logic (LTL) specifications for systems with unknown dynamics. We assume that the underlying
(unknown) dynamics is modeled by a finite-state
and action Markov decision process (MDP). Our
core technical result is a regret-free learning algorithm for infinite-horizon reach-avoid problems
on MDPs. For general LTL specifications, we
show that the synthesis problem can be reduced
to a reach-avoid problem once the graph structure
is known. Additionally, we provide an algorithm
for learning the graph structure, assuming knowledge of a minimum transition probability, which
operates independently of the main regret-free algorithm. Our LTL controller synthesis algorithm
provides sharp bounds on how close we are to
achieving optimal behavior after a finite number
of learning episodes. In contrast, previous algorithms for LTL synthesis only provide asymptotic
guarantees, which give no insight into the transient performance during the learning phase.

In practice, it is not enough to know that approximations
converge in the limit; we would prefer to know how close
our current policy is to the optimal one, and to stop learning
when the policy is close to optimal. One way to quantify this
is through regret minimization (Auer et al., 2008; Agarwal
et al., 2014; Srinivas et al., 2012; Dann et al., 2017). For
an online learning algorithm, intuitively, regret is defined as
the difference between the accumulated rewards collected
by an optimal policy and the algorithm during learning. A
learning algorithm is called regret-free if the regret grows
sublinearly with the number of episodes.
In this paper, we propose the first regret-free learning algorithm for policy synthesis against LTL objectives. We consider the class of systems whose dynamics can be captured
by a finite-state and action Markov decision process (MDP)
with unknown transition probabilities and fixed initial state
sinit . The objective is to synthesize a policy that maximizes
the probability of satisfying a given LTL specification ϕ.
Let π ∗ denote an optimal policy, meaning that applying π ∗
maximizes the satisfaction probability for ϕ. Our online
algorithm produces a sequence of policies π1 , π2 , . . . , one
per episode. Let v ∗ (sinit ) and vk (sinit ) denote, respectively,
the satisfaction probabilities of π ∗ and πk when starting
from sinit . After passing
PK K > 0 episodes, we define the
regret as R(K) := k=1 (v ∗ (sinit )−vk (sinit )), the accumulated difference between the satisfaction probabilities under
the optimal and learned policy. Our algorithm ensures that
limK→∞ R(K)/K = 0.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of learning an optimal control policy for a stochastic system, whose dynamics are unknown,
with respect to linear temporal logic (LTL) specifications.
This is a core problem in control and robotics, with a rich
body of existing techniques. A fundamental approach to
the problem is to apply reinforcement learning (RL): the
agent maintains a model of the world learned through exploration, and computes a sequence of approximations to an
optimal control policy that maximizes the probability that

We first state our algorithm for reach-avoid specifications,
the subset of LTL specifications that require a set of goal
states must be visited while avoiding hitting a set of bad
states. In every episode, our algorithm (1) computes an
interval MDP (iMDP) by taking all the collected state observations into account; (2) finds an optimistic policy over
the computed iMDP to solve the reach-avoid problem; and
(3) executes the computed policy before an episode-specific
deadline is reached. We prove that the regret of our al-

1

MPI-SWS, Kaiserslautern, Germany 2 University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. Correspondence to: Mahmoud Salamati
<msalamati@mpi-sws.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

