OpenworldAUC: Towards Unified Evaluation and Optimization
for Open-world Prompt Tuning

Cong Hua 1 2 Qianqian Xu 1 Zhiyong Yang 2 Zitai Wang 1 Shilong Bao 2 Qingming Huang 2 3 1

Abstract

–

Table 1. An overview of the existing metrics for OPT. ✓ means
OverallAcc evaluates detection implicitly.
Metrics
HM
OverallAcc
AUROC
OpenworldAUC

(P1)First-stage
detection
✗
✓
✓
✓
–

Prompt tuning adapts Vision-Language Models like CLIP to open-world tasks with minimal training costs. In this direction, one typical paradigm evaluates model performance separately on known classes (i.e., base domain) and
unseen classes (i.e., new domain). However, realworld scenarios require models to handle inputs
without prior domain knowledge. This practical
challenge has spurred the development of openworld prompt tuning, which demands a unified
evaluation of two stages: 1) detecting whether
an input belongs to the base or new domain (P1),
and 2) classifying the sample into its correct class
(P2). What’s more, as domain distributions are
generally unknown, a proper metric should be insensitive to varying base/new sample ratios (P3).
However, we find that current metrics, including
HM, overall accuracy, and AUROC, fail to satisfy
these three properties simultaneously. To bridge
this gap, we propose OpenworldAUC, a unified
metric that jointly assesses detection and classification through pairwise instance comparisons.
To optimize OpenworldAUC effectively, we introduce Gated Mixture-of-Prompts (GMoP),
which employs domain-specific prompts and a
gating mechanism to dynamically balance detection and classification. Theoretical guarantees ensure generalization of GMoP under practical conditions. Experiments on 15 benchmarks in open-world scenarios show GMoP
achieves SOTA performance on OpenworldAUC
and other metrics. We release the code at
https://github.com/huacong/OpenworldAUC

(P2)Second-stage
classification
✓
✓
✗
✓

(P3)Domain distribution
insensitivity
✓
✗
✓
✓

1. Introduction
Recent powerful Vision-Language Foundation Models
(VLMs), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), use natural language to align visual concepts, enabling them to
infer new samples. To better utilize such abilities with minimal computational cost, Prompt Tuning (PT) has gained
significant attention (Lester et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022b).
PT allows the model to adapt to open-world scenarios with
only a small set of learnable parameters for textual or visual
prompts.
In this direction, a common setting is base-to-new (Zhou
et al., 2022b; Yao et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2022a; Khattak et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2024), where the model is
trained on a set of known classes (i.e., base domain) and
evaluated separately on the base domain and the unseen
classes (i.e., new domain). This task implicitly assumes that
the input samples are pre-labeled as belonging to either the
base or new domain. However, this assumption may not
hold in practice. To address this limitation, (Zhou et al.,
2024) adopt a divide-and-conquer strategy, inducing a more
practical setting named Open-world Prompt Tuning (OPT).
In this setting, the pipeline has two stages: the first stage
performs base-to-new detection to determine whether an
input belongs to the base or new domain, and the second
stage classifies the sample into its correct class.
In this complicated setting, how to evaluate model performance becomes challenging. We argue that an appropriate
metric should comprehensively evaluate (P1) first-stage detection, (P2) second-stage classification, and also (P3) be
insensitive to the domain distribution, i.e. the base/new ratio.
Unfortunately, as summarized in Tab. 1, existing metrics do
not satisfy the aforementioned properties simultaneously,
making them inconsistent with the actual model performance. Concretely, the harmonic mean (HM) of BaseAcc
and NewAcc, a common metric for the base-to-new task,

1
Key Lab of Intelligent Info. Processing, Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China 2 School of Comput. Sci. and
Tech., UCAS, Beijing, China 3 Key Lab of Big Data Mining
and Knowl. Manag., UCAS, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang
<qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

