Exploiting Curvature in Online Convex Optimization with Delayed Feedback

Hao Qiu * 1 Emmanuel Esposito * 1 Mengxiao Zhang * 2

Abstract

this round to update her strategy in the next round. However,
in many real-world applications, feedback is not immediately available after the learner’s decision but is instead subject to a delay. For instance, in online ad recommendation
systems (He et al., 2014), click-through information may
be delayed, and during this time the system must continue
making recommendations for other users without access to
the delayed feedback.

In this work, we study the online convex optimization problem with curved losses and delayed
feedback. When losses are strongly convex, existing approaches obtain regret bounds of order
dmax ln T , where dmax is the maximum delay and
T is the time horizon. However, in many
√ cases,
this guarantee can be much worse than dtot as
obtained by a delayed version of online gradient descent, where dtot is the total delay. We
bridge this gap by proposing a variant of followthe-regularized-leader
that obtains regret of order
√
min{σmax ln T, dtot }, where σmax is the maximum number of missing observations. We then
consider exp-concave losses and extend the Online Newton Step algorithm to handle delays with
an adaptive learning
√ rate tuning, achieving regret
min{dmax n ln T, dtot } where n is the dimension. To our knowledge, this is the first algorithm
to achieve such a regret bound for exp-concave
losses. We further consider the problem of unconstrained online linear regression and achieve
a similar guarantee by designing a variant of the
Vovk-Azoury-Warmuth forecaster with a clipping
trick. Finally, we implement our algorithms and
conduct experiments under various types of delay and losses, showing an improved performance
over existing methods.

Another crucial element in OCO is given by properties of
the loss functions such as the curvature. It is indeed often the case that losses have additional curvature properties
such as strong convexity or exp-concavity. For example,
exp-concave losses are prevalent in portfolio management
(Cover, 1991), in which the learner (investor) needs to distribute her wealth over a set of financial instruments in order
to maximize her return. When the loss functions have a
certain curvature, previous works (Hazan et al., 2007) have
shown that a significantly better regret guarantee can be
achieved (i.e., the so-called fast rates). However, this type
of assumption received little attention when assuming that
the feedback suffers some delay. Therefore, we are interested in investigating the following question:
Can we design algorithms that exploit the loss curvature to
obtain improved guarantees even with delayed feedback?
There is a line of works studying OCO with delayed feedback. For general convex functions, Quanrud & Khashabi
(2015) provided an algorithm called Delayed Online
√ Gradient Descent (DOGD) and achieves a regret of O( T + dtot )
where T is the time horizon and dtot is the total delay. Subsequently, Wan et al. (2022a); Wu et al. (2024) focused on
strongly convex losses, introducing DOGD-SC and SDMDRSC, which achieve a regret bound of O((dmax + 1) ln T ),
where dmax represents the maximum delay for any single
round of feedback. However, the O((dmax + 1)√
ln T ) regret
bound can sometimes be much worse than O( T + dtot ).
This occurs in scenarios when even a single round of feedback is delayed by Θ(T ) rounds (e.g., missing feedback),
undermining the benefits of having both regret guarantees
under stronger curvature assumptions. Furthermore, to
the best of our knowledge, no prior work has investigated
whether improved regret guarantees are achievable for expconcave losses under delayed feedback, leaving an important gap in the literature.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) is a powerful framework
for sequential decision making in uncertain environments
(Hazan et al., 2007; Orabona, 2025). In classic OCO, a
learner repeatedly makes a decision, incurs a loss for the
chosen action, and uses the feedback of the loss function at
*

1
Equal contribution
Università degli Studi di Mi2
lano University of Iowa.
Correspondence to:
Hao
Qiu <hao.qiu@unimi.it>,
Emmanuel Esposito <emmanuel@emmanuelesposito.it>, Mengxiao Zhang <mengxiaozhang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

