SDP-CROWN: Efficient Bound Propagation for Neural Network Verification
with Tightness of Semidefinite Programming

Hong-Ming Chiu 1 Hao Chen 1 Huan Zhang 1 Richard Y. Zhang 1

Abstract
Neural network verifiers based on linear bound
propagation scale impressively to massive models but can be surprisingly loose when neuron
coupling is crucial. Conversely, semidefinite programming (SDP) verifiers capture inter-neuron
coupling naturally, but their cubic complexity
restricts them to only small models. In this
paper, we propose SDP-CROWN, a novel hybrid verification framework that combines the
tightness of SDP relaxations with the scalability of bound-propagation verifiers. At the core
of SDP-CROWN is a new linear bound—derived
via SDP principles—that explicitly captures ℓ2 norm-based inter-neuron coupling while adding
only one extra parameter per layer. This bound
can be integrated seamlessly into any linear
bound-propagation pipeline, preserving the inherent scalability of such methods yet significantly improving tightness. In theory, we prove
that√our inter-neuron bound can be up to a factor
of n tighter than traditional per-neuron bounds.
In practice, when incorporated into the state-ofthe-art α-CROWN verifier, we observe markedly
improved verification performance on large models with up to 65 thousand neurons and 2.47
million parameters, achieving tightness that approaches that of costly SDP-based methods.

Figure 1: Verification of the ConvLarge network on the
CIFAR-10 dataset (six convolutional layers + three fully
connected layers, ≈2.47M parameters and 65k neurons) under ℓ2 adversaries. State-of-the-art bound propagation algorithms α-CROWN, β-CROWN and BICCOS
yield surprisingly loose relaxations under ℓ2 adversaries
(verified accuracy 2.5%, 5.0% and 6.0%, respectively) at
high cost (up to 289s per example). A naive Lipschitz baseline, which multiples per-layer ℓ2 Lipschitz constants directly (“LipNaive”), outperforms them (47.5% verified accuracy) with negligible runtime. In contrast, our proposed
method achieves a striking 63.5% verified accuracy while
keeping runtime moderate (73s). See Section 6.1 for experimental details; note that the model is too large to be
verified with traditional SDP methods.
ification methods, linear bound propagation based approaches (Zhang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Wong &
Kolter, 2018; Dvijotham et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2018;
2019; Xu et al., 2020) have emerged as the dominant approach due to their effectiveness and scalability. The core
idea is to construct linear functions that provide pointwise
upper and lower bounds for each nonlinear activation function and recursively propagate these bounds through the
network. This method has proven particularly effective
in certifying robustness against ℓ∞ -norm perturbations,
where individual input features are perturbed within fixed
limits. Notably, many highly ranked verifiers in VNNCOMP verification competition rely on bound propagation
due to its success in scaling to large networks (Brix et al.,
2023; 2024).

1. Introduction
Neural network verification is critical for ensuring that
models deployed in safety-critical applications adhere to
robustness and safety requirements. Among various ver1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence
to: Hong-Ming Chiu <hmchiu2@illinois.edu>, Hao Chen
<haoc8@illinois.edu>, Huan Zhang <huan@huan-zhang.com>,
Richard Y. Zhang <ryz@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

