Devil is in the Details: Density Guidance
for Detail-Aware Generation with Flow Models
Rafał Karczewski 1 Markus Heinonen 1 Vikas Garg 1 2

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful
class of generative models, capable of producing high-quality images by mapping noise to a
data distribution. However, recent findings suggest that image likelihood does not align with
perceptual quality: high-likelihood samples tend
to be smooth, while lower-likelihood ones are
more detailed. Controlling sample density is thus
crucial for balancing realism and detail. In this
paper, we analyze an existing technique, Prior
Guidance, which scales the latent code to influence image detail. We introduce score alignment,
a condition that explains why this method works
and show that it can be tractably checked for any
continuous normalizing flow model. We then
propose Density Guidance, a principled modification of the generative ODE that enables exact log-density control during sampling. Finally,
we extend Density Guidance to stochastic sampling, ensuring precise log-density control while
allowing controlled variation in structure or fine
details. Our experiments demonstrate that these
techniques provide fine-grained control over image detail without compromising sample quality.
Code is available at https://github.com/
Aalto-QuML/density-guidance.

Figure 1. Density guidance controls the amount of detail. Images sampled from the same condition and latent code with different strengths of guidance. Top: StableDiffusion v2.1 (Rombach
et al., 2022). Bottom: EDM2 (Karras et al., 2024b).

Remarkably, the density p0 correlates negatively with the
amount of detail: within the typical samples (Nalisnick et al.,
2019) x ∼ p0 higher-density images tend to lack detail and
be smooth, while lower-density images tend to be richly
textured and detailed (Sehwag et al., 2022) (See Fig. 1).
Outside the typical samples, extremely low density leads
to broken images (Karras et al., 2024a), while extremely
high density strips detail to the point of resembling sketch
drawings or blurs (Karczewski et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models are a family of generative models that
learn to map noise to a data distribution p0 , which allows realistic image sampling (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b;a;
Vahdat et al., 2021). In the quest towards high-fidelity sampling it is natural to ask whether perceptual quality of images
aligns with their likelihood p0 (x) (Karczewski et al., 2025)?

Somewhat surprisingly the common sampling strategies
in flow models do not optimise for sample density (Karras
et al., 2022). Recently, Karczewski et al. (2025) proposed an
approach towards controlling the sample density by biasing
the sampling towards the extremely high likelihood regions
of p(x0 |xt ), and demonstrated that these correspond to
unrealistic images. Their work is limited in three ways.

1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland 2 YaiYai Ltd. Correspondence to: Rafał Karczewski
<rafal.karczewski@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

