LAION-C: An Out-of-Distribution
Benchmark for Web-Scale Vision Models
Fanfei Li 1 Thomas Klein 1 Wieland Brendel 1 2 3 Robert Geirhos ‡ 4 Roland S. Zimmermann ‡ 4

Abstract

1. Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness is a desired property of computer vision models. Improving model robustness requires high-quality
signals from robustness benchmarks to quantify progress. While various benchmark datasets
such as ImageNet-C were proposed in the ImageNet era, most ImageNet-C corruption types
are no longer OOD relative to today’s large, webscraped datasets, which already contain common
corruptions such as blur or JPEG compression
artifacts. Consequently, these benchmarks are
no longer well-suited for evaluating OOD robustness in the era of web-scale datasets. Indeed, recent models show saturating scores on
ImageNet-era OOD benchmarks, indicating that
it is unclear whether models trained on web-scale
datasets truly become better at OOD generalization or whether they have simply been exposed
to the test distortions during training. To address
this, we introduce LAION-C as a benchmark alternative for ImageNet-C. LAION-C consists of
six novel distortion types specifically designed
to be OOD, even for web-scale datasets such as
LAION. In a comprehensive evaluation of stateof-the-art models, we find that the LAION-C
dataset poses significant challenges to contemporary models, including MLLMs such as Gemini
and GPT-4o. We additionally conducted a psychophysical experiment to evaluate the difficulty
of our corruptions for human observers, enabling
a comparison of models to lab-quality human robustness data. We observe a paradigm shift in
OOD generalization: from humans outperforming models, to the best models now matching or
outperforming the best human observers.

In recent years, large-scale vision models such as vision
transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and ConvNeXt (Liu
et al., 2022), trained on expansive web-scale datasets like
LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022), have pushed the boundaries of performance on standard benchmarks. However,
the continued advancement and reliable evaluation of these
models depends on the availability of datasets that effectively challenge model robustness and generalization capabilities.
In the era of training models on curated datasets like
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), creating OODbenchmarks was relatively straight-forward: By introducing visual corruptions that were absent from the training
set, such as blur and noise, researchers could evaluate the
robustness of their models in a controlled manner. If a
model performs well on a corruption it has never seen, it
can be said to be robust to this corruption. For example,
ImageNet-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019), which introduces different parametric corruptions to the ImageNet validation set, has long stood as the de facto standard for OOD
evaluation. Models that were trained on the (uncorrupted)
ImageNet images must robustly generalize in order to perform well on ImageNet-C.
With the shift towards training models on vast, largely unfiltered image datasets, it is much less clear how to obtain
test images that are truly OOD. Adding noise and blur to
images can no longer be considered a distribution shift, because such images are already present in the training set,
as demonstrated in Fig. 1. Models trained on LAION have
seen the types of corruption in ImageNet-C, and are likely
exposed to all realistic corruptions. Therefore, the fact that
models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) exhibit much better performance on classic OOD datasets than ImageNettrained models might not be an indication of true OOD robustness, but rather a consequence of a smaller train-test
gap. For distribution shifts defined by the style of an image,
recent work empirically shows that such datasets are indeed
not OOD, but overlap with LAION-400M (Mayilvahanan
et al., 2023; 2024). Hence, to measure the OOD robustness
of modern models, a dataset containing truly new image
corruptions is needed—even if this means that the corrup-

‡
Supervised this work. 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen
3
Tübingen AI Center 4 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Fanfei Li <first.last@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

