Neutral Residues: Revisiting Adapters for Model Extension

Franck SIGNE TALLA 1 Édouard Grave 1 Hervé Jégou 1

LOG PERPLEXITY

Abstract
LEARNING (FR)

We address the problem of extending a pretrained
large language model to a new domain that was
not seen during training. Standard techniques,
such as finetuning or low-rank adaptation (LoRA)
are successf ul at domain adaptation, but do not
formally add capacity to the model. This often
leads to a trade-off, between performing well on
the new domain vs. degrading performance on
the original domain. Here, we revisit and improve
adapters to extend LLMs from three angles: data,
architecture and training procedure, which are advantageously considered jointly. The resulting
method, called neutral residues, modifies adapters
in a way that leads each new residual block to
output near-zeros on the original domain. This
solution leads to strong results when adapting a
state-of-the-art model originally trained on English to a new language. Neutral residues significantly outperform competing approaches such as
finetuning, LoRA or vanilla adapters in terms of
the trade-off between learning the new language
and not forgetting English.

1.1
1.0

Backbone
Finetuning
LoRA
Adapters
Ours

0.9
0.8
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
FORGETTING (EN)

Figure 1. Learning or Forgetting? Fine-tuning a model reduces
the model performance on the original task. Potential trade-offs
are governed by the learning rate, with extreme cases being (topleft) the original backbone and (bottom-right) finetuning on the
new data with a large learning rate. LoRA or vanilla adapters
mitigate catastrophic forgetting but only to some extent. Our
method significantly improves this compromise. We report detailed
results in Table 7 of Section 4.

dollars, mostly due to the training on 16,000 H100 GPUs
for months,1 not counting the hidden costs of exploration.
In this paper, we consider the question of extending an
existing model, in order to add some new capabilities or
knowledge without retraining it from scratch and therefore
in a much more resource-efficient manner. The solutions
that are successful for domain adaptation, such as finetuning
or Low-Rank Adaptation (Hu et al., 2022, LoRA), are not
adequate in this context because they do not add any extra
capacity. Therefore they are inherently limited in the amount
of knowledge that they can incorporate without suffering
significant forgetting. This catastrophic forgetting is a wellknown problem in the continual learning setting (McCloskey
& Cohen, 1989; French, 1999).

1. Introduction
The dominating strategy for producing foundation models involves training from scratch on a large collection of
data, typically trillions of tokens, covering multiple domains.
Training such models is extremely costly in terms of computing resources. In view of the explosion of the number of
gigantic models produced in the last years (the HuggingFace
model repository claims to host about one million models),
this training paradigm raises the problem of the economical and ecological sustainability of the model production
pipelines. As an example, the cost of training the Llama 3
model is estimated be in the order of hundreds of millions

In contrast, the adapters introduced by Rebuffi et al. (2017)
extend a pretrained model by adding new parameters. When
transferring to a new domain or task, only these new weights
are trained while those of the original backbone are frozen.
This extension strategy, which was initially introduced in

1

Kyutai, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Franck SIGNE
TALLA <franck.signe-talla@kyutai.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/

