Are Large Brainwave Foundation Models Capable Yet? Insights from
Fine-tuning

Na Lee * 1 2 Konstantinos Barmpas * 1 2 3 Yannis Panagakis 2 3 4 Dimitrios Adamos 1 2 Nikolaos Laskaris 2 5
Stefanos Zafeiriou 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) technology promises a new
way to interact with machines by creating direct communication between the human brain and computers. This
technology is based on the analysis of brainwaves from electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings using advanced signal
processing and, more recently, machine learning techniques.
BCI technology finds application in various areas like emotion recognition [(Torres et al., 2020), (Xu et al., 2018)],
epileptic seizure detection [(Alkawadri, 2019), (Djoufack
Nkengfack et al., 2021)], robotic control (Irimia et al., 2012)
and video gaming (Kerous et al., 2018). BCIs can also augment human abilities and have the potential to transform
how we interact with our environment and each other, offering hope to people with disabilities to regain lost functions
[(Chaudhary et al., 2016), (Luu et al., 2017), (Biasiucci
et al., 2018), (Kumarasinghe et al., 2021), (Sharma et al.,
2016)].

Foundation Models have demonstrated significant success across various domains in Artificial Intelligence (AI), yet their capabilities for
brainwave modeling remain unclear. In this paper, we comprehensively evaluate current Large
Brainwave Foundation Models (LBMs) through
systematic fine-tuning experiments across multiple Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) benchmark
tasks, including memory tasks and sleep stage
classification. Our extensive analysis shows that
state-of-the-art LBMs achieve only marginal improvements (0.9%-1.2%) over traditional deep
architectures while requiring significantly more
parameters (millions vs thousands), raising important questions about their efficiency and applicability in BCI contexts. Moreover, through
detailed ablation studies and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), we significantly reduce trainable parameters without performance degradation, while
demonstrating that architectural and training inefficiencies limit LBMs’ current capabilities. Our
experiments span both full model fine-tuning and
parameter-efficient adaptation techniques, providing insights into optimal training strategies for
BCI applications. We pioneer the application of
LoRA to LBMs, revealing that performance benefits generally emerge when adapting multiple neural network components simultaneously. These
findings highlight the critical need for domainspecific development strategies to advance LBMs,
suggesting that current architectures may require
redesign to fully leverage the potential of foundation models in brainwave analysis.

The early days of the BCI era placed human experts at the
center of brainwave analysis, with manual feature extraction by neuroengineers regarded as the gold standard for
many years [(Bashashati et al., 2007), (Handy, 2009), (Rao,
2013), (Nam et al., 2018), (McFarland et al., 2006)]. However, these hand-crafted features often fail to generalize
effectively to real-world data, limiting their practicality in
everyday BCI applications.
The advent of deep learning has made the need for manual feature extraction redundant, as new data-driven approaches led to state-of-the-art performance in various BCI
paradigms [(Lawhern et al., 2018), (Santamarı́a-Vázquez
et al., 2020), (Song et al., 2023), (Barmpas et al., 2023),
(Bakas et al., 2022), (Wei et al., 2022)]. Although deep
learning models have demonstrated impressive results, they
generally demand substantial supervision and task-specific
data collection, making the process both time-intensive and
resource-demanding.

*
Equal contribution 1 Imperial College London 2 Cogitat
Archimedes / Athena Research Unit 4 National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens 5 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. Correspondence to: Na Lee <na.lee12@ic.ac.uk>.
3

Foundation Models have recently emerged as a promising
approach to address these limitations, showing remarkable
results in various domains, particularly in Natural Language
Processing and Computer Vision [(Brown et al., 2020), (Tou-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

