The Impact of Uncertainty on Regularized Learning in Games

Pierre-Louis Cauvin 1 Davide Legacci 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 1

Abstract

observed that, in the presence of uncertainty, “the players
of the game may not have full knowledge of [the game’s]
structure, or the ability and inclination to go through any
complex reasoning process to calculate an equilibrium. But
the participants are still supposed to adapt by accumulating empirical information on the relative advantages of the
various pure strategies at their disposal.”

In this paper, we investigate how randomness
and uncertainty influence learning in games.
Specifically, we examine a perturbed variant of
the dynamics of “follow-the-regularized-leader”
(FTRL), where the players’ payoff observations
and strategy updates are continually impacted
by random shocks. Our findings reveal that, in
a fairly precise sense, “uncertainty favors extremes”: in any game, regardless of the noise
level, every player’s trajectory of play reaches
an arbitrarily small neighborhood of a pure strategy in finite time (which we estimate). Moreover,
even if the player does not ultimately settle at
this strategy, they return arbitrarily close to some
(possibly different) pure strategy infinitely often.
This prompts the question of which sets of pure
strategies emerge as robust predictions of learning
under uncertainty. We show that (a) the only possible limits of the FTRL dynamics under uncertainty are pure Nash equilibria; and (b) a span of
pure strategies is stable and attracting if and only
if it is closed under better replies. Finally, we turn
to games where the deterministic dynamics are
recurrent—such as zero-sum games with interior
equilibria—and show that randomness disrupts
this behavior, causing the stochastic dynamics to
drift toward the boundary on average.

1

A natural context to study this question is that of noregret learning algorithms and dynamics—and, in particular, the family of learning dynamics known as “follow-theregularized-leader” (FTRL). The leading example of this
class is the replicator dynamics of Taylor & Jonker [63],
the continuous-time limit of the exponential / multiplicative
weights (EW) algorithm [4, 5, 40, 64], and a central object
of study in a rich literature at the intersection of learning
theory, games, and optimization, cf. the textbook treatments
of Hofbauer & Sigmund [25], Weibull [66] and Sandholm
[59]. The FTRL dynamics enjoy a broad range of appealing
properties—from (near-)optimal regret guarantees [33, 62]
and convergence to equilibrium in potential games [23, 43],
to a version of the folk theorem of evolutionary game theory [26, 42]—so, together with their many variants and
extensions, they have become virtually synonymous with
sequential learning in games.
At the same time, many of the most powerful and widely
used results of FTRL rely—often implicitly—on having access to perfect, deterministic information and exact knowledge of the players’ payoffs. This level of precision is often
difficult to justify in real-world decision-making scenarios,
whether due to imperfect observations, stochastic fluctuations in the players’ environment, or intrinsic variabilities in
the observed outcomes. In view of this, we ask the question:

Introduction

The surge of breakthrough applications of game theory to
machine learning and data science—from multi-agent reinforcement learning to online ad auctions and recommender
systems—has brought to the forefront the fundamental question of “as if” rationality: whether selfishly-minded, myopic
agents may eventually learn to behave “as if” they were fully
rational. This question dates back to Nash [53, p. 21] who

What is the impact of noise, randomness,
and uncertainty on the FTRL dynamics?
Our contributions in the context of related work. Our
findings can be summarized by a disarmingly simple mantra:

1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG,
38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Pierre-Louis Cauvin
<pierre-louis.cauvin@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.

“Uncertainty favors extremes.”

Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

By this, we mean that, irrespective of the structure of the
game or the level of noise and uncertainty, the FTRL dynamics tend to favor pure over mixed strategies.
1

