Beyond Topological Self-Explainable GNNs:
A Formal Explainability Perspective

Steve Azzolin * 1 Sagar Malhotra * 2 Andrea Passerini 1 Stefano Teso 1

Abstract

discriminative subgraph of the input and a classifier mapping said subgraph onto a prediction. Since this subgraph,
taken in isolation, is enough to infer the prediction, it plays
the role of a local explanation thereof. Despite the popularity of SE-GNNs (Miao et al., 2022a; Lin et al., 2020; Serra
& Niepert, 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ragno et al., 2022;
Dai & Wang, 2022), little is known about the properties and
limitations of their explanations. Our work fills this gap.

Self-Explainable Graph Neural Networks (SEGNNs) are popular explainable-by-design GNNs,
but their explanations’ properties and limitations
are not well understood. Our first contribution fills
this gap by formalizing the explanations extracted
by some popular SE-GNNs, referred to as Minimal Explanations (MEs), and comparing them to
established notions of explanations, namely Prime
Implicant (PI) and faithful explanations. Our analysis reveals that MEs match PI explanations for a
restricted but significant family of tasks. In general, however, they can be less informative than PI
explanations and are surprisingly misaligned with
widely accepted notions of faithfulness. Although
faithful and PI explanations are informative, they
are intractable to find and we show that they can
be prohibitively large. Given these observations,
a natural choice is to augment SE-GNNs with alternative modalities of explanations taking care of
SE-GNNs’ limitations. To this end, we propose
Dual-Channel GNNs that integrate a white-box
rule extractor and a standard SE-GNN, adaptively
combining both channels. Our experiments show
that even a simple instantiation of Dual-Channel
GNNs can recover succinct rules and perform on
par or better than widely used SE-GNNs.

Focusing on graph classification, we introduce the notion
of Minimal Explanations (MEs) as the minimal subgraphs
of the input ensuring that the classifier outputs the target
prediction. We then show that some popular SE-GNNs are
implicitly optimized for generating MEs. We further compare MEs with two other families of formal explanations:
Prime Implicant explanations1 (PIs) and faithful explanations. Faithful explanations are subgraphs that are sufficient
and necessary for justifying a prediction, i.e., they capture
all and only those elements that cause the predicted label
(Yuan et al., 2022; Tan et al., 2022; Agarwal et al., 2023;
Azzolin et al., 2025). PIs, instead, are minimally sufficient
explanations extensively studied in formal explainability
of tabular and image data (Marques-Silva, 2023; Darwiche
& Hirth, 2023; Wang et al., 2021). They are also highly
informative, e.g., for any propositional formula the set of
PIs is enough to reconstruct the original formula (Ignatiev
et al., 2015). Moreover, both PI and sufficient explanations
are tightly linked to counterfactuals (Beckers, 2022) and
adversarial robustness (Ignatiev et al., 2019). An example
of these families’ nuances is shown in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction

Our results show that MEs match PI explanations in the
restricted but important family of motif-based prediction
tasks, where labels depend on the presence of topological
motifs. Although in these tasks MEs inherit all benefits of
PIs, in general they are neither faithful nor PIs.

Self-Explainable GNNs (SE-GNNs) are Graph Neural Networks (Scarselli et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2020b) designed
to combine high performance and ante-hoc interpretability.
In a nutshell, a SE-GNN integrates two GNN modules: an
explanation extractor responsible for identifying a class-

These observations motivate augmenting SE-GNNs with
alternative explanation modalities to address their limitations. To this end, we introduce Dual-Channel GNNs (DCGNNs), a novel family of SE-GNNs that aim to extend the
perks of motif-based tasks to more general settings. DCGNNs combine a SE-GNN and a non-relational white-box

*
Equal contribution 1 DISI, University of Trento, Trento,
Italy 2 TU Wien, Wien, Austria.
Correspondence to:
Steve Azzolin <steve.azzolin@unitn.it>, Sagar Malhotra
<sagar.malhotra@tuwien.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Also known as sufficient reasons (Darwiche & Hirth, 2023).

