Info-Coevolution: An Efficient Framework for Data Model Coevolution
Ziheng Qin 1 2 Hailun Xu 2 § Wei Chee Yew 2 Qi Jia 1 Yang Luo 1 Kanchan Sarkar 2 ♢ Danhui Guan 2 ♢
Kai Wang 1 § Yang You 1 †

Abstract

paradigms for large-scale dataset construction fall into two
categories: (1) collecting and annotating data for fully supervised training, or (2) sourcing data from the web, followed
by automated cleaning and weakly-supervised/unsupervised
training, and subsequently fine-tuning models on downstream tasks with supervised data. However, both approaches incur significant costs for both annotation and
training, making them viable only for a few well-resourced
institutions. As a result, the construction of large-scale
datasets remains an insufficiently democratized and decentralized process.

Machine learning relies heavily on data, yet the
continuous growth of real-world data poses challenges for efficient dataset construction and training. A fundamental yet unsolved question is:
given our current model and data, does a new data
(sample/batch) need annotation/learning? Conventional approaches retain all available data,
leading to non-optimal data and training efficiency. Active learning aims to reduce data redundancy by selecting a subset of samples to annotate, while it increases pipeline complexity and
introduces bias. In this work, we propose InfoCoevolution, a novel framework that efficiently
enables models and data to coevolve through online selective annotation with no bias. Leveraging task-specific models (and open-source models), it selectively annotates and integrates online and web data to improve datasets efficiently.
For real-world datasets like ImageNet-1K, InfoCoevolution reduces annotation and training costs
by 32% without performance loss. It is able to
automatically give the saving ratio without tuning the ratio. It can further reduce the annotation ratio to 50% with semi-supervised learning.
We also explore retrieval-based dataset enhancement using unlabeled open-source data. Code
is available at https://github.com/NUS-HPC-AILab/Info-Coevolution/.

Before 2010, popular datasets such as MNIST (Deng, 2012)
and CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky et al., a;b) each contained
60,000 hand-annotated low-resolution images, reflecting the
modest scale of early machine learning datasets. The lack
of data limited the development speed of machine learning
at that time. In 2010, ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009) was
publicly released with more than 1M human annotated samples. It was the first large-scale supervised dataset, leading
to the development of many modern deep-learning algorithms and architectures, boosting the development of AI
research today. An estimated cost of building ImageNet1-k
is at least 0.4 million USD for labeling the total 1.28m images, and 4 million for 14m ImageNet-12k, excluding other
costs. With cloud GPU today, training a deep learning neural
network on ImageNet-1K with A100 GPU takes about $240
to $1400, while labeling an ImageNet-scale (million-scale)
data still takes more than 100 times this cost, ranging from
$24,000 to more than $1m depending on annotators’ degree
of proficiency. Constructing supervised data is usually more
expensive compared to training with them.

1. Introduction

Besides the supervised datasets, other types of datasets
emerge later with corresponding training schemes. Bert
(Devlin et al., 2019) and GPT (Brown et al., 2020) use largescale unsupervised text corpus, such as BooksCorpus (Zhu,
2015) and Common Crawl (Raffel et al., 2020), to train with
masked language modeling/next-token-prediction. CLIP
(Radford et al., 2021) scale the training on weakly supervised (web-sourced image-text pair) data with cross-modal
contrastive learning. Segment Anything (Kirillov et al.,
2023) utilizes models and manpower together to increase
the data scale and quality of segmentation data iteratively.
These different types of data have various quality and cost.

Machine learning is inherently data-driven and has numerous practical applications. Currently, the dominant
♢
Project lead § Core contribution 1 National University
of Singapore, School of Computing, 11 Research Link, Singapore 2 ByteDance Ltd, Singapore.
Correspondence to:
Ziheng Qin <zihengq@comp.nus.edu.sg>, Kanchan Sarkar
<kanchan.sarkar@bytedance.com>, Danhui Guan <guandanhui@bytedance.com>, Yang You <youy@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

