SPRI: Aligning Large Language Models with Context-Situated Principles

Hongli Zhan † 1 Muneeza Azmat 2 Raya Horesh 2 Junyi Jessy Li 1 Mikhail Yurochkin 2 3

Abstract
User

Aligning Large Language Models to integrate and
reflect human values, especially for tasks that demand intricate human oversight, is arduous since
it is resource-intensive and time-consuming to
depend on human expertise for context-specific
guidance. Prior work has utilized predefined
sets of rules or principles to steer the behavior
of models (Bai et al., 2022b; Sun et al., 2023).
However, these principles tend to be generic,
making it challenging to adapt them to each individual input query or context. In this work,
we present S ITUATED -PRI NCIPLES (SPRI), a
framework requiring minimal or no human effort
that is designed to automatically generate guiding principles in real-time for each input query
and utilize them to align each response. We
evaluate SPRI on three tasks, and show that 1)
SPRI can derive principles in a complex domainspecific task that leads to on-par performance as
expert-crafted ones; 2) SPRI-generated principles lead to instance-specific rubrics that outperform prior LLM-as-a-judge frameworks; 3) using SPRI to generate synthetic SFT data leads
to substantial improvement on truthfulness. We
release our code and model generations at https:
//github.com/honglizhan/SPRI-public.

Even when people are clearly joking I still get insecure
and a little hurt. I do my best not to show it but i think
to the more perceptive folks itʼs probably obvious …
Itʼs so stupid. I know itʼs rooted deeper like problems I
have with my dad and family and being accepted but
it still annoys me. Is there any fix to this?
Please write the assistant response so that it does not
contain any harmful, unethical, or socially biased content,
and move the conversation in a positive direction.
If the narrator is stressing over things they are not responsible
for, tell them that it may not require as much responsibility as
they think and not to worry about them too much. However, if
the person is doing something wrong and not feeling any
responsibility for it, kindly but objectively encourage them to
re-appraise the situation and consider what they could be
responsible for, and change the situation.

Acknowledge the narratorʼs emotional response without judgment,
while gently guiding them to reframe their perception of
responsibility … Suggest that the narratorʼs past experiences (e.g.,
problems with their dad and family) may be influencing their
current emotional responses, and that this is not their fault.
Encourage self-reflection to identify whether there are any patterns
or triggers that contribute to their feelings of insecurity and hurt …

Generic
Rules

Human
Experts

SPRI w/
GPT-4o
(mini)

Figure 1. Using SPRI, GPT-4o-mini can generate situated and
detailed principles to guide the response to a person narrating
in distress. Compared with generic rules (Bai et al., 2022b) and
human-expert-crafted principles (Zhan et al., 2024), SPRI requires
minimal to no human efforts yet produces context-specific guidance for every query at hand.

achieve the desired level of performance. For example,
Zhan et al. (2024) showed that LLMs are capable of generating high-quality cognitive reappraisals when guided by
“constitutions” written by clinical psychologists with doctoral degrees.1 LLM-as-a-judge (Zheng et al., 2023) is another prominent application that typically requires carefully
crafted evaluation criteria to align with human annotators
(Yu et al., 2024; Hashemi et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have showcased impressive performance across diverse applications (Achiam et al.,
2024; Dubey et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025; Jiang et al.,
2024; Groeneveld et al., 2024). However, in more complex tasks, human-expert-crafted prompts are required to

To better guide LLMs, several prior works utilized principles
or constitutions in the context of synthetic data generation
for alignment (Bai et al., 2022b; Sun et al., 2023). Such
approaches are effective at reducing data annotation efforts,
however, they are limited by the general nature of such
principles making them hard to interpret in a given context,
even for humans (Kirk et al., 2023a;b). For example, Bai

†
Work started and partially done during Hongli’s internship at IBM Research. 1 Department of Linguistics, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 2 IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI
Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Hongli Zhan
<honglizhan@utexas.edu>.

1
Cognitive reappraisal is a strategy commonly practiced by
clinical psychologists to foster long-term emotional well-being
(Arnold, 1960; Gross & John, 2003; Yeo & Ong, 2024). See
Appendix §E for more details.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

