Position: Future Research and Challenges Remain Towards AI for Software
Engineering

Alex Gu 1 Naman Jain 2 * Wen-Ding Li 3 * Manish Shetty 2 * Kevin Ellis 3 Koushik Sen 2
Armando Solar-Lezama 1

Abstract

automated program repair (Zhang et al., 2023c) focus on
automated program repair, and formal mathematical reasoning (Yang et al., 2024d). In addition, many papers discuss
the current state, challenges, and future of AI for software
engineering (Fan et al., 2023; Ozkaya, 2023; Wong et al.,
2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Hou et al., 2024; Jin et al., 2024;
Wan et al., 2024b; Roychoudhury et al., 2025a). Our work
draws inspiration from them, and we recommend that the
reader consult with them for alternative perspectives.

AI for software engineering has made remarkable progress, becoming a notable success within
generative AI. Despite this, there are still many
challenges that need to be addressed before automated software engineering reaches its full potential. In this paper, our goal is threefold. First,
we provide a taxonomy of measures and tasks to
categorize work towards AI software engineering.
Second, we outline key bottlenecks permeating today’s approaches. Finally, we call for large opensource community efforts and lay out a collection
of promising research directions to address these
challenges, hoping that we can all come together
to advance and shape the future of AI for code.

In this paper, our goal is threefold. In Sec. 2, we provide
a structured taxonomy of concrete tasks in AI for software
engineering. In particular, we emphasize that there are
many other tasks in SWE beyond code generation and code
completion, encouraging research in these areas. Moving
forward to Sec. 3, we highlight four main challenges that
today’s models face, each cross-cutting and applicable to
several tasks. In Sec. 4, we call for large open-source
community efforts in the field and lay out a collection of
promising research directions to address these challenges.
The main text contains a summary of highlights, with a full
version in the Appendix. We hope that after reading our
paper, the reader can appreciate the progress AI for code
has made, understand the shortcomings of today’s state-ofthe-art models, and come together to advance and shape the
future of the field.

1. Introduction
AI for software engineering has made remarkable progress
recently, becoming a notable success within generative AI.
Despite this, there are still many challenges that need to be
addressed before automated software engineering reaches
its full potential. With additional efforts, it should be possible to reach high levels of automation where humans can
focus on the critical decisions of what to build and how to
balance difficult tradeoffs while most routine development
effort is automated away. Reaching this level of automation,
however, will require substantial research and engineering
efforts across academia and industry. This paper provides
an opinionated view of the tasks, challenges, and promising directions towards achieving this goal.

2. Tasks in AI Software Engineering
We first provide a taxonomy of tasks in AI software engineering. To provide a structured way to consider each task,
we define three measures that apply across them: scope,
logical complexity, and level of human intervention. To
achieve an AI software engineer, we strive for AI to be
capable across the board for all three measures.

Many existing surveys overlap with the topics that are discussed in this paper, such as AI for programming assistants (Liang et al., 2024; Sergeyuk et al., 2025), LLMs for
software testing (Wang et al., 2024c), using LLMs in lowresource and domain-specific languages (Joel et al., 2024),

Scope Measure: We define three levels of scope, the extent
of changes that the AI makes to the codebase. Functionlevel scope refers to single, self-contained functions such
as in HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a) and MBPP (Austin
et al., 2021). Self-contained unit scope goes beyond singular
functions and to larger chunks of code such as entire files
and classes. Project-level scope refers to larger codebases

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 UC Berkeley 3 Cornell. Correspondence to: Alex Gu <gua@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

