What Has a Foundation Model Found?
Using Inductive Bias to Probe for World Models

Keyon Vafa 1 Peter G. Chang 2 Ashesh Rambachan 2 Sendhil Mullainathan 2

Abstract

gerich, 2004). This path — from predicting sequences to
understanding the deeper mechanisms that underlie them —
is not unique to physics. In biology, animal breeders noticed
patterns in the traits of offspring long before their predictive
insights inspired Mendel to develop a theory of genetics.

Foundation models are premised on the idea
that sequence prediction can uncover deeper
domain understanding, much like how Kepler’s
predictions of planetary motion later led to the
discovery of Newtonian mechanics. However,
evaluating whether these models truly capture
deeper structure remains a challenge. We develop
a technique for evaluating foundation models that
examines how they adapt to synthetic datasets
generated from some postulated world model.
Our technique measures whether the foundation
model’s inductive bias aligns with the world
model, and so we refer to it as an inductive bias
probe. Across multiple domains, we find that
foundation models can excel at their training
tasks yet fail to develop inductive biases towards
the underlying world model when adapted to
new tasks. We particularly find that foundation
models trained on orbital trajectories consistently
fail to apply Newtonian mechanics when adapted
to new physics tasks. Further analysis reveals
that these models behave as if they develop
task-specific heuristics that fail to generalize.

How would we know if foundation models have also made
the leap from making accurate predictions to developing
reliable world models? This paper develops a framework for
answering this question. Specifically, we create a procedure
that, when given a foundation model and world model, tests
whether the foundation model has learned that world model.
We call this technique an inductive bias probe, and it is
built on a simple insight: the implicit world model of a
foundation model is revealed by how it extrapolates from
a small amount of information. This is inspired by how
scientists use world models — to make inferences from
small amounts of data. Similarly, the inductive bias of a
foundation model reveals its world model.
We first demonstrate this procedure using an example from
physics. Specifically, we aim to replicate Kepler’s and Newton’s experiments, albeit replacing the physicist with a foundation model of orbital mechanics. Much like Kepler, the
model is able to predict orbital trajectories, even for solar
systems it has not seen.
What would it mean for this foundation model’s inductive
bias to be toward Newtonian mechanics? We demonstrate
one tangible way to test this: we fine-tune the foundation
model on a small dataset where the output is exactly the
force vector (a cornerstone of Newtonian mechanics) at
each point in the trajectory. If the foundation model’s world
model is toward Newtonian mechanics, it should have an
inductive bias towards these force vectors. In contrast, Figure 1 shows that the model produces poor force vectors.
More extremely, when we perform this exercise at a larger
scale across many solar systems, the laws of gravity it uses to
generalize bear no resemblance to Newton’s law (Table 1).

1. Introduction
The promise of foundation models relies on a central presumption: that learning to predict sequences can uncover
deeper truths, or optimistically, even a world model. While
this idea is new in one sense, it is old in another. Hundreds
of years ago, astronomers like Kepler discovered geometric
patterns that could pinpoint the future locations of planets in
the night sky. Newton would later expand on this progress to
develop Newtonian mechanics, fundamental laws that could
not only predict the movement of planets but also explain
physical properties across the universe (Koestler, 1959; Gin-

We further apply inductive bias probes in other domains
with a known world model: lattice problems and Othello
games (Liu et al., 2022; Hazineh et al., 2023; Nanda et al.,
2023b; Vafa et al., 2024). Across these domains, we find
that neural sequence models have weak inductive biases

1

Harvard University 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Keyon Vafa
<kvafa@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

