Position: Societal Impacts Research
Requires Benchmarks for Creative Composition Tasks

Judy Hanwen Shen 1

Abstract

dataset has served as a workhorse of measuring demographic
disparities in predicting income both for early fairnessaware algorithms and in large language model trustworthiness benchmarks today (Huang et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2023). As another example, TruthfulQA, a benchmark to
measure truthfulness (lack of misconceptions) in English,
has been included in benchmark suites (Huang et al., 2024),
leaderboards (Liang et al., 2022), and model technical reports (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023).

Foundation models that are capable of automating
cognitive tasks represent a pivotal technological
shift, yet their societal implications remain unclear. These systems promise exciting advances,
yet they also risk flooding our information ecosystem with formulaic, homogeneous, and potentially misleading synthetic content. Developing
benchmarks grounded in real use cases where
these risks are most significant is therefore critical. Through a thematic analysis using 2 million
language model user prompts, we identify creative composition tasks as a prevalent usage category where users seek help with personal tasks
that require everyday creativity. Our fine-grained
analysis identifies mismatches between current
benchmarks and usage patterns among these tasks.
Crucially, we argue that the same use cases that
currently lack thorough evaluations can lead to
negative downstream impacts. This position paper argues that benchmarks focused on creative
composition tasks is a necessary step towards understanding the societal harms of AI-generated
content. We call for greater transparency in usage patterns to inform the development of new
benchmarks that can effectively measure both the
progress and the impacts of models with creative
capabilities.

These are examples of benchmarks used to measure a specific construct related to safety or harm mitigation (Röttger
et al., 2024). However, when a model meets a certain score
threshold on these benchmarks, there is no guarantee that at
deployment time the model will exhibit the desired behavior
entirely (Kaiyom et al., 2024). One barrier to generalizable
evaluation is the gap between model usage and benchmark
development. Recent works have highlighted the need for
deployment-based evaluations for AI systems (De Vries
et al., 2020; Berente et al., 2024; Saxon et al., 2024), aligning with calls for benchmarks that demonstrate stronger
construct validity through contextual considerations (Raji
et al., 2021). In the domain of societal impacts, Wang et al.
(2024) extends this reasoning to advocate for more comprehensive evaluation benchmark suites.
What are the deployment scenarios where assessing the
societal impacts of AI is important? One way to answer
this question is to study how models are used. Domainspecific studies have found an increase in the use of large
language models in writing; from student essays (Jelson &
Lee, 2024) to scientific articles (Liang et al., 2024). Meanwhile, language model prompt datasets report categories
such as “helping and creative writing” (Zhao et al., 2024)
and “language and content creation” (Zheng et al., 2023)
contributing to up to two-thirds of usage. We translate these
broad domains into fine-grained categories of use through
a large-scale thematic analysis of 2 million prompts. Our
analysis reveals a family of tasks, which we term creative
composition tasks, where the generations of language models has salient downstream societal impacts.

1. Introduction
Responsible and safe AI development has been significantly aided by the availability and adoption of key benchmarks (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Angwin et al., 2022;
Weidinger et al., 2023). For example, the UCI Adult (Becker
& Kohavi, 1996) (and later Folktables (Ding et al., 2021))
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Joint
Work with Carlos Guestrin. Correspondence to: Judy Hanwen
Shen <jhshen@stanford.edu>.

On the surface, the connection between creative composition tasks and societal impacts may seem indirect. However,
the tasks we find require creativity for communication and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

