GaussMark: A Practical Approach for
Structural Watermarking of Language Models

Adam Block 1 2 Alexander Rakhlin 3 Ayush Sekhari 3 4

Abstract

quality artificial text (Achiam et al., 2023; Schulman et al.,
2022). While LLMs provide many benefits (He-Yueya et al.,
2023; Ahn et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Imani et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023), their rapid evolution and widespread
deployment pose significant risks to social, political, and
economic institutions (Mirsky et al., 2023). In particular,
the ability of LLMs to produce human-like text has raised
concerns about potential misuse, including academic plagiarism (Kasneci et al., 2023) and the spread of tailored
misinformation (Islam et al., 2020).

Watermarking, the process by which Large Language Model (LLM) servers imbed an imperceptible signal at inference time in order to detect
text generated by their own models, has grown in
importance due to the significant improvements
in natural language processing tasks by modern
LLMs. Current approaches are often impractical
due to generation latency, detection time, degradation in text quality, or robustness; such problems often arise due to the focus on token-level
watermarking, which ignores the inherent structure of text. In this work, we introduce a new
scheme, GaussMark, that is simple and efficient
to implement, has formal statistical guarantees,
comes at no cost in generation latency, and embeds the watermark into the weights of the model
itself, providing a structural watermark. Our approach is based on Gaussian independence testing and is motivated by recent empirical observations that minor additive corruptions to LLM
weights can result in models of identical (or even
improved) quality. We provide formal statistical
bounds on the validity and power of our procedure
and, through an extensive suite of experiments,
demonstrate that GaussMark is reliable, efficient,
relatively robust to corruption, and can be instantiated with essentially no loss in model quality.

To address these issues, a substantial body of research has
focused on watermarking LMs, i.e. embedding a signal
into generated text that the provider can use to determine
whether or not a given example was machine-generated. In
order for watermarking to be practical, it must possess a few
key properties: (a) watermarks should be easily detectable
with formal statistical guarantees; (b) watermarking should
not degrade LM performance either in quality or latency;
and (c) watermarks should remain detectable after common
token- and sequence-level corruptions are applied. Among
these desiderata, formal statistical guarantees on the validity
of the watermark are particularly important in situations
where authorship claims are sensitive, with a recent example being a lawsuit against a Massachusetts school by a
student’s parents after the school wrongly accused a student
of cheating with ChatGPT (Tenbarge, 2024); while such
claims do not always rise to the level of litigation, examples
of students falsely accused of cheating due to unreliable
detection abound (Jimenez, 2023; Klee, 2023; Giray, 2024;
Mathewson, 2023; Verma, 2023). As such, watermarking
schemes relying on heuristics or trained detectors, such as
Dathathri et al. (2024), cannot be reliably deployed.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Language Models (LMs) have significantly transformed the field of Natural Language Processing, offering unprecedented capabilities in generating high-

Prior works have proposed a plethora of watermarking
schemes in recent years, discussed in detail in Appendix B.
While some, such as that of Dathathri et al. (2024), allow for
efficient and practical watermarking, in order to maintain
high quality text, they require storage scaling linearly with
the number of generated tokens, which can be impractical
in large production systems. Others achieve rigorous guarantees for watermarking by embedding statistical patterns
into the autoregressive next-token sampling process of language models and further emphasize indistinguishability

1
Microsoft Research, New York, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
4
Boston University, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Adam Block
<adam.block@columbia.edu>, Ayush Sekhari <sekhari@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

