Policy Design for Two-sided Platforms with Participation Dynamics

Haruka Kiyohara 1 Fan Yao 2 Sarah Dean 1

Abstract

Considering such non-stationarity and two-sided dynamics
is crucial, as the viewers and providers are affected by each
others’ population in self-reinforcing feedback loops.

In two-sided platforms (e.g., video streaming or
e-commerce), viewers and providers engage in
interactive dynamics: viewers benefit from increases in provider populations, while providers
benefit from increases in viewer population. Despite the importance of such “population effects”
on long-term platform health, recommendation
policies do not generally take the participation
dynamics into account. This paper thus studies the dynamics and recommender policy design
on two-sided platforms under the population effects for the first time. Our control- and gametheoretic findings warn against the use of the standard “myopic-greedy" policy and shed light on the
importance of provider-side considerations (i.e.,
effectively distributing exposure among provider
groups) to improve social welfare via population growth. We also present a simple algorithm
to optimize long-term social welfare by taking
the population effects into account, and demonstrate its effectiveness in synthetic and real-data
experiments. Our experiment code is available
at https://github.com/sdean-group/dynamics-twosided-market.

Example 1 (Video recommendation). When a platform has
many videos about sports, viewers can expect that top sports
videos have high quality (e.g., production and intellect).
Meanwhile, if a platform is popular among sports lovers,
creators will produce more sports videos to gain more views.
Example 2 (Job matching). When a platform has many
applicants from a target category, companies looking to fill
a specific role can identify more highly skilled applicants.
On the other hand, if a platform has more openings for a
specific job type, more applicants from target categories will
register for the service.
The “population effects” in the aforementioned examples
strongly affect viewer utility and their long-term satisfaction. However, their implications for recommendation policy design have been under-explored. The conventional
formulation of recommendation follows (contextual) bandits (Li et al., 2010) and assumes that viewers and providers
are static across timesteps. Some recent work studies content provider departures (Mladenov et al., 2020; Huttenlocher et al., 2023) and the (negative) impacts on viewer
welfare (Yao et al., 2024b; 2023a). However, the viewer
population is modeled as static. In contrast, existing works
which consider dynamic viewer populations assume that
provider population is fixed (Hashimoto et al., 2018; Dean
et al., 2022). Therefore, we cannot tell how we should
optimize a policy, particularly in the initial launch of the
platform when two-sided dynamics exist. Finally, existing works considering strategic content providers (Hron
et al., 2022; Jagadeesan et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023b;
2024a; Prasad et al., 2023) model the (strategic) evolution
of provider features, assuming that the total number of viewers and providers are fixed. These works cannot tell if a
platform can “grow the pie” (i.e., viewer and provider populations) to improve long-term welfare.

1. Introduction
Two-sided platforms, where some individuals view content
or information provided by other individuals, are ubiquitous
in real-world decisions, e.g., video streaming, job matching,
and online ads (Boutilier et al., 2023). In such applications,
viewers and providers may co-evolve and mutually influence
each other: providers increase their content production if
they receive more attention from viewers (i.e., exposure),
and the platform gains more viewers if viewers receive highquality and favored content (i.e., satisfaction). These effects
are mediated by the platform’s recommendation algorithm.
1

Cornell University 2 University of Virginia. Correspondence to: Haruka Kiyohara <hk844@cornell.edu>, Sarah Dean
<sdean@cornell.edu>.

In response to this gap, we study the dynamics of “population effects” on two-sided platforms. Specifically, we
consider viewer and provider participation dynamics which
operate as follows: (1) the population of providers increases
as their exposure increases, (2) the population of viewers
increases as their satisfaction increases, and (3) the potential

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

