Measuring Diversity in Synthetic Datasets

Yuchang Zhu † 1 Huizhe Zhang 1 Bingzhe Wu 2 Jintang Li 3 4 Zibin Zheng 3 4 Peilin Zhao 5 6 Liang Chen * 1
Yatao Bian * 6 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have shown exceptional performance across a range of fields, such as chatbots (Achiam
et al., 2023), computer programming (Gu, 2023), and reasoning (Yuan et al., 2024). Inspired by their remarkable
capacities, some research (Ye et al., 2022; Abdullin et al.,
2024; Ding et al., 2024) employs LLMs as dataset generators
to mitigate the shortage of training data. Although generated data facilitates model optimization, recent studies (Yu
et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2023) suggest that a lack of diversity
within the dataset—measured by the variation between samples (Long et al., 2024)—may lead to performance degradation in some scenarios. Although previous studies (Yu
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2022) leverage well-designed generation strategies to create highly diverse synthetic datasets,
they consistently neglect to evaluate the diversity of these
datasets. Additionally, a principled diversity evaluation metric serves not only to guide LLM generators in creating more
diverse data but also extends its utility to data selection (Cao
et al., 2023), quantifying augmentation performance (Yang
et al., 2024a), and assessing mode collapse (Dan Friedman
& Dieng, 2023). Thus, a diversity evaluation method for
synthetic datasets is becoming increasingly important.

Large language models (LLMs) are widely
adopted to generate synthetic datasets for various
natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such
as text classification and summarization. However, accurately measuring the diversity of these
synthetic datasets—an aspect crucial for robust
model performance—remains a significant challenge. In this paper, we introduce DCScore, a
novel method for measuring synthetic dataset diversity from a classification perspective. Specifically, DCScore formulates diversity evaluation
as a sample classification task, leveraging mutual
relationships among samples. We further provide
theoretical verification of the diversity-related
axioms satisfied by DCScore, highlighting its
role as a principled diversity evaluation method.
Experimental results on synthetic datasets reveal that DCScore enjoys a stronger correlation
with multiple diversity pseudo-truths of evaluated
datasets, underscoring its effectiveness. Moreover,
both empirical and theoretical evidence demonstrate that DCScore substantially reduces computational costs compared to existing methods.
Code is available at: https://github.com/
bluewhalelab/dcscore.

Since the diversity evaluation of synthetic datasets remains
under-explored, a natural solution is to directly employ diversity evaluation methods from related fields, such as natural language processing (NLP) (Khurana et al., 2023) and
machine learning (ML) (Jordan & Mitchell, 2015). Specifically, efforts to measure diversity within these domains
can be summarized into three categories: N-gram-based
method (Zhu et al., 2018; Mishra et al., 2020), Referencebased method (Heusel et al., 2017; Cı́fka et al., 2018), and
Transformation-based method (Du & Black, 2019; Zhang
et al., 2024). The n-gram-based method evaluates diversity
through n-gram statistics, e.g., distinct-n (Li et al., 2015), focusing on textual form rather than semantic content. To align
the diversity criteria with human judgment, the referencebased method has emerged as a promising alternative. This
approach employs a reference distribution or data as an approximation of human judgment and calculates the similarity between the evaluated data and the reference data (Holtzman et al., 2019). However, collecting reference data can be
both time-consuming and may introduce potential biases.

†
Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab
Corresponding author 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 School
of Artificial Intelligence, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
Zhuhai, China 4 Zhuhai Key Laboratory of Trusted Large Language Models, Zhuhai, China 5 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 6 Tencent AI
Lab, Shenzhen, China 7 Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Yatao Bian <bianyt@comp.nus.edu.sg>, Liang Chen <chenliang6@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

