Human Cognition-Inspired Hierarchical Fuzzy Learning Machine

Junbiao Cui 1 Qin Yue 1 Jianqing Liang 1 Jiye Liang 1

Abstract

cross-entropy loss widely adopted in deep neural networks
(LeCun et al., 2015), etc. Despite their differences, these
loss functions share a common underlying assumption, i.e.,
the concepts corresponding to classes can be precisely defined. This assumption inherently implies that class relation
are crispy, where any two classes are either identical or
distinct, leaving no room for ambiguity.

Classification is a cornerstone of machine learning
research. Most of the existing classifiers assume
that the concepts corresponding to classes can be
precisely defined. This notion diverges from the
widely accepted understanding in cognitive science, which posits that real-world concepts are
often inherently ambiguous. To bridge this big
gap, we propose a Human Cognition-Inspired Hierarchical Fuzzy Learning Machine (HC-HFLM),
which leverages a novel hierarchical alignment
loss to integrate rich class knowledge from human knowledge system into learning process. We
further theoretically prove that minimizing this
loss can align the hierarchical structure derived
from data with those contained in class knowledge, resulting in clear semantics and high interpretability. Systematic experiments verify that the
proposed method can achieve significant gains in
interpretability and generalization performance.

In the classification problem, each class corresponds to
a concept. Unlike existing classifiers, human solves the
classification problem mainly based on concept cognition
(Murphy, 2004). Over the centuries, the classical theory of
concept representation prevailed, positing that all concepts
can be precisely defined. However, in 1953, the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein challenged this proposition by
exploring the concept of “game”, questioning whether a
precise definition of such a concept truly exists (Wittgenstein, 1953). This seminal inquiry sparked a paradigm shift,
leading the philosophy community to widely accept that
real-world concepts are often inherently ambiguous and
resist precise definition.
Building on the above consensus, modern cognitive science has developed several influential theories for concept
representation. Prototype theory (Rosch, 1975) models a
concept using an idealized prototype that encapsulates its
most representative features. Exemplar theory (Medin &
Schaffer, 1978) represents a concept through a set of typical
and representative instances. Knowledge theory (Murphy
& Medin, 1985) posits that concepts are deeply embedded
within human knowledge system, asserting that human cognition of a concept is inseparable from the contextual and
relational structure of this system. As the most sophisticate
framework, knowledge theory not only aligns closely with
human cognitive processes but also provides a compelling
foundation for advancing machine learning models that aim
to mimic human-like cognition.

1. Introduction
Classification stands as one of the most fundamental and
extensively studied problems in machine learning. Over
the years, a vast array of classifiers has been developed
(Delgado et al., 2014), with their methodologies broadly
categorized into two main approaches. The first approach
relies directly on the discrete 0-1 loss, as seen in classifiers such as k-nearest neighbors (Cover & Hart, 1967),
decision trees (Quinlan, 1986), and naive Bayes (Domingos & Pazzani, 1997), etc. The second approach employs
continuous functions as proxies for the 0-1 loss, including
the hinge loss used in support vector machine (Cortes &
Vapnik, 1995), the exponential loss adopted by AdaBoost
(Freund & Schapire, 1997; Friedman et al., 2000), and the

Recently, we proposed a fuzzy learning machine (FLM)
inspired by concept cognition (Cui & Liang, 2022). FLM
leverages fuzzy set theory (Zadeh, 1965) to capture the
inherent fuzziness of concepts (McCloskey & Glucksberg,
1978; Marti et al., 2023) and employs exemplar theory to
capture the typicality effects (Smith et al., 1974), achieving
good interpretability, robustness, and generalization.

1

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese
Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan
030006, Shanxi, China. Correspondence to: Jianqing Liang
<liangjq@sxu.edu.cn>, Jiye Liang <ljy@sxu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, FLM still faces limitations in understanding con1

