Neural Graph Matching Improves Retrieval Augmented Generation
in Molecular Machine Learning

Runzhong Wang * 1 Rui-Xi Wang * 1 Mrunali Manjrekar 1 Connor W. Coley 1

Abstract

reliable models is prominent, retrieval-augmented generation has achieved significant success. Recent progress in
small-molecule research further highlights the potential of
retrieval-augmented generation, which is also the main focus
of this paper.1 This approach has been demonstrated to enhance the accuracy and robustness of various molecular machine learning applications, including structure-based drug
design (Zhang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024), fragmentbased drug discovery (Lee et al., 2024), and monomer design for advanced materials (Buehler, 2024).

Molecular machine learning has gained popularity
with the advancements of geometric deep learning. In parallel, retrieval-augmented generation
has become a principled approach commonly used
with language models. However, the optimal integration of retrieval augmentation into molecular
machine learning remains unclear. Graph neural networks stand to benefit from clever matching to understand the structural alignment of retrieved molecules to a query molecule. Neural
graph matching offers a compelling solution by
explicitly modeling node and edge affinities between two structural graphs while employing a
noise-robust, end-to-end neural network to learn
affinity metrics. We apply this approach to mass
spectrum simulation and introduce MARASON,
a novel model that incorporates neural graph
matching to enhance a fragmentation-based neural network. Experimental results highlight the
effectiveness of our design, with MARASON
achieving 28% top-1 accuracy, a substantial improvement over the non-retrieval state-of-the-art
accuracy of 19%. Moreover, MARASON outperforms both naive retrieval-augmented generation methods and traditional graph matching approaches. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/coleygroup/ms-pred.

We assume a database exists with pairs of molecular structures and their properties of interest. For a new structure of
interest, references in the database can be straightforwardly
retrieved with cheminformatic tools such as molecular fingerprints (Morgan, 1965) and Tanimoto similarity (Bajusz
et al., 2015). Domain experts benefit from such features
in databases by searching for pairs of structures to correlate differences in structures with differences in properties,
even leading to entire subfields like matched molecular pair
analysis (Griffen et al., 2011). Therefore, we expect that
augmenting a structure-property relationship model with
structurally similar molecules and their associated properties should improve the accuracy of predictions.
However, designing an effective neural network architecture
for retrieval augmentation presents significant challenges.
Simple approaches, such as direct concatenation of reference information to the input of the neural network, often
yield minimal or no improvements (see Table 3). We hypothesize that this is due to models’ inabilities to adequately
address differences between the retrieved references and
the target molecule. We propose that employing atom-level
or fragment-level matching mechanisms in an end-to-end
network would allow for reference information to be used
more effectively.

1. Introduction
Enhancing neural networks with task-relevant factual knowledge has shown great promise in advancing knowledgeintensive applications, a technique widely recognized as
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020).
In scientific domains, where the demand for accurate and

Graph matching, which addresses node-level correspondences across multiple graphs, naturally emerges as a suitable approach to this challenge. It explicitly incorporates
structural matching by formulating both node-wise and
edge-wise graph affinity scores into the quadratic assign-

*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, United States. Correspondence to: Connor W.
Coley <ccoley@mit.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

“Small molecules” are defined in this work by a mass upper
limit of 1500 Da, enforced in all experiments.

1

