Near-Optimal Consistency-Robustness Trade-Offs
for Learning-Augmented Online Knapsack Problems

Mohammadreza Daneshvaramoli 1 Helia Karisani 1 Adam Lechowicz 1 Bo Sun 2 Cameron Musco 1
Mohammad Hajiesmaili 1

Abstract

In the online knapsack problem (OKP), the goal is to pack a
finite number of sequentially arriving items with different
values and weights into a knapsack with limited capacity,
so that the total value of admitted items is maximized. In
the online setting, the decision maker must immediately and
irrevocably admit or reject an item upon its arrival without
knowing future items. OKP captures a broad range of resource allocation problems with applications to online advertising (Zhou et al., 2008), resource allocation (Zhang et al.,
2017; Buchbinder & Naor, 2009), dynamic pricing (Bostandoost et al., 2023), supply chain (Ma et al., 2019), and
beyond. Historically, work on OKP variants has focused
on developing algorithms under the framework of competitive analysis (Borodin et al., 1992). It is well known that
no online algorithm can achieve bounded competitive ratio for the basic version of OKP (Marchetti-Spaccamela &
Vercellis, 1995; Böckenhauer et al., 2014b) without making additional assumptions on the input, e.g., assuming that
value-to-weight ratios are bounded (Zhou et al., 2008; Sun
et al., 2021a; Yang et al., 2021). In this work, we go beyond competitive analysis, to study OKP through the lens of
learning-augmented design.

This paper introduces a family of learningaugmented algorithms for online knapsack problems that achieve near Pareto-optimal consistencyrobustness trade-offs through a simple combination of trusted learning-augmented and worst-case
algorithms. Our approach relies on succinct, practical predictions—single values or intervals estimating the minimum value of any item in an
offline solution. Additionally, we propose a novel
fractional-to-integral conversion procedure, offering new insights for online algorithm design.

1. Introduction
Learning-augmented design (Lykouris & Vassilvtiskii, 2018;
Purohit et al., 2018) is a successful framework whose goal
is to systematically go beyond competitive analysis in online problems by leveraging ML predictions to improve
algorithm performance without sacrificing worst-case guarantees. In this framework, online algorithms are evaluated
using the concepts of consistency and robustness, which
characterize the competitive ratio (see § 2.1) when the prediction is accurate or arbitrarily wrong, respectively. An
overarching design goal is to achieve a Pareto-optimal result
that captures the best achievable trade-off between consistency and robustness. Toward this goal, algorithms have
been proposed that achieve optimal consistency-robustness
trade-offs for several problems such as ski rental (Bamas
et al., 2020; Wei & Zhang, 2020), online search (Sun et al.,
2021a), and bin packing (Angelopoulos et al., 2024). However, Pareto-optimal results remain open for several other
online problems, including the online knapsack problem.

Prior results. There has been substantial work on learningaugmented algorithms for OKP. We classify them into three
categories: (i) OKP with frequency predictions (Im et al.,
2021), (ii) advice complexity of OKP (Böckenhauer et al.,
2014b), and (iii) Pareto-optimal algorithms for simplified
OKP variants (Sun et al., 2021a; Lee et al., 2022; Balseiro
et al., 2023). See § A.1 for a complete literature review. In
the following, we focus on closely related prior work.
In the first category, Im et al. (2021) study learningaugmented OKP using frequency predictions, i.e., predictions of the total weights of items for each possible unit
value in an instance. The authors provide upper bounds on
the consistency and robustness of their SENTINEL algorithm,
but do not provide a lower bound on the best achievable
consistency-robustness trade-off under the frequency prediction model, leaving the question of optimality open. Further,
the frequency prediction model requires the algorithm to
be given a large number of predictions (one for each possible unit value). Due to this complexity, accurate frequency
predictions may be difficult to obtain in practice.

1
Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA
2
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada. Correspondence to: Mohammadreza
Daneshvaramoli <mdaneshvaram@umass.edu>, Helia Karisani
<hkarisani@umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

