Offline Learning for Combinatorial Multi-armed Bandits

Xutong Liu 1 Xiangxiang Dai 2 Jinhang Zuo 3 Siwei Wang 4 Carlee Joe-Wong 1 John C.S. Lui 2 Wei Chen 4

Abstract

the past decade, CMAB has been extensively studied (CesaBianchi & Lugosi, 2012; Bubeck et al., 2012; Audibert et al.,
2014; Neu, 2015; Gai et al., 2012; Kveton et al., 2015c;
Combes et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016; Wang & Chen, 2017;
Merlis & Mannor, 2019; Saha & Gopalan, 2019; Zimmert
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2024b; Qin et al., 2014; Liu et al.,
2023a; Choi et al., 2024; Hwang et al., 2023), driving advancements in real-world applications like recommendation
systems (Kveton et al., 2015a; Li et al., 2016; Lattimore
et al., 2018; Agrawal et al., 2019), healthcare (Lin & Bouneffouf, 2022; Verma et al., 2023; Bouneffouf et al., 2020),
and cyber-physical systems (György et al., 2007; Kveton
et al., 2015b; Li et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2023b).

The combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) is
a fundamental sequential decision-making framework, extensively studied over the past decade.
However, existing work primarily focuses on the
online setting, overlooking the substantial costs
of online interactions and the readily available
offline datasets. To overcome these limitations,
we introduce Off-CMAB, the first offline learning framework for CMAB. Central to our framework is the combinatorial lower confidence bound
(CLCB) algorithm, which combines pessimistic
reward estimations with combinatorial solvers.
To characterize the quality of offline datasets,
we propose two novel data coverage conditions
and prove that, under these conditions, CLCB
achieves a near-optimal suboptimality gap, matching the theoretical lower bound up to a logarithmic
factor. We validate Off-CMAB through practical applications, including learning to rank, large
language model (LLM) caching, and social influence maximization, showing its ability to handle nonlinear reward functions, general feedback
models, and out-of-distribution action samples
that exclude optimal or even feasible actions. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets for these applications further highlight
the superior performance of CLCB.

Most success stories of CMAB have emerged within the
realm of online CMAB1 , which relies on active data collection through online exploration. While effective in certain
scenarios, this framework faces two major limitations. On
one hand, online exploration becomes impractical when it
incurs prohibitive costs or raises ethical and safety concerns.
On the other hand, they neglect offline datasets that are often
readily available at little or no cost.
For instance, in healthcare systems (Liu et al., 2020),
recommending optimal combinations of medical treatments—such as drugs, surgical procedures, and radiation
therapy—requires extreme caution. Experimenting directly
on patients is ethically and practically infeasible. Instead,
leveraging pre-collected datasets of prior treatments can
help to make informed decisions while ensuring patient
safety. Similar happens for recommendation systems (Chen
et al., 2023) and autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2020),
offline datasets such as user click histories and human driving logs are ubiquitous. Leveraging these offline datasets
can guide learning agents to identify optimal policies while
avoiding the significant costs associated with online exploration—such as degrading user experience or risking car
accidents. For more examples, see Appendix B for details.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) is a fundamental sequential decision-making framework, designed
to tackle challenges in combinatorial action spaces. Over
1

ECE Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, United States 2 CSE Department, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China 3 CS Department, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
4
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiangxiang Dai <xxdai23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Jinhang Zuo <jinhang.zuo@cityu.edu.hk>, Wei Chen <weic@microsoft.com>.

To address the limitations of online CMAB, we propose the
first offline learning framework for CMAB (Off-CMAB),
where we leverage a pre-collected dataset consisting of n
samples of combinatorial actions and their corresponding
feedback data. Our framework handles rewards that are

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

See Appendix A for a comprehensive discussion on the related
works.

1

