Overcoming Spurious Solutions in Semi-Dual Neural Optimal Transport:
A Smoothing Approach for Learning the Optimal Transport Plan

Jaemoo Choi 1 Jaewoong Choi * 2 Dohyun Kwon * 3 4

Abstract

the optimal transport map directly using neural networks.
OT has found extensive applications in various machine
learning domains by appropriately defining source and target distributions, such as generative modeling (Rout et al.,
2022; Choi et al., 2023; 2024b; Choi & Choi, 2024; Lipman et al., 2023), image-to-image translation (Korotin et al.,
2023b; Fan et al., 2022), point cloud completion (Lee et al.,
2024), and domain adaptation (Flamary et al., 2016). The
OT framework is particularly advantageous for unpaired distribution transport tasks, as it relies solely on a predefined
cost function to map one distribution to another, eliminating
the need for paired data.

We address the convergence problem in learning the Optimal Transport (OT) map, where the
OT Map refers to a map from one distribution
to another while minimizing the transport cost.
Semi-dual Neural OT, a widely used approach for
learning OT Maps with neural networks, often
generates spurious solutions that fail to transfer
one distribution to another accurately. We identify
a sufficient condition under which the max-min
solution of Semi-dual Neural OT recovers the true
OT Map. Moreover, to address cases when this
sufficient condition is not satisfied, we propose
a novel method, OTP, which learns both the OT
Map and the Optimal Transport Plan, representing
the optimal coupling between two distributions.
Under sharp assumptions on the distributions, we
prove that our model eliminates the spurious solution issue and correctly solves the OT problem.
Our experiments show that the OTP model recovers the optimal transport map where existing methods fail and outperforms current OT-based models
in image-to-image translation tasks. Notably, the
OTP model can learn stochastic transport maps
when deterministic OT Maps do not exist, such as
one-to-many tasks like colorization.

Among various approaches, the minimax algorithm, derived
from the semi-dual formulation, has been widely investigated (Fan et al., 2022; Rout et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2023;
2024c). Formally, Fan et al. (2022); Rout et al. (2022) established the adversarial algorithm by leveraging the following
max-min problem:
sup inf L(V, T ) where L(V, T ) :=
T :X →Y
ZV
Z
(1)
c(x, T (x)) − V (T (x))dµ(x) +
V (y)dν(y).
X

Y

Here, the probability measures µ and ν represent the source
and the target distribution, respectively. The function V :
Y → R and T approximates a Kantorovich potential (Kantorovich, 1948), and an optimal transport map, respectively.
Throughout this paper, we call these approaches the Semidual Neural OT (SNOT).

1. Introduction

When the optimal potential V ⋆ and the transport map T ⋆
exist, it is well-known that
T ⋆ ∈ arg min L(V ⋆ , T ).
(2)

Optimal Transport (OT) theory (Villani et al., 2009; Peyré
et al., 2019) addresses the problem of finding the costoptimal transport map that transforms one probability distribution (source distribution) into another (target distribution). Recently, there has been growing interest in learning

T

as shown in Rout et al. (2022); Fan et al. (2022). Thus,
the pair (V ⋆ , T ⋆ ) is the solution to this max-min problem.
However, a critical challenge arises: not all solutions of
Eq.1 correspond to the optimal potential and transport map
pair. In other words, even the optimal solution in the SNOT
framework may not recover the correct optimal transport
map. We refer to this challenge as the spurious solution
problem.

*

1
Equal contribution
Georgia Institute of Technology
Sungkyunkwan University 3 University of Seoul 4 Korea Institute for Advanced Study. Correspondence to: Dohyun Kwon
<dh.dohyun.kwon@gmail.com>, Jaewoong Choi <jaewoongchoi@skku.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we analyze this fundamental issue of the spurious solution problem in existing SNOT frameworks. Specif1

