Measuring Diversity: Axioms and Challenges

Mikhail Mironov 1 Liudmila Prokhorenkova 1

Abstract

synthetic data in augmentation (Mumuni & Mumuni, 2022).
Thus, being able to quantify diversity is important.

This paper addresses the problem of quantifying
diversity for a set of objects. First, we conduct
a systematic review of existing diversity measures and explore their undesirable behavior in
certain cases. Based on this review, we formulate
three desirable properties (axioms) of a reliable
diversity measure: monotonicity, uniqueness, and
continuity. We show that none of the existing
measures has all three properties and thus these
measures are not suitable for quantifying diversity.
Then, we construct two examples of measures that
have all the desirable properties, thus proving that
the list of axioms is not self-contradictory. Unfortunately, the constructed examples are too computationally expensive (NP-hard) for practical use.
Thus, we pose an open problem of constructing a
diversity measure that has all the listed properties
and can be computed in practice or proving that
all such measures are NP-hard to compute.

Traditional methods of assessing diversity may differ across
domains and tasks. In the image generation domain, diversity ensures that at least some of the generated images can
fit a user’s preference. The average of pairwise distances between the output images is commonly used as a measure of
diversity. For instance, Ruiz et al. (2023) compute diversity
as the average LPIPS similarity between the output objects,
while Saharia et al. (2022) compute the average pairwise
SSIM between the first output sample and the remaining
samples. Similarly, in recommender systems, diversity ensures that at least some of the model outputs can fit a user’s
preference. The average pairwise distance between the outputs is a popular diversity measure in this domain (Alhijawi
et al., 2022). Another way of assessing diversity is via the
determinantal point process (DPP) approach that defines
diversity as the determinant of the similarity matrix (Wilhelm et al., 2018). In the molecule generation domain, the
typical task is to generate a diverse collection of molecules
with some predefined properties. The underlying goal is to
explore the whole space of such possible molecules and pick
the best candidates, so diversity of the output collection ensures that generated molecules are not clustered in one area,
while other areas are unexplored. A common diversity measure here is also the average pairwise distance between the
outputs (Du et al., 2022), although sometimes the percentage of unique generated molecules is reported (Hoogeboom
et al., 2022). Finally, in a recent paper on generating structurally diverse graphs (Velikonivtsev et al., 2024), a new
measure called energy is proposed as a better and more
reliable alternative to the average pairwise distance.

1. Introduction
Diversity of a collection of objects is a concept that is widely
used in practice: image generation models are required to
generate a diverse sample of images for a given prompt,
recommender systems are required to output a diverse set
of suggestions for a query, molecule generation models
often aim at generating a collection of structurally diverse
molecules with a given property. Diversity can also play
an important role in assessing how representative a given
dataset is, e.g., in molecule generation (Xie et al., 2023) or
neural algorithmic reasoning (Veličković & Blundell, 2021;
Mahdavi et al., 2023); and Zhao et al. (2024) argue that
it is critical to provide a clear definition of diversity when
analyzing datasets. A well-defined diversity measure also
ensures informative sample selection in active learning (Ren
et al., 2021) or may guide the generation of meaningful

Note that in all the examples above, diversity can also be
thought of as coverage: the goal is to cover different areas
of the space of potentially valid outputs. Thus, in this paper,
we use the terms diversity and coverage interchangeably.
In the literature, there have been a few attempts to analyze,
compare, or suggest better measures of diversity (Xie et al.,
2023; Friedman & Dieng, 2023; Velikonivtsev et al., 2024).
However, as we show in this paper, the problem is still
underexplored.

1

Yandex Research. Correspondence to: Mikhail Mironov
<mironov.m.k@gmail.com>,
Liudmila
Prokhorenkova
<ostroumova-la@yandex-team.ru>.

We limit the scope of our research to the following setup: we
are given a collection of abstract objects and their pairwise

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

