LightGTS: A Lightweight General Time Series Forecasting Model

Yihang Wang * 1 Yuying Qiu * 1 Peng Chen 1 Yang Shu 1 Zhongwen Rao 2 Lujia Pan 2 Bin Yang 1
Chenjuan Guo 1

0.52

Existing works on general time series forecasting
build foundation models with heavy model parameters through large-scale multi-source pre-training.
These models achieve superior generalization ability across various datasets at the cost of significant computational burdens and limitations in
resource-constrained scenarios. This paper introduces LightGTS, a lightweight general time series
forecasting model designed from the perspective
of consistent periodical modeling. To handle diverse scales and intrinsic periods in multi-source
pre-training, we introduce Periodical Tokenization,
which extracts consistent periodic patterns across
different datasets with varying scales. To better
utilize the periodicity in the decoding process, we
further introduce Periodical Parallel Decoding,
which leverages historical tokens to improve forecasting. Based on the two techniques above which
fully leverage the inductive bias of periods inherent
in time series, LightGTS uses a lightweight model
to achieve outstanding performance on general
time series forecasting. It achieves state-of-the-art
forecasting performance on 9 real-world benchmarks in both zero-shot and full-shot settings with
much better efficiency compared with existing
time series foundation models.

0.47

Average MSE

Abstract

Timer
MSE: 0.496
Parameters: 67M
Chronos
MSE: 0.400
Parameters: 700M

0.42

MOIRAI
MSE: 0.413
Parameters: 311M

0.37
Time-MoE
MSE:0.371
Parameters: 453M

LightGTS-tiny
MSE: 0.305
Parameters: 1.3M

0.32

LightGTS-mini
MSE: 0.294
Parameters: 4M

0.27
1

10

100

1000

Number of parameters (millions)

Figure 1. Comparison of model sizes and average zero-shot performance across seven benchmark datasets between LightGTS and
the state-of-the-art TSFMs.

datasets, several Time Series Foundation Models (TSFM)
have emerged (Liu et al., 2024; Woo et al., 2024a; Shi et al.,
2024), demonstrating promising potential. However, the
generalization capability of existing TSFMs largely depends
on massive pre-training data and large model parameters as
shown in Figure 1, resulting in high computational costs and
low efficiency.
Although both language and time series are sequential data,
unlike language which uses word tokens as basic elements,
time series elements can vary substantially and exhibit
distinctive characteristics. Specifically, scale refers to the
sampling rate of time series, e.g., sampling every 15 mins or
every hour, and intrinsic period reflects the time interval, e.g.
daily, that a pattern repetitively appears in the real-world.
Meanwhile, different scales affect the number of data points
that appear in an intrinsic period, referred to as a cycle length,
as shown in Figure 2(a). In multi-source time series pretraining, this scale-dependent variation necessitates models
to learn consistent representations of real-world periodic
patterns across different cycle lengths, a core demand for
reliable forecasting as evidenced by the critical role of
periodic modeling in (Lin et al., 2024b;a).

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is widely applied across various
domains, including energy, meteorology, education, finance,
and transportation (Wu et al., 2021; 2023; 2024; 2025c).
Traditional time series forecasting approaches typically use
task-specific statistical or deep learning models in an end-toend manner (Wu et al., 2025a; Qiu et al., 2025b; Wu et al.,
2025b). Recently, with a collection of large-scale time series
* Equal contribution 1 East China Normal University, Shanghai,

China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Chenjuan Guo <cjguo@dase.ecnu.edu.cn>.

However, the existing TSFMs adopt fixed tokenization,
where each token contains a fixed number of data points,
making it struggle to handle diverse scales and intrinsic
periods in multi-source pre-training. Specifically, fixed tokenization leads to varying information density of tokens

Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

