OTTER: A Vision-Language-Action Model
with Text-Aware Visual Feature Extraction
Huang Huang * 1 Fangchen Liu * 1 Letian Fu * 1 Tingfan Wu 2 Mustafa Mukadam 2
Jitendra Malik 1 2 Ken Goldberg 1 Pieter Abbeel 1

Abstract
Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models aim to
predict robotic actions based on visual observations and language instructions. Existing approaches require fine-tuning pre-trained visionlanguage models (VLMs) as visual and language
features are independently fed into downstream
policies, degrading the pre-trained semantic alignments. We propose OTTER, a novel VLA architecture that leverages these existing alignments
through explicit, text-aware visual feature extraction. Instead of processing all visual features, OTTER selectively extracts and passes only
task-relevant visual features that are semantically
aligned with the language instruction to the policy transformer. This allows OTTER to keep
the pre-trained vision-language encoders frozen.
Thereby, OTTER preserves and utilizes the rich
semantic understanding learned from large-scale
pre-training, enabling strong zero-shot generalization capabilities. In simulation and real-world
experiments, OTTER significantly outperforms
existing VLA models, demonstrating strong zeroshot generalization to novel objects and environments. Video, code, checkpoints, and dataset:
https://ottervla.github.io/.

Figure 1: (Top) Different feature extraction approaches in VLA
models. (a) Direct Feature Passing: existing approaches, exemplified by Octo and OpenVLA, extract and pass visual and text
tokens independently to the policy network. (b) Text-Aware Feature Extraction: the proposed approach, OTTER, extracts visual
tokens that correspond to the text tokens, and then feeds them
into the policy. (Bottom) Real-world Robot Experiments: OTTER
demonstrates higher success rates on both training and unseen realworld robot pick-and-place tasks compared to Octo and OpenVLA.
OTTER exhibits better zero-shot generalization to unseen objects,
maintaining strong performance across a variety of novel tasks.

Kim et al., 2024). Different input modalities are usually encoded into separate tokens: multi-view images encoded via
visual feature extractors, along with tokenized language instructions, optionally with the robot’s proprioceptive states,
are fed into a transformer-based robot policy for end-to-end
action generalization. This approach requires the policy
network to connect the vision and language information
and conduct precise robot control, which often presents
significant challenges, especially in unseen environments.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs)
and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have inspired the exploration of scaling datasets and computational resources for
vision-language-action (VLA) models (Collaboration et al.,
2024; Khazatsky et al., 2024; Octo Model Team et al., 2024;

Existing works such as RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023) and OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) have demonstrated the benefits of
directly fine-tuning pre-trained VLMs on robotic datasets to
map vision and language to control. While these approaches
leverage rich visual and language features from pre-trained
encoders, this fine-tuning may interfere with pre-trained vision and language features, particularly since robot datasets
are far less semantically diverse compared to large visionlanguage datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2022) where these

*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley 2 Meta
AI. Correspondence to: Huang Huang <huangr@berkeley.edu>,
Fangchen Liu <fangchen liu@berkeley.edu>, Letian Fu
<max.fu.letian@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

