Compositional Flows for 3D Molecule and Synthesis Pathway Co-design

Tony Shen * 1 Seonghwan Seo * 2 Ross Irwin 3 4 Kieran Didi 5 6 Simon Olsson 4 Woo Youn Kim 2 Martin Ester 1

Abstract

sequence of compositional reaction steps and predict their
continuous 3D conformations relative to a protein target
(Li et al., 2022). To this end, we propose a flow-based
generative framework that jointly models the compositional
structure and continuous state of objects.

Many generative applications, such as synthesisbased 3D molecular design, involve constructing compositional objects with continuous features. Here, we introduce Compositional Generative Flows (CGFlow), a novel framework that
extends flow matching to generate objects in compositional steps while modeling continuous states.
Our key insight is that modeling compositional
state transitions can be formulated as a straightforward extension of the flow matching interpolation process. We further build upon the theoretical foundations of generative flow networks
(GFlowNets), enabling reward-guided sampling
of compositional structures. We apply CGFlow
to synthesizable drug design by jointly designing the molecule’s synthetic pathway with its 3D
binding pose. Our approach achieves state-ofthe-art binding affinity and synthesizability on
all 15 targets from the LIT-PCBA benchmark,
and 4.2× improvement in sampling efficiency
compared to 2D synthesis-based baseline. To
our best knowledge, our method is also the first
to achieve state of-art-performance in both Vina
Dock (-9.42) and AiZynth success rate (36.1%)
on the CrossDocked2020 benchmark.

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021) and flow matching models (Lipman et al., 2023) have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in high-dimensional modeling tasks such as 3D molecule
generation and protein structure design (Hoogeboom et al.,
2022; Campbell et al., 2024; Schneuing et al., 2024a). However, standard diffusion and flow matching are restricted to
modeling all the dimensions of the object at once (Chen
et al., 2024). This results in an inability to model the compositional structure of objects through sequential construction
steps. As a consequence, two main limitation arise: (1)
the validity of compositional objects cannot be ensured, as
invalid generative actions cannot be masked, and (2) the
potential for efficient reward credit assignment in the compositional space is restricted (Bengio et al., 2021; Hansen
et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023). In drug design, where synthesizability is crucial for wet-lab validation, molecules can
be naturally viewed as compositional objects constructed
through sequential synthesis steps. Unfortunately, existing diffusion and flow matching models lack the ability to
effectively model and respect the compositional nature of
synthesis constraints when generating molecules.
Sequential models are a natural fit for generating composite
objects. For instance, autoregressive models have been applied for 3D molecular design (Peng et al., 2023; Gebauer
et al., 2020). However, current autoregressive models lack
mechanisms to correct errors from earlier steps, causing
slight errors in early position predictions to cascade (Jin
et al., 2022). Generative flow networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al., 2021) have recently shown success in sampling
compositional structure for synthesis-based molecule design
(Koziarski et al., 2024; Cretu et al., 2024; Seo et al., 2024),
but remain limited to 2D molecules.

1. Introduction
Sampling objects through compositional steps while modeling continuous state is essential for a wide range of scientific
applications (Jain et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023). One such
important application is synthesizable target-based drug design, which aims to jointly generate molecules through a
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing Science, Simon
Fraser University, Canada 2 Department of Chemistry, KAIST, Republic of Korea 3 Molecular AI, Discovery Sciences, R&D, AstraZeneca 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden 5 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK 6 NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Tony Shen <tsa87@sfu.ca>.

In this paper, we identify the key gap in standard flow matching and sequential models when generating compositional
objects with continuous properties. To address this limitation, we introduce Compositional Generative Flows
(CGFlow), a novel generative framework that enables flow-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

