AutoAL: Automated Active Learning with Differentiable Query Strategy Search

Yifeng Wang 1 Xueying Zhan 2 Siyu Huang 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning (DL) techniques,
large volumes of high-quality labeled data have become
increasingly crucial as the model training processes are
usually data hungry (Ren et al., 2021; Zhan et al., 2022).
Active learning (AL) addresses this challenge by iteratively
selecting the most informative unlabeled samples for annotation, thereby boosting model efficiency (Xie et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2023). Deep active learning strategies are
typically divided into two categories: uncertainty-based
and representativeness/diversity-based approaches (Sener
& Savarese, 2017; Zhu & Bento, 2017; Ash et al., 2019).
Uncertainty-based methods focus on querying samples the
model is most uncertain about, while diversity-based strategies aim to select a diverse subset of samples that effectively
represent the entire dataset (Citovsky et al., 2021). Both
strategies have limitations, especially in batch selection and
varying dataset complexities, leading to the inconsistency
of the strategy efficiency (Ren et al., 2021). Hybrid strategies, which balance uncertainty and diversity (Zhan et al.,
2021a;b), offer partial solutions. However, these strategies
rely on strategy choices and subjective experiment settings,
which can be ineffective in real-life applications.

As deep learning continues to evolve, the need
for data efficiency becomes increasingly important. Considering labeling large datasets is both
time-consuming and expensive, active learning
(AL) provides a promising solution to this challenge by iteratively selecting the most informative subsets of examples to train deep neural networks, thereby reducing the labeling cost. However, the effectiveness of different AL algorithms
can vary significantly across data scenarios, and
determining which AL algorithm best fits a given
task remains a challenging problem. This work
presents the first differentiable AL strategy search
method, named AutoAL, which is designed on
top of existing AL sampling strategies. AutoAL
consists of two neural nets, named SearchNet
and FitNet, which are optimized concurrently under a differentiable bi-level optimization framework. For any given task, SearchNet and FitNet are iteratively co-optimized using the labeled data, learning how well a set of candidate AL algorithms perform on that task. With
the optimal AL strategies identified, SearchNet
selects a small subset from the unlabeled pool
for querying their annotations, enabling efficient
training of the task model. Experimental results
demonstrate that AutoAL consistently achieves
superior accuracy compared to all candidate AL
algorithms and other selective AL approaches,
showcasing its potential for adapting and integrating multiple existing AL methods across diverse tasks and domains. Code is available at:
https://github.com/haizailache999/AutoAL.

Previous works (Baram et al., 2004; Hsu & Lin, 2015; Pang
et al., 2018) have explored selecting among different AL
strategies to achieve optimal selections without human effort. SelectAL (Hacohen & Weinshall, 2024) introduces
a method for dynamically choosing AL strategies for different deep learning tasks and budgets by estimating the
relative budget size of the problem. It involves evaluating
the impact of removing small subsets of data points from the
unlabeled pool to predict how different AL strategies would
perform. However, this strategy depends on approximating
the reduction in generalization error on small subsets, which
would not fully capture the complexities of real-world tasks.
Zhang et al. (2024) proposes to select the optimal batch of
AL strategy from hundreds of candidates, aiming to maximize future cumulative rewards based on noisy past reward
observations of each candidate algorithm. However, both
the computational cost and the lack of differentiability make
the optimization of these works inefficient.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Ray and Stephanie Lane
Computational Biology Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, USA 3 Visual Computing Division, School of Computing, Clemson University, Clemson, USA. Correspondence to:
Xueying Zhan <xueyingz@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address these challenges, we propose AutoAL, an automated active learning framework that leverages differen1

