Global Convergence and Rich Feature Learning in L-Layer Infinite-Width
Neural Networks under µ Parametrization

Zixiang Chen * 1 Greg Yang * 2 Qingyue Zhao 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

challenge: how can we explain the effectiveness of neural
networks given their non-convex optimization landscape
and over-parameterized nature? Traditional optimization
and learning theory frameworks struggle to provide satisfactory explanations. A breakthrough came with the study
of infinite-width neural networks, where the network behavior can be precisely characterized in the limit of infinite
width. This theoretical framework has spawned several important approaches to understanding neural networks, with
the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) emerging as a prominent
example.

Despite deep neural networks’ powerful representation learning capabilities, theoretical understanding of how networks can simultaneously achieve meaningful feature learning and
global convergence remains elusive. Existing approaches like the neural tangent kernel (NTK) are
limited because features stay close to their initialization in this parametrization, leaving open questions about feature properties during substantial
evolution. In this paper, we investigate the training dynamics of infinitely wide, L-layer neural
networks using the tensor program (TP) framework. Specifically, we show that, when trained
with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) under the
Maximal Update parametrization (µP) and mild
conditions on the activation function, SGD enables these networks to learn linearly independent
features that substantially deviate from their initial values. This rich feature space captures relevant data information and ensures that any convergent point of the training process is a global
minimum. Our analysis leverages both the interactions among features across layers and the properties of Gaussian random variables, providing new
insights into deep representation learning. We
further validate our theoretical findings through
experiments on real-world datasets.

Under the NTK parametrization (NTP) (Jacot et al., 2018),
neural network training behaves like a linear model: the
features learned during training in each layer remain essentially identical to those obtained from random initialization.
Consequently, the training process of over-parameterized
deep neural networks can be characterized by training linear
models with random feature (Lee et al., 2019; Arora et al.,
2019b; Cao & Gu, 2019; Chen et al., 2021). Since random
features are linearly independent, global convergence can be
proved for wide neural networks trained using (stochastic)
gradient descent (GD/SGD) (Du et al., 2019c; Allen-Zhu
et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019a; Zou et al., 2019; Zou & Gu,
2019). However, the NTK parametrization has significant
limitations, such as its inability to perform feature learning
and transfer learning, which involve pretraining and finetuning. While NTK theory provides convergence results
under infinite width, its inability to explain feature learning
motivates us to ask:

1. Introduction

Can deep neural networks simultaneously learn meaningful
features and achieve global convergence?

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various machine learning tasks, from image classification
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and speech recognition (Hinton
et al., 2012) to game playing (Silver et al., 2016). Yet
this empirical success has posed a significant theoretical

In this paper, we show that deep neural networks can achieve
both objectives through proper parametrization. While previous approaches like NTK and standard parametrization
fail to perform meaningful feature learning, and mean field
parametrization suffers from feature collapse in deep networks, we demonstrate that the µ parametrization (Yang &
Hu, 2020; 2021; Yang et al., 2021; Yang, 2019a) enables
both feature learning and global convergence. Specifically,
working with L-layer neural networks under µP scaling, we
prove that despite substantial feature evolution during train-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 xAI, USA. Correspondence
to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

