SFT Memorizes, RL Generalizes:
A Comparative Study of Foundation Model Post-training

Tianzhe Chu ♠ * Yuexiang Zhai ♥ ♣ * Jihan Yang ♦ Shengbang Tong ♦
Quoc V. Le ♣ Sergey Levine ♥ Yi Ma ♠ ♥
Saining Xie ♣ ♦ Dale Schuurmans ♣

Abstract

1. Introduction
Although SFT and RL are both widely used for foundation
model training (OpenAI, 2023b; Google, 2023; Jaech et al.,
2024; DeepSeekAI et al., 2025), their distinct effects on
generalization (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2000; Zhang et al.,
2021) remain unclear, making it challenging to build reliable and robust AI systems. A key challenge in analyzing the generalizability of foundation models (Bommasani
et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2020) is to separate data memorization1 from the acquisition of transferable principles.
Thus, we investigate the key question whether SFT or RL
primarily memorize training data (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023a;
Ye et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2024), or whether they learn
generalizable rules that can adapt to novel task variants.

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement
learning (RL) are widely used post-training techniques for foundation models. However, their
respective role in enhancing model generalization in rule-based reasoning tasks remains unclear. This paper studies the comparative effect
of SFT and RL on generalization and memorization, focusing on text-based and visual reasoning tasks. We introduce GeneralPoints, an
arithmetic reasoning card game, and also consider V-IRL, a real-world navigation environment, to assess how models trained with SFT and
RL generalize to unseen variants in both novel
textual rules and visual domains. We show that
RL, especially when trained with an outcomebased reward, generalizes in both the rule-based
textual and visual environments. SFT, in contrast, tends to memorize the training data and
struggles to generalize out-of-distribution in either scenario. Further analysis reveals that RL
improves the model’s underlying visual recognition capabilities, contributing to its enhanced
generalization in visual domains. Despite RL’s
superior generalization, we show that SFT is still
helpful for effective RL training: SFT stabilizes
the model’s output format, enabling subsequent
RL to achieve its performance gains. These findings demonstrate the advantage of RL for acquiring generalizable knowledge in complex, multimodal tasks.

To address this question, we focus on two aspects of generalization: textual rule-based generalization and visual generalization. For textual rules, we study the ability of a
model to apply learned rules (given text instructions) to
variants of these rules (Zhu et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2024;
Ye et al., 2024). For vision-language models (VLMs),
visual generalization measures the consistency of performance with variations in visual input, such as color and
spatial layout, within a given task. For studying text-based
and visual generalization, we investigate two different tasks
that embody rule-based and visual variants. Our first task
is GeneralPoints, an original card game task similar
to Points24 of RL4VLM (Zhai et al., 2024a), which is
designed to evaluate a model’s arithmetic reasoning capabilities. The model receives four cards (presented as a
text description or an image), and is required to compute
a target number (24 by default) using each card’s numerical value exactly once. Second, we adopt V-IRL (Yang
et al., 2024a), a real-world navigation task that focuses on
the model’s spatial reasoning capabilities.

*
♠
Equal contribution .
HKU, ♥ UC Berkeley, ♣ Google
DeepMind, ♦ NYU,
University of Alberta.
All experiments are conducted outside of Google.
Project page:
https://tianzhechu.com/SFTvsRL. Correspondence
to: Tianzhe Chu <tianzhechu@gmail.com>, Yuexiang Zhai <simonzhai@berkeley.edu>.

We adopt a multi-step RL framework similar to Zhai
et al. (2024a), by instantiating RL after running SFT on
1
We use “memorization” the refer a model’s capacity to generate near-exact copies of training examples when prompted based
on information present in the training dataset. This definition explicitly excludes bitwise or codewise replication of training data
within the model itself.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

