Over-Tokenized Transformer: Vocabulary is Generally Worth Scaling

Hongzhi Huang 1 Defa Zhu 1 Banggu Wu 1 Yutao Zeng 1 Ya Wang 1 Qiyang Min 1 Xun Zhou 1

Abstract
2.9

2.9

2.8

2.8

Loss

Loss

Tokenization is a fundamental component of
large language models (LLMs), yet its influence on model scaling and performance is not
fully explored. In this paper, we introduce OverTokenized Transformers, a novel framework that
decouples input and output vocabularies to improve language modeling performance. Specifically, our approach scales up input vocabularies
to leverage multi-gram tokens. Through extensive
experiments, we uncover a log-linear relationship
between input vocabulary size and training loss,
demonstrating that larger input vocabularies consistently enhance model performance, regardless
of model size. Using a large input vocabulary,
we achieve performance comparable to doublesized baselines with no additional cost. Our findings highlight the importance of tokenization in
scaling laws and provide practical insight for tokenizer design, paving the way for more efficient
and powerful LLMs.

2.7
2.6
2.5
151M

Loss -0.125

Matches 2x baseline
Baseline
OE-1.2M
OE-12.8M

400M

1B

Dense Parameters (log scale)

2.7
2.6
0.1M

151M Param
400M Param
1B Param

1.2M

12.8M

Vocabulary Size (log scale)

Figure 1: Scaling trend for Over-Encoded models and baselines on OLMo2. We plot the loss with 400B tokens’ training. For over-encoding, input vocabulary size is extended
from 0.1 to 1.2 and 12.8 million (12× and 128× larger
than baseline), referred to as OE-1.2M and OE-12.8M. We
observe OE-12.8M with 400M parameters matches the baseline with 1B parameters.

smaller models. Thus, it is natural to consider decoupling
the input and output vocabularies for separate investigations.
Our research is fundamentally based on this idea.

1. Introduction

Starting with synthetic experiments on context-free grammar modeling, we systematically analyze the effects of token granularity and vocabulary size on models of varying
scales. Firstly, it is revealed that larger tokenizers improve
the performance of larger models while introducing challenges for smaller ones, which is consistent with previous
studies. Furthermore, once the input and output vocabulary
is decoupled, we find that scaling up input vocabulary solely
keeps improving model, while larger output vocabulary may
be harmful to smaller models. This insight motivates the
development of Over-Tokenized Transformers, which decouple the encoding and decoding vocabularies to achieve
greater flexibility and performance gains.

The rapid advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have been driven by innovations in model architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017) and training paradigms (Radford
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). Moreover, with the guidance of scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020), models prove
to become stronger with increasing number of parameters
or training data. Tokenization, the process of converting
raw text into discrete tokens as the input and output of the
model, is recently found relevant to scaling laws, where
larger models deserve larger vocabulary and achieve better
performance under the same training cost (Tao et al., 2024).
In fact, expanding the input vocabulary incurs almost no additional computational cost, whereas expanding the output
vocabulary significantly increases the training overhead for

Specifically, we introduce Over-Encoding(OE), which utilizes large hierarchical n-gram input vocabulary. As shown
in Figure 1, our method improves the model scalability
by a significant margin. Increasing the input vocabulary
size by 128×, our 400M model matches the training loss
of a 1B baseline with no additional training cost (see left
panel). More interestingly, we observe a strong log-linear
relationship between the input vocabulary size and model

1
Bytedance Seed. Correspondence to: Hongzhi Huang
<huanghongzhi.51@bytedance.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

