S AFE A RENA: Evaluating the Safety of Autonomous Web Agents

Ada Defne Tur * 1 2 Nicholas Meade * 1 2 Xing Han Lù * 1 2 Alejandra Zambrano † 3 2 Arkil Patel † 1 2
Esin Durmus 4 Spandana Gella 5 Karolina Stańczak 1 2 Siva Reddy 1 2 5 6

Abstract

et al. 2024) are increasingly being deployed as agents for
interactive tasks, such as software engineering (Jimenez
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), web navigation (Zhou et al.,
2024; Koh et al., 2024), and computer use (Anthropic, 2024;
OpenAI, 2025). Open-source frameworks (Wang et al.,
2024b; Drouin et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024) are aiding
the widespread real-world adoption of these agents by allowing LLMs, such as ChatGPT, to be easily integrated with
web browsers, code interpreters, and external knowledge
sources. While this real-world use carries great promise,
the direct access to environments, alongside the high level
of autonomy granted to these agents, introduces new safety
concerns (Bengio et al., 2025).

LLM-based agents are becoming increasingly proficient at solving web-based tasks. With this capability comes a greater risk of misuse for malicious purposes, such as posting misinformation
in an online forum or selling illicit substances
on a website. To evaluate these risks, we propose S AFE A RENA, a benchmark focused on the
deliberate misuse of web agents. S AFE A RENA
comprises 250 safe and 250 harmful tasks across
four websites. We classify the harmful tasks into
five harm categories—misinformation, illegal activity, harassment, cybercrime, and social bias,
designed to assess realistic misuses of web agents.
We evaluate leading LLM-based web agents, including GPT-4o, Claude-3.5 Sonnet, Qwen-2-VL
72B, and Llama-3.2 90B, on our benchmark. To
systematically assess their susceptibility to harmful tasks, we introduce the Agent Risk Assessment framework that categorizes agent behavior across four risk levels. We find agents are
surprisingly compliant with malicious requests,
with GPT-4o and Qwen-2 completing 34.7% and
27.3% of harmful requests, respectively. Our findings highlight the urgent need for safety alignment
procedures for web agents. Our benchmark is
available here: https://safearena.github.io

A considerable amount of preliminary research on LLMbased agent safety has focused on investigating whether
agents can complete harmful tasks in text-based environments (Andriushchenko et al., 2024; Debenedetti et al.,
2024; Zou et al., 2024, etc.). Benchmarks released in this
area evaluate whether, via a series of function calls, LLMbased agents can perform harmful tasks, such as writing a
blog post containing misinformation. While these works
take an important first step towards evaluating malicious
misuse of LLM-based agents, they often make simplifying assumptions, such as the use of synthetic tools, which
limit their real-world relevance. Furthermore, the rapid rise
in agent capability, observed on tasks like web navigation
(Kim et al., 2023), highlights the need for more sophisticated LLM agent safety evaluations which operate within
more ubiquitous graphical user interfaces.

Warning: This paper contains examples that may
be offensive or upsetting.

In response to the above limitations, we introduce
S AFE A RENA, a benchmark for evaluating autonomous web
agent safety across five harm categories—misinformation,
harassment, illegal activity, cybercrime, and social bias—
on four realistic websites. Our benchmark is comprised of
250 pairs of safe and malicious tasks (giving a total of 500
tasks), which allows us to simultaneously evaluate the capability of agents to complete benign and harmful web tasks.
We design tasks in our benchmark to assess whether web
agents can be used to complete real-world malicious tasks.
For example, a malicious actor may instruct a web agent to
create a misleading forum post to spread misinformation or
submit a code repository issue encouraging discriminatory
discussions (see Figure 1).

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs; Brown et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2023; Groeneveld et al. 2024; Gemma Team
Equal contribution † Core contributors 1 McGill University
Mila Quebec AI Institute 3 Concordia University 4 Anthropic
5
ServiceNow Research 6 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Nicholas Meade <nicholas.meade@mila.quebec>, Siva
Reddy <siva.reddy@mila.quebec>.
*

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

