iDPA: Instance Decoupled Prompt Attention for Incremental
Medical Object Detection

Huahui Yi 1 Wei Xu 2 Ziyuan Qin 3 Xi Chen 4 5 Xiaohu Wu 6 Kang Li 1 7 † Qicheng Lao 6 †

1. Introduction

Abstract
Existing prompt-based approaches have demonstrated impressive performance in continual learning, leveraging pre-trained large-scale models
for classification tasks; however, the tight coupling between foreground-background information and the coupled attention between prompts
and image-text tokens present significant challenges in incremental medical object detection
tasks, due to the conceptual gap between medical
and natural domains. To overcome these challenges, we introduce the iDPA framework, which
comprises two main components: 1) Instancelevel Prompt Generation (IPG), which decouples
fine-grained instance-level knowledge from images and generates prompts that focus on dense
predictions, and 2) Decoupled Prompt Attention
(DPA), which decouples the original prompt attention, enabling a more direct and efficient transfer
of prompt information while reducing memory
usage and mitigating catastrophic forgetting. We
collect 13 clinical, cross-modal, multi-organ, and
multi-category datasets, referred to as ODinM13, and experiments demonstrate that iDPA outperforms existing SOTA methods, with FAP improvements of 5.44%, 4.83%, 12.88%, and 4.59%
in full data, 1-shot, 10-shot, and 50-shot settings, respectively. Code is available at https:
//github.com/HarveyYi/iDPA.git.

Prompts
Prior
Work

Image-text

nodule
Instances

Tokens
Prompts
Generate

Our
Work

Decoupling
Image-text

nodule

Tokens

Prompt Attention

𝑃𝑃𝑡𝑡

𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣

𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣 →𝑇𝑇

𝑃𝑃𝑡𝑡 →𝑉𝑉
𝑉𝑉

𝑇𝑇

LOC
CLS

Decoupled Prompt Attention

𝑃𝑃𝑡𝑡 →𝑉𝑉
𝑉𝑉

𝑇𝑇

𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣 →𝑇𝑇

LOC

CLS

Figure 1: Comparison of our method (iDPA) with prior
methods, highlighting improved object localization and
recognition through instance-level prompt generation and
decoupled prompt attention for medical detection tasks.
Vision Language Object Detection (VLOD) (Li et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2023a; Cheng et al., 2024), a paradigm
that enables recognition of novel categories and scenes,
has advanced object detection (OD) by integrating a language branch and leveraging large-scale image-text datasets.
While these models demonstrate strong zero-shot capabilities in general domains, they struggle in the medical domain
due to the degradation of medical object localization and
recognition. However, neither fine-tuning separate OD models for each task nor jointly training a single model for all
tasks is practical, as maintaining multiple models is inefficient and predefining all medical concepts is infeasible. Instead, Continual Learning (CL) (Li & Hoiem, 2017; Rebuffi
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2022c) is essential for adapting to
emerging medical concepts while retaining prior knowledge.
It must balance stability and plasticity to enable continuous
learning and improve healthcare outcomes.

1

West China Biomedical Big Data Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University 2 School of Biomedical Engineering, Division
of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China 3 Case Western Reserve University 4 Sports Medicine
Center, Department of Orthopedics and Orthopedic Research Institute, West China Hospital, West China School of Medicine,
Sichuan University 5 Department of Orthopedics and Orthopedic Research Institute, West China Hospital, Sichuan University
6
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 7 Sichuan
University Pittsburgh Institute. Correspondence to: Kang Li
<likang@wchscu.cn>, Qicheng Lao <qicheng.lao@bupt.edu.cn>.

Recently, prompt-based CL approaches (Wang et al.,
2022c;b;a; Smith et al., 2023) have gained popularity for
encoding knowledge into prompt sets, enabling a frozen
pre-trained model to handle sequential tasks. Compared
to previous methods, these approaches not only achieve
remarkable performance but also offer key advantages for
continual learning. By keeping the base model unchanged
and tuning only the prompt vectors, training efficiency is
enhanced while eliminating the need for exemplar storage,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

