Hgformer: Hyperbolic Graph Transformer for Collaborative Filtering

Xin Yang 1 Xingrun Li 2 Heng Chang 3 Jinze Yang 4 Xihong Yang 5 Shengyu Tao 3 Maiko Shigeno 1
Ningkang Chang 2 Junfeng Wang 5 Dawei Yin 5 Erxue Min 5

Abstract
Problem 1: Local structure modeling.

Recommender systems are increasingly spreading to different areas like e-commerce or video
streaming to alleviate information overload. One
of the most fundamental methods for recommendation is Collaborative Filtering (CF), which leverages historical user-item interactions to infer user
preferences. In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been extensively studied to
capture graph structures in CF tasks. Despite
this remarkable progress, local structure modeling and embedding distortion still remain two
notable limitations in the majority of GNN-based
CF methods. Therefore, in this paper, we propose
a novel Hyperbolic Graph Transformer architecture, to tackle the long-tail problems in CF tasks.
Specifically, the proposed framework is comprised of two essential modules: 1) Local Hyperbolic Graph Convolutional Network (LHGCN),
which performs graph convolution entirely in the
hyperbolic manifold and captures the local structure of each node; 2) Hyperbolic Transformer,
which is comprised of hyperbolic cross-attention
mechanisms to capture global information. Furthermore, to enable its feasibility on large-scale
data, we introduce an unbiased approximation of
the cross-attention for linear computational complexity, with a theoretical guarantee in approximation errors. Empirical experiments demonstrate that our proposed model outperforms the
leading collaborative filtering methods and significantly mitigates the long-tail issue in CF tasks.
Our implementations are available in https:
//github.com/EnkiXin/Hgformer.

Euclidean
distance
Distance in the graph
Problem 2: High distortion!
: Items

Hierarchical structure

: Users

Figure 1. This figure highlights two key challenges that traditional
GNNs often face when dealing with long-tail items. The first one
is the message-passing paradigm in local neighborhoods, which
prevents the model from transferring information from less popular
items to most users, leading to poor recommendations for these
items. The second one is that the embeddings in Euclidean space
may fail to capture the long distance in graphs, and will lead to
serious information distortion in graph structure.

1. Introduction
Recommender systems have become an indispensable part
of our daily life, serving as fundamental tools for personalized information filtering and prioritization (Cheng et al.,
2016; Davidson et al., 2010; Gong et al., 2020; Min et al.,
2025; Xihong et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025). The core of
a recommender system is to predict whether a user will engage with an item, such as by clicking, rating, or purchasing
it. In this context, Collaborative Filtering (CF) (Rendle et al.,
2012; Xue et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2018; He et al., 2020),
which leverages past interactions between users and items to
make these predictions, remains an essential component to
deliver effective personalized recommendations. The interaction patterns between users and items in CF tasks naturally
form a graph structure, motivating researchers to investigate
the use of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (He et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2019a; Sun et al., 2021), which has proven
significant advantages in modeling graph structures(Kipf &
Welling, 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017).
Despite the significant attention and fruitful outcomes in
this field, most existing GNNs normally assume that the
degree of each node is balanced. However, data in the realm
of recommender systems generally exhibit a long-tail distribution (Park & Tuzhilin, 2008; Park, 2012; Yin et al.,
2012; Zhao et al., 2023): a small portion of items are highly
popular with numerous users, whereas most other items

1

University of Tsukuba 2 Kyoto University 3 Tsinghua University
4
University of Tokyo 5 Baidu Inc.. Correspondence to: Erxue Min
<erxue.min@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

