Statistical Collusion by Collectives on Learning Platforms

Etienne Gauthier 1 Francis Bach 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 2
adversarial behavior, the collective may be able to exert
a significant influence on the algorithm. This concept of
collective action has its origins in economic theories (Olson,
1965) and has been more recently explored in the context of
machine learning (Hardt et al., 2023). It is crucial to understand how such collectives can influence learning algorithms
to better comprehend the dynamics within the network of
agents and to deploy algorithms that are reliable and aligned
with the majority interests of consumers. We will focus
specifically on the case of a platform that deploys a learning
algorithm and interacts with a population of consumers.

Abstract
As platforms increasingly rely on learning algorithms, collectives may form and seek ways to
influence these platforms to align with their own
interests. This can be achieved by coordinated
submission of altered data. To evaluate the potential impact of such behavior, it is essential to
understand the computations that collectives must
perform to impact platforms in this way. In particular, collectives need to make a priori assessments
of the effect of the collective before taking action,
as they may face potential risks when modifying their data. Moreover they need to develop
implementable coordination algorithms based on
quantities that can be inferred from observed data.
We develop a framework that provides a theoretical and algorithmic treatment of these issues and
present experimental results in a product evaluation domain.

Collective Action in Machine Learning. We draw on
the work of Hardt et al. (2023), who investigate the following problem: a population of individuals (x, y) ∈ X × Y,
drawn i.i.d. from a distribution D, interacts with a platform. A collective of relative size α ∈ (0, 1) forms within
this population with the goal of influencing the platform.
The collective’s influence is quantified by a success metric S(α), the definition of which depends on the collective’s objective. To influence the platform, members of the
collective modify their data according to a common strategy h : X × Y → X × Y, which maps the original features
and labels of the data to modified features and labels. The
platform observes a mixture of distributions αD̃ +(1−α)D,
where D̃ is the distribution of h(z) with z ∼ D. The platform selects a classifier based on this distribution. Thus,
the objective for the collective is to choose a strategy h that
maximizes its success S(α). Hardt et al. (2023) propose
strategies h for two distinct goals: signal planting and signal erasing. They derive lower bounds on the success S(α),
enabling the identification of a minimum collective size α∗
such that S(α) ≥ S ∗ for all α ≥ α∗ , where S ∗ is a target
threshold.

1. Introduction
The dynamic interaction among agents and algorithms creates a complex ecosystem where unanticipated individual
and collective behavior can emerge. The study of such behavior is crucial for understanding how to design systems
that are robust, fair, and aligned with societal values.
In a network, agents often have diverse motivations and
multiple incentives. When the incentives of the interacting
agents do not fully align with those of the designer of the
learning system, the former may wish to influence the learning process. This becomes salient in the common case in
which a learning system interacts with a large number of
agents. Such agents may collaborate, forming a cartel, by
pooling their data and devising a common strategy. Accordingly, even if the learning algorithm is robust to single-agent

Unfortunately, several of the strategies h studied by Hardt
et al. (2023) are not available in practice to the collective.
Furthermore, the bounds obtained on the success S(α) depend on key parameters that are unknown to the collective.
Lastly, in practice, the collective seeks a priori guarantees
of success before altering its data, as modifying the data
may expose members to risk. In this paper, we introduce
a new framework to enable members of the collective to
learn strategies h efficiently and to infer the parameters that
determine their success on the platform.

1
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University,
Paris 2 Departments of EECS and Statistics, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Etienne Gauthier <etienne.gauthier@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

