Subobject-level Image Tokenization

Delong Chen 1 2 Samuel Cahyawijaya 2 Jianfeng Liu 3 Baoyuan Wang 4 Pascale Fung 1 2

Abstract

celli & Olshausen, 2001). Direct modeling on pixels (Chen
et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2024) tends to be computationally inefficient, especially for high-resolution images. The
widely adopted approach is patch-based tokenization (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), which divides images into fixed-size
square patches, each treated as a single token. Although being straightforward and efficient, the non-adaptive nature of
patch-based tokenization prohibits its ability to capture the
underlying morphological structure of the image (Palmer,
1977). Consequently, larger patches fuse multiple semantics within a single token (polysemanticity), an undesirable
property that hinders effective learning of token representations. On the other hand, smaller patches exhibit greater
monosemanticity but lead to an excessive number of tokens,
resulting in computational inefficiency.

Patch-based image tokenization ignores the morphology of the visual world, limiting effective
and efficient learning of image understanding. Inspired by subword tokenization, we introduce subobject-level adaptive token segmentation and explore several approaches, including superpixel,
SAM, and a proposed Efficient and PanOptiC
(EPOC) image tokenizer. Our EPOC combines
boundary detection–a simple task that can be handled well by a compact model–with watershed
segmentation, which inherently guarantees no pixels are left unsegmented. Intrinsic evaluations
across 5 datasets demonstrate that EPOC’s segmentation aligns well with human annotations
of both object- and part-level visual morphology, producing more monosemantic tokens and
offering substantial efficiency advantages. For
extrinsic evaluation, we designed a token embedding that handles arbitrary-shaped tokens, and
trained VLMs with different tokenizers on 4
datasets of object recognition and detailed captioning. The results reveal that subobject tokenization enables faster convergence and better generalization while using fewer visual tokens. Project website: https://github.
com/ChenDelong1999/subobjects.

In Natural Language Processing (NLP), similar challenges
of input redundancy also exist, and the solution is to merge
characters that frequently co-occur into individual tokens
(Sennrich et al., 2016; Kudo, 2018; Gastaldi et al., 2024).
Sennrich et al. (2016) demonstrates that a statical-based
grouping approach can produce subword tokens that identifies the morphological structure, e.g., the word sweetish in
English can be chunked into “sweet” and “-ish”, while the
word “süßlich” in German, can be chunked into “süß” and
“-lich”. This yields better monosemanticity of tokens compared to other alternatives such as word-based or characterbased tokenization methods which improves generalization
to rare or out-of-vocabulary words by enabling semantic
composition of subwords (Wang et al., 2018; Wilie et al.,
2020; Mielke et al., 2021), while also guaranteeing efficiency by significantly reducing sequence length (Song et al.,
2021; Muller et al., 2022; Cahyawijaya et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Partitioning the raw observational data stream into a manageable number of segments is often beneficial for learning,
particularly when nearby elements in the data stream exhibit
strong correlations and therefore high redundancy (Cover,
1999; Barlow et al., 1961; Biederman, 1987; Marr, 2010;
Delétang et al., 2024). In Computer Vision (CV), nearby
pixels are often highly correlated (He et al., 2022; Simon-

Patch tokenization on images is analogous to “character
chunk tokenization” on text, which is conterintuitive and
rarely adopted in practice. We hypothesize that adaptive
token segmentation, as opposed to static patch tokenization,
can facilitate better learning of image understanding. To
test this, we explore both object-level tokenization, which
is akin to word-level tokenization, and subobject-level tokenization, resembling subwords in images. For subobject
segmentation, a promising method is SAM’s “segment everything” mode (Kirillov et al., 2023), but it suffers from
computational inefficiency and the presence of unsegmented
regions. We propose Efficient and PanOptiC (EPOC) to

1
Meta FAIR Paris 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Alibaba Group 4 Zillow. Correspondence
to: Pascale Fung <pascale@ece.ust.hk>, Delong Chen <delong.chen@connect.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

