Leveraging Sparsity for Sample-Efficient Preference Learning:
A Theoretical Perspective

Yunzhen Yao 1 Lie He 2 3 Michael Gastpar 1

Abstract

preferences (Resnick & Varian, 1997; Rendle et al., 2009;
He et al., 2017). Similarly, information retrieval systems can
leverage user clickthrough data from search-engine query
logs to improve the relevance of retrieved results (Joachims,
2002; Burges et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2009). More recently,
large language models (LLMs) are often pretrained on largescale internet data, which may contain harmful or biased
content, making direct deployment risky. Learning from human preferences is thus adopted to align pretrained models
with human values and objectives (Christiano et al., 2017;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022).

This paper considers the sample-efficiency of
preference learning, which models and predicts human choices based on comparative judgments. The minimax optimal estimation error rate
Θ(d/n) in classical estimation theory requires
that the number of samples n scales linearly with
the dimensionality of the feature space d. However, the high dimensionality of the feature space
and the high cost of collecting human-annotated
data challenge the efficiency of traditional estimation methods. To remedy this, we leverage
sparsity in the preference model and establish
sharp error rates. We show that under the sparse
random utility model, where the parameter of the
reward function is k-sparse, the minimax optimal
rate can be reduced to Θ(k/n log(d/k)). Furthermore, we analyze the ℓ1 -regularized estimator and
show that it achieves near-optimal rate under mild
assumptions on the Gram matrix. Experiments on
synthetic data and LLM alignment data validate
our theoretical findings, showing that sparsityaware methods significantly reduce sample complexity and improve prediction accuracy.

Preferences among alternatives can be represented by a
real-valued utility function, where a higher function value
corresponds to a more preferred option, provided that the
preference relation is complete, transitive, and continuous,
according to Debreu’s representation theorem (Debreu et al.,
1954). Moreover, to account for inconsistencies and randomness in human decision-making—arising from subjective
interpretations, ambiguous guidelines, and fluctuating focus—a deterministic utility function can be extended to a
stochastic utility model, in which the probability of choosing one alternative is higher when its utility is greater. This
paper focuses on learning preferences by training a parameterized random utility model.
A major challenge in preference learning is the high cost of
collecting human preference data (Gao et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023; Mahan et al., 2024). For example, aligning
LLMs with human values requires a significant amount
of samples labeled by experienced human annotators who
select the most “helpful” and “harmless” response among
all candidates. This difficulty is compounded by the fact that
alternatives often lie in feature spaces whose dimensionality
d far exceeds the number of available samples n, leading
to high estimation error Θ(d/n) for prevalent maximum
likelihood methods (Shah et al., 2016; Faury et al., 2020;
Saha et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Preference learning focuses on modeling and predicting
subjective choices or priorities from empirical comparative
data to support tasks such as decision-making, ranking, and
recommendation. For example, commercial recommender
systems select items from a set of candidates based on user
1
LINX, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics (Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics), Ministry of Education,
China 3 School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Yunzhen Yao <yunzhen.yao@epfl.ch>.

While alternatives may have thousands of attributes (dimensions), human preferences are usually driven by only a
small set of critical factors in a given context. For instance,
when a user selects among smartphones, the decision might
hinge primarily on price, camera quality, and UI design,
whereas many other attributes (e.g., place of manufacture)

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

