Benefits of Early Stopping in Gradient Descent
for Overparameterized Logistic Regression

Jingfeng Wu 1 Peter L. Bartlett * 1 2 Matus Telgarsky * 3 Bin Yu * 1

Abstract

explanation is that GD exhibits certain implicit regularization effects that prevent overfitting.

In overparameterized logistic regression, gradient
descent (GD) iterates diverge in norm while converging in direction to the maximum ℓ2 -margin
solution—a phenomenon known as the implicit
bias of GD. This work investigates additional regularization effects induced by early stopping in
well-specified high-dimensional logistic regression. We first demonstrate that the excess logistic
risk vanishes for early-stopped GD but diverges
to infinity for GD iterates at convergence. This
suggests that early-stopped GD is well-calibrated,
whereas asymptotic GD is statistically inconsistent. Second, we show that to attain a small excess
zero-one risk, polynomially many samples are
sufficient for early-stopped GD, while exponentially many samples are necessary for any interpolating estimator, including asymptotic GD. This
separation underscores the statistical benefits of
early stopping in the overparameterized regime.
Finally, we establish nonasymptotic bounds on
the norm and angular differences between earlystopped GD and ℓ2 -regularized empirical risk
minimizer, thereby connecting the implicit regularization of GD with explicit ℓ2 -regularization.

The implicit regularization of GD is relatively well understood in regression settings. Using overparameterized linear
regression as an example, amongst all interpolators, GD
asymptotically converges to the minimum ℓ2 -norm interpolator (Zhang et al., 2021). Moreover, when the data covariance satisfies certain conditions, the minimum ℓ2 -norm
interpolator achieves vanishing excess risk while fitting
training data with constant amount of noise, a phenomenon
known as benign overfitting (see Bartlett et al., 2020; Tsigler
& Bartlett, 2023, and references therein). When the data
covariance is general, although benign overfitting may not
occur, early-stopped GD (and one-pass stochastic GD) can
still achieve vanishing excess risk (Bühlmann & Yu, 2003;
Yao et al., 2007; Lin & Rosasco, 2017; Dieuleveut & Bach,
2016; Zou et al., 2023; 2022; Wu et al., 2022a). This suggests early stopping provides an additional regularization
effect for GD in linear regression. Moreover, the statistical
effects of early stopping are known to be comparable to
that of ℓ2 -regularization in linear regression (Suggala et al.,
2018; Ali et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2021; Sonthalia et al.,
2024).
However, the picture is less complete for classification,
where the risk is measured by the logistic loss and the zeroone loss instead of the squared loss. In overparameterized
logistic regression, GD diverges in norm while converging
in direction to the maximum ℓ2 -margin solution (see Soudry
et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2018, and Proposition 2.2 in
Section 2), which is in contrast with GD’s convergence to
the (bounded!) minimum ℓ2 -norm solution in the linear
regression setting. In standard (finite-dimensional, lownoise, large margin) classification settings, the asymptotic
implicit bias of GD implies generalization via classical margin theory (Bartlett & Shawe-Taylor, 1999). More recently,
certain high-dimensional settings exhibit well-behaved maximum margin solutions and benign overfitting (see Montanari et al., 2019, for example), but it is unclear if these
results apply more broadly or represent special cases. Moreover, if the maximum ℓ2 -margin solution generalizes poorly,
new techniques are required, as the aforementioned least
squares techniques cannot be easily adapted owing to their

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning often operates in the overparameterized regime, where the number of parameters exceeds
the number of training data. Despite this, models trained
by gradient descent (GD) often generalize well even in
the absence of explicit regularization (Zhang et al., 2021;
Neyshabur et al., 2017; Bartlett et al., 2021). The common
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley
Google DeepMind 3 New York University. Correspondence to:
Jingfeng Wu <uuujf@berkeley.edu>, Peter L. Bartlett <peter@berkeley.edu>, Matus Telgarsky <mjt10041@nyu.edu>, Bin
Yu <binyu@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

