Reflect-then-Plan:
Offline Model-Based Planning through a Doubly Bayesian Lens

Jihwan Jeong 1 * Xiaoyu Wang 1 Jingmin Wang 1 Scott Sanner 1 Pascal Poupart 2

Abstract

Most offline RL methods aim to learn a conservative policy
that stays close to the data distribution, thus steering away
from high epistemic uncertainty.

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is crucial
when online exploration is costly or unsafe but
often struggles with high epistemic uncertainty
due to limited data. Most of existing methods rely
on fixed conservative policies, restricting adaptivity and generalization. To address this, we propose Reflect-then-Plan (RefPlan), a novel doubly
Bayesian offline model-based (MB) planning approach. RefPlan unifies uncertainty modeling and
MB planning by recasting planning as Bayesian
posterior estimation. At deployment, it updates a
belief over environment dynamics using real-time
observations, incorporating uncertainty into MB
planning via marginalization. Empirical results
on standard benchmarks show that RefPlan significantly improves the performance of conservative
offline RL policies. In particular, RefPlan maintains robust performance under high epistemic
uncertainty and limited data, while demonstrating resilience to changing environment dynamics,
improving the flexibility, generalizability, and robustness of offline-learned policies.

While incorporating conservatism into offline learning has
proven effective (Jin et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2020), it
can result in overly restrictive policies that lack generalizability. Most methods learn a Markovian policy that relies
solely on the current state, leading the agent to potentially
take poor actions in unexpected states during evaluation.
Model-based (MB) planning can enhance the agent’s responsiveness during evaluation (Sikchi et al., 2021; Argenson &
Dulac-Arnold, 2021; Zhan et al., 2022), but it still primarily
addresses epistemic uncertainty through conservatism.
Noting this challenge, Chen et al. (2021) and Ghosh et al.
(2022) propose to learn an adaptive policy that can reason
about the environment and accordingly react at evaluation.
Essentially, they formulate the offline RL problem as a
partially observable MDP (POMDP)—where the partial
observability relates to the agent’s epistemic uncertainty, aka
Epistemic POMDP (Ghosh et al., 2021). Thus, learning an
adaptive policy involves approximately inferring the belief
state from the history of transitions experienced by the agent
and allowing the policy to condition on this belief state.
While learning an adaptive policy can help make the agent
more flexible and generalizable, it still heavily depends on
the training phase. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates
that a learned policy—whether it be adaptive or fixed—can
be significantly strengthened by incorporating MB planning.
However, existing MB planning methods fall short in adequately addressing the agent’s epistemic uncertainty, and
it remains elusive how one can effectively incorporate the
uncertainty into planning.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in offline reinforcement learning (RL)
enable learning performant policies from static datasets
(Levine et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020), making it appealing when online exploration is costly or unsafe.
The agent’s inability to gather more experiences have severe
implications. In particular, it becomes practically impossible to precisely identify the true Markov decision process
(MDP) with a limited dataset, as it only covers a portion of
the entire state-action space, leading to high epistemic uncertainty for states and actions outside the data distribution.

We propose Reflect-then-Plan (RefPlan), a novel doubly
Bayesian approach for offline MB planning. RefPlan combines epistemic uncertainty modeling with MB planning in
a unified probabilistic framework, inspired by the control-asinference paradigm (Levine, 2018). RefPlan adapts Bayesadaptive deep RL techniques (Zintgraf et al., 2020; Dorfman
et al., 2021) to infer a posterior belief distribution from past
experiences during test time (Reflect). To harness this uncertainty for planning, we recast planning as Bayesian posterior

*

Currently at Google Research, Mountain View, CA.
University of Torornto, Toronto 2 University of Waterloo, Waterloo.
Correspondence to: Jihwan Jeong <jihwanjeong@google.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

