On Exact Bit-level Reversible Transformers Without Changing Architecture

Guoqiang Zhang 1 J.P. Lewis 2 W. Bastiaan Kleijn 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
An active research trend in deep learning is to scale up
the size of both the deep neural networks (DNNs) and the
training data, with the aim of obtaining universal machinelearning models that are capable of accomplishing various tasks. Examples are large language models (LLMs)
such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) and Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023), which can, for example, have informative
and friendly conversations with humans, solve mathematical problems, and produce high-quality source codes for
programming tasks. A major bottleneck for training those
large DNNs is that they often require large on-chip memory
and large inter-chip communication bandwidth across many
chips to accommodate both the DNN model and the intermediate activations of the input data-batch in back-propagation
(Gholami et al., 2024), which is referred to as memory wall
in the literature.

In this work we present the BDIA-transformer,
which is an exact bit-level reversible transformer
that uses an unchanged standard architecture for
inference. The basic idea is to first treat each
transformer block as the Euler integration approximation for solving an ordinary differential equation (ODE) and then incorporate the technique of
bidirectional integration approximation (BDIA)
(originally designed for diffusion inversion) into
the neural architecture, together with activation
quantization to make it exactly bit-level reversible.
In the training process, we let a hyper-parameter
γ in BDIA-transformer randomly take one of the
two values {0.5, −0.5} per training sample per
transformer block for averaging every two consecutive integration approximations. As a result,
BDIA-transformer can be viewed as training an
ensemble of ODE solvers parameterized by a set
of binary random variables, which regularizes the
model and results in improved validation accuracy. Lightweight side information is required to
be stored in the forward process to account for
binary quantization loss to enable exact bit-level
reversibility. In the inference procedure, the expectation E(γ) = 0 is taken to make the resulting
architecture identical to transformer up to activation quantization. Our experiments in natural
language generation, image classification, and language translation show that BDIA-transformers
outperform their conventional counterparts significantly in terms of validation performance while
also requiring considerably less training memory.
Thanks to the regularizing effect of the ensemble,
the BDIA-transformer is particularly suitable for
fine-tuning with limited data. Source-code can be
found via this link.

One promising technique to alleviate the issue of memory
wall is to design and train reversible DNNs (Dinh et al.,
2014; 2016; Behrmann et al., 2019; Mangalam et al., 2023).
By doing so, the intermediate activations in the forward
pass do not have to be stored in the memory to allow for
back-propagation. Instead, they can be recomputed onthe-fly in the backward pass by exploiting the reversibility
of the DNN, thus saving memory consumption by a large
margin for deep DNNs. The procedure essentially reduces
memory consumption at the cost of a reasonable amount of
additional computation. The reduction in memory also has
the potential to improve throughput by increasing the batch
size.
Early reversible DNNs, such as NICE (Dinh et al., 2014), the
methods of (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), Real NVP (Dinh
et al., 2016), and Inverse Autoregressive Flow (Kingma
et al., 2016) are differentiable transformations that were
aimed at facilitating generative modeling. For an overview
of such early normalizing flows see (Kobyzev et al., 2020).
Inspired by these works, a range of reversible residual
models were proposed subsequently, including RevNet
(Gomez et al., 2017), Glow (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018),
i-RevNet (Jacobsen et al., 2018), i-ResNet (Behrmann et al.,
2019), layerwise inversion (Hascoet et al., 2019), Fouriertransformation based CNN inversion (Finzi et al., 2019),
and Mintnet (Song et al., 2019). Another line of research
enforces reversibility in deep learning from the perspec-

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, UK
NVDIA, USA 3 School of Engineering and Computer Science,
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. Correspondence
to: Guoqiang Zhang <guoqiang.x.zhang@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

