Inverse Flow and Consistency Models

Yuchen Zhang 1 Jian Zhou 1

Abstract

& Ermon, 2020; Song et al., 2021; 2022), conditional flow
matching models (Lipman et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2024),
and consistency models (Song et al., 2023; Song & Dhariwal, 2023) have achieved great success by learning a mapping from a simple prior distribution to the data distribution through an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) or
Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE). We refer to their
models as continuous-time generative models. These models typically involve defining a forward process, which transforms the data distribution to the prior distribution over time,
and generation is achieved through learning a reverse process that can gradually transform the prior distribution to
the data distribution (Figure 1).

Inverse generation problems, such as denoising
without ground truth observations, is a critical
challenge in many scientific inquiries and realworld applications. While recent advances in generative models like diffusion models, conditional
flow matching, and consistency models achieved
impressive results by casting generation as denoising problems, they cannot be directly used for
inverse generation without access to clean data.
Here we introduce Inverse Flow (IF), a novel
framework that enables using these generative
models for inverse generation problems including denoising without ground truth. Inverse Flow
can be flexibly applied to nearly any continuous
noise distribution and allows complex dependencies. We propose two algorithms for learning
Inverse Flows, Inverse Flow Matching (IFM) and
Inverse Consistency Model (ICM). Notably, to derive the computationally efficient, simulation-free
inverse consistency model objective, we generalized consistency training to any forward diffusion
processes or conditional flows, which have applications beyond denoising. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of IF on synthetic and real datasets,
outperforming prior approaches while enabling
noise distributions that previous methods cannot
support. Finally, we showcase applications of
our techniques to fluorescence microscopy and
single-cell genomics data, highlighting IF’s utility
in scientific problems. Overall, this work expands
the applications of powerful generative models to
inversion generation problems.

Despite that those generative models are powerful tools for
modeling the data distribution, they are not suitable for the
inverse generation problems when the data distribution is
not observed and only data transformed by a forward process is given, which is typically true for noisy real-world
data measurements. Mapping from noisy data to the latent
ground truth is especially important in various scientific
applications when pushing the limit of measurement capabilities. This limitation necessitates the exploration of novel
methodologies that can bridge the gap between generative
modeling and effective denoising in the absence of clean
data.
Here we propose a new approach called Inverse Flow (IF)1 ,
that learns a mapping from the observed noisy data distribution to the unobserved, ground truth data distribution (Figure
1), inverting the data requirement of generative models. An
ODE or SDE is specified to reflect knowledge about the
noise distribution. We further devised a pair of algorithms,
Inverse Flow Matching (IFM) and Inverse Consistency
Model (ICM) for learning inverse flows. Specifically, ICM
involves a computationally efficient simulation-free objective that does not involve any ODE solver.

1. Introduction

A main contribution of our approach is generalizing
continuous-time generative models to inverse generation
problems such as denoising without ground truth. In addition, in order to develop ICM, we generalized the consistency training objective for consistency models to any
forward diffusion process or conditional flow. This broad-

Recent advances in generative modeling such as diffusion
models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song
1

Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, USA. Correspondence to: Jian Zhou
<jian.zhou@utsouthwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Code available at https://github.com/jzhoulab/
InverseFlow

1

