Generalists vs. Specialists: Evaluating LLMs on
Highly-Constrained Biophysical Sequence Optimization Tasks

Angelica Chen * 1 2 Samuel D. Stanton * 2 Frances Ding 3 Robert G. Alberstein 3 Andrew M. Watkins 3
Richard Bonneau 2 Vladimir Gligorijević 2 Kyunghyun Cho 2 Nathan C. Frey 2

Abstract
Although large language models (LLMs) have
shown promise in biomolecule optimization problems, they incur heavy computational costs and
struggle to satisfy precise constraints. On the
other hand, specialized solvers like LaMBO-2
offer efficiency and fine-grained control but require more domain expertise. Comparing these
approaches is challenging due to expensive laboratory validation and inadequate synthetic benchmarks. We address this by introducing Ehrlich
functions, a synthetic test suite that captures the
geometric structure of biophysical sequence optimization problems. With prompting alone, offthe-shelf LLMs struggle to optimize Ehrlich functions. In response, we propose LLOME (Language Model Optimization with Margin Expectation), a bilevel optimization routine for online black-box optimization. When combined
with a novel preference learning loss, we find
LLOME can not only learn to solve some Ehrlich
functions, but can even perform as well as or
better than LaMBO-2 on moderately difficult
Ehrlich variants. However, LLMs also exhibit
some likelihood-reward miscalibration and struggle without explicit rewards. Our results indicate
LLMs can occasionally provide significant benefits, but specialized solvers are still competitive
and incur less overhead.

Figure 1: The space of all possible polypeptide sequences
is vast, but only a tiny fraction forms stable, folded (i.e. feasible) proteins. Different protein families (alpha, beta, and
mixed alpha/beta) generally occupy distinct regions of sequence space, but disordered proteins and remote homologs
with conserved structure and low sequence identity illustrate
the complexity of the protein design landscape.

1. Introduction
Despite their remarkable abilities, large language models
(LLMs) often fail at tasks with fine-grained constraints —
recent work has shown that even state-of-the-art models
struggle to reliably generate text with a fixed number of
words or to incorporate specific keywords or constraints
(Garbacea & Mei, 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2024c). This limitation becomes especially critical in black-box biomolecule optimization problems (Figure
1), where even minor violations of biophysical constraints
like protein stability or solubility can render a solution impossible to synthesize, purify, and assay (Hie et al., 2024;
Ismail et al., 2024). While specialized solvers like LaMBO2 address these constraints through careful modeling choices
and architectural design (Gruver et al., 2024), adapting such
solvers to new domains requires significant domain expertise and engineering effort. Recent work suggests that the

Work done at Genentech 1 Center for Data Science, New
York University, New York City, U.S.A. 2 Prescient Design,
Genentech, New York City, U.S.A. 3 Prescient Design, Genentech, San Francisco, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Angelica Chen <angelica.chen@nyu.edu>, Samuel Stanton <stanton.samuel@gene.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

