SUICA: Learning Super-high Dimensional Sparse

Implicit Neural Representations for Spatial Transcriptomics
Qingtian Zhu * 1 Yumin Zheng * 2 3 Yuling Sang 4 Yifan Zhan 1 Ziyan Zhu 5 Jun Ding 2 3 6 Yinqiang Zheng 1

Abstract

(a)

(c)

UMAP 2

Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) is a method that captures gene expression profiles aligned with spatial
coordinates. The discrete spatial distribution and
the super-high dimensional sequencing results
make ST data challenging to be modeled effectively. In this paper, we manage to model ST in a
continuous and compact manner by the proposed
tool, SUICA, empowered by the great approximation capability of Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) that can enhance both the spatial density and the gene expression. Concretely within
the proposed SUICA, we incorporate a graphaugmented Autoencoder to effectively model the
context information of the unstructured spots
and provide informative embeddings that are
structure-aware for spatial mapping. We also
tackle the extremely skewed distribution in a
regression-by-classification fashion and enforce
classification-based loss functions for the optimization of SUICA. By extensive experiments of
a wide range of common ST platforms under varying degradations, SUICA outperforms both conventional INR variants and SOTA methods regarding numerical fidelity, statistical correlation, and
bio-conservation. The prediction by SUICA also
showcases amplified gene signatures that enriches
the bio-conservation of the raw data and benefits subsequent analysis. The code is available at
https://github.com/Szym29/SUICA.

(b)

UMAP 1

Adipose tissue
Adrenal gland
Bone
Brain
Cartilage
Cartilage primordium
Cavity
Choroid plexus
Connective tissue
Dorsal root ganglion
Epidermis
GI tract
Heart
Inner ear
Jaw and tooth
Kidney
Liver
Lung
Meninges
Mucosal epithelium
Muscle
Smooth muscle
Spinal cord
Submandibular gland
Sympathetic nerve

Figure 1. Starting with the discretely sampled spots (a) of ST,
SUICA performs continuous modeling (b) by aid of the great
approximation power of INRs. This approach enables complete
profiling of cell heterogeneity, as visualized in the UMAP (c),
which further facilitating the discovery of new biology.

1. Introduction
Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) enables scientists to quantify
gene expression while preserving spatial information in tissue sections (Marx, 2021). These platforms use various
strategies to capture mRNA transcripts from tissue sections
and perform sequencing to quantify the gene expressions at
spatially defined locations (Moses & Pachter, 2022). However, various degradation patterns are being observed due
to some limitations throughout the data acquisition process. For instance, achieving higher resolution is essential for accurately modeling and analyzing cellular functions (Williams et al., 2022), while for now, ST data can still
be rather expensive, e.g., $3,500/cm2 for the capture chip
and $800/cm2 for the high-density sequencing according to
Chen et al. (2022a). Beyond the cost constraints to get highresolution ST, another key technical challenge lies in the
drop-out rates (high sparsity of ST data) that makes the gene
expressions less informative for analysis (Qiu, 2020). Compounding this challenge, different sequencing techniques
and platforms exhibit significant heterogeneity in terms of
spatial distribution, sequencing depth (number of mRNA
readouts per spot), and drop-out rates (Moses & Pachter,
2022). As a result, such the difference makes a general
backbone to model and analyze data across different tissues
by different platforms less feasible. To address these technical challenges, we propose a computational framework

*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo 2 McGill University 3 MUHC Research Institute 4 Duke-NUS Medical School
5
Carnegie Mellon University 6 Mila - Quebec AI Institute. Correspondence to: Jun Ding <jun.ding@mcgill.ca>, Yinqiang Zheng
<yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

