The Logical Implication Steering Method for Conditional Interventions on
Transformer Generation
Damjan Kalajdzievski 1

Abstract

logic. More specifically, one introduces a circuit into the
internal workings of the pre-trained transformer which approximately obeys the logic: “If concept P is present in an
input x, behave according to generation behavior consistent
with the concept Q”. We refer to this as “If P (x) then Q(x)”
or “P → Q”. As an example, the concept P may be a user
requesting for the model to behave in a harmful or toxic
way, and Q could be the generation behavior rejecting such
a request. Our method uses a simple contrastive approach to
distinguish when concepts and behaviors are present or not,
and extracts the “P ”-condition and “Q”-behavior as concept vectors p, q, such that then one can add a feed-forward
circuit to steer with q only when sensing p. As opposed
to a traditionally opaque fine-tuning or prompting process,
the resulting LIMS circuit provides an interpretable and disentangled function, promoting transparency and precision
with a separation between model classification accuracy of
P and controlled behavior adjustments into Q.

The field of mechanistic interpretability in pretrained transformer models has demonstrated substantial evidence supporting the “linear representation hypothesis”, which is the idea that high
level concepts are encoded as vectors in the space
of activations of a model. Studies also show that
model generation behavior can be steered toward
a given concept by adding the concept’s vector
to the corresponding activations. We show how
to leverage these properties to build a form of
logical implication into models, enabling transparent and interpretable adjustments that induce
a chosen generation behavior in response to the
presence of any given concept. Our method, Logical Implication Model Steering (LIMS), unlocks
new hand-engineered reasoning capabilities by
integrating neuro-symbolic logic into pre-trained
transformer models.

We demonstrate that the interpretability of LIMS has practical benefits, allowing one to observe the relative difficulties
of classification and steering on a given task, or use simple
statistical models on the decoupled sensing and steering
components to estimate model generalization from classification. We also show the utility of LIMS in some Large
Language Model (LLM) use cases, including detecting and
reducing hallucinations, increased model safety, and increasing reasoning when required to solve math problems. We
demonstrate significant gains even in the very low data
regime of 100 training data points, including on the difficult
problem of reducing hallucinations caused by insufficient information in context, where traditional fine-tuning required
at least 10 times more data to compare. In addition, LIMS
circuits do not need to be learned with backpropagation
of gradients through the model, and the process is only as
memory and compute intensive as model inference, allowing a user with limited resources to “train” LIMS circuits
into much larger models than model fine-tuning. Although
LIMS introduces its circuit with a nonlinear mapping, we
also introduce a “mergeable” LIMS variant (m-LIMS) that
facilitates easy deployment by merging into existing parameters with no architecture changes required. The m-LIMS
variant performs just as well as LIMS, at the cost of a slight
reduction in interpretability.

1. Introduction
In this work, we are motivated by advances in mechanistic interpretability which deepen our understanding of the
representations within pre-trained transformer models, as
well as by the goal of bridging neuro-symbolic and algorithmic capabilities with these representations. Harnessing
the extensive knowledge and intuitive processing embedded
in these models in a high-level, interpretable, and algorithmic way, holds the potential to unlock significantly greater
reasoning capabilities and control.
Driven by these motivations, we introduce the Logical Implication Model Steering (LIMS) method, which extracts and
uses concept vectors to allow a user to “program” logical
implication into model generation behavior in a transparent
and interpretable manner. LIMS achieves this by implementing the atomic building blocks for a general neuro-symbolic
1
Salesforce. Correspondence to: Damjan Kalajdzievski <damjank7354@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

