When and How Does CLIP Enable Domain and Compositional Generalization?

Elias Kempf * 1 Simon Schrodi * 1 Max Argus 1 Thomas Brox 1
Recent work has converged on the conclusion that CLIP’s
diverse training distribution is the primary factor driving its
unprecedented generalization performance. For example,
Fang et al. (2022) found that other factors such as language
supervision, training data size, or the contrastive loss play
only a minor role, while Nguyen et al. (2022) showed that
data quality is more important than quantity. More recently,
Mayilvahanan et al. (2025) demonstrated that CLIP’s “generalization performance [...] drops to levels similar to what
has been observed for ImageNet-trained models” (Mayilvahanan et al., 2025, p. 10) by limiting the diversity of
(visual) domains1 to a minimum, i.e., by removing all nonnatural samples. This shows that the mixture of various
(non-natural) domains plays an important role for CLIP’s
generalization, yet the underlying mechanisms remain unexplored. This brings us to our core research question:

Abstract
The remarkable generalization performance of
contrastive vision-language models like CLIP is
often attributed to the diversity of their training
distributions. However, key questions remain
unanswered: Can CLIP generalize to an entirely
unseen domain when trained on a diverse mixture of domains (domain generalization)? Can it
generalize to unseen classes within partially seen
domains (compositional generalization)? What
factors affect such generalization? To answer
these questions, we trained CLIP models on systematically constructed training distributions with
controlled domain diversity and object class exposure. Our experiments show that domain diversity
is essential for both domain and compositional
generalization, yet compositional generalization
can be surprisingly weaker than domain generalization when the training distribution contains a
suboptimal subset of the test domain. Through
data-centric and mechanistic analyses, we find
that successful generalization requires the learning of sufficiently shared representations in intermediate layers and circuits.

How does the mixture of diverse (visual) domains in the
training data affect CLIP’s generalization performance?
In particular, we investigate under which circumstances
CLIP can learn the object class invariances across the training domains with the aim to generalize to entirely unseen
domains—a fundamental question about its domain generalization capability (Blanchard et al., 2011; Muandet et al.,
2013; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). We also study questions about CLIP’s compositional generalization (Hupkes
et al., 2020; Wiedemer et al., 2023), which is believed to be
an important factor of its generalization performance (Mayilvahanan et al., 2024; Udandarao et al., 2024) and a longstanding challenge of machine learning research. Adapting
Szabó’s (2012) classical example, we ask pictorially: Can
CLIP, trained on natural images of cats and dogs along with
sketches of cats, generalize to sketches of dogs?

1. Introduction
Foundation models are considered a decisive step towards
more generic AI models (Bommasani et al., 2021). For
example, CLIP scaled the alignment of image-text pairs via
a contrastive loss to millions of samples (Radford et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2023). Unlike traditional classifiers from the ImageNet era, which often experience substantial performance drops under distribution
shifts, CLIP demonstrates unprecedented generalization to
“Out-of-Distribution (OOD)” data (Radford et al., 2021).
However, what drives this improved OOD generalization?

To answer such questions, we construct fully controllable
experimental conditions that allow precise and systematic
manipulation of the domain mixtures and exposure to object
classes in the training data (see Figure 1), while keeping
all other variables, such as the CLIP model type, training
process, and class distribution constant. Specifically, we
augmented a base dataset consisting primarily of natural images, such as ImageNet-Captions (Fang et al., 2022), with
non-natural samples from DomainNet (Peng et al., 2019),

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Freiburg. Correspondence
to: Elias Kempf <kempfe@cs.uni-freiburg.de>, Simon Schrodi
<schrodi@cs.uni-freiburg.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
We refer to a domain as a group of images sharing a common
style, such as natural images, sketches, paintings, etc.

1

