On the Statistical Mechanisms of Distributional Compositional Generalization

Jingwen Fu 1 Nanning Zheng 1

Abstract

Harari, 2014). This remarkable ability empowers humans to
generate an infinite array of ideas and constructs from finite
building blocks of knowledge. For example, humans can understand the concept of the “red triangle” after grasping the
“red rectangle” and “blue triangle”. To mimic human abilities, this paper explores the question whether machines can
generalize to new data distributions that require recombining knowledge from previously learned distributions. For
example, this involves generalizing to the distribution of
a “red triangle” after learning about “red rectangles” and
“blue triangles.” We refer to this type of generalization as
Distributional Compositional Generalization (DCG).

Distributional Compositional Generalization
(DCG) refers to the ability to tackle tasks from
new distributions by leveraging the knowledge of
concepts learned from supporting distributions.
In this work, we aim to explore the statistical
mechanisms of DCG, which have been largely
overlooked in previous studies. By statistically
formulating the problem, this paper seeks to
address two key research questions: 1) Can a
method to one DCG problem be applicable to another? 2) What statistical properties can indicate
a learning algorithm’s capacity for knowledge
composition in DCG tasks? To address the first
question, an invariant measure is proposed to
provide a dimension where all different methods
converge. This measure underscores the critical
role of data in enabling improvements without
trade-offs. As for the second question, we reveal
that by decoupling the impacts of insufficient data
and knowledge composition, the ability of the
learning algorithm to compose knowledge relies
on the compatibility and sensitivity between
the learning algorithm and the composition
rule. In summary, the statistical analysis of the
generalization mechanisms provided in this paper
deepens our understanding of compositional generalization, offering a complementary evidence
on the importance of data in DCG task.

Nevertheless, machines have consistently struggled to emulate this level of compositional generalization, as it fundamentally challenges the prevalent assumption of independent and identically distributed (IID) between training
and test data, a cornerstone principle in the machine learning literature (Kawaguchi et al., 2017; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002; Mohri et al., 2018;
McAllester, 1998; Fu & Zheng, 2023; Fu et al., 2023). When
faced with the data significantly divergent from the training (support) distribution, achieving meaningful generalization becomes virtually insurmountable (Koh et al., 2021;
Sagawa et al., 2021; Dong & Ma, 2022). This stark reality underscores the critical need for a rigorous theoretical
examination of DCG, as it holds the key to bridging the
gap between human-like adaptability and the limitations of
current machine learning models in handling unforeseen,
complex combinations of concepts.
A dominant theoretical approach to understanding the generalization properties of learning systems is the statistical
method. Over the decades, numerous statistically-based
methods have been developed to enhance our understanding of generalization behavior under the IID assumption
within the PAC learning framework (Vapnik et al., 1998;
Vapnik, 1999). A key aspect of these approaches is the use
of statistical methods to formulate tasks and generalization
mechanisms. This shift allows for a focus on the statistical
properties common across various problems, rather than on
specific problems themselves. However, similar results have
not been achieved in the area of Distributional Compositional Generalization (DCG). Although various explorations
of DCG have been conducted, these methods often take different perspectives, such as identification (Wiedemer et al.,

1. Introduction
Compositional Generalization (CG) represents the capacity
to comprehend novel combinations of familiar concepts,
an intellectual feat widely regarded as a pivotal milestone
in human cognitive evolution (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018;
1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for
Visual Information and Applications, and Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University. Correspondence to: Nanning Zheng <nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

