Spatial Reasoning with Denoising Models
Christopher Wewer 1 Bart Pogodzinski 1 Bernt Schiele 1 Jan Eric Lenssen 1

Standard DDPM

SRMs (Ours)

Playing MNIST Sudoku with Image Generators….

Figure 1: We introduce Spatial Reasoning Models (SRMs), a framework to systematically investigate diffusion/flow-based
generative models with respect to their reasoning capabilities over multiple variables. We introduce benchmarks that allow
quantification of higher-level reasoning capabilities and show that manual and automatic schemes for sequentialization can
heavily reduce hallucination. Here, we show the solving process of one of the benchmarks, a Sudoku game consisting of
MNIST images, which is solved correctly by our SRMs, while standard diffusion models fail.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce Spatial Reasoning Models (SRMs),
a framework to perform reasoning over sets of
continuous variables via denoising generative
models. SRMs infer continuous representations
on a set of unobserved variables, given observations on observed variables. Current generative
models on spatial domains, such as diffusion and
flow matching models, often collapse to hallucination in case of complex distributions. To measure
this, we introduce a set of benchmark tasks that
test the quality of complex reasoning in generative
models and can quantify hallucination. The SRM
framework allows to report key findings about
importance of sequentialization in generation, the
associated order, as well as the sampling strategies during training. It demonstrates, for the first
time, that order of generation can successfully be
predicted by the denoising network itself. Using
these findings, we can increase the accuracy of
specific reasoning tasks from < 1% to > 50%.
Our project website provides additional videos,
code, and the benchmark datasets.

Conditional generative models, such as GPTs (Radford et al.,
2018) or denoising models like diffusion/flow-based models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Lipman et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023), promise significant advances in practical
reasoning. They allow to model highly complex and multimodal distributions by learning to sample from them. While
reasoning capabilities of LLMs are extensively explored
in many recent works (Huang & Chang, 2023), similar efforts in continuous, spatial domains are needed to profit
from the semantic structure that can be learned from highdimensional, continuous data. Our work approaches this
goal by providing a novel framework to benchmark and advance the reasoning capabilities of diffusion/flow-based generative models, which we deem of large importance for the
further development of large image, video, and physicallygrounded world models (Agarwal et al., 2025).
The process of reasoning can be defined as inferring the
states of unobserved variables xi , given a distinct set of
observed variables yj (Kwan et al., 2008), with varying dependencies between all variables, loosely inspired by traditional fields of probabilistic graphical models and Bayesian
networks. Most reasoning tasks are subject to a high degree
of inherent uncertainty due to incompleteness of information given in the observed variables. Thus, it is natural to
tackle reasoning problems with probabilistic inference, i.e.,
modeling p(x1 , ..., xn | y1 , ..., ym ). When reasoning across
higher-dimensional continuous domains, such as images
or image patches, these distributions become complex and
multi-modal, preventing the application of traditional ap-

1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany. Correspondence to: Christopher Wewer
<cwewer@mpi-inf.mpg.de>, Bart Pogodzinski <bpogodzi@mpiinf.mpg.de>, Jan Eric Lenssen <jlenssen@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

