The Sparse-Plus-Low-Rank Quasi-Newton Method for Entropic-Regularized
Optimal Transport

Chenrui Wang 1 Yixuan Qiu 1

Abstract

with statistical modeling and machine learning tasks. In
particular, OT provides a principled way to measure the
similarity between probability distributions by considering
the cost of transporting the mass between them (Villani et al.,
2009), making it highly relevant in applications involving
structured data or distributions with geometric properties.
See Torres et al. (2021); Montesuma et al. (2024) for an
overview of its applications in modern machine learning.

The entropic-regularized optimal transport (OT)
has gained massive attention in machine learning due to its ability to provide scalable solutions
for OT-based tasks. However, most of the existing algorithms, including the Sinkhorn algorithm and its extensions, suffer from relatively
slow convergence in many cases. More recently,
some second-order methods have been proposed
based on the idea of Hessian sparsification. Despite their promising results, they have two major
issues: first, there is limited theoretical understanding on the effect of sparsification; second, in
cases where the transport plan is dense, Hessian
sparsification does not perform well. In this paper, we propose a new quasi-Newton method to
address these problems. First, we develop new
theoretical analyses to understand the benefits of
Hessian sparsification, which lays the foundation
for highly flexible sparsification schemes. Then
we introduce an additional low-rank term in the
approximate Hessian to better handle the dense
case. Finally, the convergence properties of the
proposed algorithm are rigorously analyzed, and
various numerical experiments are conducted to
demonstrate its improved performance in solving
large-scale OT problems.

The discrete OT problem can be characterized by the following linear programming problem:
min ⟨P, M ⟩,

P ∈Π(a,b)

Π(a, b) = {P ∈ Rn×m : P 1m = a, P T 1n = b, P ≥ 0},
where a ∈ Rn , b ∈ Rm are two vectors satisfying aT 1n =
bT 1m = 1, a > 0, b > 0, M is a given cost matrix, and all
inequality signs are elementwise.
More recently, the application of OT has experienced a
significant boost due to the development of approximate
solvers such as the entropic-regularized OT. Popularized
by Cuturi (2013), the entropic-regularized
Pn OT
Pincorporates
m
an entropic regularization h(P ) =
i=1
j=1 Pij (1 −
log Pij ) into the OT problem:
min ⟨P, M ⟩ − ηh(P ).

P ∈Π(a,b)

(1)

This regularization significantly reduces the computational
cost of OT based on the Sinkhorn–Knopp algorithm (Yule,
1912; Sinkhorn, 1964), thus unlocking its potential in largescale problems. Along this direction, many extensions of
the Sinkhorn algorithm have also been proposed (Altschuler
et al., 2017; Dvurechensky et al., 2018; Guminov et al.,
2021; Lin et al., 2022). As a result, OT is increasingly
applied to solve a wide range of challenges in fields such
as image processing, graphics, and machine learning (Peyré
et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT), as originally described by Gaspard
Monge, addresses the problem of moving a distribution
(e.g., a pile of sand) to match a target configuration (e.g.,
a prescribed shape) while minimizing a cost, such as the
total distance or effort required. In recent years, OT has
received significant attention, due to its strong connections
1

However, the computation of problem (1) is still a major
challenge. For example, the Sinkhorn algorithm generally
requires a large number of iterations to converge, especially
when the regularization parameter is small. Other first-order
methods that extend the Sinkhorn algorithm also show relatively slow convergence. To this end, another approach to

School of Statistics and Data Science, Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to:
Yixuan Qiu <qiuyixuan@sufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

