BARNN: A Bayesian Autoregressive and Recurrent Neural Network

Dario Coscia 1 2 Max Welling 2 Nicola Demo 3 Gianluigi Rozza 1

Abstract

on, challenging their application outside their training domain (Papamarkou et al., 2024). Overcoming this behaviour
is critical, not only in scientific applications where phenomena can show complex data distribution shifts away from
the training data, but also in deep over-parametrized models. For example, in weather forecasting, rapidly changing
climate patterns can cause significant deviations from the
training data and lead to unpredictable results, while overparametrized LLMs often provide incorrect answers with
high confidence, highlighting issues with model calibration (Jiang et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022).
This problem is also prevalent across many other domains,
and Bayesian approaches present a promising direction for
improvement (Papamarkou et al., 2024).

Autoregressive and recurrent networks have
achieved remarkable progress across various
fields, from weather forecasting to molecular generation and Large Language Models. Despite
their strong predictive capabilities, these models lack a rigorous framework for addressing uncertainty, which is key in scientific applications
such as PDE solving, molecular generation and
Machine Learning Force Fields. To address this
shortcoming we present BARNN: a variational
Bayesian Autoregressive and Recurrent Neural
Network. BARNNs aim to provide a principled
way to turn any autoregressive or recurrent model
into its Bayesian version. BARNN is based on
the variational dropout method, allowing to apply
it to large recurrent neural networks as well. We
also introduce a temporal version of the “Variational Mixtures of Posteriors” prior (tVAMPprior) to make Bayesian inference efficient and
well-calibrated. Extensive experiments on PDE
modelling and molecular generation demonstrate
that BARNN not only achieves comparable or
superior accuracy compared to existing methods,
but also excels in uncertainty quantification and
modelling long-range dependencies.

This work aims to close the gap between autoregressive/
recurrent models and Bayesian methods, presenting a fully
Bayesian, scalable, calibrated and accurate autoregressive/
recurrent model, named BARNN: Bayesian Autoregressive
and Recurrent Neural Network. BARNN provides a principled way to turn any autoregressive/ recurrent model into
its Bayesian version. In BARNN the network weights are
evolved jointly with the observable states (e.g. language
tokens, PDE states, etc.), creating a joint probabilistic model
(see Figure 1). A new state is generated by sampling from
the distribution conditioned on previous states and the current network weights. At the same time, the latter are
drawn from a variational posterior distribution that is conditioned on the previous states. We derive a variational lower
bound for efficiently training BARNN that is related to the
VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2014) (ELBO) objective. To make
Bayesian Inference over a large number of network weights
computationally efficient, we propose an extension of Variational Dropout (Kingma et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani,
2016), which also opens the door to explore quantization and
network efficiency (Louizos & Welling, 2017; Van Baalen
et al., 2020) for overparametrized autoregressive models.
Finally, we introduce a temporal version of the “Variational
Mixtures of Posteriors" (Tomczak & Welling, 2018) prior
(tVAMP-prior) to make Bayesian inference efficient and
well-calibrated.

1. Introduction
Autoregressive and recurrent models have demonstrated
impressive advancements in different disciplines, from
weather prediction (Bodnar et al., 2024; Lam et al., 2022),
to molecules generation (Shi et al., 2020; Simm et al., 2020)
and Large Language Models (LLMs) (Bengio et al., 2000;
Vaswani, 2017; Radford et al., 2019). However, while autoregressive models show strong predictive abilities, they are
also prone to overfitting to the specific tasks they are trained
1
Mathematics Area, International School of Advanced Studies,
Italy 2 Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 3 FAST Computing Srl, Italy. Correspondence to: Dario
Coscia <dario.coscia@sissa.it>.

Building on the recent successful application of autoregressive and recurrent models to Scientific Machine Learning
tasks (Pfaff et al., 2021; Lippe et al., 2024; Segler et al.,
2018) we apply our methodology to uncertainty quantifica-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

