Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical
Vision-Language-Action Models

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi 1 2 Brian Ichter 1 Michael Equi 1 Liyiming Ke 1 Karl Pertsch 1 2 3 Quan Vuong 1
James Tanner 1 Anna Walling 1 Haohuan Wang 1 Niccolo Fusai 1 Adrian Li-Bell 1 Danny Driess 1
Lachy Groom 1 Sergey Levine 1 3 Chelsea Finn 1 2
https://www.pi.website/research/hirobot

Abstract

inputs, corrections, and feedback. Achieving this kind of
flexibility is essential for robots in open-ended, humancentric environments. For instance, consider a robot tasked
with tidying up a table after a meal: instead of rigidly following a single predefined set of steps, the robot would
need to interpret dynamic prompts like “only take away
someone’s dishes if they are done eating,” respond to corrections like “leave it alone,” and adapt when faced with unfamiliar challenges, such as a delicate object that requires
special handling. This paper aims to advance robotic intelligence by enabling robots to interpret and act on diverse
natural language commands, feedback, and corrections – a
step towards creating agents that reason through tasks, integrate human feedback seamlessly, and operate with humanlike adaptability. If we can enable a robot to process and
engage with complex natural language interaction, we can
unlock not only better instruction following, but also the
ability for users to guide a robot through new tasks and
correct the robot in real time.

Generalist robots that can perform a range of different tasks in open-world settings must be able
to not only reason about the steps needed to accomplish their goals, but also process complex
instructions, prompts, and even feedback during task execution. Intricate instructions (e.g.,
“Could you make me a vegetarian sandwich?”
or “I don’t like that one”) require not just the
ability to physically perform the individual steps,
but the ability to situate complex commands and
feedback in the physical world. In this work, we
describe a system that uses vision-language models in a hierarchical structure, first reasoning over
complex prompts and user feedback to deduce
the most appropriate next step to fulfill the task,
and then performing that step with low-level actions. In contrast to direct instruction following
methods that can fulfill simple commands (“pick
up the cup”), our system can reason through
complex prompts and incorporate situated feedback during task execution (“that’s not trash”).
We evaluate our system across three robotic platforms, including single-arm, dual-arm, and dualarm mobile robots, demonstrating its ability to
handle tasks such as cleaning messy tables, making sandwiches, and grocery shopping.

Achieving this level of flexibility and steerability in
robotic systems is challenging. While standard languageconditioned imitation learning can follow simple, atomic
instructions such as “pick up the coke can” (Brohan et al.,
2022), real-world tasks are rarely so straightforward. Imagine a more realistic prompt, such as: “Could you make
me a vegetarian sandwich? I’d prefer it without tomatoes.
Also, if you have ham or roast beef, could you make a separate sandwich with one of those for my friend?” This requires not only understanding the language, but also the
ability to situate commands within the current context and
compose existing skills (e.g., picking up the roast beef)
to solve a new task. If the robot further receives corrections and feedback (“that’s not how you do it, you have
to get lower, otherwise you’ll keep missing”), these must
also be integrated dynamically into task execution. This
challenge resembles the distinction between Kahneman’s
“System 1” and “System 2” cognitive processes (Kahneman, 2011). The “automatic” System 1 corresponds to a
policy capable of executing straightforward commands by
triggering pre-learned skills, while the more deliberative

1. Introduction
A defining feature of intelligence is its flexibility: people
not only excel at complex tasks but also adapt to new situations, modify behaviors in real time, and respond to diverse
1

Physical Intelligence 2 Stanford University 3 University of
California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Physical Intelligence
<research@physicalintelligence.company>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

