Efficient Time Series Processing for Transformers and State-Space Models
through Token Merging

Leon Götz 1 2 Marcel Kollovieh 2 3 4 Stephan Günnemann 2 3 4 Leo Schwinn 2 3

Abstract

2

Despite recent advances in subquadratic attention mechanisms or state-space models, processing long token sequences still imposes significant
computational requirements. Token merging has
emerged as a solution to increase computational
efficiency in computer vision architectures. In this
work, we perform the first investigations of token
merging in time series analysis on both transformers and state-space models. We further introduce
local merging, a domain-specific token merging
algorithm that selectively combines tokens within
a local neighborhood, achieving two major benefits: a) Local merging can adjust its computational
complexity from quadratic to linear based on the
neighborhood size to effectively scale to long sequences; b) Local merging is the first causal merging scheme enabling token merging in transformer
decoders. Further, we identify spectral properties
of the input data that reliably predict the potential benefits of local merging without requiring
evaluation on downstream tasks. Our comprehensive empirical evaluation demonstrates that
local merging offers substantial efficiency gains
with minimal impact on accuracy, achieving up
to 5400 % acceleration on the recently proposed
Chronos foundation model.

4

8

6

1
𝑘

3

5
7

1

2

3

4

5

𝑘=2
𝑺𝑘=1
𝑙𝑜𝑐 = { } 𝑺𝑙𝑜𝑐 = {

6
}

Figure 1: Local token merging: Computing token similarity on
a subset Sloc under locality constraint k reduces token merging’s
quadratic complexity to linear.

nism scales quadratically with the number of input tokens,
resulting in high memory requirements. This scalability
issue becomes especially pronounced in time series processing, where sequences frequently comprise thousands
of tokens (Godahewa et al., 2021). Consequently, recent
foundational models in time series, such as Chronos, exhibit
impressive zero-shot generalization capabilities but demand
substantial computational resources (Ansari et al., 2024).
Recently, state-space models have emerged as a solution to mitigate the computational burden of transformers.
Their complexity scales subquadratically with the sequence
length (Poli et al., 2023), which allows them to process
millions of tokens (Nguyen et al., 2023). However, even
in state-space models, very long sequences will impose
considerable memory and computational demands.

1. Introduction

Bolya et al. (2023), have shown that the efficiency of ViTs
can be substantially improved by merging tokens throughout
the transformer architecture. Specifically, they compute
similarity scores between tokens and combine them into
single tokens through a convex combination. However, they
only explore token merging for ViT architectures.

Since their inception in NLP (Vaswani et al., 2017), transformers have extended their influence into various domains, including computer vision with Vision Transformers
(ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), graphs (Yun et al., 2019),
and time series processing (Li et al., 2019). However, the
computational complexity of the standard attention mecha-

In this work, we for the first time explore token merging
within the time series domain. We introduce a novel local
token merging algorithm whose computational complexity
varies from quadratic to linear, based on the neighborhood
considered for each token merge. This allows token merging
to scale to long sequences and be applicable to state-space
models. Further, our local merging preserves causality and

1

Volkswagen AG 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Munich
Data Science Institute 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning. Correspondence to: Leon Götz <leon.goetz@volkswagen.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

