QMamba: On First Exploration of Vision Mamba for Image Quality Assessment

Fengbin Guan 1 Xin Li 1 Zihao Yu 1 Yiting Lu 1 Zhibo Chen 1

Abstract
In this work, we take the first exploration of the
recently popular foundation model, i.e., State
Space Model/Mamba, in image quality assessment (IQA), aiming at observing and excavating
the perception potential in vision Mamba. A series of works on Mamba has shown its significant
potential in various fields, e.g., segmentation and
classification. However, the perception capability
of Mamba remains under-explored. Consequently,
we propose QMamba by revisiting and adapting
the Mamba model for three crucial IQA tasks,
i.e., task-specific, universal, and transferable IQA,
which reveals its clear advantages over existing
foundational models, e.g., Swin Transformer, ViT,
and CNNs, in terms of perception and computational cost. To improve the transferability of
QMamba, we propose the StylePrompt tuning
paradigm, where lightweight mean and variance
prompts are injected to assist task-adaptive transfer learning of pre-trained QMamba for different
downstream IQA tasks. Compared with existing
prompt tuning strategies, our StylePrompt enables
better perceptual transfer with lower computational cost. Extensive experiments on multiple
synthetic, authentic IQA datasets, and cross IQA
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed QMamba. The code will be available at:
https://github.com/bingo-G/QMamba.git

(a) Cross-Scan

(b) Local-Scan

Figure 1. Scanning Methodology Illustration. (a) VMamba’s scanning method(Liu et al., 2024c) flattens 2D data into 1D, impairing
connectivity by distancing adjacent tokens. (b) Local scanning
method scans within and across windows, placing semantically
similar and distortion-related tokens closer, as shown in the blue
boxes.

essary to provide the right optimization direction tailored
for image processing techniques, i.e., compression (Li et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2024b), enhancement (Li
et al., 2023b; Fei et al., 2023), and ensure the perceptual
quality of images. Early works on IQA have been achieved
by leveraging the natural scene statistics in a hand-crafted
manner (Mittal et al., 2012a;b). With the advancements
of deep neural networks (DNNs), learning-based IQA metrics (Li et al., 2023c; Liu et al., 2022) have demonstrated
significant potential for low-level perception, which can be
roughly categorized into two types based on the pre-trained
backbones: CNN-based and Transformer-based methods.
Although the impressive progress, learning-based IQA is
susceptible to inherent limitations of existing pre-trained
backbones: (i) the CNNs are skilled at learning local
translation-invariant features from images while lacking
enough long-range dependency modeling capability, hindering the global quality perception. (ii) The emergence of
Vision Transformers presents a great solution to model longrange dependency effectively by leveraging attention mechanisms. However, the quadratic complexity of self-attention
operations poses unaffordable computational costs, especially for large-scale image quality assessment. Recently,
an innovative foundation model, the State Space Model,
particularly its implementation, i.e., Mamba (Gu & Dao,
2023) has shown considerable potential in various fields
for balancing the computational costs and performances,

1. Introduction
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) aims to measure the subjective quality of images aligned with human perception,
which has been applied in various visual fields, including
visual acquisition, transmission, AIGC (Li et al., 2023a;
Wang et al., 2023a), and UGC creation (Tu et al., 2021; Lu
et al., 2024), etc. Establishing a great IQA metric is nec1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
Correspondence to: Xin Li <xin.li@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

