The Emperor’s New Clothes in Benchmarking? A Rigorous Examination of
Mitigation Strategies for LLM Benchmark Data Contamination

Yifan Sun * 1 Han Wang * 1 Dongbai Li * 1 Gang Wang 1 Huan Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Benchmark Data Contamination (BDC)—the
inclusion of benchmark testing samples in the
training set—has raised increasing concerns
in Large Language Model (LLM) evaluation,
leading to falsely inflated performance estimates
and undermining evaluation reliability. To
address this, researchers have proposed various
mitigation strategies to update existing benchmarks, including modifying original questions or
generating new ones based on them. However,
a rigorous examination of the effectiveness of
these mitigation strategies remains lacking. In
this paper, we design a systematic and controlled
pipeline along with two novel metrics—fidelity
and contamination resistance—to provide a
fine-grained and comprehensive assessment of
existing BDC mitigation strategies. Previous
assessment methods, such as accuracy drop and
accuracy matching, focus solely on aggregate accuracy, often leading to incomplete or misleading
conclusions. Our metrics address this limitation
by emphasizing question-level evaluation result
matching. Extensive experiments with 10 LLMs,
5 benchmarks, 20 BDC mitigation strategies, and
2 contamination scenarios reveal that no existing
strategy effectively balances fidelity and contamination resistance. No semantic-preserving
strategy yields a significant improvement in
resistance over the vanilla case (i.e., no benchmark update) across all benchmarks, while
semantic-altering strategies sacrifice fidelity for
resistance. These findings underscore the urgent
need for designing more effective BDC mitigation
strategies. Our code repository is available at
https://github.com/ASTRAL-Group/
BDC_mitigation_assessment.

Benchmarking Large Language Models (LLMs) has recently become a critical area of focus (White et al., 2024;
Xia et al., 2024; Guha et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024; Lin
et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2024a), driven by the rapid increase
in their number and capacity (Achiam et al., 2023; Dubey
et al., 2024; Team, 2024b; Team et al., 2023; 2024). Reliable and high-quality evaluation benchmarks are essential
to provide comprehensive and accurate assessments of LLM
capabilities. However, as modern LLMs are trained on vast
amounts of web-scraped data, concerns have emerged regarding benchmark samples inadvertently appearing in their
training sets. Consequently, it is challenging to determine
whether the model just simply memorizes answers to difficult test questions to achieve a better performance (Oren
et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024b). This phenomena, known as
Benchmark Data Contamination (BDC), results in falsely
inflated performance metrics, thereby undermining the reliability of evaluation conclusions (Zhou et al., 2023; Sainz
et al., 2023; Dominguez-Olmedo et al., 2024).
Synonym Replacement At what temperature
does water turn into ice?
At which temperature
does water freeze?

During
Evaluation

Analysis Extension

A benchmark test sample
from Arc-Challenge
…

How does the presence
of impurities and
atmospheric pressure
influence the freezing
point?
…

Figure 1. Illustration of BDC mitigation strategies. BDC mitigation strategies, such as synonym replacement and analysis extension (Ying et al., 2024), update benchmark questions to reduce
the risk of direct memorization.

To mitigate BDC, creating new benchmark datasets from
scratch is a potential solution, but this process is often prohibitively expensive and labor-intensive1 . Moreover, some
existing benchmark datasets, such as MMLU (Hendrycks
et al., 2020) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), are already

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Yifan Sun <yifan50@illinois.edu>, Huan
Zhang <huan@huan-zhang.com>.

1

For instance, curating the GPQA dataset (Rein et al., 2023),
which contains 448 multiple-choice questions written by domain
experts, required over $120,000 (Rein, 2024). Similarly, the recently introduced HLE benchmark (Phan et al., 2025) has allocated
$500,000 to collect high-quality benchmark questions.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

