OmiAD: One-Step Adaptive Masked Diffusion Model for Multi-class Anomaly
Detection via Adversarial Distillation
Yaoxuan Feng 1 Wenchao Chen 1 Yuxin Li 1 Bo Chen 1 Yubiao Wang 1 Zixuan Zhao 1 Hongwei Liu 1
Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract

analysis (Fernando et al., 2021), and video surveillance (Ramachandra et al., 2020). In industrial environments, due to
the scarcity of anomalous samples, unsupervised anomaly
detection has gained significant attention for its capability
to learn the normal data distribution and detect deviations
indicative of anomalies (You et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023; He
et al., 2024b). Furthermore, industrial anomaly detection often involves objects spanning diverse categories with distinct
normal patterns. Such scenarios require models capable of
generalizing across different classes without necessitating
extensive fine-tuning. As such, developing a robust unsupervised multi-class anomaly detection framework is crucial to
achieving consistent and efficient production workflows in
real-world industrial scenarios.

Diffusion models have demonstrated outstanding performance in industrial anomaly detection.
However, their iterative denoising nature results
in slow inference speed, limiting their practicality
for real-time industrial deployment. To address
this challenge, we propose OmiAD, a One-step
masked diffusion model for multi-class Anomaly
Detection, derived from a well-designed multistep adaptive masked diffusion model (AMDM)
and compressed using adversarial score distillation (ASD). OmiAD first introduces AMDM,
equipped with an adaptive masking strategy that
dynamically adjusts masking patterns based on
noise levels and encourages the model to reconstruct anomalies as normal counterparts by leveraging broader context, to reduce the pixel-level
shortcut reliance. Then, ASD is developed to
compress the multi-step diffusion process into
a single-step generator by score distillation and
incorporating a shared-weight discriminator effectively reusing parameters while significantly
improving both inference efficiency and detection performance. The effectiveness of OmiAD
is validated on four diverse datasets, achieving
state-of-the-art performance across seven metrics
while delivering a remarkable inference speedup.
Code is available at https://github.com/
luolundashu/OmiAD

Under the paradigm of unsupervised multi-class anomaly detection, diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020) have garnered substantial interest for their ability to handle highdimensional data and model complex distributions. These
models operate by progressively denoising a sample from
random noise, enabling them to reconstruct intricate data
patterns that traditional methods often struggle to capture.
This generative process makes diffusion models are particularly effective at learning the distribution of normal data and
identifying deviations that signal anomalies, making them a
promising approach for unsupervised multi-class anomaly
detection tasks (Yin et al., 2023; He et al., 2024b).
Several diffusion-based approaches have been proposed for
anomaly detection, with a primary focus on generating impactful conditional embeddings derived from abnormal inputs (Mousakhan et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023; He et al.,
2024b; Fučka et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025). These embeddings are then fed into the denoising network to guide the
reverse process within the diffusion model. For instance,
DADD (Mousakhan et al., 2023) conditions the denoising
process on the original input, enabling the model to progressively remove noise and accurately reconstruct the normal
distribution. Similarly, DiAD (He et al., 2024b) leverages
pixel-level semantic information as conditional inputs to
guide the denoising process. While these methods enhance
reconstruction quality, they often overlook a critical limitation in reconstruction-based anomaly detection, known as

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection plays a pivotal role in manufacturing
defect detection (Bergmann et al., 2019), medical image
1
National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian
University, Xi’an, 710071, China 2 McCombs School of Business,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. Correspondence to: Wenchao Chen <chenwenchao@xidian.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

