Demystifying Singular Defects in Large Language Models

Haoqi Wang 1 Tong Zhang 1 2 Mathieu Salzmann 1 3

Abstract

tokens during the forward pass, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This
behavior has been observed in both large vision transformers (Darcet et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) and large language models (LLMs) (Sun et al., 2024).

Large transformer models are known to produce
high-norm tokens. In vision transformers (ViTs),
such tokens have been mathematically modeled
through the singular vectors of the linear approximations of layers. However, in large language
models (LLMs), the underlying causes of highnorm tokens remain largely unexplored, and their
different properties from those of ViTs require a
new analysis framework. In this paper, we provide both theoretical insights and empirical validation across a range of recent models, leading
to the following observations: i) The layer-wise
singular direction predicts the abrupt explosion of
token norms in LLMs. ii) The negative eigenvalues of a layer explain its sudden decay. iii) The
computational pathways leading to high-norm tokens differ between initial and noninitial tokens.
iv) High-norm tokens are triggered by the right
leading singular vector of the matrix approximating the corresponding modules. We showcase
two practical applications of these findings: the
improvement of quantization schemes and the design of LLM signatures. Our findings not only
advance the understanding of singular defects in
LLMs but also open new avenues for their application. We expect that this work will stimulate
further research into the internal mechanisms of
LLMs. Code is released at https://github.
com/haoqiwang/singular_defect.

In particular, in vision foundation model DINOv2 (Oquab
et al., 2024; Darcet et al., 2024), high-norm tokens appear
as defective patch tokens, degrading the feature quality and
hindering performance on downstream dense prediction
tasks. In pursuit of repairing these defects, Wang et al.
(2024) revealed a connection between the direction of the
high-norm tokens and the leading left singular vector of the
matrix that provides a linear approximation of a transformer
layer, and therefore name these tokens as singular defects.
In the context of LLMs, high-norm hidden states have also
been observed (Sun et al., 2024) and referred to as massive activations. Specifically, the following properties were
empirically identified: (1) The appearance of a massive
activation is abrupt, emerging suddenly in one layer and
diminishing later in the model after another. (2) Massive
activations appear mostly for the initial token and the delimiter tokens. These properties differ from those made with
DINOv2, where the norm of the defective tokens increases
gradually layer by layer, and the defective tokens are randomly scattered across the feature map, with a tendency to
appear in low-semantic regions. Given these different behaviors of high-norm tokens in LLMs vs. ViTs, it is natural
to wonder (i) whether the theory of singular defects can be
applied to LLMs; and (ii) how to further explain the new
observations related to massive activations?
In this paper, we confirm that singular defects can predict
the direction of high-norm tokens in LLMs. However, it
falls short of explaining the high-norm properties that are
unique to LLMs. To understand the full life cycle of the
high-norm tokens, we thus expand the theory and provide
the following insights:

1. Introduction
While large foundation models are proving increasingly effective, their intrinsic behavior remains poorly understood.
An example of this is the emergence of tokens whose norm
is unexpectedly higher than that of the majority of the other

1. (Development) The explosion of the initial1 token norm
is linked to self-attention, whereas that of the noninitial
high-norm tokens is unrelated to self-attention.

1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Switzerland 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Swiss Data Science Center, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Mathieu Salzmann <mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch>.

2. (Trigger) A norm explosion is initiated when the input
vector has a projection onto the leading right singular

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

We define the initial token as the first token in the user input.

