Inverse Bridge Matching Distillation

Nikita Gushchin 1 2 David Li * 1 3 Daniil Selikhanovych * 1 4 5 Evgeny Burnaev 1 2 Dmitry Baranchuk 4
Alexander Korotin 1 2
Input

Diffusion Bridge Models (DBMs) represent a specialized
class of diffusion models designed for data-to-data tasks,
such as image-to-image translation. Unlike standard diffusion models, which operate by mapping noise to data (Ho
et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), DBMs construct
diffusion processes directly between two data distributions
(Peluchetti, 2023a; Liu et al., 2022b; Somnath et al., 2023;

JPEG restoration
Inpainting
Normal-to-Image

1. Introduction

Teacher

Sketch-to-Image

Learning diffusion bridge models is easy; making them fast and practical is an art. Diffusion
bridge models (DBMs) are a promising extension
of diffusion models for applications in image-toimage translation. However, like many modern
diffusion and flow models, DBMs suffer from
the problem of slow inference. To address it,
we propose a novel distillation technique based
on the inverse bridge matching formulation and
derive the tractable objective to solve it in practice. Unlike previously developed DBM distillation techniques, the proposed method can distill both conditional and unconditional types of
DBMs, distill models in a one-step generator, and
use only the corrupted images for training. We
evaluate our approach for both conditional and
unconditional types of bridge matching on a wide
set of setups, including super-resolution, JPEG
restoration, sketch-to-image, and other tasks, and
show that our distillation technique allows us to
accelerate the inference of DBMs from 4x to
100x and even provide better generation quality than used teacher model depending on particular setup. We provide the code at https:
//github.com/ngushchin/IBMD.

IBMD (Ours)

Super-resolution

Abstract

Figure 1. Outputs of DBMs models distilled by our Inverse Bridge
Matching Distillation (IBMD) approach on various image-toimage translation tasks and datasets (M5). Teachers use NFE≥ 500
steps, while IBMD distilled models use NFE≤ 4.

*

Equal contribution 1 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology 2 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute 3 Moscow Institute
of Physics and Technology 4 Yandex Research 5 HSE University.
Correspondence to: Nikita Gushchin <n.gushchin@skoltech.ru>,
Alexander Korotin <a.korotin@skoltech.ru>.

Zhou et al., 2024a; Yue et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023; De Bortoli et al., 2023). This approach allows DBMs to modify
only the necessary components of the data, starting from an
input sample rather than generating it entirely from Gaus-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

