Understanding Model Ensemble in Transferable Adversarial Attack

Wei Yao ⋆ 1 2 3 Zeliang Zhang ⋆ 4 Huayi Tang 1 2 3 Yong Liu 1 2 3

Abstract

1

Introduction

Neural networks are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014)—perturbations that closely resemble the original data but can
severely compromise safety-critical applications (Zhang &
Li, 2019; Kong et al., 2020; Bortsova et al., 2021). Even
more concerning is the phenomenon of adversarial transferability (Papernot et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2017): adversarial
examples crafted to deceive one model often succeed in
attacking others. This property enables attacks without requiring any knowledge of the target model, significantly
complicating efforts to ensure the robustness of neural networks (Dong et al., 2019; Silva & Najafirad, 2020).

Model ensemble adversarial attack has become a
powerful method for generating transferable adversarial examples that can target even unknown
models, but its theoretical foundation remains underexplored. To address this gap, we provide
early theoretical insights that serve as a roadmap
for advancing model ensemble adversarial attack.
We first define transferability error to measure
the error in adversarial transferability, alongside
concepts of diversity and empirical model ensemble Rademacher complexity. We then decompose
the transferability error into vulnerability, diversity, and a constant, which rigidly explains the
origin of transferability error in model ensemble
attack: the vulnerability of an adversarial example to ensemble components, and the diversity of
ensemble components. Furthermore, we apply the
latest mathematical tools in information theory to
bound the transferability error using complexity
and generalization terms, validating three practical guidelines for reducing transferability error:
(1) incorporating more surrogate models, (2) increasing their diversity, and (3) reducing their
complexity in cases of overfitting. Finally, extensive experiments with 54 models validate our
theoretical framework, representing a significant
step forward in understanding transferable model
ensemble adversarial attacks.

To enhance adversarial transferability, researchers have proposed a range of algorithms that fall into three main categories: input transformation (Xie et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2021), gradient-based optimization (Gao et al., 2020; Xiong
et al., 2022), and model ensemble attacks (Li et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2024b). Among these, model ensemble attacks
have proven especially powerful, as they leverage multiple
models to simultaneously generate adversarial examples
that exploit the strengths of each individual model (Dong
et al., 2018). Moreover, these attacks can be combined with
input transformation and gradient-based optimization methods to further improve their effectiveness (Tang et al., 2024).
However, despite the success of such attacks, their theoretical foundation remains poorly understood. This prompts an
important question: Can we establish a theoretical framework for transferable model ensemble adversarial attacks
to shape the evolution of future algorithms?
To conduct a preliminary exploration of this profound question, we propose three novel definitions as a prerequisite of
our theoretical framework. Firstly, we define transferability
error as the gap in expected loss between an adversarial
example and the one with the highest loss within a feasible region of the input space. It captures the ability of an
adversarial example to generalize across unseen models,
representing its transferability. Secondly, we introduce prediction variance across the ensemble classifiers. It offers a
novel perspective on quantifying diversity in model ensemble attacks, providing a fresh approach to guide the selection
of ensemble components. Finally, we also introduce the empirical model ensemble Rademacher complexity, inspired

*
Equal contribution 1 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 3 Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE 4 Independent Researcher.
Contributed ideas during the author’s B.S. studies at Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Yong Liu <liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

