A Theory for Conditional Generative Modeling on Multiple Data Sources

Rongzhen Wang 1 2 3 Yan Zhang 4 Chenyu Zheng 1 2 3 Chongxuan Li 1 2 3 † Guoqiang Wu 4 †

Abstract

key factor behind their strong performance is the diverse and
rich training data. For instance, large language models are
trained on heterogeneous datasets comprising web content,
books, and code (Brown et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2024b),
while image generation models benefit from vast datasets
spanning various categories and aesthetic qualities (Peebles
& Xie, 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Esser et al., 2024). Empirical
evidence suggests that, under certain conditions, training
on multiple data sources can enhance performance across
all sources (Pires et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2024; Allen-Zhu
& Li, 2024a). Consequently, data mixture strategies have
become an essential research topic (Nguyen et al., 2022;
Chidambaram et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024b).

The success of large generative models has driven
a paradigm shift, leveraging massive multi-source
data to enhance model capabilities. However, the
interaction among these sources remains theoretically underexplored. This paper takes the first step
toward a rigorous analysis of multi-source training in conditional generative modeling, where
each condition represents a distinct data source.
Specifically, we establish a general distribution estimation error bound in average total variation distance for conditional maximum likelihood estimation based on the bracketing number. Our result
shows that when source distributions share certain
similarities and the model is expressive enough,
multi-source training guarantees a sharper bound
than single-source training. We further instantiate the general theory on conditional Gaussian
estimation and deep generative models including
autoregressive and flexible energy-based models,
by characterizing their bracketing numbers. The
results highlight that the number of sources and
similarity among source distributions improve the
advantage of multi-source training. Simulations
and real-world experiments validate our theory.
Code is available at: https://github.com/
ML-GSAI/Multi-Source-GM.

However, the theoretical underpinnings of this multi-source
training paradigm remain poorly understood. This raises a
fundamental question: is it more effective to train separate
models on individual data sources, or to train a single model
using data from multiple sources? In this paper, we take the
first step toward a rigorous analysis of multi-source training,
focusing on its impact on conditional generative models,
where each condition represents a distinct data source.
Our first contribution is establishing a general upper bound
on distribution estimation error for conditional generative
modeling via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) in
Section 3. Specifically, we measure the error using average
total variation (TV) distance between the true and estimated
conditional
distributions across all sources, which scales
q
as Õ( log NPX|Y /n), where n is the training set size and
NPX|Y is the bracketing number of the conditional distribution space PX|Y . Further, when source distributions exhibit
parametric similarity, multi-source training effectively reduces the complexity of the distribution space, leading to a
provably sharper bound than single-source training.

1. Introduction
Large generative models have achieved remarkable success
in generating realistic and complex outputs across natural
language (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) and
computer vision (Rombach et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2024). A

Technically, our analysis extends classical MLE estimation
error bounds from empirical process theory (Wong & Shen,
1995; Geer, 2000; Ge et al., 2024) to the conditional setting by adapting the complexity of the distribution space
and measuring the estimation error in terms of average TV
distance. Further discussions are provided in Section 6.

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 3 Engineering
Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE 4 School of Software, Shandong University,
Shandong, China. † Correspondence to: Chongxuan Li <chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn>, Guoqiang Wu <guoqiangwu@sdu.edu.cn>.

As the second contribution, we instantiate our general theory in three specific cases: (1) parametric estimation of
conditional Gaussian distributions, a simple example clearly

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

