Leveraging Offline Data in Linear Latent Contextual Bandits

Chinmaya Kausik 1 Kevin Tan 2 Ambuj Tewari 1

Abstract

dation (Li et al., 2010), distributed networks (Kar et al.,
2011), and portfolio design (Brochu et al., 2011). There is
often a wealth of offline data in such domains, which has
led to a growing interest in using offline data to accelerate
online learning. However, there often also exist unobserved
contexts in the population that influence the distribution of
rewards, making it non-trivial to leverage offline data. In
Hong et al. (2020), it is shown that this uncertainty can be
modeled by a latent bandit (or mixture of bandits). This is
a bandit where an unobserved latent state determines the
reward model for the trajectory. For example, a patient’s underlying genetic conditions in healthcare and a user’s tastes
in recommendation systems are both examples of latent
states in sequential decision making. Typically, these latent
states are less complex than the actual models underlying
users or patients, making it valuable to reduce the online
task to learning the latent state (Hong et al., 2020; 2022).

Leveraging offline data is an attractive way to accelerate online sequential decision-making. However, it is crucial to account for latent states in
users or environments in the offline data, and latent bandits form a compelling model for doing
so. In this light, we design end-to-end latent bandit algorithms capable of handing uncountably
many latent states. We focus on a linear latent
contextual bandit – a linear bandit where each
user has its own high-dimensional reward parameter in RdA , but reward parameters across users
lie in a low-rank latent subspace of dimension
dK ≪ dA . First, we provide an offline algorithm to learn this subspace with provable guarantees. We then present two online algorithms
that utilize the output of this offline algorithm
to accelerate
p The first enjoys
√ online√ learning.
Õ(min(dA T , dK T (1 + dA T /dK N ))) regret guarantees, so that the effective dimension
is lower when the size N of the offline dataset
is larger. We prove a matching lower bound on
regret, showing that our algorithm is minimax optimal up to coverage terms. The second is a practical algorithm that enjoys only a slightly weaker
guarantee, but is computationally efficient. We
also establish the efficacy of our methods using
experiments on both synthetic data and real-life
movie recommendation data from MovieLens. Finally, we theoretically establish the generality of
the latent bandit model by proving a de Finetti
theorem for stateless decision processes.

The latent bandit framework therefore has high practical
value, and efficient principled algorithms are needed for
using offline data to speed up online learning. Using traditional bandit algorithms in this setting does not leverage the
offline data that is often available to the agent. Naturally,
one also cannot treat the offline data as coming from a single bandit. For example, different user tastes or different
underlying genetic conditions require modeling the offline
data as coming from a latent bandit. So, we have to develop
algorithms specific to the latent bandit setting that leverage
the offline data to improve online performance.
We note that in bandit literature, it is common to impose
a structure on bandit rewards when designing algorithms,
the most popular one being a linear structure (Li et al.,
2010; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011). In this light, we study a
linear contextual bandit setting where each user has its own
high-dimensional reward parameter, but reward parameters
across users lie in a low-rank subspace. This is a linear
latent contextual bandit1 , and is much more general than
existing models that restrict themselves to finitely many
latent states (Hong et al., 2020; 2022). We design a twopronged algorithm to tackle this setting. First, we provide
a method to approximate the low-dimensional subspace
spanned by latent states from an offline dataset of unlabeled
trajectories collected under some behavior policy πb . This is
non-trivial since the trajectories are unlabeled, and standard

1. Introduction
Many sequential-decision making problems can be effectively modeled using the bandit framework. This can span
domains as diverse as healthcare (Lu et al., 2021b), randomized clinical trials (Press, 2009), search and recommen1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, USA
Department of Statistics and Data Science, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Chinmaya
Kausik <ckausik@umich.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

This can also be thought of as a continuous mixture of bandits.

