Compression via Pre-trained Transformers:
A Study on Byte-Level Multimodal Data

David Heurtel-Depeiges * † 1 Anian Ruoss * 2 Joel Veness 2 Tim Genewein 2

Abstract

ing (Pasco, 1977; Rissanen, 1976; Witten et al., 1987).
Consequently, large pre-trained foundation models, such
as LLMs, achieve high data compression on their training
distributions and beyond (Delétang et al., 2024). However,
when factoring these models’ size into the compression
ratio, too large models actually perform worse. For this
reason, large foundation models with billions of parameters
cannot compete with standard compression algorithms such
as gzip (Deutsch, 1996) or LZMA2 (Pavlov, 2019). The
goal of this paper is thus to investigate whether pre-trained
vanilla transformers can achieve compression ratios that
are competitive with standard algorithms across a range of
data modalities. This places fairly tight constraints on the
maximal model size, leading us to investigate families of
relatively small transformers (with millions of parameters).
Note that our aim is not to build a practical transformerbased data compressor, as the computational footprint (running time, memory, FLOPs) of even small models is far
beyond standard compressors. Instead, studying compression via pre-trained models provides insight into the models’
learned inductive biases, e.g., whether they are domaingeneral, how they depend on the training data composition,
and whether there is transfer between modalities.

Foundation models are strong data compressors,
but when accounting for their parameter size, their
compression ratios are inferior to standard compression algorithms. Naively reducing the parameter count does not necessarily help as it deteriorates predictions and, accordingly, compression.
We conduct a large-scale empirical study to find a
sweet spot where pre-trained vanilla transformers
can achieve competitive compression ratios. To
this end, we train models on 165GB of raw byte
sequences of either text, image, or audio data (and
all possible combinations of the three) and then
compress 1GB of out-of-distribution (OOD) data
from each modality. We find that relatively small
models (millions of parameters) can outperform
standard general-purpose compression algorithms
(gzip, LZMA2) and even domain-specific compressors (PNG, JPEG-XL, FLAC) — even when
accounting for parameter size. We achieve, e.g.,
the lowest compression ratio of 0.49 on OOD
audio data (vs. 0.54 for FLAC). We conduct extensive ablations and hyperparameter sweeps to
study the impact of model- and dataset scale, and
we investigate the effect of unimodal versus multimodal training. We find that even small models
can be trained to perform well on multiple modalities, but unlike large-scale foundation models,
transfer to unseen modalities is generally weak.

Recently, Delétang et al. (2024) stated that “language modeling is compression”, pointing out that log-loss minimization
is equivalent to optimizing a lossless compression objective. To illustrate this point, Delétang et al. (2024) used
billion-parameter LLMs that were exclusively trained on
text (Touvron et al., 2023b; Hoffmann et al., 2022) to compress 1GB of ImageNet images (Russakovsky et al., 2015)
and LibriSpeech audio (Panayotov et al., 2015), respectively. They found that these models compress better than
gzip or LZMA2 and even domain-specific compressors such
as PNG (Boutell, 1997) or FLAC (Coalson, 2008), but only
when parameter counts are not considered. However, when
evaluating pre-trained neural networks as compressors, the
parameter count has to be factored into the compression ratio. To illustrate this, imagine that Alice wants to compress
and send data to Bob, who wants to decompress it. If Alice
trains a neural network to compress the data but does not
communicate the model’s weights, Bob cannot decode the
data (unless Alice communicates the training recipe and Bob
retrains the same network from scratch, but that would no

1. Introduction
Strong predictive models can straightforwardly be turned
into strong lossless compressors, e.g., via arithmetic codEqual contribution † Work performed while the author was at
Google DeepMind 1 Chandar Research Lab. MILA - Quebec AI
Institute Polytechnique Montréal 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Anian Ruoss <anianr@google.com>, Tim Genewein
<timgen@google.com>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

