Decoupled SGDA for Games with Intermittent Strategy Communication

Ali Zindari * 1 Parham Yazdkhasti * 1 Anton Rodomanov 1 Tatjana Chavdarova 2 Sebastian U. Stich 1

Abstract

2019; Robey et al., 2023) and multi-agent reinforcement
learning (e.g., Lowe et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019).

We introduce Decoupled SGDA, a novel adaptation of Stochastic Gradient Descent Ascent
(SGDA) tailored for multiplayer games with intermittent strategy communication. Unlike prior
methods, Decoupled SGDA enables players to
update strategies locally using outdated opponent strategies, significantly reducing communication overhead. For Strongly-Convex-StronglyConcave (SCSC) games, it achieves near-optimal
communication complexity comparable to the
best-known GDA rates. For weakly coupled
games where the interaction between players
is lower relative to the non-interactive part of
the game, Decoupled SGDA significantly reduces communication costs compared to standard
SGDA. Additionally, Decoupled SGDA outperforms federated minimax approaches in noisy,
imbalanced settings. These results establish Decoupled SGDA as a transformative approach for
distributed optimization in resource-constrained
environments.

Several gradient-based methods have been proposed for
solving minimax problems (Korpelevich, 1976; Popov,
1980; Balduzzi et al., 2018; Nouiehed et al., 2019; Chavdarova et al., 2020; Kovalev & Gasnikov, 2022). One of
the most widely used is the gradient descent method. In the
context of 2-player zero-sum minimax games, this approach
is referred to as Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA), where the
minimizing player (u–player) takes descent steps and the
maximizing player (v–player) takes ascent steps.
In some situations, however, players may not have direct
access to their opponents’ exact strategies. The u–player
might only have a noisy estimate of v when updating its
parameters, and vice versa. In extreme cases, players might
operate with outdated strategies from their opponents, with
limited opportunities to synchronize. We refer to this scenario as games with intermittent strategy communication
(ISC-games). Here are a few illustrative examples:
• Corporate competitors. Companies frequently adjust
their strategies based on individual objectives and the
strategies of their competitors. For instance, Netflix
may need to lower its prices if a competitor like Max
reduces its subscription rates (Jagadeesan et al., 2022).
Corporations may occasionally release (noisy) general
information about their strategies, giving each company an imperfect understanding of its competitor’s
actions. Alternatively, companies might hire experts to
estimate competitor strategies using publicly available
data, although this process is expensive and infrequent.
• N -agents with restricted communication. In control theory, applications involving drones or robots are
modeled with N -player games (see Spica et al., 2020;
Laine et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021, and references
therein). However, due to factors like long distances or
limited battery life caused by weight constraints, communication between agents regarding learned strategies
is costly and can only occur intermittently.

1. Introduction
Several real-world problems in diverse areas, such as economics and computer science, can frequently be described
as N -player differentiable games (Von Neumann & Morgenstern, 2007). While players may have competing objectives, the aim is to identify an equilibrium, a strategy
where no player benefits from deviating unilaterally. Examples of such games in machine learning include Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014),
adversarial robustness (Madry et al., 2017; Shafahi et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Politecnico di Milano,
Italy. Correspondence to: Ali Zindari <ali.zindari@cispa.de>,
Parham Yazdkhasti <parham.yazdkhasti@cispa.de>, Anton
Rodomanov <anton.rodomanov@cispa.de>, Tatjana Chavdarova <tatjana.chavdarova@polimi.it>, Sebastian U. Stich
<stich@cispa.de>.

In summary, this paper focuses on the following questions.
• Can players effectively learn and adapt locally in ISCgames when relying on noisy or outdated opponent
strategies?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

