Uncertainty Estimation for Heterophilic Graphs
Through the Lens of Information Theory

Dominik Fuchsgruber * 1 Tom Wollschläger * 1 Johannes Bordne 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract

like graphs gained traction (Stadler et al., 2021; Fuchsgruber et al., 2024b; Trivedi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024).
Many approaches assume homophily – that nodes preferably
connect to nodes of the same class – either explicitly by using graph diffusion (Stadler et al., 2021; Fuchsgruber et al.,
2024a; Wu et al., 2023) or implicitly through the chosen
backbone model (Bazhenov et al., 2022).

While uncertainty estimation for graphs recently
gained traction, most methods rely on homophily
and deteriorate in heterophilic settings. We address this by analyzing message passing neural
networks from an information-theoretic perspective and developing a suitable analog to data
processing inequality to quantify information
throughout the model’s layers. In contrast to
non-graph domains, information about the nodelevel prediction target can increase with model
depth if a node’s features are semantically different from its neighbors. Therefore, on heterophilic
graphs, the latent embeddings of an MPNN each
provide different information about the data distribution – different from homophilic settings. This
reveals that considering all node representations
simultaneously is a key design principle for epistemic uncertainty estimation on graphs beyond
homophily. We empirically confirm this with a
simple post-hoc density estimator on the joint
node embedding space that provides state-of-theart uncertainty on heterophilic graphs. At the
same time, it matches prior work on homophilic
graphs without explicitly exploiting homophily
through post-processing.

In heterophilic settings, when nodes primarily connect to
nodes of a different class, these methods and their uncertainty estimates deteriorate. One reason is that they often explicitly rely on smoothing to propagate (un)certainty within
clusters in the graph. This can be beneficial when links exist
predominantly between semantically similar nodes but it is
less justified on heterophilic graphs.
In this work, we approach uncertainty estimation from an
information-theoretic perspective. Taking inspiration from
Tishby & Zaslavsky (2015), we study Message Passing
Neural Networks (MPNNs) in terms of the information its
latent node representations provide about the target variable. By formulating a suitable graphical model, we derive
an analog to the Data Processing Inequality (DPI) that applies to settings with independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) data. It enables us to propose a novel definition of
homophily based on the semantically relevant information
a node’s neighbors provide that is different from its own.
We prove that in homophilic graphs where the information
of adjacent nodes is similar to a node’s own features, the
information gained through considering deeper layers diminishes. In heterophilic graphs, adjacent nodes exhibit
different semantics that are captured by representations at
different layers. This reveals a key principle for uncertainty
quantification in MPNNs under heterophily: They should
jointly consider all node representations.

1. Introduction
Trusting a machine learning model is critical for real-world
use, especially in high-risk application domains (Xu &
Saleh, 2021; Rabe et al., 2021). While most uncertainty
modeling focuses on computer vision models (Gawlikowski
et al., 2023), recently, also interdependent data modalities

We realize this design principle through Joint Latent Density
Estimation (JLDE) on the embeddings in an MPNN using
a simple KNN-based estimator. We are the first to study
uncertainty estimation in node classification beyond homophilic graphs and systematically compare our principle
to established estimators on model architectures that perform well on heterophilic data. It provides state-of-theart epistemic uncertainty across different datasets, distribution shifts, and MPNN backbones, confirming the validity

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computation, Information & Technology and Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich.
Correspondence to: Dominik Fuchsgruber <d.fuchsgruber@tum.de>, Tom Wollschläger
<t.wollschlaeger@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

