Channel Normalization for Time Series Channel Identification
Seunghan Lee 1 2 Taeyoung Park * 1 Kibok Lee * 1
Channel-Unidentifiable (Non-CID*)

Abstract

Channel 1

Channel identifiability (CID) refers to the ability
to distinguish among individual channels in time
series (TS) modeling. The absence of CID often
results in producing identical outputs for identical inputs, disregarding channel-specific characteristics. In this paper, we highlight the importance of CID and propose Channel Normalization (CN), a simple yet effective normalization
strategy that enhances CID by assigning distinct
affine transformation parameters to each channel. We further extend CN in two ways: 1) Adaptive CN (ACN) dynamically adjusts parameters
based on the input TS, improving adaptability in
TS models, and 2) Prototypical CN (PCN) introduces a set of learnable prototypes instead of
per-channel parameters, enabling applicability to
datasets with unknown or varying number of channels and facilitating use in TS foundation models.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of CN and its
variants by applying them to various TS models, achieving significant performance gains for
both non-CID and CID models. In addition, we
analyze the success of our approach from an information theory perspective. Code is available at
https://github.com/seunghan96/CN.

Channel-Identifiable (CID)
Channel 1

+ CN
Channel 2

Channel 2

* iTransformer (ICLR 2024), Linear (AAAI 2023)

Channel Normalization (CN)

Figure 1: Motivating example for channel identifiability. When
two different channels receive the locally identical inputs (green),
a non-CID model yields the same outputs (yellow) for both, failing
to distinguish between them, as shown in the left panel. In contrast,
applying CN enables CID and produces distinct outputs even with
the same inputs, as shown in the right panel.
Average MSE (4Hs)

ETTm1

Weather

PEMS03

Imp.

iTransformer
+ Constant vector

.408
.397

.260
.246

.142
.114

6.5%

Table 1: Necessity of CID. Simply adding different constant vectors to each channel token improves the performance. Full results
and comparison with our methods are shown in Appendix G.

CID), while others are not (i.e., channel-unidentifiable or
non-CID), producing identical outputs for the identical input
regardless of the channel (Liu et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2023).
Figure 1 illustrates the TS forecasting results using iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024), a widely adopted non-CID model,
on a toy dataset with two channels displaying distinct patterns. The figure shows that the model fails on this simple
task, as non-CID models lack information about channel
identities, producing identical outputs (yellow) for both
channels whenever given identical inputs (green). Furthermore, Table 1 shows that adding distinct constant vectors
to each channel token, enabling the model to distinguish
among channels, improves the forecasting performance.
These results highlight the importance of CID in TS models.

1. Introduction
Time series (TS) forecasting is widely used in various fields,
including traffic (Cirstea et al., 2022), electricity (Dudek
et al., 2021), and sales forecasting (Li et al., 2022). A
range of TS forecasting methods have been developed based
on different architectures, such as Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017), multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) (Rumelhart
et al., 1986), and state-space models (SSMs) (Gu & Dao,
2023). Among them, some models are inherently able to
distinguish among channels (i.e., channel-identifiable or

A naive approach to solving this issue is to use different parameters for each channel in the tokenization layer, although
this increases computational burden (Nie et al., 2024), or to
add learnable vectors to each channel token (i.e., channel
identifiers) (Chi et al., 2024). These methods yield limited
performance gains, as discussed in Section 5.3, motivating
us to design a simple yet effective method to enhance CID.

*
Equal advising 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yonsei University 2 KRAFTON; work done while at Yonsei University. Correspondence to: Taeyoung Park <tpark@yonsei.ac.kr>,
Kibok Lee <kibok@yonsei.ac.kr>.

To this end, we propose Channel Normalization (CN), a
simple yet effective normalization strategy designed to enhance CID of TS models. Unlike Layer Normalization (LN)
(Ba et al., 2016) which applies shared affine transformation
parameters across all channels, CN employs distinct parameters for each channel, allowing the model to differentiate

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

