Multi-Objective Causal Bayesian Optimization

Shriya Bhatija 1 2 Paul-David Zuercher 2 3 Jakob Thumm 1 Thomas Bohné 2

Abstract

(a) MO - CBO problem

In decision-making problems, the outcome of
an intervention often depends on the causal
relationships between system components and
is highly costly to evaluate. In such settings,
causal Bayesian optimization (CBO) exploits the
causal relationships between the system variables
and sequentially performs interventions to approach the optimum with minimal data. Extending CBO to the multi-outcome setting, we propose multi-objective causal Bayesian optimization (MO - CBO), a paradigm for identifying Paretooptimal interventions within a known multi-target
causal graph. Our methodology first reduces
the search space by discarding sub-optimal interventions based on the structure of the given
causal graph. We further show that any MO - CBO
problem can be decomposed into several traditional multi-objective optimization tasks. Our
proposed MO - CBO algorithm is designed to identify Pareto-optimal interventions by iteratively exploring these underlying tasks, guided by relative
hypervolume improvement. Experiments on synthetic and real-world causal graphs demonstrate
the superiority of our approach over non-causal
multi-objective Bayesian optimization in settings
where causal information is available.

BMR

Height

PSA
feasible region

Weight

Aspirin

BMI

CI

Age
Cancer
Statin

(b) MO - CBO solution

Pareto
front
infeasible

PSA

Statin

Figure 1. MO - CBO problem in healthcare. (a) Causal graph where
red, orange, and grey nodes depict outcome, manipulative, and
non-manipulative variables, respectively. (b) The solution consists
of interventions that yield optimal trade-offs between the targets.

by causal mechanisms, which can be exploited to approach
optimal outcomes in a targeted and cost-efficient manner.
A well-established strategy for optimizing such expensiveto-evaluate black-box functions is Bayesian optimization
(Shahriari et al., 2016), but it cannot leverage the causal
structure between its input variables. To this end, causal
Bayesian optimization (CBO) (Aglietti et al., 2020) was introduced to generalize Bayesian optimization to settings
where causal information is available. While existing CBO
variants focus on optimizing a single objective, real-world
systems often require the simultaneous optimization of multiple outcome variables. Here, the aim is to establish optimal
trade-offs between these variables instead of identifying the
global optimum of a single objective. As an example, consider the graph in Figure 1 (a), which depicts the causal
relationships between prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and
its risk factors (Ferro et al., 2015). For patients sensitive
to Statin medications, the aim is to manipulate these risk
factors to simultaneously minimize both the required Statin
intake and PSA levels. Figure 1 (b) shows the Pareto front,
i.e., the optimal trade-offs between Statin and PSA.

1. Introduction
Decision-making problems arise in various domains, such
as healthcare, manufacturing, and public policy, and involve manipulating variables to obtain an outcome of interest. In many such domains, interventions are inherently
costly, and practical applications are subject to budgetary
constraints. Moreover, these systems are often governed
1

Department of Computer Engineering, Technical University of
Munich, Munich, Germany 2 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 3 The Alan Turing
Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Shriya
Bhatija <shriya.bhatija@tum.de>.

We propose multi-objective causal Bayesian optimization
(MO - CBO) to generalize CBO to problems with multiple
outcome variables. Figure 2 gives a high-level overview of
our proposed methodology. Our key contributions are:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. We formally define MO - CBO as a new class of optimization problems.
1

