Optimizing Test-Time Compute via Meta Reinforcement Finetuning

Yuxiao Qu * 1 Matthew Y. R. Yang * 1 Amrith Setlur 1 Lewis Tunstall 2 Edward Emanuel Beeching 2
Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 Aviral Kumar 1

Abstract

scaling test-time compute. Generally, these approaches train
models to produce traces that are longer than the typical correct solution, and consist of tokens that attempt to implement
some “algorithm”, e.g., reflecting on previous answers (Qu
et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2024), planning (DeepSeek-AI
et al., 2025), or implementing some form of linearized
search (Gandhi et al., 2024). These approaches include
explicitly fine-tuning pre-trained LLMs for algorithmic behavior, e.g., SFT on search data (Gandhi et al., 2024; Nie
et al., 2024), or running outcome-reward RL (DeepSeek-AI
et al., 2025) against a 0/1 correctness reward.

Training models to effectively use test-time compute is crucial for improving the reasoning performance of LLMs. Current methods mostly do
so via fine-tuning on search traces or running RL
with 0/1 outcome reward, but do these approaches
efficiently utilize test-time compute? Would these
approaches continue to scale as the budget improves? To answer these questions, in this paper,
we formalize the problem of optimizing test-time
compute as a meta-reinforcement learning (RL)
problem, which provides a principled perspective
on spending test-time compute. This perspective
enables us to view the long output stream from the
LLM as consisting of several episodes run at test
time and leads us to use a notion akin to cumulative regret over output tokens as a way to measure
the efficacy of test-time compute. Akin to how RL
algorithms can best tradeoff exploration and exploitation over training, minimizing regret should
also provide the best balance between exploration
and exploitation in the token stream. While we
show that state-of-the-art models do not minimize
regret, one can do so by maximizing a dense reward bonus in conjunction with the outcome 0/1
reward RL. This bonus is the “progress” made
by each subsequent block in the output stream,
quantified by the change in the likelihood of eventual success. Using these insights, we develop
Meta Reinforcment Fine-Tuning, or MRT, a new
class of fine-tuning methods for optimizing testtime compute. MRT leads to a 2-3x relative gain
in performance and roughly a 1.5x gain in token
efficiency for math reasoning.

While training models to spend test-time compute by generating long reasoning chains via outcome-reward RL has
been promising, for continued gains from scaling test-time
compute, we ultimately need to answer some critical understanding and method design questions. First, do current
LLMs efficiently use test-time compute? That is, do they
spend tokens roughly in the ballpark of the typical solution
length or do they use too many tokens even on easy questions? Second, would LLMs be able to “discover” solutions
to harder questions when run at much larger test-time token budgets than what was used for training? Ultimately,
we would want models to derive enough utility from every token (or any semantically meaningful segment) they
produce, not only for efficiency but also because doing so
imbues a systematic procedure to discover solutions for
harder, out-of-distribution problems.
In this paper, we formalize the above challenges in optimizing test-time compute through the lens of meta reinforcement learning (RL) (Weng, 2019). To build our approach,
we segment the output stream from an LLM on a problem
into multiple episodes (Figure 2). If we were to only care
about (a) the efficiency, then the LLM only needs to learn
to exploit and directly output the answer without spending
too many episodes. On the other hand, if the LLM is solely
focused on (b) the discovery, then exploration is more desirable, so that the LLM can spend several episodes trying
different approaches, verifying and revising them, before
producing the final answer. Fundamentally, this is different
from traditional RL since the goal here is to learn an LLM
that implements explore-exploit algorithms on every test
problem. In other words, we aim to learn such algorithms
from training data, making this a meta RL learning problem.

1. Introduction
Recent results in LLM reasoning (Snell et al., 2024) illustrate the potential to improve reasoning capabilities by
*
Equal contribution 1 CMU 2 Hugging Face. Correspondence to:
Yuxiao Qu <yuxiaoq@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

