Privacy Attacks on Image AutoRegressive Models

Antoni Kowalczuk * 1 Jan Dubiński * 2 3 Franziska Boenisch 1 Adam Dziedzic 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The field of visual generative modeling has seen rapid advances in recent years, primarily due to the rise of Diffusion
Models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) that achieve
impressive performance in generating highly detailed and
realistic images. For this ability, they currently act as the
backbones of commercial image generators (Rombach et al.,
2022; Team, 2022; Saharia et al., 2022). Yet, recently,
their performance was closely matched or further surpassed
through novel image autoregressive models (IARs). Over
the last months, IARs have been achieving new state-ofthe-art performance for class-conditional (Tian et al., 2024;
Yu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024) and text-conditional (Han
et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024) generation.
The crucial improvement of their training cost and generation quality results from the scaling laws that previously
were observed for large language models (LLMs) (Kaplan
et al., 2020) with which they share both a training paradigm
and architectural foundation. As a result, with more compute budget, and larger datasets, IARs can achieve better
performance than their DM-based counterparts.

Image AutoRegressive generation has emerged
as a new powerful paradigm with image autoregressive models (IARs) matching state-of-the-art
diffusion models (DMs) in image quality (FID:
1.48 vs. 1.58) while allowing for a higher
generation speed. However, the privacy risks
associated with IARs remain unexplored, raising
concerns regarding their responsible deployment.
To address this gap, we conduct a comprehensive
privacy analysis of IARs, comparing their privacy
risks to the ones of DMs as reference points.
Concretely, we develop a novel membership
inference attack (MIA) that achieves a remarkably
high success rate in detecting training images
(with a True Positive Rate at False Positive
Rate = 1% of 86.38% vs. 6.38% for DMs with
comparable attacks). We leverage our novel
MIA to provide dataset inference (DI) for IARs,
and show that it requires as few as 6 samples to
detect dataset membership (compared to 200 for
DI in DMs), confirming a higher information
leakage in IARs. Finally, we are able to extract
hundreds of training data points from an IAR
(e.g., 698 from VAR-d30). Our results suggest a
fundamental privacy-utility trade-off: while IARs
excel in image generation quality and speed, they
are empirically significantly more vulnerable to
privacy attacks compared to DMs that achieve
similar performance. We release the code
at
https://github.com/sprintml/
privacy_attacks_against_iars
for
reproducibility.

At the same time, the privacy risks of IARs remain largely
unexplored, posing challenges for their responsible deployment. While privacy risks, such as the leakage of training
data points at inference time, have been demonstrated for
DMs and LLMs (Carlini et al., 2021; 2023; Duan et al.,
2023a;b; Hanke et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Wen et al.,
2024; Hayes et al., 2025), no such evaluations currently exist
for IARs. As a result, the extent to which IARs may similarly expose sensitive information remains an open question,
underscoring the necessity for rigorous privacy investigations in this context.
To address this gap and investigate the privacy risks associated with IARs, we conduct a comprehensive analysis using
multiple perspectives on privacy leakage. First, we develop
a new membership inference attack (MIA) (Shokri et al.,
2017), which aims to determine whether a specific data
point was included in an IAR’s training set—a widely used
approach for assessing privacy risks. We find that existing
MIAs developed for DMs (Carlini et al., 2023; Duan et al.,
2023c; Kong et al., 2023; Zhai et al., 2024) or LLMs (Mattern et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024), are ineffective for IARs, as
they rely on signals specific to their target model. We com-

*

Equal contribution 1 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany 2 Warsaw University of Technology,
Poland 3 NASK National Research Institute, Poland. Correspondence to: Antoni Kowalczuk <antoni.kowalczuk@cispa.de>,
Jan Dubiński <jan.dubinski.dokt@pw.edu.pl>, Franziska
Boenisch
<boenisch@cispa.de>,
Adam
Dziedzic
<adam.dziedzic@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

