Stronger Neyman Regret Guarantees for Adaptive Experimental Design

Georgy Noarov 1 Riccardo Fogliato 2 Martin Bertran 2 Aaron Roth 1 2

Abstract

have low variance.
In many cases, RCTs are run sequentially: Experimental
units arrive one by one, and each unit is assigned to treatment or control adaptively, based on previous outcomes or
auxiliary information. The data-driven nature and flexibility of these experiments suggest that such adaptive trials
can achieve substantial efficiency gains over standard fixed
designs, as shown in domains ranging from political science (Offer-Westort et al., 2021; Blackwell et al., 2022)
to medicine (Chow & Chang, 2008; Villar et al., 2015;
FDA, 2019). However, so far adaptive experiments have received limited attention (Hu & Rosenberger, 2006) and have
been rarely used in practice due to concerns that adaptivity could invalidate standard statistical guarantees (van der
Laan, 2008). Indeed, classic solutions for improving estimator efficiency in the batch setting, such as Neyman
allocation (Neyman, 1992), can be nontrivial to extend to
the sequential setting.

We study the design of adaptive, sequential experiments for unbiased average treatment effect (ATE)
estimation in the design-based potential outcomes
setting. Our goal is to develop adaptive designs
offering sublinear Neyman regret, meaning their
efficiency must approach that of the hindsightoptimal nonadaptive design. Recent work (Dai
et al., 2023) introduced
ClipOGD, the first method
√
e T ) expected Neyman regret under
achieving O(
mild conditions. In this work, we propose adaptive designs with substantially stronger Neyman
regret guarantees. In particular, we modify Clie
pOGD to obtain anytime O(log
T ) Neyman regret
under natural boundedness assumptions. Further,
in the setting where experimental units have pretreatment covariates, we introduce and study a
class of contextual “multigroup” Neyman regret
guarantees: Given any set of possibly overlapping
groups based on the covariates, the adaptive design outperforms each group’s best non-adaptive
designs. In particular, we
√ develop a contextual
e T ) anytime multigroup
adaptive design with O(
Neyman regret. We empirically validate the proposed designs through an array of experiments.

Recently, a growing body of work (Hahn et al., 2011; Kato
et al., 2020; Li & Owen, 2024; Dai et al., 2023; Cook et al.,
2023) has made progress on this front by introducing multistage adaptive designs that estimate the ATE via inverseprobability weighting (IPW)-type estimators with adaptively
adjusted propensity scores. 1 Our work contributes to this
literature by developing novel adaptive sequential designs
for IPW-based ATE estimation with efficiency guarantees.
Crucially, our methods –unlike most existing work– are developed within the finite-population setting (Wager, 2024),
where the ATE is defined as a deterministic function of the
observed population rather than a superpopulation parameter. This distinction ensures robustness to treatment effect
heterogeneity and temporal data drift, challenges that can
undermine conventional superpopulation-based designs.

1. Introduction
Randomized control trials (RCTs) play a central role in a
variety of settings where causal effects need to be accurately
measured, spanning healthcare and epidemiology, policymaking, the social sciences, econometrics, e-commerce, and
beyond. In the classic potential outcomes framework (Neyman, 1923; Rubin, 1974), a central estimand is the average
treatment effect (ATE) – the average individual causal effect
across experimental units. To obtain precise estimates of
the ATE, we generally seek estimators that are unbiased and

Our Contributions We focus on the design of adaptive
RCTs to estimate the ATE as efficiently as the best-inhindsight IPW design from some benchmark class, up to

1

Georgy Noarov conducted part of this work as an intern at
Amazon Web Services.
1
In parallel, studies that fall into the multi-armed bandits
literature have developed adaptive designs for finding rewardmaximizing treatments (arms) or policies, which is a distinct, and
conflicting, objective than estimation efficiency (Zhang et al., 2020;
2021; Hadad et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2016; 2024).

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania. 2 Amazon Web Services. Correspondence to:
Georgy Noarov <gnoarov@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

