Hypothesis Testing for Generalized Thurstone Models

Anuran Makur * 1 2 Japneet Singh * 2

Abstract

choice theory (Luce, 1959; Yellott, Jr., 1977). The class
of generalized Thurstone models (GTMs) (Thurstone, 1927;
Nelder & Wedderburn, 1972; McCullagh & Nelder, 1989),
which fall under the broader framework of random utility
models, is a widely adopted framework for ranking agents,
items, or choices based on given preference data. GTMs
include many other models as special cases, most notably
the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry,
1952; Luce, 1959; McFadden, 1973), which has been widely
studied. Given n agents [n] = {1, . . . , n}, GTMs can be
construed as likelihood models for pairwise comparisons
between pairs of agents. In particular, a GTM TF assumes
that each agent i is endowed with an unknown utility parameter wi ∈ R and the probability that agent i is preferred over
agent j (e.g., i beats j in a game) is given by F (wi − wj ),
where F represents a known choice function which is a
cumulative distribution function (CDF).

In this work, we develop a hypothesis testing
framework to determine whether pairwise comparison data is generated by an underlying generalized Thurstone model TF for a given choice
function F . While prior work has predominantly
focused on parameter estimation and uncertainty
quantification for such models, we address the fundamental problem of minimax hypothesis testing
for TF models. We formulate this testing problem
by introducing a notion of separation distance between general pairwise comparison models and
the class of TF models. We then derive upper and
lower bounds on the critical threshold for testing
that depend on the topology of the observation
graph. For the special case of complete observation graphs, this threshold scales as Θ((nk)−1/2 ),
where n is the number of agents and k is the
number of comparisons per pair. Furthermore, we
propose a hypothesis test based on our separation distance, construct confidence intervals, establish time-uniform bounds on the probabilities
of type I and II errors using reverse martingale
techniques, and derive minimax lower bounds using information-theoretic methods. Finally, we
validate our results through experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets.

While GTMs have been utilized in many contexts, e.g.,
(Thurstone, 1927; Elo, 1986), they are parametric models
where n utility parameters characterize the model. Indeed,
the assumption that pairwise comparison data is governed
by a small number of parameters forms the basis of most
results on GTMs (Cattelan et al., 2013; Vojnovic & Yun,
2016; Shah et al., 2016; Jadbabaie et al., 2020; 2024). However, such parametric models can sometimes be too restrictive, failing to capture intricacies in real-world applications
(Davidson & Marschak, 1974; McLaughlin & Luce, 1965;
Tversky, 1972). Notably, GTMs struggle to accommodate
context-dependent effects, such as the home-advantage effect observed in sports tournaments (Clarke & Norman,
1995; Morley & Thomas, 2005), where teams may perform differently when playing at home versus away. Furthermore, GTMs assume transitive relationships, which may
not hold in real-world datasets. To accurately capture the
complex and diverse behaviors observed in real-world data,
non-parametric models, e.g., (Chatterjee, 2015; Shah et al.,
2016), have been studied as an alternative. This conversation
raises an important question: Given pairwise comparison
data, can we determine whether it is comes from a specific
GTM? If it does, then we can rely on the vast GTM literature
for learning and interpretation, and if it does not, then we
can resort to using other parametric models, such as the
Mallows model (Mallows, 1957), or non-parametric models
(Seshadri et al., 2020; Mania et al., 2018; Bong et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Learning rankings from data is a fundamental problem underlying numerous applications, including recommendation
systems (Jannach et al., 2016), sports tournaments (Bradley
& Terry, 1952; Cattelan et al., 2013), fine-tuning large language model (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022), and social
∗
The author ordering is alphabetical. 1 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
2
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Anuran Makur <amakur@purdue.edu>, Japneet Singh
<sing1041@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

