Beyond One-Hot Labels: Semantic Mixing for Model Calibration

Haoyang Luo 1 Linwei Tao 2 Minjing Dong 1 Chang Xu 2

Abstract
Augmentations

Source

Model calibration seeks to ensure that models
produce confidence scores that accurately reflect
the true likelihood of their predictions being correct. However, existing calibration approaches are
fundamentally tied to datasets of one-hot labels
implicitly assuming full certainty in all the annotations. Such datasets are effective for classification
but provides insufficient knowledge of uncertainty
for model calibration, necessitating the curation
of datasets with numerically rich ground-truth
confidence values. However, due to the scarcity
of uncertain visual examples, such samples are
not easily available as real datasets. In this paper,
we introduce calibration-aware data augmentation
to create synthetic datasets of diverse samples
and their ground-truth uncertainty. Specifically,
we present Calibration-aware Semantic Mixing
(CSM), a novel framework that generates training samples with mixed class characteristics and
annotates them with distinct confidence scores
via diffusion models. Based on this framework,
we propose calibrated reannotation to tackle the
misalignment between the annotated confidence
score and the mixing ratio during the diffusion
reverse process. Besides, we explore the loss
functions that better fit the new data representation paradigm. Experimental results demonstrate
that CSM achieves superior calibration compared
to the state-of-the-art calibration approaches. Our
code is available here.

Mixup

Ours

𝜆𝜆̂

Target

Cat

Horse

Bear

Cat

Cairn
Terrier

Ostrich
1.00

0.75

0.5

0.25

0.00

Figure 1. Differences between Mixup and the Proposed Augmentation. Samples with intermediate mixing coefficients exhibit
simple overlapping pattern for Mixup. The proposed augmentation mixes semantics while preserving the object completeness,
displaying enhanced image fidelity.

DNNs can achieve exceptional accuracy, they could be unreliable in real-world scenarios since the predictions are
always over-confident (Mukhoti et al., 2020; Wei et al.,
2022). This issue could mislead security-sensitive applications, such as autonomous systems, surveillance applications, medical diagnostics, etc. Model calibration (Vaicenavicius et al., 2019; Tao et al., 2023b), the process which
refines the models’ predicted confidence to be consistent
with the actual probability of correct prediction, stands as
the key to reliable vision models.
Various calibration techniques have been introduced, including post-hoc calibration (Platt et al., 1999; Guo et al.,
2017; Tao et al., 2025), loss function designs (Mukhoti et al.,
2020; Tao et al., 2023a), and regularization methods (Kumar
et al., 2018; Krishnan & Tickoo, 2020). However, current
methods rely on one-hot labeled data, which inaccurately
assume uniform uncertainty across samples for confidence
estimation. For instance, while a clear cat image and an ambiguous cat-dog hybrid image demand distinct confidence
distributions, one-hot labels enforce identical certainty. This
creates a critical gap that current datasets lack ground-truth
uncertainty annotations necessary to teach models nuanced
confidence distinctions. However, real-world collection of
such data is infeasible due to scalability and ambiguity challenges. This necessitates us to create synthetically generated
datasets with diverse ground-truth confidence annotations.

1. Introduction
Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant effectiveness in various vision tasks including image
recognition, retrieval, and object segmentation (Zagoruyko,
2016; Gordo et al., 2016; Kirillov et al., 2023). Although
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong 2 School of Computer Science, University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Minjing Dong <minjdong@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

