InfAlign: Inference-aware language model alignment

Ananth Balashankar * 1 Ziteng Sun * 2 Jonathan Berant 1 Jacob Eisenstein 1
Michael Collins 1 Adrian Hutter 1 Jong Lee 1 Chirag Nagpal 2 Flavien Prost 1 Aradhana Sinha 1
Ananda Theertha Suresh 2 Ahmad Beirami 1

π0

r

RLHF

π

Inference-aware
reward calibration
& transformation

Language model alignment is a critical step
in training modern generative language models.
Alignment targets to improve win rate of a sample
from the aligned model against the base model.
Today, we are increasingly using inference-time
algorithms (e.g., Best-of-N , controlled decoding, tree search) to decode from language models rather than standard sampling. We show that
this train/test mismatch makes standard RL framework sub-optimal in view of such inference-time
methods. To this end, we propose a framework for
inference-aware alignment (InfAlign), which
aims to optimize inference-time win rate of the
aligned policy against the base model. We prove
that for any inference-time decoding procedure,
the optimal aligned policy is the solution to the
standard RLHF problem with a transformation
of the reward. This motivates us to provide the
calibrate-and-transform RL (InfAlign-CTRL)
algorithm to solve this problem, which involves
a reward calibration step and a KL-regularized
reward maximization step with a transformation
of the calibrated reward. For best-of-N sampling
and best-of-N jailbreaking, we propose specific
transformations offering up to 3-8% improvement
on inference-time win rates. Finally, we also show
that our proposed reward calibration method is a
strong baseline for optimizing standard win rate.

R

RLHF

π∗

T : Inference-time procedure

Standard RLHF

Abstract

Tπ

InfAlign

Tπ ∗

Figure 1. Given an inference-time procedure such as Best-of-N ,
standard RLHF suffers from a train/test mismatch between traintime policy π and inference-time policy Tπ . InfAlign bridges
the gap by optimizing a policy-transformed reward R, yielding a
policy, π ∗ , that is optimized for inference under Tπ∗ .

1. Introduction
Aligning language models (LMs) through reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) is a widely adopted
finetuning framework to improve a reward (e.g., safety or
quality). RLHF generally entails training a reward model,
and then solving a KL-regularized RL problem (Christiano
et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Other ways of solving RLHF include variants of direct preference optimization (Rafailov et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2023),
reward model distillation (Fisch et al., 2024), and Best-of-N
distillation (Gui et al., 2024; Amini et al., 2024; Sessa et al.,
2024). The success of RLHF is typically measured through
the win rate of the aligned model against the base model,
i.e., how often a sample from the aligned model wins against
the base model using a judge for the task.
However, rarely is the aligned model used as is at inference
time; instead an inference-time procedure is typically used to
accomplish a task. For example, it is customary to perform
one or more of the following procedures at decoding: bestof-N sampling (Nakano et al., 2022; Beirami et al., 2024),
best-of-N jailbreaking (Hughes et al., 2024b), chain-ofthought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2024), and
self consistency (Wang et al., 2022a; DeepSeek-AI, 2025)
(see Appendix A for a more comprehensive discussion).

*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to:
Ananth Balashankar <ananthbshankar@google.com>,
Ziteng Sun <zitengsun@google.com>,
Jonathan Berant <joberant@google.com>,
Jacob Eisenstein <jeisenstein@google.com>,
Ananda Theertha Suresh <theertha@google.com>,
Ahmad Beirami <ahmad.beirami@gmail.com>.

In this paper, we address the following question: Can we
better align a language model to be served with a known
inference-time procedure? We propose a family of optimization objectives, which we call the inference-aware alignment

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

