Flow Matching for Few-Trial Neural Adaptation with Stable Latent Dynamics

Puli Wang 1 2 Yu Qi 2 3 Yueming Wang 1 2 Gang Pan 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
The aim of Brain-computer Interfaces (BCIs) is to establish
a direct link between the brain and external devices, presenting great opportunities for improving neural rehabilitation
in individuals with paralysis (Willett et al., 2021; 2023;
Wu et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2023a). However, sustaining
long-term decoding performance in chronic implantation is
challenging, resulting from behavioral variability (Truccolo
et al., 2008), physiological changes (Athalye et al., 2017),
and device degradation (Woeppel et al., 2021). The dynamic
relationship between neural data and behavior necessitates
recalibrating neural representations through adaptation to
ensure high-performance behavioral decoding.

The primary goal of brain-computer interfaces
(BCIs) is to establish a direct linkage between
neural activities and behavioral actions via neural decoders. Due to the nonstationary property
of neural signals, BCIs trained on one day usually obtain degraded performance on other days,
hindering the user experience. Existing studies
attempted to address this problem by aligning
neural signals across different days. However,
these neural adaptation methods may exhibit instability and poor performance when only a few
trials are available for alignment, limiting their
practicality in real-world BCI deployment. To
achieve efficient and stable neural adaptation with
few trials, we propose Flow-Based Distribution
Alignment (FDA), a novel framework that utilizes
flow matching to learn flexible neural representations with stable latent dynamics, thereby facilitating source-free domain alignment through
likelihood maximization. The latent dynamics
of FDA framework is theoretically proven to be
stable using Lyapunov exponents, allowing for robust adaptation. Further experiments across multiple motor cortex datasets demonstrate the superior
performance of FDA, achieving reliable results
with fewer than five trials. Our FDA approach
offers a novel and efficient solution for few-trial
neural data adaptation, offering significant potential for improving the long-term viability of
real-world BCI applications.

Existing work on neural adaptation (Dabagia et al., 2023)
have focused on latent embeddings and aligned them for
stable long-term neural decoding. For example, linear methods, such as principal component analysis (PCA) (Degenhart et al., 2020), are used for aligning interpretable latent
factors. Non-linear methods based on low-dimensional latent spaces usually have explicit assumptions on the statistical properties of latent variables. NoMAD (Karpowicz
et al., 2022) and the source-free alignment (Vermani et al.,
2024) based on seq-VAEs assume Gaussian posteriors for
the closed-form distribution divergences.
However, these methods may lack stability and efficiency
when only a few trials are available for alignment in realworld BCI deployment, which requires minimal recalibration (Karpowicz et al., 2024) over extended periods. For instance, empirical results for two typical methods are shown
in Fig. 1(a). While they achieved reasonable performance
with a substantial number of target trials (∼ 100), they failed
to maintain effective behavioral decoding with fewer than 5
target trials. This issue may be attributed to two main factors.
First, some alignment techniques assume prior distributions
for latent variables to simplify likelihood estimation (Karpowicz et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Vermani et al.,
2024). Nonetheless, this assumption may be invalid when
target trials are limited. NoMAD relies on the closed-form
KL-divergence of Gaussian distributions, which may lead
to negative transfer (Pan & Yang, 2009) in few-trial scenarios, as shown in Fig. 1(b)(Left). Second, training of
certain alignment methods, such as Cycle-GAN (Ma et al.,
2023), might be quite unstable with few trials as illustrated

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University 2 The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence,
Zhejiang University 3 MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain
Science and Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University.
Correspondence to: Yu Qi <qiyu@zju.edu.cn>, Gang Pan
<gpan@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

