Rejecting Hallucinated State Targets during Planning

Mingde “Harry” Zhao 1 2 3 Tristan Sylvain 4 Romain Laroche 3 Doina Precup 1 2 5 Yoshua Bengio 1 6

Abstract
In planning processes of computational decisionmaking agents, generative or predictive models
are often used as “generators” to propose “targets”
representing sets of expected or desirable states.
Unfortunately, learned models inevitably hallucinate infeasible targets that can cause delusional
behaviors and safety concerns. We first investigate the kinds of infeasible targets that generators
can hallucinate. Then, we devise a strategy to
identify and reject infeasible targets by learning a
target feasibility evaluator. To ensure that the evaluator is robust and non-delusional, we adopted a
design choice combining off-policy compatible
learning rule, distributional architecture, and data
augmentation based on hindsight relabeling. Attaching to a planning agent, the designed evaluator
learns by observing the agent’s interactions with
the environment and the targets produced by its
generator, without the need to change the agent
or its generator. Our controlled experiments show
significant reductions in delusional behaviors and
performance improvements for various kinds of
existing agents.

GENERATOR

hallucinated
targets
feasible targets

reject
feasibility
accept

EVALUATOR
paired training data

reach indicator h

other
components target encoder g
actions
environment

observations / states
rewards

hindsight
experience replay

Figure 1. Target Evaluator attached to a Target-Assisted Planning (TAP) Agent: An abstracted framework that encompasses,
but is not limited to, methods listed in Tab. 2 (in Appendix). The
generator proposes candidate target embeddings g ⊙ . Our proposed evaluator can be attached to learn to reject infeasible targets
(related parts marked in dashed lines).

some rollout-based model-based RL methods are TAP, such
as those following the classic Dyna or Monte-Carlo treesearch frameworks, utilize fixed-horizon transition models
to simulate experiences (Sutton, 1991; Schrittwieser et al.,
2019; Łukasz Kaiser et al., 2020); While, TAP also encompasses methods that directly generate arbitrarily distant
targets acting as candidate sub-goals to divide-and-conquer
the tasks into smaller, more manageable steps (Zadem et al.,
2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Lo et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

It is the defining characteristic of TAP - the usage of generators, that brings us to the topic of this work: an often
unstated assumption is that generated targets are always
feasible. However, the desired generalization abilities of
generative models are inevitably accompanied by hallucinations (Xu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024b; Xing et al., 2024;
Jesson et al., 2024; Aithal et al., 2024) - the “dark side” that
produces infeasible targets that can never be experienced
by anyhow. Hallucinations impact TAP agents differently
based on their planning behaviors. In decision-time TAP
methods (Alver & Precup, 2024), where models are used
to make an immediate decision on what to do next, hallucinated targets can lead to delusional plans that compromise
performance and safety (Langosco et al., 2022; Bengio et al.,
2024). For background TAP agents that train on simulated
experiences constructed with generated targets, delusional
values estimated from hallucinated targets can be catastrophically destabilizing (Jafferjee et al., 2020; Lo et al., 2024).

The advent of computational modeling has spurred advancements in computational decision making agents, most notable of which is, model-based Reinforcement Learning
(RL). This work is focused on those models that play the
role of generators, which imagine or specify future outcomes for agents. Some generators imagine next states or
observations, while others specify subgoals (sets of states)
to accomplish. No matter how they are represented, we refer
to these generator outputs as targets and methods that make
such use of generators Target-Assisted Planning (TAP).
TAP is a new perspective for unifying many planning / reasoning agents with wildly different behaviors. For instance,
1

Mila (Quebec AI Institute) 2 McGill University 3 Wayve 4 RBC
Borealis 5 Google Deepmind 6 Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: Mingde “Harry” Zhao <mingde.zhao@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Human brains reject infeasible intentions hallucinated by
the belief formation system (brain’s generator) using a be1

