Toward Robust Hyper-Detailed Image Captioning: A Multiagent Approach and
Dual Evaluation Metrics for Factuality and Coverage

Saehyung Lee 1 * Seunghyun Yoon 2 Trung Bui 2 Jing Shi 2 Sungroh Yoon 1 3

Abstract

generating short captions, which constrains their broader
application in real-world scenarios. For instance, in cases
such as assistance for visually impaired individuals, where
it is necessary to provide highly detailed descriptions of the
scene in front of the user, these methods may not be suitable.

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) excel at generating highly detailed captions but often
produce hallucinations. Our analysis reveals that
existing hallucination detection methods struggle
with detailed captions. We attribute this to the increasing reliance of MLLMs on their generated
text, rather than the input image, as the sequence
length grows. To address this issue, we propose a
multiagent approach that leverages LLM-MLLM
collaboration to correct given captions. Additionally, we introduce an evaluation framework and
a benchmark dataset to facilitate the systematic
analysis of detailed captions. Our experiments
demonstrate that our proposed evaluation method
better aligns with human judgments of factuality
than existing metrics and that existing approaches
to improve the MLLM factuality may fall short
in hyper-detailed image captioning tasks. In contrast, our proposed method significantly enhances
the factual accuracy of captions, even improving
those generated by GPT-4V. Finally, we highlight
a limitation of VQA-centric benchmarking by
demonstrating that an MLLM’s performance on
VQA benchmarks may not correlate with its ability to generate detailed image captions. Our code
and data are available at https://github.
com/adobe-research/CapMAS.

Following the recent success of large language models
(LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020), there have been attempts to
use text and information from other modalities as input to
LLMs. Notably, many studies have explored multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) that incorporate visual
information (Li et al., 2023a; Dai et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2024b). These models have demonstrated significantly superior performance compared to traditional models in tasks
such as visual question answering (VQA) and captioning
(Liu et al., 2024a). In particular, MLLMs, leveraging the advanced language capabilities of LLMs, are able to generate
much longer and more detailed captions than conventional
captioning models. However, these generated captions frequently contain inaccurate information, including descriptions of objects that are not present in the input image (Leng
et al., 2024). Such hallucination problems hinder the practical application of MLLMs in real-world settings.
Three major approaches have been recently proposed to improve the factuality of MLLMs: (i) Decoding-based methods
(Leng et al., 2024) reduce the probabilities of hallucinationrelated tokens during the model’s decoding process without
requiring additional training; (ii) Training-based methods
(Liu et al., 2023a) further train the models on curated multimodal datasets to ensure they generate only accurate responses; (iii) Corrector-based methods (Zhou et al., 2024)
employ a corrector model that detects and either removes or
revises hallucinations present in the model’s responses.

1. Introduction
Numerous image captioning methods utilizing deep neural
networks (DNNs) have been proposed (Vinyals et al., 2015;
Xu et al., 2015). However, they are generally limited to

In this paper, we propose Caption factuality enhancing
MultiAgent System (CapMAS), a multiagent approach
to correct hyper-detailed image captions. Unlike existing
corrector-based approaches that require training a corrector (Lee et al., 2024), CapMAS improves the factuality of
detailed image captions by leveraging the collaboration between an LLM and MLLM, without the need for additional
training. Moreover, unlike methods that target specific types
of hallucinations (Li et al., 2023b; Zhou et al., 2024), our approach does not pre-define the hallucination types, allowing

*

Work done during internship at Adobe Research. 1 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Adobe Research 3 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Sungroh
Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

