TINED: GNNs-to-MLPs by Teacher Injection and Dirichlet Energy Distillation

Ziang Zhou 1 Zhihao Ding 1 Jieming Shi∗ 1 Qing Li 1 Shiqi Shen 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have delivered impressive
outcomes in important applications (Hamilton et al., 2017;
Kipf and Welling, 2017; Veličković et al., 2018). The power
of GNNs is underpinned by the message passing framework
that assimilates and refines node representations by considering their (multi-hop) neighborhood over graphs (Wu
et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020). Nonetheless, the message
passing is computationally demanding due to numerous
nodes involved, posing significant challenges to deploy
GNNs in latency-sensitive applications that require fast inference (Zhang et al., 2020; 2022a; Jia et al., 2020).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are pivotal in
graph-based learning, particularly excelling in
node classification. However, their scalability is
hindered by the need for multi-hop data during
inference, limiting their application in latencysensitive scenarios. Recent efforts to distill GNNs
into multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) for faster inference often underutilize the layer-level insights
of GNNs. In this paper, we present TINED, a
novel approach that distills GNNs to MLPs on a
layer-by-layer basis using Teacher Injection and
Dirichlet Energy Distillation techniques. We focus on two key operations in GNN layers: feature
transformation (FT) and graph propagation (GP).
We recognize that FT is computationally equivalent to a fully-connected (FC) layer in MLPs.
Thus, we propose directly transferring teacher parameters from an FT in a GNN to an FC layer
in the student MLP, enhanced by fine-tuning. In
TINED, the FC layers in an MLP replicate the
sequence of FTs and GPs in the GNN. We also
establish a theoretical bound for GP approximation. Furthermore, we note that FT and GP operations in GNN layers often exhibit opposing
smoothing effects: GP is aggressive, while FT
is conservative. Using Dirichlet energy, we develop a DE ratio to measure these effects and
propose Dirichlet Energy Distillation to convey
these characteristics from GNN layers to MLP layers. Extensive experiments show that TINED outperforms GNNs and leading distillation methods
across various settings and seven datasets. Source
code are available at https://github.com/
scottjiao/TINED_ICML25/.

Recent studies attempt to combine the performance advantage of GNNs and the latency advantage of multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) (Hu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022b; Tian
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021). Specifically, GLNN (Zhang
et al., 2022b) distills teacher GNNs into student MLPs via
soft labels. Then the student is deployed for fast inference
to approximate the performance of GNNs without expensive message passing on graphs. NOSMOG (Tian et al.,
2022) further considers graph structures, robustness, and
node relations, while a new graph representation space is
learned in (Yang et al., 2024). Current research often treats
both teacher GNN and student MLP as monolithic model
entities, focusing primarily on soft label outputs of the GNN
for distillation, which overlooks the intrinsic knowledge
contained within fine-grained GNN layers.
In this paper, we conduct an in-depth analysis to reveal
important properties of the key operations in GNN layers
and propose a novel method, TINED, distilling GNNs to
MLPs layer-wise by Teacher INjection and Dirichlet Energy
Distillation. The main ideas are explained below, and the
detailed architecture of TINED is presented later.
Main Idea of Teacher Injection. A typical GNN layer includes two key operations: feature transformation (FT) and
graph propagation (GP) (Kipf and Welling, 2017; Veličković
et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020; Zhu et al.,
2021). GP aggregates neighbor representations of a node,
while FT transforms node representations with learnable
parameters. The valuable knowledge of a teacher GNN is
preserved in the well-trained parameters of its FT and GP
operations. Existing studies do not directly utilize these parameters (Zhang et al., 2022b). In Section 4.1, we recognize

1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China 2 Wechat, Tencent, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: ∗ Jieming Shi <jieming.shi@polyu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

