On Temperature Scaling and Conformal Prediction of Deep Classifiers

Lahav Dabah 1 Tom Tirer 1

Abstract

ciated with each prediction of the DNN. This is crucial in
high-stakes scenarios where human lives are at risk, such
as medical diagnoses (Miotto et al., 2018) and autonomous
vehicle decision-making (Grigorescu et al., 2020).

In many classification applications, the prediction
of a deep neural network (DNN) based classifier
needs to be accompanied by some confidence indication. Two popular approaches for that aim are:
1) Calibration: modifies the classifier’s softmax
values such that the maximal value better estimates the correctness probability; and 2) Conformal Prediction (CP): produces a prediction set of
candidate labels that contains the true label with a
user-specified probability, guaranteeing marginal
coverage but not, e.g., per class coverage. In practice, both types of indications are desirable, yet,
so far the interplay between them has not been
investigated. Focusing on the ubiquitous Temperature Scaling (TS) calibration, we start this paper
with an extensive empirical study of its effect on
prominent CP methods. We show that while TS
calibration improves the class-conditional coverage of adaptive CP methods, surprisingly, it
negatively affects their prediction set sizes. Motivated by this behavior, we explore the effect
of TS on CP beyond its calibration application
and reveal an intriguing trend under which it allows to trade prediction set size and conditional
coverage of adaptive CP methods. Then, we establish a mathematical theory that explains the
entire non-monotonic trend. Finally, based on our
experiments and theory, we offer guidelines for
practitioners to effectively combine adaptive CP
with calibration, aligned with user-defined goals.

In practice, DNN classification models typically generate a
post-softmax vector, akin to a probability vector with nonnegative entries that add up to one. One might, intuitively, be
interested in using the value associated with the prediction
as the confidence (Cosmides & Tooby, 1996). However, this
value often deviates substantially from the actual correctness probability. This discrepancy, known as miscalibration,
is prevalent in modern DNN classifiers, which frequently
demonstrate overconfidence: the maximal softmax value
surpasses the true correctness probability (Guo et al., 2017).
To address this issue, post-processing calibration methods
are employed to adjust the values of the softmax vector. In
particular, Guo et al. (2017) demonstrated the usefulness
of a simple Temperature Scaling (TS) procedure (a single
parameter variant of Platt scaling (Platt et al., 1999)). Since
then, TS calibration has gained massive popularity (Liang
et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Frenkel &
Goldberger, 2021; Ding et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022). Thus
studying it is of high significance.
Another post-processing approach for uncertainty indication is Conformal Prediction (CP), which was originated in
(Vovk et al., 1999; 2005) and has attracted much attention
recently. CP algorithms are based on devising scores for all
the classes per sample (based on the softmax values) that are
used for producing a set of predictions instead of a single
predicted class. These methods have theoretical guarantees
for marginal coverage: given a user-specified probability,
the produced set will contain the true label with this probability, assuming that the data samples are exchangeable
(e.g., the samples are i.i.d.). Note that this property does
not ensure conditional coverage, i.e., coverage of the true
label with the specified probability when conditioning the
data, e.g., to a specific class. Consequently, CP methods are
usually compared by both their prediction set sizes and their
conditional coverage performance.

1. Introduction
Modern classification systems are typically based on deep
neural networks (DNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al.,
2016; Huang et al., 2017). In many applications, it is necessary to quantify and convey the level of uncertainty asso1
Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
Correspondence to: Lahav Dabah <lahavdabah@gmail.com>.

Clearly, in critical applications, both calibration and CP are
desirable, as they provide complementary types of information that can lead to a comprehensive decision. However, so
far the interplay between them remains largely unexplored.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

