Inference-Time Decomposition of Activations (ITDA): A Scalable Approach to
Interpreting Large Language Models

Patrick Leask 1 Neel Nanda Noura Al Moubayed 1

Abstract

source SAEs, such as Lieberum et al. (2024) and He et al.
(2024), which are currently limited to models with up to
27B parameters.

Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) are a popular
method for decomposing Large Language Model
(LLM) activations into interpretable latents, however they have a substantial training cost and
SAEs learned on different models are not directly
comparable. Motivated by relative representation
similarity measures, we introduce Inference-Time
Decomposition of Activation models (ITDAs). ITDAs are constructed by greedily sampling activations into a dictionary based on an error threshold
on their matching pursuit reconstruction. ITDAs
can be trained in 1% of the time of SAEs, allowing
us to cheaply train them on Llama-3.1 70B and
405B. ITDA dictionaries also enable cross-model
comparisons, and outperform existing methods
like CKA, SVCCA, and a relative representation
method on a benchmark of representation similarity. Code available at github.com/pleask/itda.

Furthermore, comparing SAEs trained on different models
is challenging: their parameters are learned from model
activations, which vary for the same input between models
even of the same family. Lan et al. (2024) proposes that
SAEs reveal universal feature spaces across LLMs by using centered kernel alignment (Kornblith et al., 2019) to
compare the decoders of SAEs. The problem of aligning
the representation spaces of different LLMs is also fundamental to absolute measures of representation similarity
such as SVCCA (Raghu et al., 2017) and CKA (Kornblith
et al., 2019), which is addressed with relative representation
measures by Moschella et al. (2022), who use the cosine
similarity of representations with respect to the representations of a fixed random set of anchor inputs in different
models.
In this paper, we introduce Inference-Time Decomposition
of Activations (ITDA) as a lightweight alternative to SAEs.
Similarly to the relative representation method of Moschella
et al. (2022), we construct a dictionary of anchors to which
we relate activations by their cosine similarity. However, we
extend this method by decomposing activations into this dictionary using matching pursuit, a method for inference-time
optimization. As with SAEs, this approach finds sparse
decompositions of test LLM activations. In contrast to
Moschella et al. (2022), who use random anchor points,
we form the dictionary by initializing with the most frequent activations, and greedily adding training activations
that are most poorly reconstructed by the dictionary so far.

1. Introduction
Mechanistic interpretability aims to reverse-engineer neural networks into human-interpretable algorithms (Olah
et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2023; Nanda
et al., 2023; Elhage et al., 2021). Sparse autoencoders
(SAEs) have recently emerged as a promising alternative
for decomposing LLM activations into a dictionary of interpretable and monosemantic latents (Cunningham et al.,
2023; Bricken et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2025; Marks et al.,
2025; Lieberum et al., 2024; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024).
However, training SAEs is computationally expensive: it
requires model activations for hundreds of millions or even
billions of tokens, which are expensive to collect for large
models; and the parameter count of SAEs can exceed that
of the models to which they are applied (Sharkey et al.,
2025). As a result, much academic research relies on open-

ITDAs can be trained on a million tokens to the same performance as SAEs trained on hundreds of millions of tokens,
resulting in a proportional decrease in training times. GPT-2
(Radford et al., 2019) SAEs take hours to train (Leask et al.,
2025), whereas ITDAs can be trained in minutes to similar
reconstruction performance. This means we are able to train
ITDAs on 70B and 405B parameter LLMs: an order of magnitude greater than the largest models on which open-source
SAEs have been trained. The cross entropy loss degradation
when replacing activations with their ITDA reconstructions
is similar or slightly worse to using SAE reconstructions

1
Department of Computer Science, Durham University. Correspondence to: Patrick Leask <patrickaaleask@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

