Compressing Tree Ensembles through Level-wise Optimization and Pruning

Laurens Devos * 1 2 Timo Martens * 1 2 Deniz Can Oruç 1 2 Wannes Meert 1 2 Hendrik Blockeel 1 2 Jesse Davis 1 2

Abstract

much from reducing their size? The answer is yes, for
multiple reasons: (1) Due to their efficiency, forests are
very suitable for use on embedded or battery-powered devices (Fan et al., 2013; Donos et al., 2015; Daghero et al.,
2021; Lauwereins et al., 2015). A smaller forest has a
smaller memory footprint and consumes less energy per prediction (Buschjäger & Morik, 2023). On battery-powered
devices, this can have a substantial effect on battery autonomy. (2) Forest size is relevant when models must be verifiable, for instance, in the context of fairness or robustness
against adversarial attacks (Devos et al., 2021b;a). Verification methods for decision forests tend to scale exponentially
in the size of the forest (Kantchelian et al., 2016; Devos
et al., 2023). Therefore, any size reduction has an important
effect on verifiability.

Tree ensembles (e.g., gradient boosting decision
trees) are often used in practice because they offer
excellent predictive performance while still being
easy and efficient to learn. In some contexts, it
is important to additionally optimize their size:
this is specifically the case when models need
to have verifiable properties (verification of fairness, robustness, etc. is often exponential in the
ensemble’s size), or when models run on batterypowered devices (smaller ensembles consume less
energy, increasing battery autonomy). For this
reason, compression of tree ensembles is worth
studying. This paper presents LOP, a method for
compressing a given tree ensemble by pruning or
entirely removing trees in it, while updating leaf
predictions in such a way that predictive accuracy
is mostly unaffected. Empirically, LOP achieves
compression factors that are often 10 to 100 times
better than that of competing methods.

While one could try to construct smaller forests from the
start, the success of existing methods such as Random
Forests or XGBoost is an argument for not changing the
method of growing the forest, but reducing its size afterwards (Ren et al., 2015; Buschjäger & Morik, 2023). In this
formulation, the original forest provides a reference point
in terms of predictive performance. This enables designing
compression approaches that more explicitly trade off predictive accuracy versus other aspects of performance, such
as memory footprint, energy consumption, and verifiability
(all of which correlate with size).

1. Introduction
Ensembles of decision trees, a.k.a. decision forests, are
frequently used in practice because of their ease of training,
excellent overall performance, and high efficiency. Their
training requires little or no hyperparameter tuning, the
computational cost of both training and prediction is very
small, and for tabular data, they are usually among the best
performing models (Grinsztajn et al., 2022).

Multiple methods for reducing the size of forests have been
proposed. There has been extensive research on removing component models from ensembles (Tsoumakas et al.,
2009). More recently, methods specific to forests have
been proposed. These usually optimize the values stored
in the leaves, with size reduction as a possible side-effect
rather than the primary goal (e.g, Ren et al., 2015), though
several approaches explicitly add pruning as an objective
(Buschjäger & Morik, 2023; Liu & Mazumder, 2023a). Generally, all these methods try to find an optimum for some
cost function that trades off size versus accuracy.

This paper is about compressing decision forests: reducing
their size as measured by, e.g., the total number of leaves
in the forest, while maintaining their accuracy. In the light
of the above successes, one might wonder whether this is
worthwhile: if forests are already so efficient, can we gain
*

Equal contribution 1 KU Leuven Department of Computer
Science, Leuven, Belgium 2 Leuven.AI, KU Leuven Institute for
Artificial Intelligence, Leuven, Belgium. Correspondence to:
Jesse Davis <jesse.davis@kuleuven.be>, Hendrik Blockeel <hendrik.blockeel@kuleuven.be>.

In this paper, we propose a novel method called LOP for
compressing decision forests. LOP tries to find the smallest forest whose predictive accuracy is still within a userprovided margin to that of the original forest. Like other
methods, it starts from a given forest. In contrast to existing
methods that restrict what can be pruned, LOP can prune any

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

