PIGDreamer: Privileged Information Guided World Models for Safe Partially
Observable Reinforcement Learning

Dongchi Huang 1 Jiaqi Wang 2 Yang Li 1 Chunhe Xia 1 Tianle Zhang 3 *Kaige Zhang 4

Abstract

Markov decision processes (CMDPs) (Altman, 2021), in
which agents operate on the underlying states with the objective of maximizing rewards while ensuring that costs remain
below predefined constraint thresholds. However, existing
approaches overlook the inherent partial observability in
real-world applications, thereby leading to the suboptimal
deployment of Safe RL algorithms.

Partial observability presents a significant challenge for Safe Reinforcement Learning (Safe RL),
as it impedes the identification of potential risks
and rewards. Leveraging specific types of privileged information during training to mitigate the
effects of partial observability has yielded notable empirical successes. In this paper, we propose Asymmetric Constrained Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (ACPOMDPs)
to theoretically examine the advantages of incorporating privileged information in Safe RL. Building upon ACPOMDPs, we propose the Privileged
Information Guided Dreamer (PIGDreamer), a
model-based RL approach that leverages privileged information to enhance the agent’s safety
and performance through privileged representation alignment and an asymmetric actor-critic
structure. Our empirical results demonstrate that
PIGDreamer significantly outperforms existing
Safe RL methods. Furthermore, compared to alternative privileged RL methods, our approach
exhibits enhanced performance, robustness, and
efficiency. Codes are available at: https://
github.com/hggforget/PIGDreamer.

To mitigate partial observability in Safe RL, recent studies (Hogewind et al., 2022; As et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2024) have investigated the application of world models
(LeCun & Courant, 2022), resulting in remarkable success.
These methods are situated within a more realistic framework: Constrained Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes (CPOMDPs) (Lee et al., 2018), where the agent
operates on a history of previous observations and actions,
without direct access to the underlying states. Thus, world
models (Hafner et al., 2023) which learn environmental dynamics and task-specific predictions from past observations
and actions, have been shown to effectively memorize historical information and enhance sample efficiency. However,
despite enabling agents to utilize historical information,
these models introduce computational (Papadimitriou &
Tsitsiklis, 1987) and statistical (Krishnamurthy et al., 2016;
Jin et al., 2020) chanllengs under partial observations.
To address these challenges, recent studies (Hu et al., 2024;
Lambrechts et al., 2024) investigate methods for leveraging
privileged information within world models. The utilization
of privileged information is a practical solution, as in the
real-world deployment of RL, only a subset of sensors is
accessible during testing (Hu et al., 2024) while a greater
number of sensors is available during training. Furthermore,
for agents trained in simulators and subsequently transferred
to the real world through Sim2Real approaches (Yamada
et al., 2023; Pinto et al., 2017), the underlying states in
the simulators can be effectively leveraged to enhance the
agents. Despite their remarkable empirical successes, these
approaches still encounter two challenges: (1) The theoretical understanding of leveraging privileged information
in the world models remain relatively limited (Cai et al.,
2025); (2) These approaches exhibit limited efficiency in
leveraging privileged information (Hu et al., 2024). These
issues raise a crucial question:

1. Introduction
Safety presents a significant challenge to the real-world
applications of reinforcement learning (RL) (Feng et al.,
2023; Ji et al., 2024; OpenAI et al., 2019; Papadimitriou
& Tsitsiklis, 1987). Several researches (Liu et al., 2021;
Thomas et al., 2022; Achiam et al., 2017) has been dedicated to addressing this challenge, relying on constrained
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, University of Beihang, Beijing, China 2 School of Computer Science,
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, China 3 JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China 4 North Automatic Control Institute, Taiyuan, China. Correspondence to: Kaige Zhang <zkgusu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

