Feature learning from non-Gaussian inputs:
the case of Independent Component Analysis in high dimensions

Fabiola Ricci 1 Lorenzo Bardone 1 Sebastian Goldt 1

Abstract

tional neural networks (CNNs), which recover Gabor filters (Gabor, 1946) like the ones shown in Figure 1(a) in
their first layer when trained on sets of natural images like
ImageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Lindsey et al., 2019;
Guth & Ménard, 2024). Since Gabor filters are localised
in both space and frequency domains, they are effective for
capturing edges and textures in natural images (Hyvärinen
et al., 2009). How these filters emerge from training a deep
network end-to-end on natural images with stochastic gradient descent remains a key question for the theory of neural
networks.

Deep neural networks learn structured features
from complex, non-Gaussian inputs, but the mechanisms behind this process remain poorly understood. Our work is motivated by the observation
that the first-layer filters learnt by deep convolutional neural networks from natural images resemble those learnt by independent component
analysis (ICA), a simple unsupervised method
that seeks the most non-Gaussian projections of
its inputs. This similarity suggests that ICA provides a simple, yet principled model for studying feature learning. Here, we leverage this connection to investigate the interplay between data
structure and optimisation in feature learning for
the most popular ICA algorithm, FastICA, and
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which is used
to train deep networks. We rigorously establish
that FastICA requires at least n & d4 samples
to recover a single non-Gaussian direction from
d-dimensional inputs on a simple synthetic data
model. We show that vanilla online SGD outperforms FastICA, and prove that the optimal sample
complexity n & d2 can be reached by smoothing
the loss, albeit in a data-dependent way. We finally demonstrate the existence of a search phase
for FastICA on ImageNet, and discuss how the
strong non-Gaussianity of said images compensates for the poor sample complexity of FastICA.

Deep neural networks are not the only approach to learning
Gabor filters directly from data. Instead, it is well-known
that independent component analysis (ICA) (Comon, 1994;
Bell & Sejnowski, 1995; Olshausen & Field, 1996; Bell &
Sejnowski, 1996; Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000), a simple, unsupervised learning algorithm, learns filters that are similar to
the first-layer filters of a deep CNN when applied to patches
of natural images, see Figure 1(b). The key idea of ICA is
to identify directions of maximal non-Gaussianity in input
space, suggesting that the non-Gaussian structure in data
plays a crucial role in shaping the representations learnt by
deep neural networks (Refinetti et al., 2023). More precisely,
given a set of n zero-mean inputs D = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn },
ICA seeks the direction w∗ ∈ Rd that maximises the nonGaussianity of the projections of the inputs s := w · x,
w∗ := arg max ED G(w · x),

(1)

kwk=1

where the contrast function G is a measure of the nonGaussianity of the projection s, for example its excess
kurtosis G(s) = s4 − 3. For ICA, inputs are always prewhitened, so ICA can be seen as a refinement of standard principal component analysis, which instead seeks
the projection of the data that maximises its variance, i.e.
G(s) = s2 . On images, PCA yields a completely different set of filters which is spatially extended and oscillating
due to the approximate translation-invariance of the image
patches (Hyvärinen et al., 2009), see Figure 1(c).

1. Introduction
The practical success of deep neural networks is generally attributed to their ability to learn the most relevant
input features directly from data (LeCun et al., 2015). A
classic example for this feature learning are deep convolu1

International School of Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy. Correspondence to: Fabiola Ricci <fricci@sissa.it>, Lorenzo Bardone
<lbardone@sissa.it>, Sebastian Goldt <sgoldt@sissa.it>.

A closer look at the dynamics of the CNNs trained on
the standard ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009) reveals
further similarities between ICA and deep CNNs. In Figure 1(d), we plot the excess kurtosis of the first-layer pro-

st

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

