Benign Overfitting in Token Selection of Attention Mechanism

Keitaro Sakamoto 1 Issei Sato 1

Abstract

it remains unclear whether such max-margin solutions actually generalize well. In contrast, theoretical studies such
as (Jelassi et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a; Jiang et al., 2024)
analyzed the generalization ability of attention mechanisms,
but in the data models assumed by these works, token selection proceeds in the same direction for all training samples.
Under annotation errors or adversarial label flips, the behavior of token selection in both clean and noisy samples and
its impact on generalization remain unclear. These existing
studies raise the following research questions: (Q1) How do
the training dynamics of token selection evolve under label
noise? (Q2) Does the obtained solutions generalize well?

Attention mechanism is a fundamental component
of the transformer model and plays a significant
role in its success. However, the theoretical understanding of how attention learns to select tokens
is still an emerging area of research. In this work,
we study the training dynamics and generalization
ability of the attention mechanism under classification problems with label noise. We show that,
with the characterization of signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), the token selection of attention mechanism
achieves “benign overfitting”, i.e., maintaining
high generalization performance despite fitting
label noise. Our work also demonstrates an interesting delayed acquisition of generalization after
an initial phase of overfitting. Finally, we provide
experiments to support our theoretical analysis
using both synthetic and real-world datasets.

To this end, we analyze the token selection of attention
mechanisms in the context of benign overfitting studies,
which allows us to study the training dynamics of gradient
descent and the generalization performance. Modern overparameterized neural networks achieve a high generalization while perfectly fitting to the training data (Zhang et al.,
2021). This “benign overfitting” phenomenon has attracted
attention over the past few years because it contrasts with
the conventional wisdom that achieving better generalization requires balancing training error and model complexity.
There are lines of studies analyzing the benign overfitting
phenomenon in various settings, including linear classification and two-layer neural networks, but the analysis of
benign overfitting is mostly limited to these types of architecture. In this paper, following the common setup in existing
attention work (Tarzanagh et al., 2023a;b; Oymak et al.,
2023; Sheen et al., 2024), we analyze a one-layer attention
network f (X; W, p) = ν ⊤ X⊤ S(XW⊤ p) ∈ R, where
S(·) is the softmax function, X = (x1 , . . . , xT )⊤ ∈ RT ×d
is the sequence of input tokens, W ∈ Rd×d is the trainable
key-query matrix, p ∈ Rd is a tunable token, and ν ∈ Rd
is a pretrained linear head, on a binary classification task.
Here, p corresponds to the trainable [CLS] token (Devlin
et al., 2018; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) or prompt tuning (Li &
Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021) in the application of transformers, and f represents the output at that token position.
To isolate the role of benign overfitting in token selection,
we fix the linear classifier ν, and focus our analysis on the
training dynamics and generalization behavior that arise
solely from optimizing the attention mechanism.

1. Introduction
The transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have greatly
succeeded across a wide range of fields, including natural
language (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020), vision
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021), and have become a foundational architecture in modern machine learning. The key component that characterizes the transformer
model is the attention mechanism, which was originally
introduced in recurrent neural network (RNN) and long
short-term memory (LSTM) to capture the long-range structure of sequence (Bahdanau, 2014; Xu, 2015). The attention
architecture can process variable-length input sequences
and flexibly select important tokens based on the input. The
seminal work on the training dynamics of this token selection mechanism (Tarzanagh et al., 2023a;b; Vasudeva et al.,
2024; Sheen et al., 2024) studied the implicit bias of gradient descent to the max-margin token separator. However,
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Keitaro Sakamoto
<sakakei-1999@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>, Issei Sato <sato@g.ecc.utokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

