WILTing Trees: Interpreting the Distance Between MPNN Embeddings

Masahiro Negishi Thomas Gärtner 1 Pascal Welke 2 1

Abstract

learned. That line of work has derived generalization bounds
under strong assumptions on the margin between classes or
on the Lipschitz constants of MPNNs, which often do not
hold in practice. In this work, we instead investigate the
distance dMPNN implicitly obtained from a popular MPNN
trained on a practical dataset.

We investigate the distance function learned by
message passing neural networks (MPNNs) in
specific tasks, aiming to capture the functional
distance between prediction targets that MPNNs
implicitly learn. This contrasts with previous
work, which links MPNN distances on arbitrary
tasks to structural distances on graphs that ignore
task-specific information. To address this gap, we
distill the distance between MPNN embeddings
into an interpretable graph distance. Our method
uses optimal transport on the Weisfeiler Leman
Labeling Tree (WILT), where the edge weights
reveal subgraphs that strongly influence the distance between embeddings. This approach generalizes two well-known graph kernels and can
be computed in linear time. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that MPNNs define
the relative position of embeddings by focusing
on a small set of subgraphs that are known to be
functionally important in the domain.

Specifically, we ask: What properties does the distance
dMPNN learned by a well-performing MPNN have in practice
that can explain its high performance? While previous studies (Chuang & Jegelka, 2022; Böker et al., 2024) focused
on the alignment between dMPNN and a non-task-tailored
structural graph distance dstruc , we have found that it is not
critical to the predictive performance of MPNNs. Rather,
even if an MPNN was trained with classical cross-entropy
loss, dMPNN respects the task-relevant functional distance
dfunc . Furthermore, the alignment between dMPNN and dfunc
is highly correlated with the predictive performance of the
MPNN. Then, we move to our second question: How do
MPNNs learn such a metric structure? Since dMPNN is essentially a distance between multisets of Weisfeiler Leman
(WL) subgraphs, we distill dMPNN into a more interpretable
distance between these multisets. Our distance dWILT is an
optimal transport distance on a weighted Weisfeiler Leman
Labeling Tree (WILT), which is a trainable generalization
of the graph distances of existing high-performance kernels (Kriege et al., 2016; Togninalli et al., 2019). It allows
us to identify WL subgraphs whose presence or absence
significantly affects the relative position of graphs in the
MPNN embedding space. In addition, dWILT is efficiently
computable as the ground metric is a path length on a tree,
and is at least as expressive as dMPNN in terms of binary
expressive power. We show experimentally that the WILTing tree distances fit MPNN distances well. Examination of
the resulting edge parameters on a WILT after distillation
shows that only a small number of WL subgraphs determine dMPNN . In a qualitative experiment, the subgraphs that
strongly influence dMPNN are those that are known to be
functionally important by domain knowledge. In short, our
contributions are as follows:

1. Introduction
Message passing graph neural networks (MPNNs) have
achieved high predictive performance in various domains
(Zhou et al., 2020). To understand these performance
gains, researchers have focused on the expressive power
of MPNNs (Morris et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019; Maron
et al., 2019). However, the binary nature of expressive
power excludes any analysis of the distance between graph
embeddings, which is considered to be a key to the predictive power of MPNNs (Liu et al., 2022b; Li & Leskovec,
2022; Morris et al., 2024). Recently, there has been growing
interest in the analysis of MPNN (generalization) performance using structural distances between graphs (Chuang
& Jegelka, 2022; Böker et al., 2024; Franks et al., 2024) that
consider graph topology but ignore the target function to be
1

TU Wien, Vienna, Austria 2 Lancaster University Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany. Correspondence to: Masahiro Negishi
<m.negishi25@imperial.ac.uk>.

• We show that MPNN distances after training are
aligned with the task-relevant functional distance of
the graphs and that this is key to the high predictive
performance of MPNNs.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

