Adversarial Cooperative Rationalization: The Risk of Spurious Correlations in
Even Clean Datasets
Wei Liu 1 Zhongyu Niu 1 Lang Gao 1 Zhiying Deng 2 Jun Wang 3 Haozhao Wang 1 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the success of deep learning, there are growing concerns over the model interpretability. In contrast to posthoc methods, self-explaining techniques typically offer increased transparency (Lipton, 2018) and faithfulness (Yu
et al., 2021), as the prediction is made based on the explanation itself. There is a stream of research that has exposed
the unreliability of post-hoc explanations and called for selfexplanatory methods (Rudin, 2019; Ghassemi et al., 2021;
Ren et al., 2024).

This study investigates the self-rationalization
framework constructed with a cooperative game,
where a generator initially extracts the most informative segment from raw input, and a subsequent predictor utilizes the selected subset
for its input. The generator and predictor are
trained collaboratively to maximize prediction
accuracy. In this paper, we first uncover a potential caveat: such a cooperative game could
unintentionally introduce a sampling bias during rationale extraction. Specifically, the generator might inadvertently create an incorrect correlation between the selected rationale candidate
and the label, even when they are semantically
unrelated in the original dataset. Subsequently,
we elucidate the origins of this bias using both
detailed theoretical analysis and empirical evidence. Our findings suggest a direction for inspecting these correlations through attacks, based
on which we further introduce an instruction to
prevent the predictor from learning the correlations. Through experiments on six text classification datasets and two graph classification datasets
using three network architectures (GRUs, BERT,
and GCN), we show that our method not only
significantly outperforms recent rationalization
methods, but also achieves comparable or even
better results than a representative LLM (llama3.18b-instruct). Code: https://github.com/
jugechengzi/Rationalization-A2I.

In this study,our primary focus is on investigating a general
model-agnostic self-explaining framework called Rationalizing Neural Predictions (RNP, also known as rationalization)
(Lei et al., 2016), which with its variants has become one
of the mainstream methods to facilitate the interpretability
of NLP models (Sha et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2023a;b; 2024a;b), and also holds the potential to be applied
to image classification (Yuan et al., 2022) and graph neural
networks (Luo et al., 2020). RNP utilizes a cooperative
game involving a generator and a predictor. This game is
designed with a focus on “data-centric” (i.e., it is to explain
the connection between a text and the (model-agnostic) task
label, rather than explaining the output of a specific model)
feature importance. The generator first identifies the most
informative part of the input, termed the rationale. Subsequently, the rationale is transmitted to the predictor to make
predictions, as illustrated in Figure 1. The generator and
predictor are trained cooperatively to maximize prediction
accuracy. Apart from its use for interpretability, some recent
studies find that rationalization can also serve as a method
for data cleaning. The extracted (Z, Y ) pairs can act as
a new dataset, and trained with such a cleaned dataset, a
predictor may be more robust (Chen et al., 2022) and generalizable (Wu et al., 2022; Gui et al., 2023), thanks to the
removal of task-irrelevant, harmful information.

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology 2 Faculty of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, Central China Normal University
3
iWudao Tech. Correspondence to: Zhiying Deng <zhiyingdzy@gmail.com>, Jun Wang <jwang@iwudao.tech>,
Haozhao Wang <hz wang@hust.edu.cn>, Ruixuan Li
<rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

Our research starts with a special empirical observation.
We first observe that, even if we remove “maximizing the
prediction accuracy” from the generator’s objective (thus it
selects some random noise), the predictor can still be trained
to get very high accuracy with these randomly selected
spurious rationales (the orange line in Figure 3(a) of §4.1).
This phenomenon then leads to a trust concern: whether

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

