One Stone, Two Birds: Enhancing Adversarial Defense
Through the Lens of Distributional Discrepancy

Jiacheng Zhang 1 Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein 1 Jingfeng Zhang 2 3 Feng Liu 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

The discovery of adversarial examples (AEs) has raised
a security concern for deep learning techniques in recent
decades (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015). AEs
are often crafted by adding imperceptible noise to clean examples (CEs), which can easily mislead a well-trained deep
learning model to make wrong predictions. Considering the
extensive use of deep learning-based systems, AEs pose a
significant security threat for real-world applications (Dong
et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2021; Han et al., 2025). Therefore,
it is imperative to develop advanced defense methods to
defend against AEs (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Yoon et al.,
2021; Nie et al., 2022).

Statistical adversarial data detection (SADD) detects whether an upcoming batch contains adversarial examples (AEs) by measuring the distributional discrepancies between clean examples
(CEs) and AEs. In this paper, we explore the
strength of SADD-based methods by theoretically
showing that minimizing distributional discrepancy can help reduce the expected loss on AEs.
Despite these advantages, SADD-based methods
have a potential limitation: they discard inputs
that are detected as AEs, leading to the loss of useful information within those inputs. To address
this limitation, we propose a two-pronged adversarial defense method, named Distributionaldiscrepancy-based Adversarial Defense (DAD).
In the training phase, DAD first optimizes the test
power of the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
to derive MMD-OPT, which is a stone that kills
two birds. MMD-OPT first serves as a guiding
signal to minimize the distributional discrepancy
between CEs and AEs to train a denoiser. Then,
it serves as a discriminator to differentiate CEs
and AEs during inference. Overall, in the inference stage, DAD consists of a two-pronged process: (1) directly feeding the detected CEs into
the classifier, and (2) removing noise from the
detected AEs by the distributional-discrepancybased denoiser. Extensive experiments show
that DAD outperforms current state-of-the-art
(SOTA) defense methods by simultaneously improving clean and robust accuracy on CIFAR-10
and ImageNet-1K against adaptive white-box attacks. Codes are publicly available at: https:
//github.com/tmlr-group/DAD.

Recently, statistical adversarial data detection (SADD) has
gained increasing attention due to its effectiveness in detecting AEs (Gao et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023). Unlike other
detection-based methods that train a detector for specific
classifiers (Stutz et al., 2020; Deng et al., 2021; Pang et al.,
2022b), SADD leverages statistical methods, for example,
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012),
to measure the discrepancies between clean and adversarial
distributions. Given the fact that clean and adversarial data
are from different distributions, SADD-based methods have
been shown empirically effective against adversarial attacks
(Gao et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023).
To understand the intrinsic strength of SADD-based methods from a theoretical standpoint, we establish a relationship
between distributional discrepancy and the expected loss
on adversarial data. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates
that minimizing distributional discrepancy can help reduce
the expected loss on adversarial data, revealing the potential value of leveraging distributional discrepancy to design
more effective defense methods (see Section 2 and 3).
However, despite their effectiveness from both empirical
and theoretical perspectives, detection-based methods (e.g.,
SADD-based methods) have a potential limitation: they
discard inputs if they are detected as AEs, leading to the
loss of, e.g., semantic information within those inputs. This
issue is more prominent in SADD-based methods, where
inputs are often processed in batches, potentially resulting

1

School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne 2 The University of Auckland 3 RIKEN Center
for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP). Correspondence to: Feng
Liu <fengliu.ml@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

