Active Feature Acquisition Via Explainability-driven Ranking

Osman Berke Guney 1 Ketan Suhaas Saichandran 2 3 Karim Elzokm 1 Ziming Zhang 4
Vijaya B. Kolachalama 2 3 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
In traditional machine learning, all features are typically assumed to be available at inference. However, in real-world
settings, feature acquisition is often costly, time-consuming,
and sequential. Developing models that can make accurate
predictions while minimizing feature acquisition is important for efficiency and practical implementation. This can be
achieved by selecting a static global subset of features, but
it is suboptimal since the important set of features may vary
across different instances (Kachuee et al., 2019; Covert et al.,
2023b). Furthermore, the chosen subset might not provide
sufficient information for some cases, which requires the
acquisition of more features to ensure a confident prediction.
A more effective strategy is to identify important features
sequentially for each individual instance, a technique known
as active feature acquisition (AFA), which has gained increasing attention in recent years (He & Chen, 2022; von
Kleist et al., 2023; Chattopadhyay et al., 2024).

In many practical applications, including
medicine, acquiring all relevant data for machine
learning models is often infeasible due to
constraints on time, cost, and resources. This
makes it important to selectively acquire only
the most informative features, yet traditional
static feature selection methods fall short in
scenarios where feature importance varies
across instances. Here, we propose an active
feature acquisition (AFA) framework, which
dynamically selects features based on their
importance to each individual case. Our method
leverages local explanation techniques to generate
instance-specific feature importance rankings.
We then reframe the AFA problem as a feature
prediction task, introducing a policy network
grounded in a decision transformer architecture.
This policy network is trained to select the next
most informative feature by learning from the
feature importance rankings. As a result, features
are acquired sequentially, ordered by their
predictive significance, leading to more efficient
feature selection and acquisition. Extensive
experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that
our approach outperforms current state-of-the-art
AFA methods in predictive accuracy and feature
acquisition efficiency. These findings highlight
the promise of an explainability-driven AFA
strategy in scenarios where feature acquisition is
a concern.

The literature mainly contains two different ways of approaching AFA: reinforcement learning (RL)-based and
greedy-based methods. Both approaches aim to develop
a feature selection policy through exploration, as instancewise feature importance rankings are typically unavailable.
RL-based methods (Kachuee et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2020;
von Kleist et al., 2023) train policy networks by maximizing
different reward functions. While the RL-based approach
is intuitive for this sequential task and theoretically capable of finding the optimal policy, empirical evidence shows
that RL-based methods often underperform compared to
greedy-based methods (Gadgil et al., 2024). Greedy-based
methods attempt to predict the next most important available feature by calculating conditional mutual information
(CMI). To compute CMI, researchers have proposed generative approaches (Rangrej & Clark, 2021; He et al., 2022)
and methods based on the variational perspective (Covert
et al., 2023b; Gadgil et al., 2024). However, calculating
CMI directly remains challenging, and methods leveraging the variational perspective have demonstrated superior
performance compared to generative alternatives.

1
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Boston
University, MA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Boston
University, MA, USA 3 Department of Medicine, Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, MA, USA
4
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, MA, USA 5 Faculty of Computing & Data
Sciences, Boston University, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Vijaya B. Kolachalama <vkola@bu.edu>.

In this work1 , we approached the problem by empirically

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
vkola-lab/icml2025

1

