Hybrid Batch Normalisation: Resolving the Dilemma of
Batch Normalisation in Federated Learning

Hongyao Chen 1 Tianyang XuB 1 Xiao-jun Wu 1 Josef Kittler 2

Abstract
Batch Normalisation (BN) is widely used in conventional deep neural network training to harmonise the input-output distributions for each
batch of data. However, federated learning, a
distributed learning paradigm, faces the challenge
of dealing with non-independent and identically
distributed data among the client nodes. Due to
the lack of a coherent methodology for updating
BN statistical parameters, standard BN degrades
the federated learning performance. To this end,
it is urgent to explore an alternative normalisation solution for federated learning. In this work,
we resolve the dilemma of the BN layer in federated learning by developing a customised normalisation approach, Hybrid Batch Normalisation
(HBN). HBN separates the update of statistical parameters (i.e., means and variances used for evaluation) from that of learnable parameters (i.e., parameters that require gradient updates), obtaining
unbiased estimates of global statistical parameters
in distributed scenarios. In contrast with the existing solutions, we emphasise the supportive power
of global statistics for federated learning. The
HBN layer introduces a learnable hybrid distribution factor, allowing each computing node to adaptively mix the statistical parameters of the current
batch with the global statistics. Our HBN can
serve as a powerful plugin to advance federated
learning performance. It reflects promising merits
across a wide range of federated learning settings,
especially for small batch sizes and heterogeneous
data. Code is available at https://github.
com/Hongyao-Chen/HybridBN.

Figure 1: A comparison of our Hybrid Batch Normalisation
(HBN) with standard Batch Normalisation (BN) and Group
Normalisation (GN) in the federated learning settings. (a)
Classification error rate of Simple-CNN on CIFAR-100
vs Data heterogeneity (controlled by a Dirichlet distribution coefficient). The batch size is 16. (b) Classification
error rate of Simple-CNN on CIFAR-100 vs Batch size.
The Dirichlet distribution coefficient is 0.6. For other implementation details, please refer to Section 4.1.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
paradigm that trains a global model on a central server,
while protecting the raw data of each client node (Yang et al.,
2019; Bharati et al., 2022). Different from data-centralised
training, in FL, data across client nodes may be nonindependently and identically distributed (Non-IID) (Zhao
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; 2022), which has sparked a
widespread interest in how to achieve the system-centralised
performance during distributed training.
To guarantee data privacy, only the model parameters, rather
than data, are allowed to be transferred between the central
server and local clients. Specifically, the classic Federated Averaging (FedAvg) family (McMahan et al., 2017)
performs multiple mini-batch stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) on several local clients, and then aggregates the
model parameters on the server in each communication
round.

1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science,
Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China. 2 School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering and the Centre for Vision,
Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey,
Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK.. Correspondence to: Tianyang Xu
<tianyang.xu@jiangnan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To harmonise the use of global model parameters in con1

