DeFoG: Discrete Flow Matching for Graph Generation

Yiming Qin * 1 Manuel Madeira * 1 Dorina Thanou 1 Pascal Frossard 1

Abstract

proaches, demonstrating pioneering performance in applications such as molecular generation (Irwin et al., 2024),
reaction pathway design (Igashov et al., 2024), neural architecture search (Asthana et al., 2024), and combinatorial
optimization (Sun & Yang, 2024). Recently, continuoustime discrete diffusion frameworks have further advanced
the domain of discrete graph diffusion (Xu et al., 2024;
Siraudin et al., 2024). These frameworks leverage the robustness and flexibility of continuous-time modeling, while
preserving the natural alignment with the discrete structure
of graphs.

Graph generative models are essential across
diverse scientific domains by capturing complex
distributions over relational data. Among them,
graph diffusion models achieve superior performance but face inefficient sampling and limited
flexibility due to the tight coupling between
training and sampling stages. We introduce
DeFoG, a novel graph generative framework that
disentangles sampling from training, enabling
a broader design space for more effective and
efficient model optimization. DeFoG employs a
discrete flow-matching formulation that respects
the inherent symmetries of graphs. We theoretically ground this disentangled formulation
by explicitly relating the training loss to the
sampling algorithm and showing that DeFoG
faithfully replicates the ground truth graph
distribution. Building on these foundations, we
thoroughly investigate DeFoG’s design space
and propose novel sampling methods that significantly enhance performance and reduce the
required number of refinement steps. Extensive
experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art performance across synthetic, molecular, and digital
pathology datasets, covering both unconditional
and conditional generation settings. It also
outperforms most diffusion-based models with
just 5–10% of their sampling steps.

Despite their state-of-the-art performance, the training
and sampling stages of diffusion-based models is tightly
entangled, restricting sampling options to training-phase
choices. Thus, optimizing components such as noise
schedules or rate matrices requires re-training for each
configuration, resulting in prohibitive computational costs.
Consequently, these models often adopt a single configuration across graph datasets. This one-size-fits-all approach
fails to accommodate the diverse structural characteristics
of different datasets, leaving room for further improvement.
In this work, we present DeFoG, a novel graph generative framework that disentangles the training and sampling
stages (Figure 1a), addressing the inefficiencies in graph
diffusion models and achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance. DeFoG leverages a discrete flow matching
(DFM) inspired formulation (Campbell et al., 2024) that
we tailor to graph settings. It features a linear interpolation noising process and a continuous-time Markov chain
(CTMC)-based denoising process, while ensuring node
permutation equivariance and addressing the model expressivity limitations inherent to this data modality (Morris
et al., 2019). We demonstrate that training-sampling decoupling not only enhances flexibility but is also provably
sound. By theoretically establishing that training loss optimization leads to improved sampling dynamics, DeFoG
enables faithful replication of the ground truth graph distribution. To navigate the expanded design space enabled
by such disentanglement, we take a critical step by “defogging” this space. Specifically, we explore and propose various sampling methods, including time-adaptive methods
and modifications to CTMC rate matrices, to better govern
denoising trajectories and align with the unique characteristics of graph datasets.

1. Introduction
Graph generation has become a fundamental task across
diverse fields, from molecular chemistry to social network analysis, due to graphs’ capacity to represent complex relationships and generate realistic structured data.
Diffusion-based graph generative models (Niu et al., 2020;
Jo et al., 2022), particularly those tailored for discrete data
(Vignac et al., 2022), have emerged as compelling ap*

Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Yiming Qin <yiming.qin@epfl.ch>, Manuel
Madeira <manuel.madeira@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

