Model Immunization from a Condition Number Perspective

Amber Yijia Zheng * 1 Cedar Site Bai * 1 Brian Bullins 1 Raymond A. Yeh 1

Abstract

a definition of an immunized model and the circumstances
that make immunization possible remain unclear.

Model immunization aims to pre-train models
that are difficult to fine-tune on harmful tasks
while retaining their utility on other non-harmful
tasks. Though prior work has shown empirical evidence for immunizing text-to-image models, the
key understanding of when immunization is possible and a precise definition of an immunized
model remain unclear. In this work, we propose a framework, based on the condition number of a Hessian matrix, to analyze model immunization for linear models. Building on this
framework, we design an algorithm with regularization terms to control the resulting condition
numbers after pre-training. Empirical results on
linear models and non-linear deep-nets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm
on model immunization. The code is available
at https://github.com/amberyzheng/
model-immunization-cond-num.

To tackle this issue, we propose a framework to study
model immunization using the condition number (Gloub
& Van Loan, 1996). The effectiveness of immunization can
be characterized by the condition number of the Hessian
matrix. When using gradient-based methods during finetuning, a condition number closer to one indicates faster
convergence (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004), i.e., easier to
fine-tune. With this perspective, we observe that the existence of an effective immunization for linear models is
related to the angle between the singular vectors of the
harmful fine-tuning dataset’s covariance matrix and the pretraining dataset’s covariance matrix.
From this condition number perspective, we propose an
immunization algorithm to find such a model. In detail,
we propose two additional terms to regularize the condition number during pre-training. Each of the introduced
regularization terms can be shown to ensure a monotonic
increase/decrease of the condition number under gradient
updates.

1. Introduction

Beyond the theoretical results, we empirically validate the
proposed algorithm on linear models for regression and
image classification tasks. Lastly, we conduct experiments
using the proposed algorithm on non-linear models, i.e.,
deep-nets. Despite the gap in theory, we observe that the
proposed approach remains effective at model immunization
across ResNet (He et al., 2016) and ViT (Dosovitskiy, 2021).

Model immunization, recently proposed by Zheng & Yeh
(2024), studies how to pre-train a model that is more difficult
to fine-tune on harmful content, but not others. The aim
is to mitigate the risk of misuse (Brundage et al., 2018;
Marchal et al., 2024) associated with open-sourced models
by immunizing them before they are released to the public.

Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Zheng & Yeh (2024) focus on immunizing text-to-image
models, where they formulate immunization as a bi-level optimization. Empirically, they show that pre-trained diffusion
models that undergo immunization are more difficult to finetune on a given harmful concept dataset. To quantify this
difficulty, they compare the generation quality of models
with and without immunization after a fixed number of finetuning iterations. While the empirical results are promising,

• We introduce a framework based on the condition number
to study the task of model immunization. This framework
leads to a concrete definition of an immunized model
along with a novel experiment setup and evaluation metric to compare the quality of different immunization techniques.
• We propose regularizers to maximize/minimize the condition number, with a guaranteed monotonic increase/decrease when updated with the gradient-based method.
• Together with the task objective and regularizers, we
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm effectively immunizes linear models and deep-nets on regression/image
classification tasks.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Purdue University. Correspondence to: Raymond A. Yeh
<rayyeh@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

