Adapting Precomputed Features for Efficient Graph Condensation

Yuan Li 1 Jun Hu 1 Zemin Liu 2 Bryan Hooi 1 Jia Chen 3 Bingsheng He 1

Abstract

plex graph structures such as social networks (Fan et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2022) and molecular structures (Guo
et al., 2021; Gasteiger et al., 2021). However, real-world
large-scale graphs pose significant challenges for training
GNNs (Huang et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2024). To address
this, graph condensation techniques (Jin et al., 2022b;a) propose generating a condensed graph from a large original
graph, enabling models trained on the condensed graph to
be directly applied to the original graph, achieving comparable performance on both graphs. GC enhances training efficiency by reducing computational costs on largescale graphs. Recent studies further demonstrate that GC
facilitates efficient GNN training with minor performance
loss (Gao et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) face significant
computational challenges when handling largescale graphs. To address this, Graph Condensation (GC) methods aim to compress large graphs
into smaller, synthetic ones that are more manageable for GNN training. Recently, trajectory matching methods have shown state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance for GC, aligning the model’s training behavior on a condensed graph with that on
the original graph by guiding the trajectory of
model parameters. However, these approaches
require repetitive GNN retraining during condensation, making them computationally expensive.
To address the efficiency issue, we completely
bypass trajectory matching and propose a novel
two-stage framework. The first stage, a precomputation stage, performs one-time message passing to extract structural and semantic information from the original graph. The second stage, a
diversity-aware adaptation stage, performs classwise alignment while maximizing the diversity of
synthetic features. Remarkably, even with just the
precomputation stage, which takes only seconds,
our method either matches or surpasses 5 out of
9 baseline results. Extensive experiments show
that our approach achieves comparable or better
performance while being 96× to 2,455× faster
than SOTA methods, making it more practical for
large-scale GNN applications. 1

Prior Work. GC methods encompass a variety of approaches, including coreset selection (Welling, 2009; Sener
& Savarese, 2018), gradient matching (Jin et al., 2022b;a;
Yang et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2024), distribution matching (Liu et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2025),
and trajectory matching (Zheng et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2024). Among them, trajectory matching has emerged
as the SOTA method due to its ability to align the training behavior effectively. These methods collect training
trajectories from the original graph to guide the training
process on the condensed graph, ensuring consistent training behavior between the two graphs. Notably, existing
trajectory-based methods operate in a Structure-Free (SF)
manner, producing condensed graphs without edges, which
simplifies the training process. Although these condensed
graphs lack edges, they support GNN node classification
tasks by adding self-loop edges for each node, ensuring
compatibility with GNNs and achieving SOTA.

1. Introduction

Efficiency Issues with SOTA Method. Despite the leading
performance, trajectory-based methods require a substantial
number of trajectories to achieve optimal results. As illustrated in Figure 1, trajectory collection involves repeatedly
training the model from scratch (e.g., 200 times), taking
a remarkably long time (e.g., 452 hours on million-node
graphs) and dominating the overall condensation time. This
inefficiency hinders their applications at scale, e.g., on social
networks or e-commerce graphs.

Graph Condensation. Graph learning through GNNs (Kipf
& Welling, 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017) has significantly
advanced graph data analysis, providing insights into com1

National University of Singapore 2 Zhejiang University
GrabTaxi Holdings Pte. Ltd.. Correspondence to: Jun Hu
<jun.hu@nus.edu.sg>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code and data are available at https://github.
com/Xtra-Computing/GCPA.

To address the inefficiencies, we propose a novel Graph
Condensation framework via a Precompute-then-Adapt ap-

1

