D ISTI LLM-2: A Contrastive Approach Boosts the Distillation of LLMs

Jongwoo Ko∗ 1 Tianyi Chen 2 Sungnyun Kim 1 Tianyu Ding 2 Luming Liang 2 Ilya Zharkov 2 Se-Young Yun 1
1
KAIST AI 2 Microsoft ∗ Work done as a research intern at Microsoft
https://github.com/jongwooko/distillm-2

Abstract

As the demand for reducing computational overhead grows,
knowledge distillation (KD; Hinton et al. 2015) has emerged
as a promising technique for compressing LLMs into more
lightweight student models. By transferring knowledge
from a high-capacity teacher model to a smaller student
model, KD can significantly improve the performance of
small language models (sLMs) as demonstrated by Llama
3.2 (Meta, 2024) and Gemma-2 (DeepMind et al., 2024).

Despite the success of distillation in large language models (LLMs), most prior work applies
identical loss functions to both teacher- and
student-generated data. These strategies overlook
the synergy between loss formulations and data
types, leading to a suboptimal performance boost
in student models. To address this, we propose
D ISTI LLM-2, a contrastive approach that simultaneously increases the likelihood of teacher responses and decreases that of student responses
by harnessing this synergy. Our extensive experiments show that D ISTI LLM-2 not only builds
high-performing student models across a wide
range of tasks, including instruction-following
and code generation, but also supports diverse
applications, such as preference alignment and
vision-language extensions. These findings highlight the potential of a contrastive approach to
enhance the efficacy of LLM distillation by effectively aligning teacher and student models across
varied data types.

Over the years, research on LLM distillation has largely
focused on either by designing new loss or by curating
training data. From a loss perspective, several studies suggest that Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, a common loss
for KD, may fail to capture the teacher model’s complex
generative behavior (Wen et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024). Consequently, alternative loss functions, such as skew KL (SKL;
Ko et al. 2024), have been proposed to better guide the student. On the other hand, from data perspective, previous
works emphasize how the training data is curated to enlarge
the effectiveness of KD. For instance, relying solely on offline data (e.g., teacher-generated outputs; TGOs) can be
problematic where student’s outputs at inference time deviate significantly from fixed training samples (Agarwal et al.,
2024). To address this mismatch, some works incorporate
student-generated outputs (SGOs) directly into training (Lin
et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2024b). However, these works often
overlook the synergy between loss formulations and data
types, which might have limited the extent of performance
improvement of student models.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have continuously improved
their text generation abilities by increasing the number of
parameters and the amount of high-quality training data.
However, LLMs typically require extensive computational
resources during inference, which makes them difficult to
be deployed practically. Therefore, compressing them by
reducing the number of parameters while maintaining their
performance becomes important for using these powerful
models effectively.

Recently, contrastive approaches such as direct preference
optimization (DPO; Rafailov et al. 2023), have gained popularity for their efficacy and efficiency in preference alignment (Tajwar et al., 2024) or reasoning (Pang et al., 2024),
by explicitly employing different learning strategies to handle two distinct responses. Despite their success, few works
have focused on extending their schema to KD for LLMs.
While Li et al. (2024b) attempted to simply apply DPO by
replacing the reference model to teacher model (see Equation 4), we observed that their method is prone to reward
hacking, which may limit its broader applicability (see Figure 1). This motivates us to design a scalable contrastive
approach to boost LLM distillation.

1
KAIST AI, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Microsoft,
Redmond, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Jongwoo Ko <jongwoo.ko@kaist.ac.kr>, Tianyi Chen
<tianyi.chen@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

