GuardAgent: Safeguard LLM Agents via Knowledge-Enabled Reasoning
Zhen Xiang * 1 Linzhi Zheng * 2 Yanjie Li 3 Junyuan Hong 4 Qinbin Li 5 Han Xie 6 Jiawei Zhang 2
Zidi Xiong 3 Chulin Xie 3 Carl Yang 6 Dawn Song 5 Bo Li 2 3 7

Abstract
The rapid advancement of large language model
(LLM) agents has raised new concerns regarding their safety and security. In this paper, we
propose GuardAgent, the first guardrail agent
to protect target agents by dynamically checking
whether their actions satisfy given safety guard
requests. Specifically, GuardAgent first analyzes the safety guard requests to generate a task
plan, and then maps this plan into guardrail code
for execution. By performing the code execution,
GuardAgent can deterministically follow the
safety guard request and safeguard target agents.
In both steps, an LLM is utilized as the reasoning
component, supplemented by in-context demonstrations retrieved from a memory module storing
experiences from previous tasks. In addition, we
propose two novel benchmarks: EICU-AC benchmark to assess the access control for healthcare
agents and Mind2Web-SC benchmark to evaluate the safety policies for web agents. We show
that GuardAgent effectively moderates the violation actions for different types of agents on
these two benchmarks with over 98% and 83%
guardrail accuracies, respectively. Project page:
https://guardagent.github.io/

Figure 1: Illustration of GuardAgent safeguarding other
target agents on diverse tasks. Given a) a set of safety guard
requests informed by a specification of the target agent and
b) the input and output logs recording the target agent’s
action trajectories, GuardAgent first generates an action
plan based on the experiences retrieved from the memory.
Then, a guardrail code is generated based on the action plan
with a list of callable functions. The actions of the target
agent with safety violations will be denied.

2023; Mao et al., 2024). For each user query, these agents
typically employ an LLM for task planning, leveraging the
reasoning capability of the LLM with the optional support
of long-term memory from previous use cases (Lewis et al.,
2020). The proposed plan is then executed by calling external tools (e.g., through APIs) with potential interaction with
the environment (Yao et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
AI agents empowered by large language models (LLMs)
have showcased remarkable performance across diverse application domains, including finance (Yu et al., 2023), healthcare (Abbasian et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2024; Tu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), daily work (Deng
et al., 2023; Gur et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023; Zheng et al.,
2024), and autonomous driving (Cui et al., 2024; Jin et al.,

Unfortunately, existing works on LLM agents primarily focus on their effectiveness in solving specific tasks while
significantly overlooking their potential for misuse, which
can lead to harmful consequences (Chen et al., 2024). For
example, if misused by unauthorized personnel, a healthcare agent could easily expose confidential patient information (Yuan et al., 2024a). Indeed, some existing LLM agents,
particularly those used in high-stakes applications like autonomous driving, are equipped with safety controls to prevent the execution of undesired dangerous actions (Mao

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Georgia 2 University of
Chicago 3 UIUC 4 University of Texas at Austin 5 University of California, Berkeley 6 Emory University 7 Virtue AI. Correspondence to:
Zhen Xiang <zxiangaa@uga.edu>, Bo Li <bol@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

