Subspace Optimization for Large Language Models
with Convergence Guarantees

Yutong He 1 2 Pengrui Li 3 Yipeng Hu 1 Chuyan Chen 1 Kun Yuan 1 4 5

Abstract

reduced computing resources. Most approaches (Vyas et al.,
2024; Ramesh et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2024; Bini et al., 2024; Hao et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024;
Muhamed et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2024; Loeschcke et al.,
2024; Hayou et al., 2024; Lialin et al., 2023; Han et al., 2024;
Song et al., 2023) concentrate on reducing the memory of
optimizer states, which are critical components of overall
training memory. For instance, Adam (Kingma, 2014) and
AdamW (Loshchilov, 2017) maintain first and second-order
momentum terms for gradients as optimizer states, leading
to significant memory overhead for large models.

Subspace optimization algorithms, such as GaLore (Zhao et al., 2024), have gained attention
for pre-training and fine-tuning large language
models (LLMs) due to their memory efficiency.
However, their convergence guarantees remain
unclear, particularly in stochastic settings. In
this paper, we reveal that GaLore does not always converge to the optimal solution and provide an explicit counterexample to support this
finding. We further explore the conditions under which GaLore achieves convergence, showing
that it does so when either (i) a sufficiently large
mini-batch size is used or (ii) the gradient noise
is isotropic. More significantly, we introduce
GoLore (Gradient random Low-rank projection),
a novel variant of GaLore that provably converges
in typical stochastic settings, even with standard
batch sizes. Our convergence analysis extends
naturally to other subspace optimization algorithms. Finally, we empirically validate our theoretical results and thoroughly test the proposed
mechanisms. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/pkumelon/Golore.

Among the most popular memory-efficient fine-tuning algorithms is LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), which decreases the number of trainable parameters by employing low-rank model
adapters. However, the low-rank constraint on weight updates can result in substantial performance degradation for
tasks that require full-rank updates, particularly in the pretraining of LLMs. To address this issue, several LoRA
variants have been proposed, including ReLoRA (Lialin
et al., 2023) and SLTrain (Han et al., 2024). Recently, GaLore (Zhao et al., 2024) has emerged as an effective solution, significantly reducing optimizer states by projecting
full-parameter gradients into periodically recomputed subspaces. By retaining optimizer states in low-rank subspaces,
GaLore can reduce memory usage by over 60%, enabling
the pre-training of a 7B model on an NVIDIA RTX 4090
with 24GB of memory. In contrast, the vanilla 8-bit Adam
without low-rank projection requires over 40GB of memory.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance across a variety of tasks, including language processing, planning, and coding. However, LLMs require substantial computational resources and memory due
to their large model size and the extensive amounts of training data. Consequently, recent advancements in stochastic
optimization have focused on developing memory-efficient
strategies to pre-train or fine-tune LLMs with significantly

1.1. Fundamental open questions and main results
While GaLore’s memory efficiency has been well established, its convergence guarantees remain unclear. This
raises the following fundamental open question:
Q1. Can GaLore converge to stationary solutions, under
standard and mild assumptions?

1
Peking University 2 Zhongguancun Academy 3 Beihang University 4 AI for Science Institute, Beijing, China 5 National Engineering
Laboratory for Big Data Analytics and Applications. Correspondence to: Kun Yuan <kunyuan@pku.edu.cn>.

By stationary solutions, we refer to first-order stationary
points x ∈ Rd such that ∇f (x) = 0 for f : Rd → R.
By standard and mild assumptions, we refer to common
conditions in non-convex smooth optimization, including
lower boundedness, L-smoothness and unbiased stochastic
gradients with bounded variances, as in Assumptions 1-3.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

