Physics-informed Temporal Alignment for Auto-regressive PDE Foundation
Models
Congcong Zhu * 1 2 3 Xiaoyan Xu * 1 Jiayue Han 4 Jingrun Chen 5 2 3

Abstract
Auto-regressive partial differential equation
(PDE) foundation models have shown great potential in handling time-dependent data. However, these models suffer from error accumulation caused by the shortcut problem deeply rooted
in auto-regressive prediction. The challenge becomes particularly evident for out-of-distribution
data, as the pretraining performance may approach random model initialization for downstream tasks with long-term dynamics. To deal
with this problem, we propose physics-informed
temporal alignment (PITA), a self-supervised
learning framework inspired by inverse problem
solving. Specifically, PITA aligns the physical
dynamics discovered at different time steps on
each given PDE trajectory by integrating physicsinformed constraints into the self-supervision signal. The alignment is derived from observation data without relying on known physics priors, indicating strong generalization ability to
out-of-distribution data. Extensive experiments
show that PITA significantly enhances the accuracy and robustness of existing foundation models on diverse time-dependent PDE data. The
code is available at https://github.com/
SCAILab-USTC/PITA.

Figure 1: Insight of the proposed framework. Existing (a)
Auto-regressive prediction may cause error accumulation
for long-term PDE data. (b) Physics-informed temporal
alignment is integrated to handle this problem.

& Kutz, 2024), PDE foundation models (Shen et al., 2024;
Song et al., 2024; Gupta & Brandstetter, 2022) have gained
increasing prominence in scientific machine learning. These
foundational models leverage neural operators as surrogate
models to perform PDE trajectory prediction, which runs
significantly faster than the traditional numerical solvers.
Among the various PDE foundation models, auto-regressive
prediction, i.e., predicting the next behavior based on past
dynamics data, is one of the most promising strategies for
training or pretraining, which aims to endow the models
with generalization ability to downstream tasks (Geneva &
Zabaras, 2020). However, it is observed that auto-regressive
prediction may introduce a deeply-rooted shortcut problem,
where the model chooses a simple and mendacious solution to approximately satisfy the optimization objective by
duplicating previous dynamics. More details are discussed
in Appendix B. Since the duplicating operation is easy for
neural networks to learn, the model may overlook capturing
long-term dynamics, resulting in error accumulation. Therefore, the long-term accurate prediction of auto-regressive
PDE foundation models remains a significant challenge
when facing downstream tasks with long trajectory data.

1. Introduction
With the ongoing advancement in computational capabilities
and data-driven methodologies (Cicirello, 2024; Brunton
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science, University of Science and Technology of China 2 Suzhou
Institute for Advanced Research, Unive rsity of Science and Technology of China 3 Suzhou Big Data & AI Research and Engineering
Center 4 Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Kansas
Medical Center 5 School of Mathematical Sciences, University of
Science and Technology of China. Correspondence to: Jingrun
Chen <jingrunchen@ustc.edu.cn>.

As we know, all trajectories of PDE data are simulated based
on the underlying physical dynamics. Thus, the unique underlying physical equation can govern any segment in the
corresponding PDE trajectory. This property naturally facil-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

