Stochastic Smoothed Primal-Dual Algorithms
for Nonconvex Optimization with Linear Inequality Constraints

Ruichuan Huang 1 Jiawei Zhang * 2 3 Ahmet Alacaoglu * 1

Abstract

In particular, when we have the problem

We propose smoothed primal-dual algorithms for
solving stochastic nonconvex optimization problems with linear inequality constraints. Our algorithms are single-loop and only require a single (or
two) samples of stochastic gradients at each iteration. A defining feature of our algorithm is that it
is based on an inexact gradient descent framework
for the Moreau envelope, where the gradient of
the Moreau envelope is estimated using one step
of a stochastic primal-dual (linearized) augmented
Lagrangian algorithm. To handle inequality constraints and stochasticity, we combine the recently
established global error bounds in constrained optimization with a Moreau envelope-based analysis
of stochastic proximal algorithms. We establish
the optimal (in their respective cases) O(ε−4 ) and
O(ε−3 ) sample complexity guarantees for our algorithms and provide extensions to stochastic linear constraints. Unlike existing methods, iterations of our algorithms are free of subproblems,
large batch sizes or increasing penalty parameters in their iterations and they use dual variable
updates to ensure feasibility.

min f (x) subject to Ax ≤ b,

x∈Rn

we introduce a slack variable t = Ax−b sothat Ax−t = b
and our optimization variable becomes xt . Then, we can
equivalently write the problem in the template (1)by using
the constraint t ≤ 0, where the set X = { xt : x ∈
Rn , t ≤ 0} is easy to project. As such, we focus on (1)
and our results directly apply to solving (2) by using this
standard slack variable reformulation.
The assumption of X being easy-to-project is without loss
of generality. Indeed, when X is not easy to project, we can
add a slack variable for Hx ≤ h similar to the above paragraph, to have a linear equality constrained problem with
projectable constraints (cf. (1)). We refer to (Li et al., 2021,
Remark 6), for the classical conversion of an ε-stationarity
point of the problem with the slack variable to the original
inequality constrained problem. Throughout, we assume
that we have access to an unbiased oracle F (x) such that
E[F (x)] = ∇f (x), and E∥F (x) − ∇f (x)∥2 ≤ σ 2 . (3)
A common setting is when f (x) = Eξ∼Ξ [f (x, ξ)] where Ξ
is an unknown distribution that we can draw i.i.d. samples
from. In this case, it is common to set F (x) = ∇f (x, ξ)
where E[∇f (x, ξ)] = ∇f (x). This will be our main focus.

1. Introduction
We focus on the problem template
min f (x) subject to Ax = b,

x∈X

(2)

Inclusion of the set X in (1) increases the modeling power
of (1) significantly, while causing difficulties in the analysis.
Many problems fit this template, including constrained and
distributed optimization, nonnegative matrix factorization,
sparse subspace estimation and collaborative learning, see
for example1 (Zhang et al., 2022; Hong, 2016). Moreover,
reformulations of nonconvex problems are also common by
using linear inequality constraints (Zhang et al., 2022).

(1)

where f : Rn → R is Lf -smooth, the set X ⊆ Rn is polyhedral, and easy to project. In particular, let X be given
as X = {x : Hx ≤ h} for some matrix H and vector h.
Taking H = I, for example, gives this template the ability
to model linear inequality constraints.

Algorithm development for (1) and related templates with
global complexity guarantees, have been active in the last
couple of years (Alacaoglu & Wright, 2024; Zhang & Luo,
2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2022; Yan & Xu, 2022; Li et al., 2024; Boob

*

Co-last authors 1 University of British Columbia 2 University
of Wisconsin–Madison 3 MIT. Correspondence to: Jiawei
Zhang <jzhang2924@wisc.edu>, Ahmet Alacaoglu <alacaoglu@math.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Details of some applications are given in Sec. 6 of our extended version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07607

1

