Flow of Reasoning: Training LLMs for Divergent Reasoning with Minimal
Examples

Fangxu Yu * 1 Lai Jiang * 1 Haoqiang Kang * 1 Shibo Hao 1 Lianhui Qin 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
The ability to generate diverse solutions to a
given problem is a hallmark of human creativity. This divergent reasoning is also crucial for
machines, enhancing their robustness and enabling them to assist humans in many applications such as scientific discovery. However, existing approaches to multi-step reasoning with
large language models (LLMs) have mostly focused only on reasoning accuracy, without further
discovering more diverse valid solutions. For example, supervised fine-tuning improves reasoning quality but requires vast labeled data, while
reward-maximizing reinforcement learning finds
top-reward solutions while neglecting the solution diversity. To fill this gap, we propose Flow of
Reasoning (F O R), an efficient diversity-seeking
LLM finetuning method aimed at improving reasoning quality and diversity with minimal data.
F O R formulates multi-step LLM reasoning as a
Markovian flow on a DAG-structured reasoning
graph. This formulation allows us to incorporate
and adapt principled GFlowNet approaches, for
finetuning LLMs to sample divergent paths with
probabilities proportional to the (unnormalized)
reward of target problems. Extensive experiments
show that, with limited training examples (e.g., 15
examples), F O R enables the discovery of diverse,
creative, high-quality solutions, greatly outperforming a wide range of existing inference and
training methods across six challenging reasoning tasks, including BlocksWorld (embodied reasoning), Game24 (math puzzle solving), Rubik’s
Cube (spatial reasoning), 1D-ARC (abstraction
reasoning), GSM8k (math reasoning), and ProntoQA (logical reasoning). Code is available at
https://github.com/Yu-Fangxu/FoR.

Divergent problem solving is the ability to generate multiple
diverse solutions to a given problem (Runco, 1991; Runco
& Acar, 2012). As a hallmark of human intelligence, this
ability drives creativity by uncovering novel ways to accomplish a task, providing more possibilities and adaptivity
in different complex situations. Similarly, by encouraging
machines to explore diverse solutions rather than confining to one reasoning path, we not only enhance machines’
robustness (e.g., by ranking or aggregating different solutions) (Wang et al., 2022), but also empower automated
systems that assist humans in generating ideas and thinking
out-of-the-box, thereby potentially facilitating task completion (Shinn et al., 2024), education (Li et al., 2023a), and
scientific discovery (Jain et al., 2023a).

*
Equal contribution 1 University of California San Diego. Correspondence to: Lianhui Qin <lianhui@ucsd.edu>.

To overcome the limitations, we introduce Flow of Reasoning (F O R), a data-efficient approach that finetunes
LLMs for diverse reasoning with minimal training data.
F O R draws inspirations from generative flow networks
(GFlowNets) for amortized diverse sampling (Bengio et al.,

State-of-the-art reasoning with large language models
(LLMs), however, has largely focused on improving only
the reasoning accuracy with the topmost solution, without moving a step further to discover more diverse valid
solutions. Specifically, inference methods, such as CoT
(chain of thought, Wei et al., 2022), ToT (Yao et al., 2024),
RAP (Hao et al., 2023), and others (Chen et al., 2024b;
Besta et al., 2024), rely heavily on the underlying pretrained
LLM’s capability and decoding algorithms to obtain diverse
reasoning solutions. Moreover, the search-based inference
(Yao et al., 2024; Hao et al., 2023) can be computationally
costly when searching for multiple reasoning paths. On the
other hand, the finetuning methods like supervised finetuning (SFT) (Yue et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023c) often demands
extensive supervision data to capture the full diversity of
solutions, which can be costly to label in many applications.
Alternatively, reward-maximization reinforcement learning
(RL), such as proximal policy optimization (PPO, Schulman
et al., 2017), trains LLMs to generate the highest-reward reasoning solution and overlooks solution diversity. As shown
in the case study in Figure 1, the above-mentioned methods
generate limited diverse solutions.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

