Understanding the Emergence of Multimodal Representation Alignment

Megan Tjandrasuwita 1 Chanakya Ekbote 1 Liu Ziyin 1 2 Paul Pu Liang 1

Abstract
Performance

Multimodal representation learning is fundamentally about transforming incomparable modalities
into comparable representations. While prior research primarily focused on explicitly aligning
these representations through targeted learning
objectives and model architectures, a recent line
of work has found that independently trained
unimodal models of increasing scale and performance can become implicitly aligned with each
other. These findings raise fundamental questions
regarding the emergence of aligned representations in multimodal learning. Specifically: (1)
when and why does alignment emerge implicitly? and (2) is alignment a reliable indicator
of performance? Through a comprehensive empirical investigation, we demonstrate that both
the emergence of alignment and its relationship
with task performance depend on several critical data characteristics. These include, but are
not necessarily limited to, the degree of similarity between the modalities and the balance between redundant and unique information they provide for the task. Our findings suggest that alignment may not be universally beneficial; rather, its
impact on performance varies depending on the
dataset and task. These insights can help practitioners determine whether increasing alignment
between modalities is advantageous or, in some
cases, detrimental to achieving optimal performance. Code is released at: https://github.
com/MeganTj/multimodal_alignment.

Increasing representation alignment

Figure 1: Emergence of multimodal alignment? Triangles and circles correspond to different modalities. While
the Platonic Representation Hypothesis (Huh et al., 2024)
argues that better cross-modal alignment predicts better performance, our findings demonstrate that the relation between
alignment and performance is more nuanced and depends
on several dataset characteristics including the degree of
heterogeneity and interactions between modalities.
AI systems are revolutionizing predictive analytics across
many applications, including in multimedia (Alayrac et al.,
2022; Sun et al., 2019; Ramesh et al., 2021; Singer et al.,
2022), healthcare (Cai et al., 2019; Muhammad et al., 2021),
and physical sensing (Kirchner et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019;
Xiao et al., 2020). A large body of research in designing
and training multimodal models has focused on aligning
the representations from different modalities such that they
are comparable in some semantic representation space (Baltrušaitis et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2024). Conventional
wisdom posits that aligned representations are a crucial precursor to multimodal fusion and representation learning (Li
et al., 2021). As a result, many learning methods, such as
contrastive learning and its variants (Frome et al., 2013;
Jia et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021a), and model architectures (Bertinetto et al., 2016; Lenc & Vedaldi, 2019; Bansal
et al., 2021; Csiszárik et al., 2021) have been proposed to
explicitly align incomparable modalities into comparable
representation spaces for further processing.

1. Introduction
Multimodal AI represents a cutting-edge paradigm in machine learning that enables integrating and learning from
many heterogeneous and interacting data modalities. These
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 2 NTT Research, USA. Correspondence to: Megan Tjandrasuwita
<megantj@mit.edu>.

However, recent work on the “Platonic Representation
Hypothesis” showed that, surprisingly, alignment could
even emerge across independently pre-trained vision and
language models without explicitly aligning them to-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

