Understanding the Kronecker Matrix-Vector Complexity of Linear Algebra

Raphael A. Meyer 1 William Swartworth 2 David P. Woodruff 2

Abstract

These applications overcome the curse of dimensionality
by representing an underlying high dimensional linear operator as a network of a series of low dimensional tensors.
Abstractly, in these applications we are given an order 2q
tensor A ∈ (Rn )⊗2q that represents a linear operator from
(Rn )⊗q to (Rn )⊗q , and we often want to approximately
compute some properties of this linear operator, such as its
trace or spectral norm.

We study the computational model where we can
access a matrix A only by computing matrixvector products Ax for vectors of the form x =
x1 ⊗· · ·⊗xq . We prove exponential lower bounds
on the number of queries needed to estimate various properties, including the trace and the top
eigenvalue of A. Our proofs hold for all adaptive algorithms, modulo a mild conditioning assumption on the algorithm’s queries. We further
prove that algorithms whose queries come from a
small alphabet (e.g., xi ∈ {±1}n ) cannot test
if A is identically zero with polynomial complexity, despite the fact that a single query using
Gaussian vectors solves the problem with probability 1. In steep contrast to the non-Kronecker
case, this shows that sketching A with different
distributions of the same subguassian norm can
yield exponentially different query complexities.
Our proofs follow from the observation that random vectors with Kronecker structure have exponentially smaller inner products than their nonKronecker counterparts.

By appropriately reordering the entries of A, we can explicq
q
itly write down a matrix A ∈ Rn ×n that describes this
linear operator. Our goal then becomes to estimate the trace,
spectral sum, operator norm, or some other property of A.
However, since we may not know the structure of the underlying compact representation, we would like to estimate
properties of A without explicitly forming A, as doing so
would break our compact representation of A. Instead we
take advantage of our compact representation to efficiently
and implicitly access A through linear measurements, such
as the Kronecker matrix vector product:
q

q

Definition 1. Let A ∈ Rn ×n . Then Kronecker MatrixVector Product Oracle is an oracle that, given x1 , . . . , xq ∈
q
Rn , returns Ax ∈ Rn where x = ⊗qi=1 xi . Here, ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product.
For many different compact representations of A, it is possible to compute some compact representation of the Kronecker matrix-vector product Ax efficiently (Lee & Cichocki, 2014; Feldman et al., 2022). This is done in many
algorithms and can go by different names, such as KhatriRao sketching or rank-one measurements. However, these
algorithms tend to make strong assumptions about the structure of A in order to achieve a polynomial runtime (Al Daas
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2017) or obtain a worst-case runtime
that is exponential in q (Meyer & Avron, 2023; Avron et al.,
2014; Song et al., 2019b). It has been unclear whether this
exponential cost is unavoidable and what structure in A
leads to this expensive runtime. In this paper, we address
this question by demonstrating explicit constructions of A
that elicit these lower bounds.

1. Introduction
Tensors have emerged as a canonical way to represent multimodal or very high-dimensional datasets in areas ranging
from quantum information science (Biamonte, 2019) to
medical imaging (Selvan & Dam, 2020; Sedighin, 2024).
Such applications often result in compact representations of
tensors. For instance, applications in quantum information
theory use the so-called PEPS network or other compact
tensor networks, while applications in partial differential
equations often use tucker or tensor train decompositions.
1
Computing + Mathematical Sciences Department, Cal2
ifornia Institute of Technology.
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Raphael Meyer <ram900@caltech.edu>, William Swartworth <wswartwo@andrew.cmu.edu>, David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.

Algorithms for fast tensor computations are well studied.
There is a large number of randomized algorithms that provide strong approximation guarantees to a tensor and are
very efficient. Although not all in the Kronecker matrixvector model, many such applications involve making linear

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

