FloE: On-the-Fly MoE Inference on Memory-constrained GPU

Yuxin Zhou * 1 2 Zheng Li * 1 2 Jun Zhang 1 2 Jue Wang 1 Yiping Wang 3 Zhongle Xie 1 2 Ke Chen 1 2
Lidan Shou 1 2

Abstract

chitecture by introducing sparsely activated experts. These
sparse LLMs contextually activate only a subset of experts
per token, significantly reducing inference costs while maintaining generative performance. However, the abundance
of idle, non-activated experts during MoE inference significantly hampers efficient GPU memory utilization, making it
challenging to deploy MoE models on memory-constrained
GPUs. For instance, running inference for Mixtral-8×7B,
where two experts are activated, requires approximately
94GB of VRAM in FP16 precision. Of this, 30% of the
activated parameters (27.3GB) are utilized during decoding,
while the remaining 66.8GB is occupied by non-activated experts, resulting in significant inefficiency (Shin et al., 2024).

With the widespread adoption of Mixture-ofExperts (MoE) models, there is a growing demand
for efficient inference on memory-constrained
devices. While offloading expert parameters to
CPU memory and loading activated experts on
demand has emerged as a potential solution, the
large size of activated experts overburdens the limited PCIe bandwidth, hindering the effectiveness
in latency-sensitive scenarios. To mitigate this,
we propose FloE, an on-the-fly MoE inference
system on memory-constrained GPUs. FloE is
built on the insight that there exists substantial
untapped redundancy within sparsely activated
experts. It employs various compression techniques on the expert’s internal parameter matrices to reduce the data movement load, combined
with low-cost sparse prediction, achieving perceptible inference acceleration in wall-clock time on
resource-constrained devices. Empirically, FloE
achieves a 9.3× compression of parameters per
expert in Mixtral-8×7B; enables deployment on a
GPU with only 11GB VRAM, reducing the memory footprint by up to 8.5×; and delivers a 48.7×
inference speedup compared to DeepSpeed-MII
on a single GeForce RTX 3090—all with only a
4.4% ∼ 7.6% average performance degradation.

To address the problem, offloading techniques (Sarkar et al.,
2023; Eliseev & Mazur, 2023; Hwang et al., 2024; Song
et al., 2024a; Xue et al., 2024a; Tang et al., 2024), which
unmount expert parameters to CPU memory and load them
into GPU memory on demand for each input, offers a natural solution. However, offloading shifts the decoding
bottleneck from memory-bound to I/O-bound, as transferring billions of parameters through the low-bandwidth PCIe
bus incurs substantial data transfer delays. For comparison,
the DRAM-to-VRAM bandwidth (32GB/s for PCIe 4.0)
is orders of magnitude lower than the bandwidth between
GPU memory and on-chip computation units (300GB/s).
Consequently, existing MoE inference systems with expert
offloading, designed for edge-side continuous serving scenarios (i.e., single-batch latency-sensitive inference) (Kong
et al., 2024; Eliseev & Mazur, 2023; Hwang et al., 2024;
Sarkar et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024), still fail to support
on-the-fly inference, where the loading process is perceptible to the user because its overhead cannot be hidden by the
model computation. Ultra-low-bit quantization effectively
reduces the size of transmitted parameters to mitigate the
latency of activated expert loading (Eliseev & Mazur, 2023;
Sarkar et al., 2023), but at the cost of significantly degraded
generation performance. Thus, a pressing question emerges:

1. Introduction
Mixture of Experts (MoE) models including DeepSeekR1 (DeepSeek-AI, 2025), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Phi4 (Abdin et al., 2024b), Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2024), etc.,
offer a paradigm shift in the large language model (LLM) ar*
Equal contribution 1 The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain
and Data Security, Zhejiang University 2 Hangzhou High-Tech
Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Zhongle Xie
<xiezl@zju.edu.cn>, Lidan Shou <should@zju.edu.cn>.

How can we hide the I/O overhead of activated experts
within model computation to enable on-the-fly MoE inference on the memory-constrained GPU while minimizing
generation performance degradation?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we present an on-the-fly MoE inference sys1

