Improving Out-of-Distribution Detection with Markov Logic Networks

Konstantin Kirchheim 1 Frank Ortmeier 1
DNN, such as predicted posteriors (Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2017), unnormalized logits (Zhang et al., 2022), or deeper
latent representations (Lee et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2022).
These detectors often construct a model of the neural representations for in-distribution (ID) data and classify inputs
with low probability under this model as OOD. While providing reasonable performance in many settings, current
detection methods face several limitations. Firstly, they rely
on potentially superficial statistical patterns in the representations learned by DNNs but neglect the semantics of these
representations in the context of the task. Secondly, they
lack explainability, as they generally provide only a scalar
outlier score without further justification for why an input
is marked as OOD. Thirdly, integrating prior knowledge
about the structure of the training distribution into existing
detectors remains challenging, as this knowledge often concerns abstract concepts that are difficult to correlate with
high-dimensional inputs. For instance, many people would
intuitively classify blue stop signs as OOD because stop
signs are typically red. However, embedding such domainspecific knowledge into current OOD detectors is difficult
due to their reliance on entangled, opaque neural representations.

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is essential for ensuring the reliability of deep learning models operating in open-world scenarios.
Current OOD detectors mainly rely on statistical models to identify unusual patterns in the
latent representations of a deep neural network.
This work proposes to augment existing OOD
detectors with probabilistic reasoning, utilizing
Markov logic networks (MLNs). MLNs connect first-order logic with probabilistic reasoning to assign probabilities to inputs based on
weighted logical constraints defined over humanunderstandable concepts, which offers improved
explainability. Through extensive experiments on
multiple datasets, we demonstrate that MLNs can
significantly enhance the performance of a wide
range of existing OOD detectors while maintaining computational efficiency. Furthermore, we
introduce a simple algorithm for learning logical
constraints for OOD detection from a dataset and
showcase its effectiveness.

Recently, neuro-symbolic approaches for OOD detection
have shown promise in addressing these limitations. For example, LogicOOD (Kirchheim et al., 2024) detects humanunderstandable concepts in inputs and verifies their configuration against a set of logical constraints. While this
method increases performance on some datasets and offers
a degree of explainability, its reliance on strict logical rules
can be too rigid for complex, real-world applications where
probabilistic associations dominate.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (LeCun et al., 2015;
Schmidhuber, 2015) provide state-of-the-art performance
across various computer vision tasks, including image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), object detection (He
et al., 2017), and semantic segmentation (Ronneberger et al.,
2015). However, DNNs are prone to making incorrect predictions with high confidence when applied to data outside
their training distribution (Nguyen et al., 2015). This property motivates out-of-distribution (OOD) detection mechanisms (Yang et al., 2024; Kirchheim et al., 2022), which
aim to identify OOD inputs at runtime. In recent years, a
wide array of OOD detectors has been developed, leveraging the representation of the input at different layers of a

This work proposes integrating existing OOD detectors with
a probabilistic graphical model - specifically, a Markov
logic network - defined over human-understandable concepts. Such a model offers explainability and allows the
seamless integration of prior knowledge. In particular, we
make the following contributions:

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Magdeburg,
Germany. Correspondence to: Konstantin Kirchheim <kirchhei@ovgu.de>.

1. We introduce a novel OOD detection framework based
on Markov logic networks (MLNs), leveraging probabilistic reasoning over logical constraints (Section 3).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2. We propose a novel algorithm to automatically learn
human-interpretable constraints for OOD detection
1

