When Do Neural Networks Learn World Models?
Tianren Zhang 1 Guanyu Chen 1 Feng Chen 1

Abstract

stract and interpretable features, indicating a non-trivial
representation of data generation. Others, however, report
a marked decline in LLM performance on novel tasks (Wu
et al., 2023; Berglund et al., 2024; Mirzadeh et al., 2024),
implying a lack of genuine world representations that enable
human-level generalization in out-of-distribution settings.

Humans develop world models that capture the
underlying generation process of data. Whether
neural networks can learn similar world models remains an open problem. In this work, we
present the first theoretical results for this problem, showing that in a multi-task setting, models
with a low-degree bias provably recover latent
data-generating variables under mild assumptions–
even if proxy tasks involve complex, non-linear
functions of the latents. However, such recovery is sensitive to model architecture. Our analysis leverages Boolean models of task solutions
via the Fourier-Walsh transform and introduces
new techniques for analyzing invertible Boolean
transforms, which may be of independent interest. We illustrate the algorithmic implications of
our results and connect them to related research
areas, including self-supervised learning, out-ofdistribution generalization, and the linear representation hypothesis in large language models.

Despite ongoing research, the theoretical foundations of
learning world models remain unclear. Notably, even the
term “world model” lacks a precise definition. This gives
rise to several fundamental questions: what does it mean for
neural networks to learn world models? When and why can
they do so? More fundamentally, what constitutes a bona
fide world model?
The goal of this work is to address these problems by introducing a formal framework for world model learning
and presenting the first theoretical results in this area. Following the spirit of prior work (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018;
Li et al., 2023; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2024), we first show
that latent variable models (Everett, 2013) provide a natural
scaffold for formulating world model learning. Specifically, learning world models can be framed as achieving
a non-trivial recovery of latent data-generating variables.
However, a core challenge in this formulation arises from
a well-known negative result showing that recovering true
latents is generally impossible due to a fundamental issue
of non-identifiability (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999). That is,
multiple solutions can fit the observed variables equally well,
making true latent variables non-identifiable from observed
data alone.

1. Introduction
Humans develop internal models of the world, extracting
core concepts that generate perceptual data (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018). Can neural networks do the same? With
recent advances in large language models (LLMs), this question has garnered increasing attention (Bender et al., 2021;
Mitchell, 2023). Understanding if and how neural networks
learn human-like world models is crucial for building AI
systems that are robust, fair, and aligned with human values (Hendrycks et al., 2023).

At first glance, the non-identifiability of latent variables may
suggest a pessimistic outlook on learning world models.
However, existing results overlook an important point: solutions that equally fit the data are not necessarily equivalent
as functions. Thus, algorithms with implicit bias in function
space, such as those employed in deep learning (Kalimeris
et al., 2019; Goyal & Bengio, 2020), would favor certain
solutions over others. In particular, we focus on a bias
towards low-complexity functions, a phenomenon widely
observed in neural networks and believed to be a key factor
in the success of deep learning (Pérez et al., 2019; Huh
et al., 2024; Goldblum et al., 2024). Yet, due to the lack
of a well-established complexity measure for continuous
functions, formalizing such complexity bias and analyzing
its impact remains a challenging problem on its own (see

Empirical findings on world model learning have been
mixed. Some studies suggest that medium-sized neural
networks (Mikolov et al., 2013) and LLMs (Li et al., 2023;
Bricken et al., 2023; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2024) learn ab1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Feng Chen <chenfeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

