HaploVL: A Single-Transformer Baseline for Multi-Modal Understanding

Rui Yang 1 Lin Song 2 + Yicheng Xiao 3 Runhui Huang 1 Yixiao Ge 2 Ying Shan 2 Hengshuang Zhao 1 *
RWQA

Abstract

62.0

Recent advancements in large language models
(LLMs) have significantly propelled the development of large multi-modal models (LMMs), highlighting the potential for general and intelligent assistants. However, most LMMs model visual and
textual modalities separately, leading to recent efforts to develop native LMMs using a single transformer. Despite the promise, these native models are resource-intensive and often exhibit performance gaps compared to their compositional
counterparts. To alleviate this issue, we propose a
simple yet efficient method to construct a baseline
for the native and end-to-end large multi-modal
model in a single transformer. First, we propose a
new early-fusion LMM that can fuse multi-modal
inputs in the early stage and respond to visual
instructions in an auto-regressive manner. Second, we devise an efficient training recipe for the
proposed model, which harnesses the prior knowledge of the pre-trained models, addressing both
the performance limitations and the challenge
of resource consumption. The proposed model
demonstrates superior performance compared to
other LMMs using one transformer and significantly narrows the performance gap with compositional LMMs. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Tencent/HaploVLM.

MMMU

AI2D
79.6

41.7

88.2

MMB 75.0

POPE

75.5 SEED

57.6

46.0

MMS

MMVP
65.0

GQA

94.4

SQA

LLaVA-1.5-7B
LLaVA-1.6-7B
EVE-7B
Emu3-8B
HaploVL-8B (ours)

Figure 1: Performance comparison with single-transformer
models on multi-modal understanding benchmarks. Our
HaploVL demonstrates superiority over other counterparts.

et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2024a). These models facilitate
complex vision-language dialogues and interactions. The
majority of open-source models (Liu et al., 2024c; Dai et al.,
2023) leverage one or more separate vision components to
model the visual modality, thus equipping LLMs with visual
understanding and reasoning capabilities. For instance, the
LLaVA series (Liu et al., 2024c;a) directly harnesses the
pretrained CLIP vision encoder (Radford et al., 2021) to
extract high-level vision embeddings and uses a projector to
connect these embeddings with LLMs.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Dubey
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a) have recently made significant strides in the realm of artificial intelligence. This
progress has substantially accelerated the development of
large multi-modal models (LMMs), which include both proprietary commercial models (Achiam et al., 2023; Team
et al., 2024) and open-source models (Dai et al., 2023; Zhu

Since language is human-generated signals that have already been abstracted (He et al., 2022), the text embeddings
produced by the word embedding layer contain semantic
information and are high-level. Therefore, it is reasonable to combine text embeddings with vision embeddings
from a pre-trained vision encoder, as both types of embeddings are semantic. However, the off-the-shelf vision
encoder (Radford et al., 2021) tends to produce highly compressed global semantics and neglect fine-grained visual
information. Thus, it may fail to extract effective visual
cues required by the text, leading to difficulties for LMMs
in handling fine-grained tasks (Tong et al., 2024).

1

The University of Hong Kong 2 ARC Lab, Tencent
PCG 3 Tsinghua University. Team leader: Lin Song <ronnysong@tencent.com>. Correspondence to: Hengshuang Zhao
<hszhao@cs.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

