Flow-based Domain Randomization for Learning and
Sequencing Robotic Skills

Aidan Curtis 1 Eric Li 1 Michael Noseworthy 1 Nishad Gothoskar 1 Sachin Chitta 2 Hui Li 2
Leslie Pack Kaelbling 1 Nicole Carey 2

Abstract

ments (Kober et al., 2013). Learning in simulation eliminates some of these problems, but introduces new issues
in the form of discrepancies between the training and realworld environments (Valassakis et al., 2020).

Domain randomization in reinforcement learning
is an established technique for increasing the robustness of control policies trained in simulation.
By randomizing environment properties during
training, the learned policy can become robust to
uncertainties along the randomized dimensions.
While the environment distribution is typically
specified by hand, in this paper we investigate
automatically discovering a sampling distribution
via entropy-regularized reward maximization of
a normalizing-flow–based neural sampling distribution. We show that this architecture is more
flexible and provides greater robustness than existing approaches that learn simpler, parameterized sampling distributions, as demonstrated in
six simulated and one real-world robotics domain.
Lastly, we explore how these learned sampling
distributions, along with a privileged value function, can be used for out-of-distribution detection
in an uncertainty-aware multi-step manipulation
planner.

Successful RL from simulation hence requires efficient and
accurate models of both robot and environment during the
training process. But even with highly accurate geometric
and dynamic simulators, the system can still be only considered partially observable (Kober et al., 2013)—material
qualities, inertial properties, perception noise, contact and
force sensor noise, manufacturing deviations and tolerances,
and imprecision in robot calibration all add uncertainty to
the model.
To improve the robustness of learned policies against sim-toreal discrepancies, it is common to employ domain randomization, varying the large set of environmental parameters
inherent to a task according to a given underlying distribution (Muratore et al., 2019). In this way, policies are trained
to maximize their overall performance over a diverse set
of models. These sampling distributions are typically constructed manually with Gaussian or uniform distributions
on individual parameters with hand-selected variances and
bounds. However, choosing appropriate distributions for
each of the domain randomization parameters remains a
delicate process (Josifovski et al., 2022); too broad a distribution leads to suboptimal local minima convergence (see
Figure 3), while too narrow a distribution leads to poor realworld generalization (Mozifian et al., 2019; Packer et al.,
2018). Many existing methods rely on real-world rollouts
from hardware experiments to estimate dynamics parameters (Chebotar et al., 2019; Ramos et al., 2019; Muratore
et al., 2022). However, for complex tasks with physical
parameters that are difficult to efficiently or effectively sample, this data may be time-consuming to produce, or simply
unavailable.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful tool in robotics
because it can be used to learn effective control policies
for systems with highly complex dynamics that are difficult
to model analytically. Unlike traditional control methods,
which rely on precise mathematical models, RL learns directly from simulated or real-world experience (Luo & Li,
2021; Zhu et al., 2020; Schoettler et al., 2020).
However, RL approaches can be inefficient, involving
slow, minimally parallelized, and potentially unsafe datagathering processes when performed in real environ1

An alternative strategy is to learn an environment distribution during training with the aim of finding the broadest
possible training distribution that can feasibly be solved in
order to maximize the chances of transferring to an unknown
target environment. Automating updates to parameter distributions during the training process can remove the need

2

MIT CSAIL Autodesk Research. Correspondence to: Aidan
Curtis <curtisa@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

