An End-to-End Model for Logits-Based
Large Language Models Watermarking

Kahim Wong 1 Jicheng Zhou 1 Jiantao Zhou 1 Yain-Whar Si 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
The rise of LLMs has increased concerns over
source tracing and copyright protection for
AIGC, highlighting the need for advanced
detection technologies.
Passive detection
methods usually face high false positives, while
active watermarking techniques using logits
or sampling manipulation offer more effective
protection. Existing LLM watermarking methods,
though effective on unaltered content, suffer
significant performance drops when the text is
modified and could introduce biases that degrade
LLM performance in downstream tasks. These
methods fail to achieve an optimal tradeoff
between text quality and robustness, particularly
due to the lack of end-to-end optimization of
the encoder and decoder. In this paper, we
introduce a novel end-to-end logits perturbation
method for watermarking LLM-generated text.
By joint optimization, our approach achieves a
better balance between quality and robustness.
To address non-differentiable operations in the
end-to-end training pipeline, we introduce an
online-prompting technique that leverages the
on-the-fly LLM as a differentiable surrogate.
Our method achieves superior robustness, outperforming distortion-free methods by 37–39%
under paraphrasing and 17.2% on average, while
maintaining text quality on par with the distortionfree methods in terms of text perplexity and
downstream tasks. Our method can be easily generalized to different LLMs. Code is available at
https://github.com/KAHIMWONG/E2E
LLM WM.

Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT (Achiam
et al., 2023), Llama (Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al.,
2024), and OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) have greatly improved
the quality of AI-generated content (AIGC), broadening
their applications in fields such as translation (Hendy et al.,
2023), content creation (Ni et al., 2023), etc. However, such
a rapid expansion has also raised concerns about copyright
infringement, academic dishonesty, and unethical practices
(Augenstein et al., 2024). These issues highlight the urgent
need for reliable methods to distinguish between humanwritten text and LLM-generated content, ensuring digital integrity and combating misinformation (Barrett et al., 2023).
Numerous approaches have been proposed to address LLM
ethical concerns by detecting LLM-generated content. Passive detection methods focus on identifying unique properties of generated text, often through training binary classifiers (Bakhtin et al., 2019; Jawahar et al., 2020) or statistical
techniques like DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023), which
compares a sentence’s log-probability to that of a perturbed
version. However, as LLMs improve and the gap between
generated and human-written text narrows, the effectiveness of these methods declines dramatically. In contrast,
active detection methods, like embedding watermarks in
generated text, are proving to be more robust alternatives.
LLM watermarking methods fall into two main categories:
logits-based and sampling-based. Specifically, logits-based
methods (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b; Huo
et al., 2024) randomly divide the vocabulary into “green”
and “red” lists by hashing preceding tokens as the seed.
Then, perturbations are introduced to the logits that favor
green list tokens in the generated text, and the proportion
of the “green” tokens is used to distinguish whether a text
is LLM-generated. Sampling-based methods (Kuditipudi
et al., 2024; Christ et al., 2024) rely on random bitstream
to guide token sampling, creating detectable correlations
in the text. Despite advancements, current watermarking
schemes experience significant performance degradation
with even slight text modifications. Additionally, existing
algorithms introduce logit biases or guide sampling through
random bitstream, which would result in semantic differences between watermarked and non-watermarked content,

1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
Department of Computer and Information Science, Faculty of
Science and Technology, University of Macau, China 2 Department
of Computer and Information Science, Faculty of Science and
Technology, University of Macau, China. Correspondence to:
Jiantao Zhou <jtzhou@um.edu.mo>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

