Differentially Private Analysis for Binary Response Models: Optimality,
Estimation, and Inference

Ce Zhang 1 Yixin Han 1 Yafei Wang 1 Xiaodong Yan 2 Linglong Kong 1 Ting Li 3 Bei Jiang 1

Abstract

to analyze data without directly accessing sensitive information while exploring theoretical guarantees to prevent
the exposure of private details. On the other hand, the random response mechanism (RR) (Warner, 1965) has gained
significant attention in sensitive binary data and achieves
effective DP guarantees by flipping the binary labels with a
predetermined probability (Hout et al., 2010; Coutts & Jann,
2011; Kirchner, 2015; Oberski & Kreuter, 2020). Although
a surge of works explores DP guarantees under RR mechanisms (Holohan et al., 2017; Fox et al., 2018; Ghazi et al.,
2020; Pastore & Gastpar, 2021; Xu et al., 2023), there is
still limited guidance on the optimal DP mechanism for RR
labels, particularly in the context of estimation and inference for binary response models. To address this gap, we
introduce a novel optimal DP RR mechanism tailored for binary response models that take into account the influence of
covariates. Our proposed DP RR mechanism operates under
the setting that the input covariates are publicly available
while the response labels are highly sensitive, which requires rigorous protection. Motivated by the optimal design
of the experiment via maximizing the various types of “data
information” (Pukelsheim, 2006; Dette et al., 2012; Yang
et al., 2013; Waite & Woods, 2022; Duarte et al., 2022),
we primarily focus on exploring the optimal estimation and
inference for the RR binary response models by maximizing
the trace of the Fisher Information Matrix within a LabelDP
feasible region for RR parameters. This ensures the optimality of the RR mechanism in safeguarding privacy while
maintaining statistical accuracy.

Randomized response (RR) mechanisms constitute a fundamental and effective technique for ensuring label differential privacy (LabelDP). However, existing RR methods primarily focus on the
response labels while overlooking the influence
of covariates and often do not fully address optimality. To address these challenges, this paper
explores optimal LabelDP procedures using RR
mechanisms, focusing on achieving optimal estimation and inference in binary response models.
We first analyze the asymptotic behaviors of RR
binary response models and then optimize the procedure by maximizing the trace of the Fisher Information Matrix within the ε- and (ε, δ)-LabelDP
constraints. Our theoretical results indicate that
the proposed methods achieve optimal LabelDP
guarantees while maintaining statistical accuracy
in binary response models under mild conditions.
Furthermore, we develop private confidence intervals with nominal coverage for statistical inference. Extensive simulation studies and real-world
applications confirm that our methods outperform
existing approaches in terms of precise estimation,
privacy protection, and reliable inference.

1. Introduction
Motivation. Privacy protection is crucial in modern statistical analysis and machine learning to handle personal
information and sensitive data. Differential privacy (DP)
(Dwork et al., 2006; 2014) has recently emerged as the gold
standard for preserving privacy when analyzing sensitive
data. It provides a statistical mechanism that enables users

Literature review. Numerous approaches have been proposed to develop DP algorithms through RR mechanisms
(Ding et al., 2020; Garcelon et al., 2021; Biswas et al.,
2023). In this section, we organize the relevant work into
three groups and highlight how our methodology differs
significantly, emphasizing the importance of a thorough
review.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 School
of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
China 3 Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Bei
Jiang <bei1@ualberta.ca>, Ting Li <tingeric.li@polyu.edu.hk>.

DP via RR. Based on the classical RR mechanisms, Kairouz
et al. (2016) studied the optimal local DP mechanisms for
binary data. Holohan et al. (2017) extended Warner’s original technique (Warner, 1965) to establish an RR mechanism
that simultaneously achieves DP and optimality by minimizing the variance estimator of the proportion of true answers.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

