Learning with Selectively Labeled Data from Multiple Decision-makers

Jian Chen * 1 Zhehao Li * 1 Xiaojie Mao * 1

Abstract

lation to which decisions will be applied, creating a classic
selection bias issue. As a result, models trained on selectively labeled data may perform well on the observed
subjects but fail to generalize to the full population when deployed in real-world settings. This challenge becomes even
more critical when historical decisions relied on unobservable factors not captured in the available data, as is common
when human decision-makers are involved. In such cases,
the labeled data can differ substantially from the broader
population due to unknown factors, further complicating the
development of reliable ML models.

We study the problem of classification with selectively labeled data, whose distribution may differ
from the full population due to historical decisionmaking. We exploit the fact that in many applications historical decisions were made by multiple decision-makers, each with different decision
rules. We analyze this setup under a principled
instrumental variable (IV) framework and rigorously study the identification of classification risk.
We establish conditions for the exact identification
of classification risk and derive tight partial identification bounds when exact identification fails.
We further propose a unified cost-sensitive learning (UCL) approach to learn classifiers robust to
selection bias in both identification settings. Finally, we theoretically and numerically validate
the efficacy of our proposed method.

Our paper addresses the selective label problem by leveraging the heterogeneity of decision-making processes in
many real-world applications. Specifically, we consider settings where decisions are made by multiple decision-makers
with distinct decision rules, potentially leading to different
outcomes for the same subject. Furthermore, since decisionmakers often evaluate similar pools of subjects, each subject
can be viewed as being quasi-randomly assigned to a specific decision-maker. This structure offers a way to mitigate
the selective label problem: a subject who remains unlabeled under one decision-maker might have been labeled
if assigned to another. For instance, judicial decisions are
typically made by different judges who vary in their leniency
when deciding whether to release the same defendant. The
heterogeneous decision-maker framework has also been explored in prior research to address selection bias in model
evaluation (e.g., Lakkaraju et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al.,
2018; Rambachan et al., 2021; Arnold et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The problem of selective labels is common in many decisionmaking applications involving human subjects. In these
applications, each individual receives a certain decision,
which in turn determines whether the individual’s outcome
label is observed. For example, in judicial bail, the label
of interest is whether a defendant returns to court without
committing another crime if released. However, this label
cannot be observed if bail is denied. Similarly, in lending,
the default status of a loan applicant cannot be observed
if the loan is not approved. In hiring, a candidate’s job
performance cannot be observed if the candidate is not hired.

Main Contributions In this paper, we leverage the instrumental variable framework in causal inference to formalize
the selective label problem with multiple heterogeneous
decision-makers. This enables principled identification analyses to characterize the identifiability of classification risks
from the observed data, revealing fundamental power and
limits of the multiple decision-maker structure in tackling
the selective label problem. This provides valuable insights
beyond the heuristic approaches in the prior literature. Moreover, unlike the existing selective label literature that primarily focus on evaluating fixed models, our work focuses
on learning a robust classification model from the selective
label data.

The selective label problem presents significant challenges
for developing effective machine learning (ML) algorithms
to support decision-making (Lakkaraju et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2018; De-Arteaga et al., 2021). Specifically,
labeled data may not be representative of the broader popu∗

Alphabetical Order. 1 School of Economics and Management,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiaojie
Mao <maoxj@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Specifically, we describe the problem setup and the IV

1

