Protein Structure Tokenization: Benchmarking and New Recipe

Xinyu Yuan * 1 2 Zichen Wang † 3 Marcus Collins 3 Huzefa Rangwala † ‡ 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Proteins, linear sequences of amino acid residues that fold
into complex 3D macromolecules, drive the essential machinery of life. While protein language models (PLMs)
trained on residue sequences have emerged as powerful tools
for deciphering the underlying ”language” of proteins and
decoding evolutionary patterns in protein function (Lin et al.,
2023b), their reliance on sequence tokenization (e.g., perresidue or sub-word methods like BPE (Ferruz et al., 2022))
overlooks a critical dimension: the 3D structural context.
Residues adopt diverse geometric conformations to perform
biological functions, and their structural interactions-not just
sequence-dictate protein function and behavior (Abramson
et al., 2024). To address this gap, recent work has explored
protein structure tokenization (PST), which encodes local
3D context into discrete or continuous representations. Discrete structural tokens enable powerful techniques like language modeling of protein structures, and large multimodal
models (Yin et al., 2023) that incorporate other related data
modalities, such as protein sequences and function descriptions (Hayes et al., 2025).

Recent years have witnessed a surge in the development of protein structural tokenization methods, which chunk protein 3D structures into discrete or continuous representations. Structure tokenization enables the direct application of powerful techniques like language modeling for protein structures, and large multimodal models to
integrate structures with protein sequences and
functional texts. Despite the progress, the capabilities and limitations of these methods remain
poorly understood due to the lack of a unified
evaluation framework. We first introduce StructTokenBench, a framework that comprehensively
evaluates the quality and efficiency of structure
tokenizers, focusing on fine-grained local substructures rather than global structures, as typical
in existing benchmarks. Our evaluations reveal
that no single model dominates all benchmarking
perspectives. Observations of codebook underutilization led us to develop AminoAseed, a simple yet effective strategy that enhances codebook
gradient updates and optimally balances codebook
size and dimension for improved tokenizer utilization and quality. Compared to the leading VQVAE model ESM3, our method achieves an average of 6.31% performance improvement across
24 supervised tasks, with sensitivity and utilization rates increased by 12.83% and 124.03%,
respectively. Source code and model weights
are available at https://github.com/
KatarinaYuan/StructTokenBench.

Current PST methods fall into two categories: (1) heuristic
methods relying on domain-specific knowledge and hardcoded rules to extract structural-based tokens (de Brevern,
2005; Durairaj et al., 2020); and (2) deep learning methods
that use neural networks to learn features from protein structure data. The latter further includes: VQ-VAE-based (Van
Den Oord et al., 2017) methods, which compress structures
into discrete latent spaces in codebooks via reconstruction
objective functions (Van Kempen et al., 2024; Lin et al.,
2023a), and Inverse-Folding-based (IF-based) methods,
which compress structures by predicting sequences capable
of folding into the given target protein structure (Dauparas
et al., 2022). Despite the emerging progress, the capabilities
and limitations of these PST methods remain poorly understood due to the absence of a unified evaluation framework.

*

This work was completed while the author was an intern
at Amazon. † Corresponding author. ‡ Huzefa Rangwala is on
LOA as a Professor of Computer Science at George Mason
University. This paper describes work performed at Amazon. 1 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 University of Montreal
3
Amazon. Emails: Xinyu Yuan <xinyu.yuan@mila.quebec>,
Zichen
Wang
<wangzc921@gmail.com>,
Marcus
Collins
<collmr@amazon.com>,
Huzefa
Rangwala:
<rhuzefa@amazon.com>

To address the gap, we present StructTokenBench, a comprehensive evaluation framework (Fig. 1) that assesses PSTs
across four perspectives. Unlike existing protein structure benchmarks, which primarily focus on global structures (Townshend et al., 2021), StructTokenBench is designed to evaluate the quality of the latent space defined
by the PST encoder/codebook, with an emphasis on finegrained local protein structure representations.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

