Online Pre-Training for Offline-to-Online Reinforcement Learning

Yongjae Shin2,1† Jeonghye Kim2,1† Whiyoung Jung 1 Sunghoon Hong 1 Deunsol Yoon 1 Youngsoo Jang 1
Geonhyeong Kim 1 Jongseong Chae 2 Youngchul Sung 2 Kanghoon Lee 1 Woohyung Lim 1

Abstract
Offline-to-online reinforcement learning (RL)
aims to integrate the complementary strengths
of offline and online RL by pre-training an agent
offline and subsequently fine-tuning it through
online interactions. However, recent studies reveal that offline pre-trained agents often underperform during online fine-tuning due to inaccurate value estimation caused by distribution shift,
with random initialization proving more effective in certain cases. In this work, we propose a
novel method, Online Pre-Training for Offline-toOnline RL (OPT), explicitly designed to address
the issue of inaccurate value estimation in offline
pre-trained agents. OPT introduces a new learning phase, Online Pre-Training, which allows the
training of a new value function tailored specifically for effective online fine-tuning. Implementation of OPT on TD3 and SPOT demonstrates an
average 30% improvement in performance across
a wide range of D4RL environments, including
MuJoCo, Antmaze, and Adroit.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between offline-to-online RL (yellow), from
scratch (green), and our method (purple). (a): A TD3+BC (Fujimoto & Gu 2021) pre-trained agent is fine-tuned with TD3 (Fujimoto et al. 2018). (b): A SPOT (Wu et al. 2022) pre-trained agent
is fine-tuned with the same algorithm.

To overcome the cost challenge of online RL and the performance limitation of offline RL, the offline-to-online RL
approach has been introduced (Lee et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2023; Yu & Zhang 2023). This approach entails training
an agent sufficiently on an offline dataset, followed by finetuning through additional interactions with the environment.
The offline phase allows the agent to acquire a reasonable initial policy without any online cost, providing a stable foundation for subsequent fine-tuning. Combining the strengths
of both approaches, offline-to-online RL reduces the need
for extensive environment interactions, while enhancing the
agent’s performance through online fine-tuning.

1. Introduction

Although offline-to-online RL offers clear advantages, prior
studies (Zhang et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2023; Nakamoto et al.
2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Kong et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024;
Luo et al. 2024) have shown that fine-tuning an offline pretrained agent often results in worse performance compared
to training from scratch. This phenomenon, described by
Nakamoto et al. (2024) as counter-intuitive trends, is depicted in Figure 1, which compares the learning curves
during the online phase for both fine-tuning (off-to-on)
and training from scratch with the replay buffer initialized
using the offline dataset (from scratch). As shown in
Figure 1 (a), training from scratch outperforms fine-tuning
from the very beginning of the learning process, as also
observed by Ball et al. (2023). In Figure 1 (b), although
fine-tuning demonstrates moderate performance in the early
stages, it is eventually surpassed by training from scratch.
This highlights the inherent challenges in fine-tuning pretrained agents in offline-to-online settings.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown great potential in
addressing complex decision-making tasks across various
fields (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017). In particular,
offline RL (Levine et al. 2020) offers the advantage of training an agent on the fixed dataset, thereby mitigating the
potential costs or risks associated with direct interactions in
real-world environments - a significant limitation of online
RL. However, the effectiveness of offline RL is inherently
constrained by the quality of the dataset, which can impede
the overall performance.
†
Work done during an internship at LG AI Research. 1 LG AI
Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to:
Woohyung Lim <w.lim@lgresearch.ai>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

