Efficient Multivariate Robust Mean Estimation
Under Mean-Shift Contamination
Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Giannis Iakovidis 1 Daniel Kane 2 Thanasis Pittas 1

Abstract

not accurately represent the underlying phenomenon. For
example, in ML security applications (Barreno et al., 2010;
Biggio et al., 2012; Steinhardt et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2018;
Diakonikolas et al., 2019), the data may be adversarially
manipulated or contain out-of-distribution data which arise
from unknown categories (Du et al., 2024); in biological
applications, datasets often contain natural outliers (Rosenberg et al., 2002; Paschou et al., 2010; Li et al., 2008) that
may pollute downstream statistical analysis. The field of
robust statistics originates from the early 1960s with the
pioneering works of Tukey and Huber (Tukey, 1960; Huber,
1964). Early work in the field obtained minimax optimal
robust estimators for the mean estimation and other tasks.
However, the multivariate versions of these robust estimators incurred exponential runtime in the dimension. A recent
line of work in computer science, starting with Diakonikolas
et al. (2016); Lai et al. (2016), has led to a revival of robust
statistics from an algorithmic standpoint, by providing the
first robust estimators in high dimensions with polynomial
sample and time complexity.

We study the algorithmic problem of robust mean
estimation of an identity covariance Gaussian in
the presence of mean-shift contamination. In this
contamination model, we are given a set of points
in Rd generated i.i.d. via the following process.
For a parameter α < 1/2, the i-th sample xi is
obtained as follows: with probability 1 − α, xi is
drawn from N (µ, I), where µ ∈ Rd is the target
mean; and with probability α, xi is drawn from
N (zi , I), where zi is unknown and potentially arbitrary. Prior work characterized the informationtheoretic limits of this task. Specifically, it was
shown that— in contrast to Huber contamination—
in the presence of mean-shift contamination consistent estimation is possible. On the other hand,
all known robust estimators in the mean-shift
model have running times exponential in the dimension. Here we give the first computationally
efficient algorithm for high-dimensional robust
mean estimation with mean-shift contamination
that can tolerate a constant fraction of outliers. In
particular, our algorithm has near-optimal sample
complexity, runs in sample-polynomial time, and
approximates the target mean to any desired accuracy. Conceptually, our result contributes to a
growing body of work that studies inference with
respect to natural noise models lying in between
fully adversarial and random settings.

The prototypical robust statistics task is that of Gaussian
mean estimation in Huber’s contamination model (Huber,
1964). Letting α ∈ (0, 1/2) be the contamination parameter,
each sample in Huber’s model is drawn either from an inlier
normal distribution N (µ, I) (where µ is the unknown target
mean) with probability 1 − α; or from an unknown and potentially arbitrary distribution E with probability α. Recent
work has provided efficient algorithms with near-optimal
guarantees in Huber’s model (Diakonikolas et al., 2018a;
2024). Huber’s contamination is a rather strong model, as
it allows for the unknown distribution of corruptions to be
arbitrary. On the one hand, this level of generality makes
the model quite powerful—by allowing it to cover a wider
range of phenomena. On the other hand, its definition is
inherently tied to significant information-theoretic limitations. Specifically, it is known that even with an infinite
number of samples, any mean estimator µ
b in Huber’s model
has to incur an error of ∥µ − µ
b∥ = Ω(α), where α is the
rate of contamination. This happens because it is possible
to start from two Gaussians (even in one dimension) with
means Ω(α) apart, and mix them with appropriate outlier
distributions so that the contaminated distributions are identical; see, e.g., Chapter 1 of Diakonikolas & Kane (2023).

1. Introduction
Robust statistics (Huber & Ronchetti, 2009; Diakonikolas
& Kane, 2023) aims to develop accurate estimators in the
presence of a constant fraction of outliers. In a range of machine learning scenarios, the standard i.i.d. assumption does
Authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 University of
Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Giannis Iakovidis <iakovidis@wisc.edu>, Thanasis Pittas <pittas@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

