Scaling Laws for Differentially Private Language Models

Ryan McKenna 1 Yangsibo Huang 1 Amer Sinha 1 Borja Balle 2 Zachary Charles 1
Christopher A. Choquette-Choo 2 Badih Ghazi 1 Georgios Kaissis 2 Ravi Kumar 1 Ruibo Liu 2 Da Yu 1
Chiyuan Zhang 1

Abstract

The scale of data driving LLM progress also creates a critical
privacy challenge. State-of-the-art models train on massive,
diverse datasets (Dubey et al., 2024; Gemma Team et al.,
2024a) that are also distributed (Carlini et al., 2024) making
it difficult to exclude inadvertently shared personal information. Paradoxically, user data, a key privacy concern, is
also crucial for advancing LLM capabilities. User interactions provide invaluable feedback for generating realistic
synthetic data (Xie et al., 2024; Kurakin et al., 2023) and
aligning models with human values (Stiennon et al., 2020),
reflecting real-world use cases better than web-scraped text.
However, direct training on sensitive user data is risky due to
memorization and regurgitation (Carlini et al., 2021; 2023;
Ippolito et al., 2023; Lukas et al., 2023; Biderman et al.,
2023; Prashanth et al., 2025). This tension—the need for
user data versus protecting user privacy—is addressed by
differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006).

Scaling laws have emerged as important components of large language model (LLM) training
as they can predict performance gains through
scale, and provide guidance on important hyperparameter choices that would otherwise be expensive. LLMs also rely on large, high-quality
training datasets, like those sourced from (sometimes sensitive) user data. Training models on this
sensitive user data requires careful privacy protections like differential privacy (DP). However, the
dynamics of DP training are significantly different, and consequently their scaling laws are not
yet fully understood. In this work, we establish
scaling laws that accurately model the intricacies
of DP LLM training, providing a complete picture
of the compute-privacy-utility trade-offs and the
optimal training configurations in many settings.

While DP offers a principled solution to the tension between
data utility and privacy in LLM training, applying it in practice, especially to large-scale models, presents significant
challenges. DP mechanisms like DP-SGD (Abadi et al.,
2016) and its variants introduce computational overhead,
implementation complexity (Subramani et al., 2021), and
utility degradation (Bassily et al., 2014). While it is wellknown that DP-SGD benefits substantially from training
with very large batch sizes (Anil et al., 2022; De et al., 2022;
Ponomareva et al., 2023), little work has been done to understand the conditions under which this holds in computeconstrained settings, i.e., when an increase in batch size
must be coupled with a decrease in model size or number of
iterations. In part due to this reliance on large batch sizes,
the largest models trained with DP today have hundreds
of millions, rather than billions, of parameters (Anil et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022; Berrada et al., 2023; Ghalebikesabi
et al., 2023; Charles et al., 2024; Sander et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are revolutionizing how we
interact with technology, powering everything from instant
translations and concise summaries to complex reasoning
and creative content generation (Achiam et al., 2023; Gemini Team, 2023). Training increasingly large models on
ever larger datasets is a key success factor for these LLMs,
with frontier models being trained for millions of GPUhours (Dubey et al., 2024) and trillions of tokens (Abdin
et al., 2024; Gemma Team et al., 2024a;b). Scaling laws
for neural language models are crucial because they provide
a framework for understanding and predicting the performance gains achievable with increased computational resources, and importantly, guide the optimal allocation of
that compute budget between model size and dataset size
(Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022).

To train large models with DP, it is crucial to spend both
the compute budget and the privacy budget judiciously. In
this work, we pave the way towards training at the billionparameter scale by initiating a study on the scaling laws of
DP training. To that end, we extend traditional scaling laws
to consider a compute-privacy-utility trade-off, accounting
for intricacies and additional variables introduced by DP

1
Google Research 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Ryan McKenna <mckennar@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

