A Versatile Influence Function for Data Attribution with Non-Decomposable
Loss
Junwei Deng 1 Weijing Tang 2 Jiaqi W. Ma 1

Abstract

attribution, enabling efficient influence-functionbased attribution across a wide range of machine
learning paradigms, with broad potential for practical use cases.

Influence function, a technique rooted in robust
statistics, has been adapted in modern machine
learning for a novel application: data attribution—
quantifying how individual training data points
affect a model’s predictions. However, the common derivation of influence functions in the data
attribution literature is limited to loss functions
that can be decomposed into a sum of individual
data point losses, with the most prominent examples known as M-estimators. This restricts the
application of influence functions to more complex learning objectives, which we refer to as
non-decomposable losses, such as contrastive or
ranking losses, where a unit loss term depends
on multiple data points and cannot be decomposed further. In this work, we bridge this gap
by revisiting the general formulation of influence
function from robust statistics, which extends beyond M-estimators. Based on this formulation,
we propose a novel method, the Versatile Influence Function (VIF), that can be straightforwardly
applied to machine learning models trained with
any non-decomposable loss. In comparison to
the classical approach in statistics, the proposed
VIF is designed to fully leverage the power of
auto-differentiation, hereby eliminating the need
for case-specific derivations of each loss function. We demonstrate the effectiveness of VIF
across three examples: Cox regression for survival analysis, node embedding for network analysis, and listwise learning-to-rank for information
retrieval. In all cases, the influence estimated
by VIF closely resembles the results obtained by
brute-force leave-one-out retraining, while being
up to 103 times faster to compute. We believe
VIF represents a significant advancement in data

1. Introduction
Influence function (IF) is a well-established technique originating from robust statistics and has been adapted to the
novel application of data attribution in modern machine
learning (Koh & Liang, 2017). Data attribution aims to quantify the impact of individual training data points on model
outputs, which enables a wide range of data-centric applications such as mislabeled data detection (Koh & Liang,
2017), data selection (Xia et al., 2008), and copyright compensation (Deng & Ma, 2023).
Despite its broad potential, the application of IFs for data
attribution has been largely limited to loss functions that
can be decomposed into a sum of individual data point
losses—such as those commonly used in supervised learning
or maximum likelihood estimation, which are also known
as M-estimators. This limitation arises from the specific
way that IFs are typically derived in the data attribution
literature (Koh & Liang, 2017; Grosse et al., 2023), where
the derivation involves perturbing the weights of individual
data point losses. As a result, this restricts the application of
IF-based data attribution methods to more complex machine
learning objectives, such as contrastive or ranking losses,
where a unit loss term depends on multiple data points
and cannot be further decomposed into individual data point
losses. We refer to such loss functions as non-decomposable
losses.
To address this limitation, we revisit the general formulation of IF in statistics literature (Huber & Ronchetti, 2009),
which can extend beyond M-estimators. Specifically, statistical estimators are viewed as functionals of probability
measures, and the IF is derived as a functional derivative in
a specific perturbation direction. In principle, this formulation applies to any estimator defined as the minimizer of
a loss function that depends on an (empirical) probability
measure, which corresponds to the learned parameters in
the context of machine learning. However, directly applying

1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Jiaqi W. Ma <jiaqima@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

