Prompt-to-Leaderboard: Prompt-Adaptive LLM Evaluations

Evan Frick∗ 1 Connor Chen∗ 1 Joseph Tennyson∗ 1 Tianle Li∗ 1 Wei-Lin Chiang∗ 1
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos∗ 1 Ion Stoica 1

Abstract

question-answering ability. These highly-curated benchmarks focus on domain-specific performance measures but
do not capture the general and subjective nature of organic human preferences. Live evaluations, such as Chatbot
Arena (Chiang et al., 2024), assess real-world performance
by collecting millions of organic human preferences from
users who visit the site and vote between pairs of model responses. These pairwise comparisons are aggregated using
Bradley-Terry (BT) regression (Bradley and Terry, 1952)
to form a leaderboard over LLMs. This leaderboard averages over many users and prompts, only providing a coarse
understanding of performance.

Large language model (LLM) evaluations typically rely on aggregated metrics like accuracy
or human preference, averaging across users
and prompts. This averaging obscures userand prompt-specific variations in model performance. To address this, we propose Promptto-Leaderboard (P2L), a method that produces
leaderboards specific to a prompt or set of
prompts. The core idea is to train an LLM taking
natural language prompts as input to output a vector of Bradley-Terry coefficients which are then
used to predict the human preference vote. The
resulting prompt-dependent leaderboards allow
for unsupervised task-specific evaluation, optimal routing of queries to models, personalization,
and automated evaluation of model strengths and
weaknesses. Data from Chatbot Arena suggest
that P2L better captures the nuanced landscape of
language model performance than the averaged
leaderboard. Furthermore, our findings suggest
that P2L’s ability to produce prompt-specific evaluations follows a power law scaling similar to that
observed in LLMs themselves. In January 2025,
the router we trained based on this methodology
achieved the #1 spot on the Chatbot Arena leaderboard. Our code is available at this GitHub link:
https://github.com/lmarena/p2l.

For example, if we want to identify the best model for SQL
queries, the overall Chatbot Arena leaderboard may not be
useful since SQL queries make up only 0.6% of organic
submissions and thus have little influence in the ranking.
A natural solution is to stratify the data and run a separate
BT regression for SQL queries. However, collecting the
3,000-5,000 SQL votes needed for a stable ranking would
require around a million total votes—taking months to collect. Finer-grained categories, for example SQL table joins,
would demand even more data, making stratified regression
impractical and slow. And the finest-grained analyses—for
example, producing leaderboards for a specific prompt or
use-case—are rendered impossible.
This manuscript proposes a solution to this problem via a
method called Prompt-to-Leaderboard (P2L). P2L takes a
prompt as input and outputs a leaderboard quantifying LLM
performance on that specific prompt. Thus, P2L can be used
to assess which models are best for a specific use-case, as
opposed to on average. Per-prompt leaderboards can also
be aggregated over a group of prompts to form personalized
leaderboards, showing which model is best for an individual
or enterprise based on their prompt history.

1. Introduction
Evaluating the real-world performance of large language
models is an unresolved challenge. A growing suite of
benchmarks, including MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020),
MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024), and GPQA (Rein et al.,
2023), seek to address the challenge by reporting taskspecific performance metrics, such as multiple-choice

The system works by training a P2L model, which is an
LLM trained on human preference feedback to output a
Bradley-Terry (BT) coefficient for every model in question;
see Section 2.1. Because P2L characterizes the promptconditional win rate of any two models, it enables several
downstream applications. These include optimally routing
prompts to LLMs (Section 2.1.2), personalized evaluations
based on a user’s prompt history (Section 2.1.1), automated

*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Evan Frick <evanfrick@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

