MoH: Multi-Head Attention as Mixture-of-Head Attention
Peng Jin 1 2 3 Bo Zhu 4 Li Yuan 1 2 3 5 Shuicheng Yan 6 4

Abstract

https://github.com/SkyworkAI/MoH.

In this work, we upgrade the multi-head attention
mechanism, the core of the Transformer model,
to reduce computational costs while maintaining or surpassing the previous accuracy level.
We show that multi-head attention can be expressed in the summation form. Drawing on
the insight that not all attention heads hold equal
significance, we propose Mixture-of-Head attention (MoH), a new architecture that treats attention heads as experts in the Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) mechanism. MoH has two significant advantages: First, MoH enables each token to select the appropriate attention heads, enhancing
inference efficiency without compromising accuracy or increasing the number of parameters.
Second, MoH replaces the standard summation
in multi-head attention with a weighted summation, introducing flexibility to the attention mechanism and unlocking extra performance potential.
Extensive experiments on ViT, DiT, and LLMs
demonstrate that MoH outperforms multi-head attention by using only 50%∼90% of the attention
heads. Moreover, we demonstrate that pre-trained
multi-head attention models, such as LLaMA38B, can be further continue-tuned into our MoH
models. Notably, MoH-LLaMA3-8B achieves
an average accuracy of 64.0% across 14 benchmarks, outperforming LLaMA3-8B by 2.4% by
utilizing only 75% of the attention heads. We
believe the proposed MoH is a promising alternative to multi-head attention and provides a strong
foundation for developing advanced and efficient
attention-based models. The code is available at

1. Introduction
Since attention is introduced and becomes a fundamental
component of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), multihead attention has been the standard architecture for natural
language processing (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019) and computer vision tasks (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). It is well known
that using multiple heads can improve model accuracy. However, not all attention heads hold equal significance. Some
works have shown that many attention heads can be pruned
without affecting accuracy. For example, Voita et al. (2019)
introduces a method to quantify the usefulness of each attention head and prune those that are redundant. Similarly,
Michel et al. (2019) challenges the necessity of multiple
heads by examining the impact of extensive pruning across
various settings. In computer vision, some works also identify attention head redundancy. Bhattacharyya et al. (2023)
reduces redundancy to boost performance, while Yun & Ro
(2024) develop single-head attention for efficiency. These
findings demonstrate that vanilla multi-head attention contains redundant attention heads.
Besides, in multi-head attention, each head operates in parallel, and the final output is the sum of all heads (please
refer to Section 3.1). Given that these attention heads operate independently and some may be redundant, we argue
that it is possible to build a dynamic attention-head routing
mechanism. Such a mechanism would enable each token to
adaptively select the appropriate attention heads, enhancing
inference efficiency without compromising accuracy.
To this end, we introduce Mixture-of-Head attention (MoH),
a new architecture that integrates multi-head attention with
the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) mechanism (Jacobs et al.,
1991). Specifically, we propose to treat attention heads as experts within the MoE framework. Similar to MoE, MoH consists of multiple attention heads and a router that activates
the Top-K heads for each token. Moreover, we replace the
standard summation in multi-head attention with a weighted
summation. This design offers two significant advantages:
First, MoH allows each token to select the most relevant
attention heads, improving inference efficiency without sacrificing accuracy or increasing the parameters. Second, by
replacing the standard summation in multi-head attention

1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 School of AI for Science, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen,
China 4 Skywork AI, Singapore 5 Rabbitpre Intelligence, Shenzhen,
China 6 National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Li Yuan <yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn>, Shuicheng Yan
<shuicheng.yan@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

