In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models

Matthew Faw 1 Rajat Sen 2 Yichen Zhou 2 Abhimanyu Das 2

Abstract

hered to the traditional supervised machine learning framework of having to train a forecasting model on task-specific
training data, before being able to perform forecasting for
that task. On the other hand, in Natural Language Processing (NLP), Large Language Models (LLMs) (Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020) have shown the promise of foundation models: a single pretrained model can perform well
and adapt to tasks like translation, code generation during
inference time in a zero-shot or few-shot manner.

Motivated by the recent success of time-series
foundation models for zero-shot forecasting, we
present a methodology for in-context fine-tuning
of a time-series foundation model. In particular, we design a pretrained foundation model that
can be prompted (at inference time) with multiple
time-series examples, in order to forecast a target
time-series into the future. Our foundation model
is specifically trained to utilize examples from
multiple related time-series in its context window
(in addition to the history of the target time-series)
to help it adapt to the specific distribution of the
target domain at inference time. We show that
such a foundation model that uses in-context examples at inference time can obtain much better
performance on popular forecasting benchmarks
compared to supervised deep learning methods,
statistical models, and other time series foundation models. Interestingly, our in-context finetuning approach even matches the performance
of a foundation model that is explicitly fine-tuned
on the target domain.

Motivated by the success in NLP, there has been significant
work in recent years on time-series foundation models for
forecasting, ranging from re-purposing LLMs directly for
forecasting (Gruver et al., 2023) to fine-tuning pretrained
LLMs on time-series data (Zhou et al., 2023; Chang et al.,
2023) to pretraining time-series foundation models from
scratch (Das et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2024; Woo et al.,
2024; Ansari et al., 2024; Garza & Mergenthaler-Canseco,
2023). The last approach, in particular, has been shown
to obtain strong zero-shot accuracy, rivaling the best supervised models trained specifically for the target datasets.
Several of these papers (Zhou et al., 2023; Ansari et al.,
2024; Goswami et al., 2024) have shown an opportunity
for further accuracy improvement by fine-tuning of their
pretrained models on target datasets. However, this breaks
the zero-shot paradigm that precisely makes these timeseries foundation models so appealing to practitioners who
do not want to build training pipelines. This raises a natural
question: Can we recover the benefits of fine-tuning a timeseries foundation model by providing examples from a target
dataset at inference time?

1. Introduction
Time-series data is ubiquitous in several domains such as
retail, finance, manufacturing, healthcare, and the natural
sciences. In many of these domains, time-series forecasting,
i.e., predicting time-series into the future, is a critical problem – for example, in applications like retail forecasting, climate and weather predictions, and traffic forecasting. In the
last decade, deep learning approaches (Salinas et al., 2020;
Oreshkin et al., 2020; Sen et al., 2019) have become popular
in forecasting, often outperforming statistical approaches
like ARIMA (Box & Jenkins, 1968). However, until recently, deep learning approaches for forecasting have ad-

At the same time, the first generation of time-series foundation models lack some of the desirable features of LLMs
with respect to in-context learning: the zero-shot performance of an LLM can be greatly improved at inference
time by using its context window for prompting techniques
such as few-shot (Brown et al., 2020), chain-of-thought (Wei
et al., 2022b) or instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2022a). These
papers have shown emergent in-context learning abilities for
LLMs. In particular, if we prompt them with related examples and demonstrations then ask a specialized question, the
model is able to reason similarly for the question at hand.

1
Georgia Institute of Technology. Part of this work was done
while the author was a Student Researcher and Visiting Researcher
at Google Research. 2 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Matthew Faw <mfaw3@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we study a methodology to enable similar incontext ability for time-series foundation models i.e. being
1

