Correlated Errors in Large Language Models

Elliot Kim * 1 Avi Garg * 2 Kenny Peng * 1 Nikhil Garg 1

Abstract

different available models differ in a meaningful way. How
correlated are LLM errors—i.e., how often do models converge on the same wrong answer? What features of models
predict high correlation? Are newer models more or less
homogeneous? What are the downstream effects of evolving levels of model correlation in high-stakes settings where
LLMs are used? Answering these questions is necessary
both to understand the current limits of ecosystem diversity,
and to more effectively engineer multi-agent systems.

Diversity in training data, architecture, and
providers is assumed to mitigate homogeneity
in LLMs. However, we lack empirical evidence
on whether different LLMs differ meaningfully.
We conduct a large-scale empirical evaluation
on over 350 LLMs overall, using two popular
leaderboards and a resume-screening task. We
find substantial correlation in model errors—on
one leaderboard dataset, models agree 60% of
the time when both models err. We identify factors driving model correlation, including shared
architectures and providers. Crucially, however,
larger and more accurate models have highly correlated errors, even with distinct architectures and
providers. Finally, we show the effects of correlation in two downstream tasks: LLM-as-judge evaluation and hiring—the latter reflecting theoretical
predictions regarding algorithmic monoculture.

Here, we answer these questions, using three large datasets
of LLM responses: Responses of 349 LLMs on 14,402
multiple choice questions on a HuggingFace leaderboard,
71 LLMs on 12,032 multiple choice questions on the Helm
leaderboard (Liang et al., 2023), and 20 LLMs on 1,800
resume-job description pairs.
(1) How correlated are LLM errors? To assess correlation on multiple choice questions, we evaluate the agreement rate of model pairs—conditional on both models being
wrong. On the resume evaluations, we evaluate the correlation in residuals in comparison to human labels. In all
three datasets, we find that errors correlate highly across
LLMs. For example, on Helm, pairs of models agree on average about 60% of the time when both models are incorrect
(choosing between incorrect answers uniformly at random
would lead to an agreement rate of 1/3).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly involved
in high-stakes multi-agent settings. A key characteristic
of the emerging ecosystem is the large number of models
made available by various providers. One HuggingFace
leaderboard currently hosts over 2000 models. Diversity
potentially supports a healthy ecosystem. In labor markets,
different firms using different models could reduce systemic
exclusion compared to universal adoption of a single model
(Bommasani et al., 2022; Toups et al., 2023; Creel & Hellman, 2022). Systems with multiple models may generally
be more robust, allowing “wisdom of crowds” effects and
avoiding correlated failure (Verga et al., 2024; Kleinberg &
Raghavan, 2021; Peng & Garg, 2024a;b; Jain et al., 2024a;b;
Tekin et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025).

(2) What explains model correlation? Through a regression analysis on the datasets above, we find that models
with the same provider (company), with the same base architecture, or with similar sizes have more correlated errors.
Importantly, even after conditioning on these factors, pairs
of models that are more accurate individually also have
more correlated errors. This means that newer models that
differ on the surface may be converging in their outputs.
(3) What are the downstream effects of model correlation? We then study how these patterns in correlation
translate to downstream outcomes in two settings: LLM-asjudge evaluation (Zheng et al., 2023) and hiring applications.
In the LLM-as-judge setting, we show that model correlations substantially affect LLM model evaluations when
another model is used to proxy ground truth labels: judges
overinflate the accuracy of models that are less accurate

However, we lack large-scale empirical evidence on whether
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University 2 Independent. Correspondence to: Kenny Peng <klp98@cornell.edu>, Nikhil Garg
<ngarg@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

