FlashTP: Fused, Sparsity-Aware Tensor Product for
Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials

Seung Yul Lee 1 Hojoon Kim 1 Yutack Park 1 Dawoon Jeong 1 Seungwu Han 1 2 Yeonhong Park 1 Jae W. Lee 1

Abstract

force errors but also real physical observables derived
from MD simulations (Fu et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023).
Equivariant MLIPs typically follow the principles of graph
neural networks, taking as input a graph where atoms are
represented as nodes and their interactions as edges.

Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials (MLIPs)
enable efficient molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with high accuracy. While equivariant
MLIPs achieve state-of-the-art accuracy, they face
significant computational bottlenecks centered
around their Tensor-Product layer, which account
for up to 75% of training time and cause substantial memory overhead. We present FlashTP, a
highly optimized tensor-product library that addresses these inefficiencies through kernel fusion,
sparse computation, and path-aggregated execution. FlashTP achieves up to 41.6× and 60.8×
kernel speedups over e3nn and NVIDIA cuEquivariance, respectively. For SevenNet-l3i5, it delivers 4.2× and 3.5× speedup while reducing peak
memory usage by 6.3× and 6.2× for inference
and training, respectively. The code is available
at https://github.com/SNU-ARC/flashTP.

Equivariant MLIP models, however, suffer from slow inference and training speeds, as well as high memory requirements (Passaro & Zitnick, 2023; Luo & Krishnapriyan,
2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). The key bottleneck of equivariant MLIP model lies in its Tensor-Product
layers, which serves as the core operation responsible for updating the hidden states of nodes while incorporating interactions with neighboring nodes. For instance, in SevenNetl3i5 (Park et al., 2024a;b), a state-of-the-art equivariant
MLIP model, the Tensor-Product layer accounts for 89% of
the inference time and 75% of training time. Moreover, the
Tensor-Product layer operates on edges rather than nodes,
leading to a colossal memory footprint since the number
of edges far exceeds the number of nodes (e.g., 37× more
edges on average for SevenNet on MPF dataset (Chen &
Ong, 2022)).

1. Introduction

The inefficiency of the Tensor-Product layer stems from
three sources. First, the Tensor-Product layer consists
of multiple distinct kernels, and the intermediate data exchanged between these kernels generate substantial memory
traffic. Second, the output data produced by the TensorProduct layer is significantly large, leading to memory
spikes that limit the scalability of MD simulations. Lastly,
a large amount of ineffectual computation arises from the
high sparsity of the Clebsch-Gordan (CG) coefficient matrix (Varshalovich et al., 1988), a constant matrix that ensures equivariance of updated node hidden states after their
tensor product with connected edges and neighbors.

Machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP) is a method
to predict energy and forces given atom positions and atomic
numbers with machine learning models. It is gaining significant attention as a means to accelerate molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations, which play a crucial role in computational materials science and chemistry. MLIP enables simulations to run orders of magnitude faster than quantum
mechanical methods while preserving their accuracy (Unke
et al., 2021; Deringer et al., 2021; Ko & Ong, 2023).
Among the various types of MLIPs, equivariant
MLIPs (Thomas et al., 2018; Batzner et al., 2022;
Batatia et al., 2022; Musaelian et al., 2023; Liao et al.,
2024) have demonstrated superior performance across
complex benchmarks that assess not only energy and

To address the aforementioned issues, we present FlashTP, a
specialized Tensor-Product library designed to enhance the
efficiency of equivariant MLIP model by both accelerating
its speed and reducing memory requirements. FlashTP fully
fuses all operations within the Tensor-Product layer, significantly reducing the memory traffic caused by intermediate
data. Additionally, the fully fused Tensor-Product layer
is again fused with its subsequent layer, eliminating memory spikes that would otherwise be caused by large output

1

Seoul National University 2 Korea Institute for Advanced Study.
Correspondence to: Jae W. Lee <jaewlee@snu.ac.kr>, Yeonhong
Park <ilil96@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

